


TOLEDO, Feb. 18 – In an attempt to forestall state-wide strike action of the W.P.A. workers of Ohio, Carl Watson, W.P.A. head, today announced a 10 percent pay boost for all categories of W.P.A. workers in the state.
The increase is retroactive thru February 16.
Announcement of the pay rise came within three days following the issuance of a twenty-four county conference call to W.P.A. workers and the Unemployed Leagues in Northwest Ohio to organize a widespread move to gain the increase and other concessions. The call was issued by the W.P.A. Workers Union of Lucas County and the Lucas County Unemployed League, and the conference will be held February 23 in Toledo.
Pressure from all over the state by project and unemployed organizations forced through the increase. A conference of the Ohio Workers Alliance in Columbus last Saturday, with a reported representation from twenty-one counties agreed to take a strike poll if the pay boost was not immediately effected. The combined activities and threat of action on the part of the Unemployed League, Worker-Alliance and W.P.A. Unions throughout the state is acknowledged by the W.P.A. Administration and daily press to have won the increase.
 
The Blade Concedes Victory
The Toledo Blade stated today.
“The announcement of the pay raise, it is expected, may avert a strike of W.P.A. common labor threats of which have been heard not only here but throughout the state. The Workers Alliance and W.P.A. Workers Union have been demanding the increase. They have demanded also that hours of work be changed and that no lost time on the jobs be made up.”
An article in today’s Toledo News Bee declared:
“The increase authorized by Dr. Carl Watson, state WPA director, eliminates the threat of a state-wide W.P.A. workers strike.”
Possibilities for such a strike, however, have not been eliminated but enhanced by the victory. The winning of this concession has pointed the road of militant action to the W.P.A. workers of this state as the means of gaining further concessions. Confidence in organization and workers’ action has been heightened. The fear of mounting lay-offs, discrimination and generally bad working conditions, and the knowledge that further pay-boosts can be won by fighting organized action, has evoked a genuine response in the WPA workers in this part of the state, and a highly successful conference is expected this coming Sunday by the WPA Workers Union. Response to the conference call has already come from numerous towns and counties where the workers are crying for a real fighting union.
 
Unity the Vital Need
The need for unity of the Unemployed League and the Workers Alliance is strikingly emphasized by the developments in this state. It is generally admitted that had such unity been established several months ago, this increase and other concessions would have been won long ago by a solid state-wide fighting front. The bickering and factional backbiting which has passed back and forth between individuals of both organizations has been largely the cause for keeping thousands of unemployed and projects workers from joining either organization. As the New Militant has been pointing out for the past two months, for both organizations to permit further sabotage of unity on a correct program through the actions of a few individuals at this crucial period would show a criminal lack of responsibility toward the real needs and desires of the unemployed and relief workers of this nation.
Last updated: 14 March 2018





ONCE MORE the intellectual, journalistic and labor supporters of the liberal politicians in Congress are drenching the wailing wall with their tears. They are crying about the flagrant act of indecent exposure committed by the New Deal-Fair Deal Congressional liberals who authored the so-called “Communist Control” Law which, for the first time in American history, outlaws a political party.
Not a single voice of official liberalism dares to defend the conduct of the Senate and House liberals in connection with enactment of the law which puts political liberty in America in mortal peril and places a new legislative knife at the throat of organized labor.
The Aug. 24 NY Post admitted that “it will be justly said that liberal Democrats disgraced themselves by striving to out-McCarthy McCarthy.” Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., the Post’s chief political soothsayer, spoke of “midsummer madness” in a “group of Democrats, infected by pre-election fever” and predicted that “their hasty and reckless action will plague themselves, as well as the country, for some time to come.” He added that “the Democrats succeeded triumphantly in placing their party to the right of Joe McCarthy, of Pat Mc-Carran, of Judge Harold Medina ...” Murray Kempton, the Post’s labor columnist, went all out in his excoriation of the liberal capitalist politicians that he, along with all the other liberals, had urged the people to elect. Kempton admitted:
“Every great name in the pantheon of liberalism in the United States Senate was on the list of those who voted to make simple membership in the Communist Party a felony ... Real politik has all but killed the liberals in this country, and we might as well drink the death brew at the wake ... The recent record of the Democratic Party on civil liberties is at least as bad as that of the Republicans. And liberals are its architects.”
The Aug. 21 Nation magazine, oldest and most respected voice of traditional liberalism in America, declared editorially that
“... once again, the Democratic ‘liberals’ have out-smarted themselves in their neurotic election-year anxiety to escape the charge of being ‘soft on communism’ even at the expense of sacrificing constitutional rights.”
The liberal weekly admonishes the Senate to “censure itself for the disgraceful 85 to 0 vote by which it has attempted to edge us a little closer to the concept of the one-party state.”
Speaking of the Senator who introduced the political outlawry section of the law, the Aug. 30 New Republic explains that
“... of course Senator Humphrey [Hubert Humphrey (D-Minn.)] is tired – and embattled in the current campaign. But neither fact is justification for saddling the nation with restrictive laws ... The sad truth is that the Democrats were ... weak in judgment, in miscalculating the course of public opinion. Far more important, they were weak in spirit ...”
The labor union bureaucrats, who take their ideology mainly from the liberal intellectuals and journalists, served up diluted versions of the latter’s complaints. The Sept. 1 Advance, organ of the CIO Amalgamated Clothing Workers, found that the contest between the liberal Democrats, the Eisenhower Republicans and the McCarthyites to offer the most repressive, anti-democratic measure was
“... one of the most amazing acts of demagogy any Congress has put on display ... a sorry spectacle ... Frankly, we are at a loss to understand how the bill travelled so far without defeat. Many of the Senators and Representatives voting for it have long stood out as champions of civil liberties. If, as some observers have suggested, they joined in the stampede for political expediency, their actions were heinous.”
The official national CIO and AFL papers play down the real danger of the new law to organized labor and even find merit in the conduct of the Congressional liberals who pushed this law that now hangs like a headsman’s axe over all parties which make any pretense of observing the democratic forms and over the entire union movement.
In the Aug. 23 CIO News, we find the moves and countermoves over the bill in the Senate described in terms of a slick trick by the liberals through which the Eisenhower Administration’s
“... insistence on passage now of anti-Communist legislation aimed only at unions backfired ... The Republican Party and the President got the anti-labor provisions they asked for, but they had to swallow with them a bill they didn’t want – a bill which outlaws the Communist Party and establishes severe penalties for being a member.”
The CIO News does object to the measure’s “loose language.” But the impression is given that the Eisenhower administration, yelling and balking, was driven by sheer force to back the outlawry of the Communist Party and that this wonderful political’ achievement of the liberals was secured at a small price – just a law to undermine political liberty and free trade unions.
As for the AFL tops, their AFL News-Reporter not only found nothing wrong with the law as a whole, but emphasized in a front-page headline on Aug. 27: “AFL Units Not Affected By New Anti-Red Law.” They based this deluding notion on the amendment, by Sen. Ives (R-N.Y.), whereby affiliates “of a national federation ... whose policies and activities have been directed to opposing Communist organizations” are “presumed” not to be “Communist-infiltrated organizations.” However’, Ives himself admitted his amendment would not prevent the Attorney General or the Subversive Activity Control Board making an “inquiry” and “determination” against the AFL or its affiliates as “Communist-infiltrated.” “That is definitely the intent of the amendment. Nothing stands in the way of such action by the Attorney General or the Board,” said Ives (Congressional Record, Aug. 12, 1954, p. 13551).
How do publications like the NY Post, the Nation, the New Republic and the Advance explain the fact that the liberals in Congress strove to “out-McCarthy McCarthy”? They attribute the “heinous” conduct of Senators Humphrey, Herbert Lehman (D-N.Y.), Estes Kefauver, (D-Tenn.), Wayne Morse (Ind. R-Ore.) and their liberal associates in Congress largely to personal physiological and psychological factors – to everything but the inherent nature of political liberalism itself. Senator Humphrey, and presumably his confreres, were “tired” and also “weak in judgment ... weak in spirit” (New Republic). A case of “neurotic, election-year anxiety” opined the Nation. “Midsummer madness,” said Arthur Schlesinger (NY Post), who even found an element of juvenile delinquency – “a collection of hotheads running wild like kids after their first glass of beer at a picnic.” The Advance protested simple ignorance of any reason for the liberals’ conduct – “we are at a loss to understand ...”
From this we might conclude that the liberals in Congress are either physical wrecks, or crazy from the heat, or mentally deficient, or moral weaklings, or inexperienced youth fallen victims to their environment.
We might then have to ask what there is in liberalism, that attracts as its best elements – the persons we were urged to elect to government office – a bunch of neurotic weaklings who were nothing but idiots to begin with.
The supporters and apologists for the political liberals feel that anything is better than the truth, even to pleading “temporary insanity.” The truth is, of course, that the liberals in Congress are seasoned, shrewd, coolly calculating machine politicians. They didn’t just “run wild,” on impulse, due to unendurable Republican provocations. They did what they did because they wanted to and they behaved true to their political lights. The beer-addled schoolboys that Schlesinger depicts is a lie. The Social-Democratic New Leader of Aug. 23 describes the real picture – the organized, well-prepared, disciplined character of the liberal Democrats in Congress:
“The most articulate group in the Senate has been the band of a score or so who have carried the New Deal-Fair Deal standard. They have met regularly every fortnight to coordinate their tactics and objectives, and on alternate weeks their administrative assistants have gathered for the same purpose.”
Senator Humphrey, a vice president of Americans for Democratic Action, had originally introduced a Communist Party outlawry bill four years ago during the discussion of the McCarran Subversive Registration Bill. His August 1954 contribution, therefore, was nothing he drew up at the spur of the moment while his brain was dulled by fatigue and inflamed with the heat. When the Republicans readily accepted his proposal and attached it to the Butler bill dealing with “Communist-infiltrated” unions – a bill which Humphrey ostensibly opposed – the Minnesota senator and the rest of the liberals unanimously voted for the combined bill in its final version.
In doing so, the liberals were not attempting some “naive tactic in the fight against communism,” as the Social Democratic New Leader explains it. They were not trying to give the “kiss of death” to the Butler bill by having it combined with a section on the Communist Party which would make it unpalatable to Eisenhower and therefore cause its veto. Humphrey himself has testified that he did everything to meet Eisenhower’s objections and to make the whole anti-union, police-state bill palatable to the President and thereby ensure against a veto. At no time was the question of civil liberties involved.
Consider the following dialogue in the Senate on Aug. 19 between Sen. Humphrey and Sen. Butler, author of the bill Humphrey said he opposed and a man whom McCarthy personally had helped elect in Maryland. The Minnesota senator is calling on Butler to affirm that Humphrey had done everything to facilitate passage of the whole bill.
“Mr. HUMPHREY: ... First of all, let me say that those who were members of the conference committee [joint Senate-House group] knew that they must at least take into consideration the views of the attorneys of our Government, who have some responsibility, and in fact the responsibility, for the prosecution of subversive activities.
“Mr. BUTLER: That is true.
“Mr. HUMPHREY: I think it is fair to say, and it should be said, that the changes which were made in the conference report were made because we did not want in any way to jeopardize proceedings now under way to fulfill the requirements of the internal-security law.
“Mr. BUTLER: I wholeheartedly attest to that.
“Mr. HUMPHREY: Let me say, as one who wants to cooperate with his Government, and at the same time strike a blow against those who would subvert the Government, that I felt a responsibility as one of those who had participated in formulating this proposed legislation, to give the utmost cooperation to the Department of Justice.
“Mr. BUTLER: I believe the Senator has.
“Mr. HUMPHREY: If I have a choice between giving cooperation to the Department of Justice and legislating regardless of their will or views or of their sincere observations, then my choice must be to recognize the superior knowledge and the responsibilities of the Department of Justice.
“Mr. BUTLER: I think the Senator has been very amenable to the wishes of the Department of Justice.”
What a priceless commentary on liberalism this dialogue is. The leader of the liberals boastfully states a series of facts regarding his cooperation with the government political police in enacting the exact type of legislation the police-staters want. The McCarthyite affirms, like an amen, each claim of the liberal that his political policies conform to the line laid down by the Department of Justice and the FBI.
At another point in the debate, on Aug. 19, Sen. Kefauver, who originally opposed the Humphrey proposition, expressed his fear “that the application of this provision is not limited to the Communist Party. It may apply to the Republican Party, the Democratic Party or the Farm Labor Party. I assume the Senator from Minnesota would agree that this provision is not limited to the Communist Party.” To which Humphrey replied: “Of course not. It is not limited to the Communist Party ...”
In the end, Kefauver, too, swallowed his trepidations and scruples, voting for the bill in its final form because “I have now been assured that this will not adversely affect prosecutions under the Smith Act or adversely affect the Internal Security Act.” That is, he was assured the bill would not interfere with the operations of previous police-state measures, including the Internal Security Act of 1950, which Kefauver had actually voted against. But by 1954, Kefauver told the Senate, “while I did not vote for the internal security bill, I now feel it may do some good ...”
In case anyone believes that Humphrey – who continued to describe himself during the debate as “one who is deeply interested in the preservation of our basic liberties” – worked under some misconception as to the anti-civil liberties character of his proposal, the verbatim record makes everything clear. On Aug. 12, Sen. Johnston (D-S.C.) asked:
“Is it not also true that there are two types of Communists? One is the soap box orator. This amendment would certainly do away with him. Does not the Senator from Minnesota think that when we let them talk, and talk and talk we are aiding them to a certain extent, and that this amendment would put them out of existence?”
Humphrey replied succinctly: “I think so.”
This disdain for democratic rights, this rude brushing aside of elementary civil liberties is not something new with the political liberals. It is, as a matter of fact, their characteristic mode of behavior under pressure from the extreme right. Indeed, the record shows they have systematically sponsored some of the most repressive measures enacted by Congress to destroy the political liberty of the American people.
The previously cited Murray Kempton, who proclaimed the death of liberalism, summed up in a half-correct way the characteristic conduct of the liberal politicians:
“... Liberal politicians have generally had a sorry record on civil liberties. Woodrow Wilson stuffed our jails ... (in) the first World War; he whooped up the Palmer raids; he sent Eugene Debs to prison ... Franklin D. Roosevelt was much more tolerant; yet many of his retainers would have sent Col. McCormick to jail in World War II if they had had their way...”
Roosevelt’s tolerance was limited to fascist-minded multi-millionaires like Col. McCormick. What Kempton carefully covers up is that the first police-state law – the savage Smith “Gag” Act of 1940 which makes mere expression of opinion without any overt act a felony – was rushed through by a Democratic Congress and signed by Roosevelt himself. And it was Roosevelt personally who in 1941 ordered the Smith Act prosecution of 18 members of the Socialist Workers Party and Minneapolis Truckdrivers Local 544 and had them sent to prison for their anti-war views. It was Roosevelt who ordered scores of thousands of American citizens of Japanese descent arrested, held without trial and incarcerated in concentration camps throughout World War II.
The Aug. 21 Nation reminds us of the role played in 1950 by some of the same liberal Democrats who, in Arthur Schlesinger’s words, “organized a runaway stampede” in the 83rd Congress to trample on the Bill of Rights. The Nation recalls:
“When the McCarran Act, which became the Internal Security Act, was before the Senate in 1950, Senator Paul Douglas argued that the bill was ‘ineffective’ because it did not ‘go far enough’ in attempting to curb communism. A group of seven Senate ‘liberals,’ all Democrats, then offered the detention-camp proposal as an amendment, thinking it would discredit the bill itself – or so they said. But, as now, they were caught in their own trap, and the amendment was eagerly accepted by the Republicans.”
The irrefutable fact is that the New Deal-Fair Deal liberals have been the chief authors and sponsors of the first laws (1) to make mere opinion a crime, (2) to establish concentration camps in America where political dissenters can be sent without trial in a “national emergency” and (3) to outlaw a political party. In short, they have been chiefly responsible for setting up the legal machinery which the McCarthyite fascists can use, if they c6me to power, to suppress all other political tendencies, including the liberal Democrats themselves.
The complaints of the liberal writers and publications about the latest anti-democratic acts of the liberal politicians sound like an echo of the lamentations these writers and publications have voiced time and again over the past 15 years. In the Fourth International of July 1942, we described the liberal mouthpieces then as “beginning to beat their breasts” over the reactionary conduct of Roosevelt’s New Deal government in the war presumed to be against fascism (The Wailing Liberals, by Art Preis). Then, too, it was a case of the liberal regime’s witch-hunt against political dissenters and radicals in the labor movement and government, of alliances with dictatorships abroad, of dollar-a-year men in control of the war machine in Washington.
Similarly, as reported in the Aug. 14, 1950, Militant (Liberals at Wailing Wall Over Korea, by Joseph Keller), the supporters of the Fair Deal Democratic regime of Truman were pouring out their woes over the reactionary moves of the liberal government. Then, the big gripe was the crudely aggressive character of the US invasion of Korea, conducted without any real attempt to put forward a “progressive” program to disguise the pro-capitalist, anti-land reform aims that were discrediting American imperialism throughout the colonial world. Then, too, the liberal apologists tried to make the conduct of the liberal Democrats appear as a mere temporary aberration.
The reactionary acts of the political liberals are “shocking,” “amazing,” “inexplicable,” “neurotic” only if we consider liberalism as a fixed set of principles. Chiefly, the liberals would have us believe that they constitute a movement to preserve, defend and extend civil liberties and to promote social reforms and improvements. It is true that the liberals do a great deal of talking and writing about these things, but their record in government, as we have cited it, belies their claim. Concern for civil liberties and social betterment is not a fixed attribute of liberalism, except for electioneering purposes. For a long time now, it has been more precise to speak of the police-state liberals.
The schizophrenic, or “split personality,” trait of liberalism is explainable only in terms of a class phenomenon. Liberalism is a tendency reflecting the interests of that class in modern society which has the least firm foundation and the most instability, the middle class. This class, caught in the midst of the basic struggle between big monopoly capital and organized labor, oscillates back and forth between the two, with ho clear, precise program of its own.
Historically, liberalism arose in the Struggle of the rising capitalists against feudalism and the landed nobility and was epitomized in the slogan of the French Revolution, “Liberty, equality, fraternity.” It continued as a tendency in the conflict between small and big capital, between heavy industrial and financial capital and light industrial and mercantile capital. The latter at a certain stage sought to win the lower-middle class masses and the workers with promises of social reforms and civil liberties and to use these classes as a counter-weight to the big bourgeoisie, the monopolists.
In England, liberalism had its special party called the Liberal Party. But class politics has long since supervened over the “non-class” concepts of liberal politics. The Liberal Party has been reduced almost to a relic, while the basic class forces are polarized in the Conservative Party and the Labor Party. In the United States, however, this polarization, as expressed in terms of class parties, has been delayed, primarily because the labor union leaders have accepted the political lead of the middle-class liberals.
Whatever the programmatic oscillations of the liberals, they have one constant: they are unshakably for the private-profit system which has enabled the middle-class to enjoy a privileged status, economically and socially, over the great productive class of modern society, the workers. In the final analysis, the middle-class liberals are wedded by class interests to capitalism and are loyal to it above all else.
But capitalism in decay leaves no room, for liberalism to continue in its earlier manifestations. Capitalism is torn asunder by insoluble contradictions which it seeks to resolve by wars between nations for economic advantages and by intensified exploitation of labor. The lower-middle class, on which the liberals lean most heavily, are driven into frenzy by the instability and ever-threatening crises of capitalism and seek some way to retain their status as a class. Offered no program of social betterment by the labor leaders, who themselves look to the middle-class for guidance, the lower-middle class in greater and greater numbers turns toward demagogic solutions – above all, to fascism and its thesis of “treason” by the traditional capitalist parties and the “menace of communism.”
The liberals seek to keep their hold on the lower-middle class and the more backward sectors of the Unorganized workers, who had previously looked for salvation in the promises of the New Deal and Fair Deal, by more and more asserting and demonstrating that they are the “best” fighters against “communism.” They try to maintain “class harmony” by supporting, increasing government intervention in unions and restrictions on organized labor. They may still try to preserve the shell of the old forms of democratic capitalist rule but they give it a police-slate content.
This, of course, will not halt the basic class struggle. Police-state liberalism will not stem the tide of McCarthyism but help to create conditions for its stronger flow. It will not even save the liberals from annihilation should McCarthyism come to power.
When Sen. Humphrey introduced his political outlawry bill because “I am tired of reading headlines about being ‘soft’ toward communism,” it won the liberals no respite from the McCarthyite attack. McCarthy rose on Aug. 16 in the Senate and menacingly replied:
“I am not much impressed by some of our friends who oppose the activities and the methods, if you please, of those who dig out the individual Communists – I refer to members who in their Whole lives have never dug out a single Communist – but who wish to make an anti-Communist record by sponsoring a law outlawing the Communist Party.”
McCarthy only demands more evidence of their “anti-Communism,” more proof that they are not “traitors.” They will have to back his witch-hunt, his methods, his movement. Nothing less will satisfy him. In the end, they will have to jump on the fascist bandwagon and work for the total destruction of organized labor or find themselves in the concentration camps, torture chambers and death cells.
Liberalism is no bulwark of our liberties. Nothing can save America from the iron heel but a class party of the working people in mortal combat against the fascist party of capitalism.



A mass of evidence contradicts the steady rumors of the current decline of the American labor movement. The future, in fact, promises a different prospect
NATIONAL trade union organization has existed continuously in the United States since the founding of the American Federation of Labor (AFL) in 1886. But only within the past twenty-five years has the organized labor movement assumed truly massive proportions. Organization of the industrial workers – most strategically placed and decisive sector of American labor – was not even successfully begun until the 1935-1941 period. Not until the spring of 1941, little more than two decades ago, did the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) win its conclusive victories in the automobile and steel industries with the first successful strikes and union contracts in Ford Motor Co. and Bethlehem Steel Corp.
The swift rise and gigantic growth of American organized labor within the historically brief span of a quarter of a century has induced a condition in the American capitalist class akin to what psychiatrists term a traumatic shock. The owning and employing class is like a person who never has been seriously ill and is felled suddenly by a dangerous ailment. Thereafter, he notes every twinge and palpitation, every rise or fall in his temperature, however slight.
Just within the past twenty-five years, vast staffs of labor experts, economists and statisticians, both governmental and private, have been mobilized to study and plot the growth or decline, the shifts in composition, the tendencies and trends of the American working class, its organized sector in particular.
Now, every day, week and month, new reports on the condition of American labor and its organization pour forth to enlighten us on the slightest change within the wage-earning class and the labor movement. The ruling class and its agencies, particularly the government, track the course of American labor with the absorption and concern of the US Weather Bureau and Coast Guard in charting the path, speed, intensity, area and possible shifts in direction of a hurricane sweeping north out of the Caribbean.
Despite the data being collected on labor and the constant refinement of methods used to obtain this data, it is astounding how much inaccurate and downright false information is being circulated both outside and within the labor movement. For, along with the increasing statistical study and analysis has come a sharpening of the fine art of manipulating and misinterpreting the accumulated data. We have to be ever more on the alert against false, one-sided or misleading conclusions drawn from apparently solid, factual evidence.
Two startling examples of such manipulation and misinterpretation have come to hand recently. Both have to do with the question of the division of the national income, which is at the very heart of the struggle between capital and labor.
In the first example, Herman P. Miller, a special assistant in the demographic section of the Bureau of the Census, exposes the “myth ... created in the United States that incomes are becoming more evenly distributed,” a “view held by prominent economists of both major political parties” and “also shared by the editors of the influential mass media.” Miller’s expose appears in The New York Times Magazine, November 11, 1962. In his article, entitled Is the Income Gap Closed? ‘No!’, Miller names top economic advisers of the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations, in addition to Fortune magazine and The New York Times itself as propagators of the myth of the more equal distribution of income.
In giving his “No!” answer to the question, “Has there been any narrowing of the gap between rich and poor?” Miller cites “data in US Government publications available to us all.” If we stick to these figures, he points out, “the answers are clear, unambiguous, and contrary to widely held beliefs. The statistics show no appreciable change in income shares for nearly twenty years.” The share of the national income going to the lower three-fifths of America’s families has not increased in almost two decades; the share retained by the top fifth, who get forty-five per cent of the nation’s income, has not decreased. The lowest twenty per cent of the family groups continues to get but five per cent of the national income, the same as in the past twenty years.
 
NO SOONER is one myth destroyed, however, than another is created. A week after Miller’s article appeared, the November 18 New York Times published a news story from Washington, headlined: “Gain in Living Standards Found to Top Price Rises”.
According to this dispatch, a seven-city survey by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics shows “that purchasing power has gone up by 20 to 40 per cent in the last 10 to 12 years.” A cross-section of families, including exactly 212 families in New York City, was questioned and it was determined that their spending has increased 39 per cent while the consumer price index has risen only 15 per cent since 1950. The survey did not go back before 1950. If it had, Secretary of Labor W. Willard Wirtz might not have cited it. For the findings might have been considerably different. The Bureau of Labor Statistics consumers’ price index, which has risen 15 per cent since 1950, recorded a rise in the previous decade of 72 per cent. If purchasing power has actually gone up “by 20 to 40 per cent” since 1950 it means only that the workers have been catching up a bit with the World War II and post-war inflation.
The distortion and misinterpretation of data on such vital matters as the division of the national income and the trend of consumer purchasing power are paralleled in the study and analysis of the American labor movement and such closely related matters as the class structure of US society and the composition and weight of the wage-earning sector of the population.
Ever since the AFL and CIO merged in December 1955 to form the largest independent labor organization in world history there has been a growing campaign to convey the impression that the labor movement is in rapid decline and that, at any rate, organized labor has reached its natural limits because the so-called “blue-collar” workers, traditionally the main base of the trade unions, are declining in relation to the total labor force and even in absolute numbers.
Within recent months a slew of magazine and newspaper articles, some employing impressive statistical data, have been discussing and analyzing the “decline” of organized labor. Prominent labor leaders themselves have been uttering dire forebodings based on shifts in the per capita intake. Leading liberal publications, generally regarded as having a sympathetic attitude toward organized labor, have been participating in the discussion and expressing apprehensions of their own.
In my article, The Myth of “People’s Capitalism”, published in the Winter 1962 issue of the International Socialist Review, I examined the claim made in an editorial in The New York Times, February 7, 1960, that the numerical strength of organized labor in the United States had “sharply declined” in the 1956-1958 period, thus “reversing a trend of some twenty-five years.” Citing the actual statistical data, I showed that the “sharp decline” amounted only to 1.7%.
On February 21, 1961, at a meeting of the AFL-CIO Executive Council at Miami Beach, Fla., organizing director John Livingston reported with great alarm that all organized workers in the country represented 38% of the organizable workers compared to 40% five years before. He said this could spell union labor’s “obituary.” Seven months before, on June 3, 1960, Jacob S. Potofsky, President of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, declared that organized labor faced the “grave danger” of a fast-shrinking membership. Previously, on November 9, 1959, Walter P. Reuther, United Automobile Workers President and an AFL-CIO Vice President, told a convention of the AFL-CIO Industrial Union Department which he heads that “We are going backward” and that the labor movement was “flabby.” His reference to flabbiness came just two days after the termination of the greatest single industrial strike in US history, the grueling 116-day national steel strike. In the same speech, Reuther proclaimed,
“The merger we put together in 1955 never got off the ground ... We have been pushed around and put through the meat grinder. If we sulk in our tents we’ll be pushed back and back ... We have to stand up.”
The current crop of articles and statements follows much the same pattern as these earlier plaints of leading union officials. One of these articles, however, has aroused particular attention and interest. It is Labor’s Ebbing Strength, by George Kirstein, publisher of The Nation, the venerable liberal weekly. The article was published in the magazine’s September 1 issue. Kirstein came to national prominence during World War II when he served for a period as Executive Secretary of the National War Labor Board.
It is not my purpose to discuss the article as a whole and its important conclusions, which are analyzed at some length by Milton Alvin in this issue of the International Socialist Review.
I wish to direct attention to the two opening paragraphs of Kirstein’s article in which he states the basic premises on which the entire article rests. He writes that “labor’s power and prestige have sunk in 1962 to a depth unequaled since World War II” and this is demonstrated first of all by the fact that union membership, “continuing its descending curve, has shrunk to new lows for the last twenty-five years ...”
 
BEFORE we look at Kirstein’s less measurable point about labor’s “power and prestige,” let us examine the more tangible matter of the “new lows for the last twenty-five years” allegedly reached by union membership today. Maybe, Kirstein put down a vague impression derived from such sources as the previously quoted New York Times editorial comment about union membership “reversing a trend of some twenty-five years.” Or maybe his entire editorial staff was out having a beer and he asked the office boy, “Do you think organized labor is as strong now as it was back in the good old New Deal days?” and the kid replied, “I wasn’t even born then but I hear tell that the CIO was sure hoppin’ back then and even Roosevelt was scared of John L. Lewis.” So Kirstein figured it was safe to say union membership is at its lowest point in a quarter of a century.
It just so happens that nothing could be farther from the truth. Total union membership, despite extensive unemployment, particularly in the steel and coal industries, remains not much below the 1956 peak of 18,400,000 – a number based, incidentally, on inflated figures issued by the union leaders at the time of the AFL-CIO merger, as I shall presently show.
The Department of Labor on last October 8 issued a report on its latest and most accurate survey of trade union membership. Total union membership in the United States is 17,546,000. This must be regarded as a reasonably hard figure because the data was obtained under the stringent regulations of the 1959 Landrum-Griffin Act which exacts severe penalties for inaccurate statements by union officials under the Act’s compulsory reporting provisions.
What was the union membership twenty-five years ago in the heroic days of the rise of the CIO which Kirstein recalls in such a glowing light. Let me quote from my article, The Myth of “People’s Capitalism”. A little more than a year ago, I wrote:
“But before anyone hangs a wreath on the American labor movement ... let us review certain basic facts. Twenty-eight years ago – in 1933 – there were only 2,782,296 union members, or 7.8% of the organizable workers, after 47 years of AFL activity. In 1935, the year the CIO was formed, organized workers numbered 3,616,847, or 10.6% of potential unionists. By 1937, after the CIO went into action, union membership more than doubled, numbering 7,687,087, or 21.9% of organizable workers.”
These figures are from the appendix of Edward Levinson’s classic history of the early CIO, Labor on the March. Contrary to Kirstein’s idealized picture of the American labor movement twenty-five years ago as compared to today, the unions today have two and a third times the number of members and almost double the proportion of organizable workers.
Well, maybe Kirstein slipped up on his dates. Maybe he was really thinking about ten or twelve years ago, not twenty-five. All right. Let’s see how today’s nearly 17.5 million union members compare with the number in 1950 and 1953.
The World Almanac, which annually collates all the data on union memberships from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and from direct questionnaires to the unions, lists in its 1952 edition the “approximate” total of labor union members on June 30, 1950, as “14,000,000 to 16,800,000.”
One reason for the wide spread in the approximation is the fact that the CIO leaders – it was before the Landrum-Griffin Act – had reported grossly exaggerated membership and the fact was well known. The World Almanac listed AFL membership in 1950 at 8,000,000 and the CIO’s at “5,000,000 to 6,000,000.” In 1949, the CIO had reached the climax of a four-year internal “cold war” between pro-State Department and pro-Stalinist cliques. It ended with the expulsion of eleven affiliated unions. At the November 1950 CIO convention, it was revealed that the actual CIO membership at the time of the 1949 split convention had been 3,700,000, not “5,000,000 to 6,000,000.”
In the spring of 1953, according to the 1954 edition of the World-Almanac, the “approximate total” of labor union membership was “16,500,000 to 17,000,000.” This included 8,000,000 in the AFL, 5,000,000 in the CIO and 2,500,000 in independent unions. According to my arithmetic, the three breakdown figures add up to only 15,500,000, not “16,500,000 to 17,000,000.”
We do know that two years later, at the time of the AFL-CIO merger, the CIO membership was considerably less than the 6,000,000 claimed. J.B.S. Hardman, for many years editor of Advance, official publication of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, one of the major CIO affiliates, revealed in the January 4, 1958 issue of The Nation that at the time of the AFL-CIO merger the CIO “entered as pretty much of a junior partner, its stationary 4,000,000 members unimpressive against the AFL’s affiliation of 10,000,000 and advancing.”
Hardman confirmed what most of us surmised at the time of the merger that the CIO membership was closer to 4,000,000 than to the claimed 6,000,000. If this is true – and it is – then the hard figure of 17,456,000 labor union members today remains impressive compared not merely to 1937 but to 1955.
 
WHAT is true about the decline in labor union membership is that a few key unions – notably in steel, automobile, coal and railroads – have had a fall in membership of one degree or another in the past decade. The decline has been most steep in coal mining and railroading. Here it is sufficient to note that even before the great depression of the Thirties, during the “Golden Twenties,” coal was known as a “sick industry” and the current sharp fall in the United Mine Workers membership – some two-thirds in ten years – is the continuation of a trend, based on technological development, which began more than forty years ago and was halted temporarily only during the exceptional periods of World War II and the Korean War. The railroad unions have gone through a similar technologically based four-decade decline.
We come now to the hard kernel of fact in the talk about the “rapid decline” in union membership. What really is at the heart of this question is the drop in the membership of the United Automobile Workers and United Steelworkers, whose organization in the 1935-1941 period is correctly regarded as the CIO’s two greatest achievements.
Both these unions are considerably reduced in membership from their peaks at the end of the Korean War a decade ago. But they are not down to mere skeletons or shadows by any means. Not only are they still completely entrenched in the basic auto and steel industries but they are giants both in membership and material resources compared to any time before World War II and rank among the five largest unions. Here are comparative membership figures from 1941:



 


Automobile Workers


Steelworkers




November 1941


   400,000


   500,000




June 30, 1950


   947,598


   960,738




April 1953


1,350,000


1,100,000




June 1956


1,353,993


1,032,346




June 30, 1961


   995,000


   796,000



At the end of 1961, the net assets of the American unions totaled more than $1.5 billion, aside from huge welfare and pension funds. While the United Steelworkers and the United Auto Workers do not approach the net assets of the United Mine Workers with its $105,355,886, the UAW isn’t doing too badly for a union that owned nothing but debts at the time of its historic General Motors sit-down strike in the winter of 1936-37 which established the UAW for the first time in the biggest corporation of the auto “Big Three.”
The UAW, as of December 31, 1961, had net assets of $57,284,000; the Steelworkers, $22,010,035. This compares with the $25,445,296 of the million-member International Association of Machinists; the $18,430,523 of the 771,000 member International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers; the $22,249,785 of David Dubinsky’s 446,000-member International Ladies Garment Workers Union; or the $36,760,351 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters with its 1,661,983 members. Of course, there are several dozen capitalist corporations with individual assets larger than those of all labor unions combined. But the unions of today command material resources – cash, investments, real estate – beyond anything even dreamed of in the Forties let alone the depression Thirties. In its first two years, 1935-37, the CIO was largely financed by about a million dollars in grants and loans from John L. Lewis’ United Mine Workers. The Steel Workers Organizing Committee (SWOC), the original organization of the CIO Steelworkers, did not even charge dues during its first great organizing drive in 1937.
This is a good point to discuss – and eliminate – one of the major factors most frequently cited as a reason for the membership declines in such unions as the UAW and Steelworkers. That is unemployment due to what has been termed automation – the employment of electronic and other forms of automatic controls in production to reduce the use of labor power to the starting and stopping of the power flow and the maintenance and repair of machinery and equipment. President John F. Kennedy, in his message to Congress last January, termed automation the big economic challenge of this decade.
True enough, unemployment has been a very decisive factor in preventing any over-all growth of organized labor in the past five years, except in the case of such unions as the International Association of Machinists and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, both AFL-CIO, and the independent International Brotherhood of Teamsters. But contrary to what the Kennedy administration, many economists and quite a few labor leaders contend, automation is not the critical element yet in unemployment.
 
REPORTING a recent study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the November 5 Wall Street Journal noted that in a comparison of the years 1959 and 1953, periods of relatively high industrial activity, more than half the decline in jobs in those industries which had falling employment were due to decrease in total output not increased technological efficiency. The Journal wrote that
“... job declines totaling 745,000 were associated with increases in efficiency, while declines totaling the somewhat larger number of 795,000 were associated merely with decreases in production by the industries concerned.”
Increases in “efficiency,” however, do not mean improved machinery or automation. A survey in the November Factory, McGraw-Hill trade publication, reveals that the major cause of “job displacement” in factories employing 1,000 or more workers is “improvement in business methods” and general “efficiency” rather than “modern machinery,” which runs a poor second to the “real villain” in wiping out jobs. Thus, in the basic metalworking industry during the first half of 1962, improved “work methods” – that includes good old-fashioned speed-up – were responsible for the loss of 54% of white-collar jobs and 30% of blue-collar jobs. Only 5% of the while-collar and 16% of the blue-collar jobs were eliminated by new machinery. Improved “work methods” were held responsible for 34% of the white-collar and 49% of the blue-collar job cuts in the chemical industry; slashes due to new equipment were only 19% and 13% respectively.
But “decreases in production,” as indicated in the previously cited November 5 Wall Street Journal, has been the arch villain in the unemployment situation. Take the automobile industry, which has been issuing such glowing reports of 1962 last quarter production. Ward’s automotive report on November 12 said that the automobile industry is anticipating a total car output for the entire year of 6,846,000. This is more than a million below the peak annual production of 7,942,000 in 1955, seven years ago. It is little higher than the 6,665,628 cars produced in 1950, twelve years ago.
The picture of steel production is even more revealing. During the second and third quarters of this year, the steel industry operated at between 45% and 55% of the 1961 rated capacity. In this month of November, even with the stimulus of the Cuban war crisis, the steel industry has been operating at about 61% of capacity. Based on the tonnage production index of 100 for the 1957-59 period, the index for the four weeks ending November 10 was 95.1. Iron Age, steel industry trade magazine, explained on November 14 that the $1.4 billion capital expenditures expected next year are intended to cut costs and increase efficiency, not to expand production. The steel industry’s present “break-even” point – the point where it begins to make profit – is 42% of capacity.
In spite of the factor of unemployment, the major causes of which are “efficiency” and lowered total output, the union movement of today not only remains gigantic in human and financial resources compared to twenty-five years and even ten years ago but it has more contracts and better contractual terms than in all American labor history. More than 100,000 collective bargaining agreements are negotiated each year and it is extremely rare for such agreements not to contain some gain for the workers, although for some key unions, like the Auto Workers, Steelworkers and Ladies Garment Workers, the recent gains have been minimal and not commensurate with the real size and resources of these unions and the capacity of their members for struggle.
This year, the Kennedy administration sought to impose a ceiling on wage increases in union contracts. The President indicated a limit of 2.5% to 3% based on the estimated annual average increase in hourly output per worker in industry. On November 10, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that in the first nine months of 1962 major collective bargaining settlements covering 3,100,000 workers had been negotiated. The median increase for all the workers covered by these contracts was 3.2% of straight time hourly earnings. (Median is the point where half got more and half got less.) But for those who received raises the median increase was 3.4%.
The significant fact is that the majority of workers securing increases got gains of well over 3%. This was particularly true of construction workers, transportation and other non-factory workers. The San Francisco-Oakland Bay Area construction workers, after a strike of 200,000, won wage increases of from 7% to 8.4%. Airline pilots won 8%, although the Eastern Airlines strike is still not settled at this writing. West Coast dock workers netted 6.2%; textile mill workers from 3.25% in the North to 5% for some mills in the South; non-operating railroad workers, 4.1%; copper miners, 3.8%; telephone workers, 3.5%.
The aluminum, glass and oil workers were restricted to a bare 3% while the steelworkers, under the direct pressure of the Kennedy administration, settled for 2.5%, all in fringe benefits. This latter settlement, involving a half-million workers, seriously dragged down the total average gains.
The fact is that the workers won what the union leaders were willing to let them fight for. Thus, the Teamsters Union, headed by James R. Hoffa, in late September and early October, through a brief strike of several IBT locals won New Jersey-New York area contracts providing a 37-cent an hour wage increase for 57,000 truck drivers.
One fact cited as evidence of the “rapid decline” of the American labor movement is the smaller number of strikes, strikers and man-days lost due to strikes. In his August 13 broadcast and televised speech on the nation’s economy, President Kennedy boasted of his “extraordinary record of labor peace in the last eighteen months.” The press prominently reported the fact that in July 1962 man-hours lost in strikes reached the lowest point for any month since World War II.
Of course, the month in question also saw the greatest number of wage earners enjoying union-won paid vacations of any month in US history. Aside from that, as A.H. Raskin noted in an article in the November 11 New York Times, “The strike front just won’t stay zippered up.” In fact, an examination of the over-all strike statistics for the first half of 1962 shows a total of 9,800,000 man-days lost in strikes – a 62% rise over the first half of 1961. During the first quarter of this year, the number of workers on strike rose 38% over the corresponding quarter of 1961.
There are other factors to take into account in analyzing the over-all decline in strikes since 1953 – not just in the “last eighteen months.”
A study of the annual strike statistics since 1920 reveals that the eight-year period, 1946 through 1953, coinciding except for 1953 with the last Democratic administration, was the greatest strike period in US history. The years 1950 through 1953, during the Korean war, saw the largest number of strikes for any four-year period, climaxed by the all-time annual record of 5,117 strikes in 1952.
The reason for this great upsurge in strikes ranging over an eight-year period has already been indicated in the early part of this article. A rampant inflation, boosting the consumers’ price index 72%, occurred during World War II and the post-war period. In addition, direct federal, state and local taxes levied in the same period took an estimated one-third of the average wage-earner’s income. After a brief pause in the inflation during the Truman recession of 1949-50, the rise was resumed during the Korean war, when more than one-half of the 15% rise in the price index during the decade of the Fifties was recorded.
The decline in strikes over the past decade can be attributed neither to Kennedy’s policies since he took office in January 1960 nor to any shift in the programs and attitudes of the top union leaders. The latter were just as permeated with the philosophy of class collaboration, just as opposed to militancy, just as subservient to the capitalist government in the 1946-53 period as they have been since and are today. The difference was the greater inflationary pressure on the workers which forced them to strike and forced the union bureaucrats to go along, even though reluctantly.
 
THERE is another very important element in the decline in strikes over the recent years. That is the long-term contract with built-in automatic annual wage increases. The trend toward long-term contracts, now averaging between two and three years in duration, began with the signing of the notorious five-year General Motors contract in 1950 by UAW President Walter Reuther. It was hoped that such a contract would preserve “labor peace” for a long time in the auto industry and dampen the tradition of militancy among the auto workers. The Korean War was begun about a month after the GM contract went into effect. The renewed inflationary trend brought such rank-and-file condemnation of the five-year “handcuffs” contract that Reuther was forced in 1953 to demand a wage re-opener in spite of the contract. In fear of a strike, GM yielded.
It is well to keep in mind, however, that in the glorious days of twenty-five years ago for which Nation publisher Kirstein sighs, it took a major General Motors strike, including the historic “sit-down” occupation of the company’s main plants in Flint, Mich., to win a six-month contract, after CIO President John L. Lewis indignantly rejected President Roosevelt’s offer to propose a one-month contract to settle the strike and get the workers off GM’s property.
A recent study by the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that union contracts are increasingly of longer duration. In 1956, about 15% of the contracts covering 1,000 or more workers were for three years, in contrast to the traditional one- and two-year contracts of the previous twenty years. By 1961, the proportion of three-year contracts had risen to more than 30%.
In order to get the workers to accept long-term contracts, the employers must agree to automatic annual wage concessions. In a sense, these are deferred wage increases because it is possible that the workers might insist on larger initial increases if the yearly wage raise were not built into the contract. Nevertheless, such automatic increases averaged 8 cents an hour so far this year and 8.2 cents in 1961 compared to average negotiated increases of 7.5 cents and 7.8 cents respectively, according to the Bureau of National Affairs, a Washington research organization in the labor market field.
But even with the diminution of the inflationary pressure and the increase of long-term contracts providing automatic annual wage raises, the current period is by no means the low-point of strikes during the past twenty-five years. The impression that organized labor moved steadily onward and upward following the 1937 upsurge of the CIO is wrong. In the matter of strikes, the three-year period following the smashing of the Little Steel strike in the summer of 1937 and the period of US participation in World War II from December 8, 1941 to August 14, 1945 were far more repressed years for labor than the latest period. Here is the comparative statistical chart:



Strikes in the United States




Year


Number Stoppages


Workers Involved


Man Days Idle




1937


4,740


1,861,000


28,425,000




1938


2,772


   688,000


  9,148,000




1939


2,613


1,171,000


17,812,000




1940


2,508


   577,000


  6,701,000




1941


4,288


2,363,000


23,048,000




1942


2,968


   840,000


  4,183,000




1943


3,752


1,981,000


13,501,000




1944


4,956


2,116,000


  8,721,000




1945


4,750


3,470,000


38,000,000




1958


3,694


2,060,000


23,900,000




1959


3,708


1,880,000


69,000,000




1960


3,333


1,320,000


19,100,000




1961 (Jan.-July)


2,010
(est.)


   704,000
(est.)


  7,410,000
(est.)



Even a cursory study of these figures is revealing. In both 1958 and 1959, regarded as “quiet” years on the labor front, the number of strikers was greater than in 1937, the record year for the two decades, 1920-1940. The figures for 1960, low point of the decade, were still far larger in every strike category than in 1938, 1939, 1940 and 1942. Even for the seven-month period in 1961 for which I have available statistics at this writing, there were more strikers than in the entire years of 1939 and 1940 and more man-days lost due to strikes than in all of either 1940 or 1942. And as I showed earlier in this article, the first half of this year far surpassed the comparable period of 1961 both in the number of strikers and the man-days lost.
This does not tell the whole story. The strikes of the recent “quiet” years with few exceptions brought material gains in wages, benefits and improved working conditions. Most of the strikes in the 1937-1941 period were fought for simple union recognition – to compel an employer to agree to meet with a union committee and negotiate. The Little Steel strike of 1937 – the largest steel walkout since the smashed 1919 Great Steel Strike – was wiped out in blood. The low figures for man-days lost during the World War II years represent wholesale breaking of strikes by the quick action of the government and the cooperation of the union leaders during a period of fast-rising prices while wages were officially frozen.
The facts I have just cited also throw light on the low state of “labor’s power and prestige” which so concerns Kirstein. I do not know if labor’s “power and prestige” today are any lower than during the Little Steel strike of 1937, when the police of Roosevelt’s “New Deal” colleague, Mayor Kelly of Chicago, murdered ten workers in the Memorial Day Massacre at the Republic steel plant and Roosevelt answered John L. Lewis’ plea for help with the cynical reply, “A plague on both your houses.”
 
CERTAINLY, labor’s “power and prestige” are no lower than during World War II when wages were frozen while prices soared and every strike was smashed except the four national strikes of the coal miners in 1943, when John L. Lewis stood up to the lynch cries of the national press and the tirades of Roosevelt and Congress and the miners won their greatest victory.
It is not quite clear from Kirstein’s article just how he measures labor’s “power and prestige.” But to my way of thinking, labor’s “power and prestige” can’t sink much lower than it was during the 1947-1952 period of the Truman administration – the same Truman who woke up on the morning after Election Day, 1948, to find out he’d been unexpectedly re-elected to the Presidency and exclaimed, “Labor did it!”
It was in June 1947 that Congress enacted the Taft-Hartley Act, condemned by every sector of organized labor as a “slave labor law.” The most significant political fact about the passage of this Act was that the overwhelming majority of both capitalist parties – Democratic as well as Republican – in both the House and Senate voted for this bill.
What is most significant of all is that President Truman invoked the injunctive powers of the Act against actual or threatened strikes seven times in 1948 and three times more before the end of his term in January 1953. This did not include his strikebreaking seizures of railroads, coal mines and steel plants.
There was not a single union man in Congress to speak or vote against the Taft-Hartley bill. There was no mass action of any kind initiated or led by either the CIO or AFL national leaders in opposition to passage of the T-H Act. All but a handful of labor leaders, notably John L. Lewis, Charles P. Howard of the International Typographical Union and Matthew Smith of the Mechanics Educational Society, took the degrading Taft-Hartley “non-Communist” oath.
In the spring of 1948, the top union leaders, particularly of the CIO, were hurling invectives against Truman and had initiated a “Draft Eisenhower” campaign. On April 4, 1948, the Detroit Free Press carried an interview with Walter Reuther, head of the CIO’s largest affiliate, who complained that “Truman is hopelessly inadequate” and hoped that “some competent man like Eisenhower will be nominated by the Democrats.” Surely, when Reuther and the rest of the labor leaders shortly fell into line behind Truman, campaigned furiously for him and hailed his election as a “great labor victory,” that was a pretty low point in labor’s “power and prestige.”
There is one other measurable factor most frequently cited as the conclusive argument against any further possibility of growth of the US labor unions and, indeed, as certain evidence that the unions must inevitably decline. Kirstein raises the argument as his concluding point when he refers to “the white-collar worker, who is now surpassing the blue-collar worker in numbers” and who, “one thing is certain,” will “not join the production worker’s union.”
It is not my purpose to take up the arguable point of whether white-collar workers will or will not join a blue-collar workers’ union. I wish to concentrate on the fiction, accepted as unquestionable fact by even well-informed and good-intentioned people like Kirstein, that the blue-collar workers are in decline and that the white-collar workers are inheriting the American earth.
In my previously cited article, The Myth of “People’s Capitalism”, I reported the Bureau of Labor Statistics data for July 10-16, 1960, on the occupational division of the gainfully employed in this country. As of that date, I wrote:
“Two-thirds of all the gainfully employed are males – 90% of them white. An outright majority – 58.4% – of all employed males are in the manual, service and farm laborer classifications ... Factory operatives and kindred workers form the largest single group of male employees, 19.2%. Then come craftsmen, 18.7%; non-agricultural laborers, 9%; service workers (a wide category including domestic servants, repairmen, laundry workers, elevator operators, janitors, clothes pressers, garbage collectors, barbers, hotel, restaurant and bar workers, police and firemen, etc.) 6.5%; and hired farm laborers, 4.9%.
“All income earners of both sexes totaled 68,689,000 in the above-cited BLS report. Of these, 37,449,000 – or a 54% majority – are in physical labor categories, including operatives, craftsmen, laborers, service workers and hired farm hands. Clerical workers number 9,907,000 and sales workers, 4,405,000. The latter two ‘white collar’ groups total 14,312,000. They formed 20.8% of the employed working force in July 1960. Even if we add to them a mixed category listed as ‘professional, technical and kindred workers,’ numbering 7,042,000, or 10.3% of the total, we cannot stretch the ‘white collar’ workers to more than 31.1% of the gainfully employed.”
I pointed out, however, that in arriving at the conclusion that white-collar workers outnumber blue-collar workers, the classification of the service workers, who until 1960 were classified with the manual labor group, was transferred to the “white-collar” category and the remaining classifications of “managers, officials and proprietors” and “farm owners and farm managers,” together representing 14.4% of the total, are lumped in with the white-collar wage-earners.
 
TO THIS statistical data, I am now able to add information based on an actual census presented in the October 1962 Scientific American, unquestionably the finest and most authoritative general science periodical published in this country. It is contained in the article, More from the Census of 1960, by Philip H. Hauser, chairman of the Technical Advisory Committee for the census of 1960 and head of the department of sociology at the University of Chicago.
Prof. Hauser has broken the census figures down into two general categories, “Providers of Services” and “Producers of Goods.”
Before we examine these figures, it should be noted that all managers and proprietors are listed as “producers of services” and all farmers, who are owners of their means of production and very frequently employers, are listed as “producers of goods.”
Hauser’s article contains a chart showing the continuous ratio of the various sectors of the labor force from 1900 to 1960. This chart reveals that aside from the farmers, who are in the main petty capitalists, the chief classifications of the “producers of physical goods” – the so-called blue-collar workers or operatives (factory workers mainly) and craftsmen (construction trades, etc.) – have increased in absolute numbers every year since 1900 and, every year right through to 1960, have represented a larger proportion of the total labor force. That is, the main base of the labor unions is not narrowing; it is widening.
In his two main categories, Hauser lists 54.4% in “producers of services,” including “42.2 per cent in white collar occupations and 12 per cent in household service and other service occupations.” Remember, “service occupations” include the $40-a-week Puerto Rican and Negro hospital workers in New York City who this year engaged in such a militant strike. He adds that “only 46 per cent were engaged in work directly contributing to the production of physical goods.”
He immediately adds, however, that “the decline in production workers is entirely attributable to the reduction in the number of farmers, farm laborers and nonfarm laborers. Since 1900 agricultural employment has fallen from 37.5 per cent to only 6.3 per cent of the labor force ...” He further adds that “men are still engaged primarily in the production of goods (three-fifths of the male work force in 1960, compared with four-fifths in 1900), the white-collar and service functions that have come to the fore have been taken over to a large extent by women ...” On the average, women workers earn only two-thirds the average wages of male workers.
Here is the break-down for the various classifications of “producers of goods” in 1900 and 1960 as a percentage of the total labor force:



Occupation


 


1900


 


1960




Craftsmen


10.0%


14.1%




Operatives


12.0%


20.1%




Laborers (non-farm)


12.5%


  5.5%




Farm Laborers


17.5%


  2.3%




Service (incl. Domestic)


  9.0%


19.0%



If the unions were to stick to only the above categories of manual workers, although such white-collar and professional workers as the New York City school teachers and newspaper reporters went on strike this year, they could double the present labor union membership, from 17.5 million to 35 million. As a matter of fact, the AFL-CIO announced on November 14 a plan for an organizing campaign in the Los Angeles area, where there are about 5,000 unorganized firms with 750,000 potentially organizable workers.
 
IF ORGANIZED labor faces a critical period ahead – and it does, it won’t be because the union membership is in “rapid decline” or because the blue-collar workers are disappearing. It will be due to the policies and program of the union leadership.
For one thing, the unions will have to develop a political action program and organization that will be completely independent of the old capitalist two-party set-up. The labor experts of the capitalist class don’t low-grade labor’s potential power and prestige in the political as well as economic arena. Thus, John D. Pomfret, labor reporter, wrote before this year’s elections in the October 24 New York Times about “labor’s principal political asset – sheer mass. The nation’s 17,500,000 union members and their families are an enormous political force.”
You bet. If they had their own party, they could turn the Democratic and Republican parties almost overnight into minor parties. They could be the government.
November 27, 1962



ON THE eve of the 17-nation disarmament conference convened last March 14 in Geneva, a large-scale propaganda campaign was launched to allay widespread fears in the capitalist world that any significant cut in military spending will lead to a severe economic crisis, particularly in the United States. Moscow, as well as Washington, joined in this historically unique campaign.
In this age of potential nuclear annihilation, it might seem that the exclusive concern would be whether the United States, as well as all other atomic powers, can afford not to disarm. But just before the Geneva conference opened, agencies of both the United States government and the United Nations released official reports and studies devoted to serious and extensive analyses of whether capitalist United States can afford – economically speaking – to disarm. Never before has disarmament been discussed as a possibly grave threat to US economic stability in such an open and official manner.
“The new attempt that will be made in Geneva next week to negotiate a world-wide treaty for general and complete disarmament has again raised the question of whether the United States could afford to disarm,” began Max Frankel in his special Washington dispatch to the March 5 New York Times. His lengthy article immediately makes clear that he’s not discussing some military hazard which the US cannot “afford” to risk. He explains:
“Since World War II, when huge military expenditures became an important element of the country’s economy, the thought of eliminating these expenditures from the federal budget has raised fears of a major depression. The quick downward response of the stock market to ‘peace scares’ has been symbolic of a widespread suspicion that even if the country wished to disarm and felt safe enough to do so it could not agree to disarm without risking financial chaos.”
Frankel’s article is a report and analysis of a study made by a panel of American economists for the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency set up last year by President John F. Kennedy. The panel is headed by Emil Benoit, associate professor of international business in the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University. He is also Director of the Program of Research on Economic Adjustments to Disarmament, financed by private foundations. Prof. Benoit’s own formulations on the subject may be read in the chapter he contributed to The Liberal Papers, a symposium edited by James Roosevelt and published in April 1962 by Doubleday & Company, Inc.
On March 11, less than a week after Frankel’s report on the Benoit panel study and three days before the Geneva parley opened, the United Nations made public its report by ten economics experts on “the national economic and social consequences of disarmament in countries with different economic systems and at different stages of economic development.” The ten experts, who had been chosen by the late UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold, came from countries as politically and economically divergent as the United States, France, Britain, India, Pakistan, Sudan and Venezuela, all with capitalist economies, and the Soviet Union, Poland and Czechoslovakia, all non-capitalist countries with nationalized economies.
 
WE MUST carefully note at the outset that the United Nations and the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency studies both concede, either directly or by implication, that rapid and total disarmament by the Soviet Union can be achieved without any economic crisis or serious dislocation of economic activity. Moreover, these reports, as well as commentaries on them in the US press, agree that disarmament would be immediately advantageous to the Soviet Union and the other non-capitalist countries.
The summary of the UN study published in the March 12 New York Times, disposes of the major economic problem posed by disarmament in the Soviet Union and other countries with nationalized, planned economies, in one paragraph:
“In the centrally planned economies, where productive capacity is usually fully utilized, it would be necessary to convert plants producing military equipment to production of durable consumer goods and of such investment goods as can be produced in them with only minor retooling. This can be done rapidly.”
Almost four columns of condensed type are used in the Times summary of the UN report to explain how it might be possible for the highly industrialized capitalist countries, particularly the United States and Great Britain, to avert economic decline and mass unemployment despite disarmament.
Both the US and the UN studies emphasize disarmament as a serious economic problem only for the private-profit economies. We will examine more fully what the official reports have to say on this aspect of the problem further on in this article. First, let us see what they say about the economic consequences of disarmament for the Soviet Union.
In the very last paragraph of his analysis of the Benoit panel report, Max Frankel summarizes all it has to say on the effect of disarmament on the Soviet Union:
“Should disarmament come, the experts point out, the fate of the non-Communist world would depend more than ever upon the peaceful economic competition between East and West and the two worlds’ capacities for aiding underdeveloped continents. If the United States were unprepared, they say, it could lose that long-range contest the day it achieves the long-elusive goal of freedom from war.”
 
THE experts – this special panel of American economists headed by Columbia University’s Professor Benoit – have trepidations about the “long-range” economic prospects of the United States compared to those of the Soviet Union once “freedom from war” is achieved.
On the basis of this same study, Frankel asserts that “the Russians ... derive from their Marxist schooling a deeply held conviction that disarmament would quickly give them the lead in any peaceful economic race with the West.”
But just two paragraphs before, Frankel admits that it’s not the Russians at all who voice doubts about the economic viability of American capitalism in a disarmed world. The Times correspondent writes:
“However, although the Russians, for their own political reasons, now agree that the capitalist system could withstand the shock of disarming, a great many persons both here and abroad have their doubts.”
The subversive talk about the economic hazards of peace for US capitalism is not being spread by the Russians after all, but by anonymous “great many persons both here and abroad.” The great many persons “here,” at least, are identified in part by Frankel when he notes the “quick downward response of the stock market to ‘peace scares’ ...”
Another New York Times analyst, C.L. Sulzberger, reporting from Geneva in the March 17 issue, also repeats ritualistically the formula: “Moscow is convinced the United States cannot afford to disarm because this would wreck our capitalist economy.” But then he goes on immediately to cite a more compelling reason why the Russians are most anxious for disarmament:
“Washington suspects Russia is almost forced to end the present arms race because it needs to tap the reservoir of military manpower to aid its faltering agriculture.”
Sulzberger elaborates this point and also indicates an economic motivation for the capitalist leaders to drag their feet on the disarmament issue. He writes:
“No doubt disarmament on any major scale would convenience the Soviet economy. It would provide more men to expand food production, Russia’s Achilles heel. It would afford new capital for investment in consumer goods and political exports to under-developed countries.
“Conversely, massive disarmament might for a time worry the US economy at an awkward moment. We are in the throes of adjusting ourselves to competition with the dynamic European Common Market and we have not yet solved the gold leakage. During the last dozen years our bullion holdings dropped by $7.5 billion.”
To Sulzberger’s inventory of international economic tribulations comprising an “awkward moment” for US disarmament, he would have been able to add two months later the worst stock market crash since 1929 plus signs of an approaching recession marked by industrial overcapacity, persistent mass unemployment and slackening capital investment.
But, Sulzberger nevertheless assures us, “Our immense armaments effort could be shifted with surprising ease and ultimate convenience to new, non-military endeavors ...”
Since “disarmament on any major scale would convenience the Soviet economy” and also provide “ultimate convenience to new, non-military endeavors” in this country, what prevents our achieving that “diversion to peaceful purposes of the resources now in military use” which, the UN study says, “could be accomplished to the benefit of all countries and lead to the improvement of world economic and social conditions”?
 
NONE of these studies, reports and commentaries offers a rational explanation of why the Soviet Union would want to obstruct disarmament. Indeed, they all concede or at least imply that the Soviet Union and its leaders yearn for disarmament and visualize enormous economic benefits from it.
Benoit, furthermore, on page 236 of The Liberal Papers, ascribes to “Marxian fantasies” the belief that a capitalist economy requires military expenditures to “keep going.” Sulzberger, as cited above, claims that “Moscow is convinced the United States cannot afford to disarm because this would wreck our capitalist economy.” Isn’t this all the more reason why the Soviet Union would earnestly and urgently desire immediate, full and unconditional disarmament?
But the alleged belief of the Soviet leaders that disarmament would wreck the capitalist economy is not really involved. US capitalism could quickly disprove such a belief by a disarmament agreement and a shift “with surprising ease” to “new, non-military endeavors,” if Sulzberger is correct.
There is some evidence, however, that US strategists are weighing the competitive advantage, in the economic sense, enjoyed by the United States over the Soviet Union in a continuation and intensification of the arms race. This line of thought is reflected in Military Defense: Free World Strategy in the 60s, by Dr. Robert Strausz-Hupe and Dr. William Kintner, political science professors at the University of Pennsylvania, director and deputy director respectively of the Foreign Policy Research Institute with close ties in the Pentagon. Their joint article, published in the January-March 1962 issue of General Electric Forum, says:
“Contrary to general belief, the [arms] race need not work against world stability and peace. It could serve as the most effective means to bring the Communist rulers to reasonable terms. For the Free World can better afford such a competition than the Communist bloc.” (Original emphasis)
 
THIS, of course, is only the opposite side of the coin tossed by Sulzberger when he states that Washington “suspects” the Soviet leaders want to end the arms race because it “would convenience the Soviet economy” by providing “more men to expand food production” and “new capital” for investment to produce more consumer goods and for exports to the poorer lands.
The Strausz-Hupe-Kintner thesis, however, does not answer the question whether capitalist United States can substantially reduce its military establishment and expenditures without grave consequences for the economy. It simply argues that forcing the Soviet Union into an arms race would put an intolerable economic squeeze on the USSR’s non-capitalist, planned economy. This argument does carry the implication that armaments spending is economically more supportable and more advantageous for the private profit economy than for the nationalized economy.
In its own way, therefore, this line affirms what is stated or implied in both the UN and the US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency studies: There is every economic and material reason for the Soviet Union to desire and seek speedy and total disarmament.
The whole issue of disarmament narrows down to the economic consequences of disarmament – of a non-militaristic program – for the United States. In other words, can Wall Street, the symbol of US finance monopoly capitalism, afford peace?
It must be clearly understood that no real Marxist (Stalinists or Khrushchevites are excluded from this category) has ever contended that a capitalist economy can be kept going only by armaments spending. That is a crude and vulgar distortion of Marxism by the Benoits and Sulzbergers. The basic Marxist analysis of modern capitalism and war was made in the spring of 1916 in a pamphlet, Imperialism – The Highest Stage of Capitalism. It was written by Lenin who less than two years later, with his co-worker Leon Trotsky, was to lead the first successful socialist revolution.
Lenin pointed out, with supporting statistical data, that World War I was being fought between competing gangs of monopoly capitalists for the redivision of the world, all of whose important areas had been gobbled up by 1914 and turned into colonies or “spheres of influence” by the largest and the richest capitalist powers. He called this the “imperialist” stage of capitalism, which he defined as follows:
“Imperialism is capitalism in that stage of development in which the dominance of monopolies and finance capital has established itself; in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun; in which the division of all territories of the globe among the great capitalist powers has been completed.”
Lenin pointed out that great financial oligarchies, able to dispose of immense concentrations of finance capital, were fighting for international control of markets, sources of raw materials and, above all, spheres for the profitable investment of rapidly accumulating capital lying idle at home.
Lenin subsequently described the whole epoch of the ascendancy of finance capital as the period of imperialist wars, colonial uprisings and proletarian revolutions. This historical record since 1914 gives overwhelming verification to this succinct formulation of the explosive character of the most advanced stage of capitalism. Within the brief historic span of less than half a century, living mankind has experienced two world wars among the dominant capitalist powers, including the United States; a series of successful colonial uprisings in Asia, Africa and Latin America which have wrested huge chunks of the globe from the direct rule of the capitalist imperialist powers or their indirect rule through economic domination; and several proletarian revolutions which have destroyed the capitalist state structures in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, East Germany, Yugoslavia, China, North Korea, North Vietnam and now, for the first time in the Western Hemisphere, in Cuba.
 
THESE shattering events have had their roots in the observable and measurable laws of development of world capitalism. These laws have manifested themselves in intolerable economic contradictions. The foremost of these has been the tendency of the productive forces to outstrip the available markets, resulting in what has been called “overproduction” or the production of unmarketable surpluses of commodities and the accumulation of capital at a faster rate than can be profitably invested.
Capitalism has no peaceful, non-violent, socially beneficial way of resolving this basic contradiction because it has an automatic, built-in limitation: it may not overstep the profit interests of the dominant finance capitalists. Therefore, capitalism must seek to resolve the contradiction of the “overproduction” of commodities and capital by periodic destruction or liquidation of the “surpluses.” The stronger capitalists seek to achieve a new level of economic stability – that is, an increase in the rate of profits – by wiping out the weaker competing capitalists and obtaining a monopoly of both the productive forces and the markets. This is attempted in both depressions and wars.
The world-wide capitalist depression of the Thirties, however, proved incapable of solution through purely economic measures and maneuvers, even with the massive intervention of the capitalist state. The elimination of “surplus” capital and commodities by liquidation through bankruptcies and failures, plus the direct use of government power to create scarcity through physical curtailment of production, such as the slaughter of live stock and the plowing under of a fixed percentage of crops, momentarily caused a revival of the capitalist economy in the middle Thirties. But by the end of the decade a new decline had set in.
The attempt in the United States, for instance, to restore the economy primarily through internal measures proved unsuccessful. By 1938, in fact, unemployment had again passed the 10 million mark and industrial production had fallen in one year by 25 per cent. More and more, all the major capitalist powers turned toward external measures, seeking economic rehabilitation at the expense of international competitors and rivals.
The world war that ensued solved nothing. Momentarily, the United States emerged from the war economically dominant and able to dictate terms to its imperialist rivals. At the same time it had to rehabilitate them and together with its former enemies it sought to prepare for a military accounting with its wartime ally, the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, the war had shaken loose revolutionary forces all over the world – India, China, Korea, Indo-China, Indonesia, North Africa, East Europe, Cuba. The whole colonial and semi-colonial world, comprising four-fifths of the world’s population and two-thirds of its land mass, was smashing the imperialist yoke. A large sector broke away from the capitalist economy toward nationalized economy; another sector – and a growing one – has sought to limit its economic and political dependency on the capitalist powers.
 
IT IS within this larger world historic framework that the question of the economic role of armaments in the United States must be viewed. The armaments program was not designed as an internal economic measure to bolster the economy. It was and is intended ultimately to resolve the intolerable contradictions of monopoly capitalism through the obliteration of the non-capitalist third of the earth and through the subjection of the rest of the world to the profit interests of US finance capital.
We can arrive at a correct answer to the question posed at the start – “Can American capitalism afford to disarm?” – only within this larger and more decisive context. We must understand that the military program, initiated and intended for conquest, is the consequence of impelling forces in the very structure of capitalism.
Let us now turn to our delayed examination of what the UN and US economics experts have to say about the effect of disarmament on the United States economy.
To begin with, neither group is talking about rapid and total disarmament. At best, they are discussing the economic consequences of a gradual slackening of the arms race. The UN study is much more vague on this – as well as several other points – than the study made for the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The UN report, without setting any specific time limit or degree of disarmament, simply notes that “hypothetical studies,” based on the “assumption” that military expenditures will be replaced “wholly” by increased government expenditures for non-military purposes, “suggest” that “some 6 or 7 per cent (including the armed forces) of the total labor force in the United States ... would have to find civilian instead of military employment or change their employment from one industry to another.
“These shifts would be small if spread out over a number of years ... The higher the rate of the growth of the economy, the easier the adaptation.”
This estimate leaves out two things:

the number of unemployed in this country in June was already 4,463,000, or 5.5 per cent of the civilian labor force, so that the total of those for whom jobs would have to be supplied would be more than ten million in the event of “rapid disarmament”;
the rate of growth of the economy would have to be faster than at any time since World War II, even to keep the number of unemployed from rising above the 10 million level, according to estimates of almost all US economists.

But we will leave these matters aside – for the moment. What is meant by the UN report’s phrase, “a number of years” for the shift to disarmament? The Benoit panel report tells us more explicity. As described by Max Frankel in his New York Times analysis, one of the major points of the Benoit report is:
“Assuming that disarmament will be accomplished in stages over ten to twelve years, and that it will be accompanied by greater outlays for international inspection and police forces, as well as civilian space and nuclear energy programs, it is unlikely to result in immediate depression of the United States economy.”
We will ignore the qualifying “immediate” before the word “depression” – for the time being. Certainly, no “immediate” is placed before the word “disarmament.” It is to take “ten to twelve years.” But wait, the panel is not speaking of ten to twelve years from now. Further on, Frankel explains:
“For the convenience of planning, therefore, it is assumed that disarmament is not likely to begin before 1965 and that at best it would take effect in four periods of three years, and be completed about 1977.”
In short, disarmament is envisaged “at best” within 15 years. But pause some more.
 
THE Benoit report doesn’t really base itself on “total” disarmament. As a matter of fact, it expects armaments spending to rise to $60 billion in 1965 with “more than 7,000,000 persons employed in civilian or Government defense work.” Then it will start to taper off. One thing the study is sure of: arms spending is going to grow bigger before it grows smaller.
When it starts to grow smaller, just how much smaller will it grow? Well, by 1969 it will be down to a mere $43 billion a year – about what it was just before Kennedy took office, or the highest in US peacetime history up to 1961. By 1972, ten years from now, the reduction would be to $31 billion annually. By 1977, “defense spending by the Government is expected to drop from about $60,000,000,000 to $28,000,000,000.” In other words, war spending will continue to be at a pace more than double the average annual military spending from 1946 through 1950, which in turn was thirteen times greater than in pre-war 1939. From now, until 1977, 15 years hence, the US will have “disarmed” to a total of about $600 billion of additional military spending.
Since we have had two major – that is, world – wars within the past half century, it is natural to seek in historical experience some guide to the problem of disarmament as faced by the great capitalist powers, particularly the United States where the military expenditures comprise about 45 per cent of the world’s total arms spending and four times that of the Soviet Union.
Curiously, neither the UN nor the US Arms Control Agency study investigates the economic experience following World War I. In the United States, at least, the decade following World War I was known as the “Golden Twenties.” The index of industrial production (1957=100) rose from 26 in 1920 to 38 in 1929, a 46 per cent growth. It is true that an economic decline in 1921 reduced the industrial production index to 20, down 23 per cent from the year before. But by 1923, the index stood at 30, rising almost steadily with no serious reversal until 1930. This was accomplished with an almost continuous decline in both federal spending and federal debt. Total federal spending dropped more than half between 1920 and 1925, from $6.4 billion annually to $3.06 billion, while military spending fell from $4.6 billion to $600 million. The federal debt fell from a 1919 post-war high of $25.5 billion to $16.9 billion in 1929. In short, in that period the US economy was able to advance despite a sharp decline in federal spending and with a drastic slash in military expenditures.
But both the UN and US agency reports quite correctly see no precedent in the post-World War I experience and do not bother to mention it. For by 1929, even the United States, banker to the world, could not maintain a stable and advancing economy strictly through “free enterprise.” As a matter of fact, even massive federal spending and ten straight years of federal budget deficits could not restore the US economy to the 1929 level. The job was done by war spending, piling up the federal debt from $45.9 billion in 1939 to $269.9 billion in 1946.
 
WHAT happened at the end of World War II is examined by both reports to see if it contains some guide for disarmament today. Here we find a wide difference of opinion.
The UN report emphasizes:
“The post-war conversion was a much larger one and involved a more rapid transfer of resources than total disarmament would require today. Nevertheless, huge armies were quickly demobilized without a significant rise in unemployment in most countries.”
Only as a quite casual afterthought, does the UN study add:
“During the post-war conversion, however, the major concern of economic policy was to restrain, rather than maintain, over-all demand.”
The Benoit panel report, as described by Max Frankel, dismisses as totally inapplicable to the present situation the post-World War II experience.
“Demobilizations after World War II and the Korean War are not comparable, the experts maintain, because consumer saving and demand has not been pent up, as it was then. The employment problem now, they note, is much more serious than it was after Korea with both the labor force and the productivity of each worker growing rapidly in the Nineteen Sixties.”
One simple fact, which neither report mentions, underscores the difference between disarming today and after World War II. During World War II it was necessary to drastically limit and curtail civilian production to provide enough labor, plants and resources for war production. Today, with military spending within a billion dollars of the Korean War peak in 1953, we are having the beginnings of an economic crisis of overproduction in civilian commodities and uninvested private capital.
What is the weight of militarism in the US economy today? An extensive review of “the pattern of defense spending” in the Sunday Business Section of the April 29 New York Times, begins:
“There’s no business like big business and the biggest of all is defense business ... the biggest single economic activity, not only in the United States but in the world.”
In the United States, according to Frankel’s review of the Benoit panel study, the military business involves
“... nearly one in ten of every dollar produced in goods and services ... nearly one in ten of all workers ... 86 per cent of all federal government purchases of goods and services ... 95 per cent of all jobs in the aircraft and missile industries, 60 per cent of jobs in ship and boat-loading industries and 40 per cent of the jobs in radio and communications equipment manufacturing.”
Now keep in mind that the “defense business” has not replaced normal civilian production but has been incorporated into the regular economic machinery as the “biggest of all” the big businesses. How can this be eliminated, or even reduced about 50 per cent, as the Benoit study really envisages “disarmament,” without a serious economic convulsion?
It can be done, say the various official reports from the UN and US agencies, with a couple of mammoth-sized “ifs.” If “total effective demand can be maintained” (UN study). If “military expenditures were fully replaced by public and private non-military spending ...” (UN study). If the government “could strike the proper balance between immediate tax reductions to spur civilian demands, and increased Government spending on longer-range needs ... school construction, teacher training, roads, urban renewal, area redevelopment, public health and social services.” (US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency study).
Unfortunately, Frankel observes in his summary of the Benoit panel report,
“... the experts also note that under present laws, without vigorous Government action of the kind the country has never before been required to take, a drop of $5,000,000,000 in defense spending could cause a serious slowdown.”
But that wouldn’t be the half of it, Frankel indicated back last March 5, if another development took place:
“Pessimism and a break in the stock market, the experts say, might make matters very bad.”
Matters have become “very bad,” because the worst break in the stock market since 1929 occurred in May and June, little more than two months after Frankel’s report.
The Benoit panel concluded, “education, welfare and public works projects are the most attractive aspects of disarmament.” But, these same experts concede, “it remains a problem how these can be achieved in a way that will maintain and spur economic growth in the absence of defense spending.
“Students of the economics of disarmament have begun to explore these areas,” we are informed. “But they are not certain that a tradition-oriented Congress would accept such Government activity in time.”
A Congress which would vote down a Medicare bill to provide a little medical assistance to aged sick through funds levied by a payroll tax is certainly going to need a lot of persuading to vote for thirty or forty billions of federal spending for socially beneficial purposes to replace the decline in arms spending some fifteen years from now.
 
IT IS in the light of such political considerations, if nothing else, that we must evaluate the Kremlin’s line on disarmament as expressed by Professor Oskar Lange once Poland’s representative in the UN Security Council, in the April 16 issue of a leading Moscow newspaper, Izvestia. Lange wrote that in many capitalist countries “there are fears that disarmament would provoke mass unemployment and economic crisis” and that “reactionary imperialist circles as well as the monopolies that have profited from military contracts make use of these fears in their struggle against disarmament.” But, Lange assures the ruling US Monopoly capitalists,
“... this does not mean that it would be impossible to bring about disarmament in the capitalist countries without economic shocks. Such shocks could be avoided by application of certain measures of economic policy directed toward the replacement of military contracts by orders connected with peaceful aims ...”
Let us assume that the reactionary US Congress, the political agency of the monopolists who benefit from military contracts, agrees to disarmament and a titanic increase in social and welfare spending. Let us assume that the private real estate interests are unable to block new low-rent housing, that the giant industrial corporations permit the government to invade the fields of industrial production, that the Church hierarchs and the Southern segregationists cease to obstruct federal spending for public education. Let us assume all this and a great deal more and we still have not answered the question about armaments and the economy. Can Wall Street afford to disarm? But this is not really the decisive question. In fact, it’s the wrong question.
The question that must be answered is this: if more than a trillion dollars of military spending since 1946, if the accumulation of a $300 billion federal debt now maturing at a dizzying rate of nearly $100 billion a year, if the withholding of millions of youth from the labor force by their sequestration in the armed forces – if all these have failed to stabilize the US capitalist economy, how will the same amount or less of federal spending for peaceful purposes in place of militarism fundamentally solve the basic contradictions of capitalism? If the monstrous armaments spending won’t do the trick, how will welfare spending?
This contradiction can be resolved in just one way, as Socialist Workers Party Chairman James P. Cannon once put it, by “one small, but good, social revolution” to replace capitalist anarchy with socialist planning.



TODAY, American employers and trade union leaders alike insist there is no basis in this country for class struggle. They claim, in fact, that “class distinctions” and even classes themselves have disappeared from our society.
The founders of the American Federation of Labor in 1886 did not deny the fact of the class struggle. They said in the Preamble of the AFL Constitution:
“A struggle is going on in all nations of the civilized world between the oppressors and the oppressed of all countries, a struggle between the capitalist and the laborer ...”
It is true that Samuel Gompers, the AFL’s founding president, disavowed class struggle methods. He proclaimed in his 1910 Labor Day statement, for instance, that
“Labor Day stands for industrial peace ... Our labor movement has no system to crush ... It has nothing to overturn ...”
William Green, Gompers’ successor, announced in 1935, on the eve of the stormy rise of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) that we were at the dawn of class peace. He assured labor that “the majority of employers sincerely and honestly wish to maintain decent wage standards and humane conditions ...” He boasted of his “consistent refusal to commit our movement” to “tactics based upon belief that irreconcilable conflict exists between owners of capital and labor ...”
The modern union leaders have gone Green one better. They have banished economic classes altogether or reduced class differences to the vanishing point. Without classes or class differences, they ask, how can there be class struggle? The late Philip Murray, president of both the CIO and the United Steelworkers of America, thus wrote in July 1948:
“Today, progressive businessmen regard their workers ... as welcome partners ... We have no classes in this country; that’s why the Marxist theory of the class struggle has gained so few adherents. We’re all workers here.”
Walter Reuther, United Automobile Workers President and Murray’s successor in the CIO, spoke at the 1954 CIO Convention against a labor party here because he said this country does not have the same type of class structure as in Europe. Over there, he claimed,
“society developed along very classical economic lines, there you have rigid class groupings ... But America is a society in which social groups are in flux, in which we do not have this rigid class structure ...”
Reuther has never made clear whether we are becoming “all workers here,” as Murray said, all capitalists or some new hybrid class. But he is sure of one thing:
“We don’t believe in the class struggle. The labor movement in America has never believed in the class struggle.” (New York Times, March 28, 1958).
AFL-CIO President George Meany also abhors class struggle. But Meany, unlike Murray, has liquidated the working class. At the AFL-CIO merger in December 1955, Meany decreed:
“We must not think of ourselves as a group apart; there is no such thing as a proletariat in America.”
This echoes a note sounded since the end of World War II by ideologists and propagandists of big business, who spread the myth that in America we have achieved – or soon will – a “classless” society – and without abolishing the private profit system. This unique form of society they call “people’s capitalism.” Thus, the General Electric Corporation in a large advertising spread in the February 22, 1959, New York Times Magazine, explained that its shareowners “come from all walks of life” and “this trend has made American capitalism more and more a people’s capitalism.” (Original emphasis.)
Adolph A. Berle Jr., Roosevelt’s wartime Assistant Secretary of State and a luminary early in the Kennedy Administration, specializes in this type of myth-making. In the New York Times Magazine, November 1, 1959, Berle states that what Marxists describe as capitalism “perhaps did exist a century ago. But in America it stopped existing somewhere between 1920 and 1930.” He informs us: “This American system has not received a distinctive name. It has been called ‘people’s capitalism’.” This “people’s capitalism,” according to Berle, is a transformation from the “age of moguls” which existed seventy or eighty years ago. In
the last decades of the Nineteenth Century, Berle concedes, “individual owners of private capitalist enterprise were ... piling up fabulous fortunes from the profits of railroads and mines, steel, copper and oil ...” But today the corporations have “displaced the tycoons and moguls, substituting professional management.” In a subsequent New York Times article, Berle dissolved the working class as easily as he had eliminated the “tycoons and moguls.” He wrote on December 18, 1960, that “in America the ‘proletariat’ is hard to find.”
The New York Times editors also claim it is absurd to speak of class distinctions. In a Labor Day editorial, the September 5, 1960, Times instructs us:
“What we most need to remember is that such expressions as ‘labor’ and the ‘workingman’ have a diminished meaning today. We have no class distinctions to fit such words. Among the crowds on our Appian Ways it is difficult to tell employer and employee apart ...”
Let the Times editors – and Berle and Meany, too – seek beyond “our Appian Ways” and go to the unemployment compensation offices or welfare relief agencies. Let them survey the vast and rotting slum areas of New York City and our other large population centers. They will find, by some odd chance, that such places and such areas, are frequented almost exclusively by workers.
Here we have one rule-of-thumb measure of class distinctions in America. Unemployment and the need for unemployment relief are almost exclusively conditions affecting wage workers. A study of unemployment, published in June, 1958, by the US Bureau of the Census, disclosed that 11,600,000 workers had suffered some period of unemployment in 1957, a “good” year. If we count as proletarians only those subject to unemployment and their dependents, we must conclude that, contrary to Berle’s claim, the proletariat in the United States is not at all “hard to find.”
 
CLASS divisions in America have been the subject of serious studies in recent years by outstanding sociologists and scholars – all non-Marxists. Their findings are contained in such widely heralded books as The Status Seekers by Vance Packard, The Power Elite by C. Wright Mills and Social Class and Mental Illness by August B. Hollingshead and Frederick C. Redlich. They all confirm, in their own way, that class lines exist and are hardening more than ever.
The Status Seekers, a best-seller in 1959 and 1960, marshals an impressive array of facts to answer the directly posed question: has the United States become a classless society or is it even approaching such a condition?
Packard concludes that class lines in this country are becoming more rigid and that even within the upper strata of society the straining for status and privileged position has intensified. Moreover, he dismisses the “widespread assumption” that the rise in available “spending money” in the late fifties is making everyone equal. He stresses that a working-class man does not move into a higher social class even if he should succeed in purchasing a “limousine” or some other material status symbol. And the worker knows it, says Packard. For, in terms of the worker’s productive role, class lines are becoming “more rigid, rather than withering away.”
Packard refutes the widely circulated propaganda that the working class is being absorbed into the middle class. In 1940, only about one-third of those gainfully employed were in so-called “white collar” occupations. By 1959, it was claimed, at least half were in the “white collar” group. This, says Packard, has been incorrectly interpreted to signify a great upthrust of working-class people into the middle class. Actually, a large percentage of those recruited into the new “white collar” jobs are women who did not previously work. Besides, many jobs classified as “white collar,” Packard points out, are really low-paid manual occupations that require little skill, such as that of office machine operators, gas station attendants, retail store clerks and many government employees.
Today, there are some 23,000,000 women workers, almost a third of the entire labor force. They provide a high percentage of the clerical and other “white collar” workers. The average full-time yearly pay of women workers in 1960 was $3,102, or two-thirds of men’s average earnings. Thus, the majority of working women get wages close to or below the poverty level, fixed by government experts at $2,500 a year. This hardly qualifies these new “white collar” workers as middle-class, even if one believes that a poorly paid typist or mimeograph machine operator has a status superior to a union-scale linotypist or pressman in the printing industry.
 
THE FACTS cited above confirm Packard’s contention that there has been a “revolutionary blurring” between so-called “white collar” and “blue collar” workers in the sense that every basis for the claim of “white collar” clerical workers to superior status over “blue collar” workers has been undermined. Furthermore, Packard divides the “white collar” classification into a “lower” and an “upper” group. The latter includes the managers and executive employees, as well as self-employed professionals like doctors and lawyers. He explains, however, that between the “lower” and “upper” “white collar” groups there is a “sharp and formidable” boundary line.
We are forced to conclude from Packard’s findings that the “blue collar” workers are not being uplifted into the middle class. Rather, there has been a massive “proletarianization” of the lower middle class. Our society has become polarized into two primary classes, the wage workers and the owners. The letter’s top richest circles are the dominant sector of the American ruling class.
There was a time, however, when the American people might have spoken of “people’s capitalism” with a large degree of truth. That was before the American Civil War. Packard has noted this significant historical fact. There has been a tremendous shrinkage in the relative number of small entrepreneurs and self-employed people – farm owners, small tradesmen and shopkeepers, and craftsmen with their own workshops. These independent enterprisers originally constituted a true middle class in this country. They owned their means of production; they did not sell their labor power for wages.
Thus, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, during Thomas Jefferson’s presidency, four out of five Americans were self-employed enterprisers, a majority of them being farmers, Packard points out. By 1940, these enterprisers were only about one-fifth of the income earners. In 1959, they were reduced to about 13% of the “gainfully employed.” (By April 1960, the farm population, including all “hired hands,” had fallen to only 8.7% of the national total.)
In the late fifties, Packard also notes, some 87% of the income-earning populace were employed by others, by a tiny minority of employers, usually in corporate guise. I add the very significant fact that less than 1% of the corporations employ nearly 60% of all paid workers. (US Department of Commerce report, September 22, 1959.) Packard himself, I must further add, fervently disapproves of the hardening of class lines and wishes something might be done about it for the sake of the private profit system itself. But at least he does not shrink from the facts.
The “free enterprise” system in its corporate monopoly phase is not dominated by faceless “professional managers.” The Commissioner of Internal Revenue revealed in 1957 that 201 individuals had reported personal incomes of a million dollars or more in 1954 compared to “only” 145 in 1953. A further rise was expected in 1955. Fortune magazine, in its November 1957 issue, noted the significance of this data. Its article, The Fifty-Million-Dollar Man by Richard Austin Smith, observed there had been a lot of “poor-mouthing” about the million-dollar income dying out. It is plain from the statistics, said the Fortune writer, that “America’s Very Rich” have not gone the way of the pre-historic dinosaurs and do not seem likely to. The evidence points rather to what Fortune called “the resurgent Very Rich,” defined as individuals with personal estates of not less than fifty million dollars. That is the minimum wealth, Fortune contended, to be rich enough never to escape “the aura of money” or to conceive of ever being broke. A Treasury official cited by Fortune estimated there are between 150 and 500 persons in the golden circle of the “fifty-millionaires.”
Fortune itself identified 155 “fifty-millionaires” and thought it likely there were another hundred. Under the heading, America’s Biggest Fortunes, the magazine printed the names and chief sources of wealth of the 76 richest people in the country, so far as Fortune was able to uncover them.
 
THE majority of these super-rich “tycoons and moguls” have inherited their fortunes; their family names, such as Rockefeller, Harriman, Mellon, duPont, Astor, Whitney and Ford, have been associated with fabulous wealth for three or more generations. The minority of “self-made” rich listed by Fortune “made their pile” mainly during World War I and the post-war boom. They include the General Motors quartet, Alfred P. Sloan Jr., Charles F. Kettering, John L. Pratt and Charles S. Mott. Joseph P. Kennedy, stock market and real estate speculator whose son John was then in the Senate, was listed in Fortune’s $200 million to $400 million bracket.
Of Fortune’s 76 richest Americans, 31 were in the $75 million to $100 million group; 29, in the $100 million to $200 million; eight, in the $200 million to $400 million; and seven, in the $400 million to $700 million sector. J. Paul Getty, a California oil “tycoon” domiciled in Paris, occupied the $700 million to $1 billion niche alone. Getty in 1959 stated that his fortune was probably greater than a billion. (New York Times, October 16, 1959.) Several billionaire families are on the list, including seven Rockefellers, four Mellons and four duPonts. Forty one of the 76 inherited their fortunes; of the remaining 35, thirteen got rich from oil. Fortune explained its estimates were “conservative.” I put the combined wealth of the 76 at between $17 billion and $20 billion. Several of the 76 have died since 1957. But the corporations and banks which they or their heirs control or directly influence reflect the spectrum of American industry and finance, with many scores of billions in assets.
The “moguls” dominate more than ever. But the individual or family ownership and operation of a single enterprise, which characterized the economy of the last century, has been transformed into vast industrial and financial complexes owned and controlled largely by single individuals, families or small inner groups who hire and fire professional managers at will.
When confronted with these facts proving that there are more and richer “moguls” than ever, the propagandists of “people’s capitalism” brush the whole matter aside. G. Keith Funston, President of the New York Stock Exchange, has erected the final and, presumably, most invulnerable line of defense of the “people’s capitalism” theory. This Maginot Line of “people’s capitalism” is “broadened ownership of corporation stock.” The New York Post, April 21, 1959, published an interview with Funston and explained:
“G. Keith Funston did not invent the phrase ‘peoples capitalism.’ But he’s done such a job popularizing it ... that people’s capitalism – broadened ownership of corporation stock – has become pretty much of a Funston hallmark.”
Funston is quoted:
“I like the term because it’s expressive and because the Russians hate it so. They say, yes, there may be over 8,600,000 Americans owning stock but that only 1 per cent own more than 90 per cent of it – or some such figure. Well, we don’t know exactly how stock ownership is spread, but we estimate that two-thirds of those 8,600,000 shareowning Americans have incomes of $7,500 and under ... we know there’s been a significant increase of stockownership in recent years – about one-third more buyers than in 1951.”
 
FUNSTON infers that the question of the vast proportion of all stocks owned by the top one per cent of stockholders is just “Russian” propaganda. This “Russian” propaganda happens to be based on data published by such ardently pro-capitalist institutions as the US Senate and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
A 1946 Report on Monopolies by the Senate Small Business Committee disclosed that the top 1% of shareholders then owned 60% of the outstanding stock of the 200 largest corporations. “The rich are getting richer,” said the February 29, 1960, New York Times, in describing a survey by the National Bureau of Economic Research. This survey, said the Times, “showed that since 1949 there has been a trend toward more wealth in the hands of fewer people ...” This trend, the Times reported, “was clearly evident in 1953 ... when 1.6 per cent of the country’s population held 30 per cent of the nation’s personal wealth” including “at least 80 per cent of the corporate stock held in the personal sector, virtually all of the state and local government bonds and between 10 and 35 per cent of each type of property.”
What is true of the division of all shareholdings is also true for the shareholdings in individual corporations. The classic case is the American Telephone and Telegraph Company. For many years, AT&T has been cited as the outstanding example of “people’s capitalism” because it has more stockholders than any other corporation.
In 1951, AT&T celebrated the attainment of one million shareholders. Widely publicized ceremonies were held in the New York Stock Exchange. The publicity neglected to mention, however, that the vast majority of AT&T stockholders individually and collectively owned very little of AT&T. While just 30 top shareholders in 1950 owned 1,160,000 of AT&T’s 29 million outstanding shares, some 200,000 AT&T wage workers who had been induced to become “capitalists” by buying AT&T shares controlled less stock than the top 30 owners. These AT&T worker-shareowners, representing 20% of all the company’s shareholders, had to strike repeatedly just to win union recognition.
CIO Communications Workers President Joseph A. Beirne called the publicity about the one-millionth shareholder a “shallow and cheap device to fool the public.” He cited AT&T’s own figures to show that “7.5 per cent of stockholders own over one half of the outstanding shares.” He added: “Conversely, the remaining 92.5 per cent of the shareholders combined don’t even have majority control of the company ...” Today, AT&T boasts nearly two million stockholders. More than 90% of them possess insignificant holdings. All of the latter combined have less control over AT&T than a man with a paddle has over an ocean liner.
The head of the New York Stock Exchange, however, has declared that anyone who talks about how few own so much is practically an agent of the Kremlin. I will limit myself, therefore, to examining simon-pure “people’s capitalism” as defined by G. Keith Funston. In his New York Post interview, he saw this new and better economic order in the fact that about 8,600,000 Americans in the spring of 1959 owned at least one share of stock. That is, only 5% of the population owned stock.
 
THERE was more “people’s capitalism” during the great depression in 1936. That year there were 8,039,000 shareholders, or 6.3% of the population. (The Economic Almanac for 1946-47, Page 45.) By 1952, when Funston began unfolding his propaganda campaign, the number had dropped to 6,490,000, or only 4.2% of the population, according to the New York Stock Exchange’s own report. In 1956, the Exchange reported 8,630,000 shareholders, or 5.2% of the American people – still a smaller percentage than in 1936. Finally, in June 1959, Funston was able to come up with a figure on stock ownership representing a higher ratio to population than the 1936 depression figure. The New York Stock Exchange claimed there were 12,493,000 shareholders in June 1959, or about 7% of the population, compared to 6.3% in 1936.
Let us turn from the America of the 1.6% who own 80% of all privately held corporation shares to the proletarian America of the 87% who live primarily by the sale of their labor power for wages. If the “Very Rich” of Fortune’s 1957 survey are those who cannot conceive of ever becoming broke, the people of the wage-workers’ America never know what it’s like not to feel insecure, not to fear that a day will come when they will be broke or nearly so. Most of them at some time in their lives have been broke, or next to it, and many are broke right now.
Under the present private-profit order, the wage workers never escape the fear of pauperization. Insecurity nags the workers even in periods of relative “prosperity.” What if a prolonged illness strikes? What if the job folds up? What if a depression comes? These questions are never far from the surface of the minds of even the best-paid workers.
A US Department of Labor survey indicated that the average family of four needed an annual income of $6,120 in 1959 to maintain a “modest but adequate” standard of living. This did not allow for any prolonged illness or savings. This budget required a full year’s income of $118 every week. The average factory wage at the time was $90.78 a week before withholding taxes. I have before me a recent Labor Department report showing that in February 1961 the actual average weekly take-home pay of factory production workers in the metropolitan New York-Northeastern New Jersey area was $80.87 for a worker with three dependents and $73.31 for a single worker.
The US Census Bureau reported on January 5, 1961, that the median family income in 1959 – before the current recession – was $5,400 before taxes. That is, half the families in this country had incomes during the last “boom” year below $5,400, or at least $720 less than the government’s own “modest but adequate” family budget.
In the peak “prosperity” year, 1959, a large segment of the population lived close to or in dire poverty. Nearly 25% – one in four – families had to subsist on $3,000 a year or less, the equivalent in buying power of about $1,250 at pre-war 1939 price and tax levels. Fortune magazine, March 1961, cites the fact that today there are 32 million American people living in outright poverty – below the $2,500 a year level per family.
The impoverished in America are equal to nearly 75% of the population of France; about 60% of West Germany or 65% of Italy; nearly double the population of East Germany; and five times the population of Cuba. Many more than half the American people live well below what is officially considered the minimum “decency and comfort” standard for a country as rich and productive as the United States.
Remember, we are not speaking of a land newly emerged from age-long backwardness, like China. Our country, with 6.2% of the world’s population, owns 50% of its wealth. (Information Please Almanac – 1961, page 628.) Our governmental units (federal, state and local) together spent $153 billion in the fiscal year 1960. Since the end of World War II, we have spent more than $500 billion for direct military purposes – enough to have built fifty million modern $10,000 homes. In fact, we spend a million dollars a day just for storage of the “surplus” farm commodities bought by the government to prop up agricultural prices.
 
AMIDST these Himalayas of waste, great sectors of the American people live in permanent misery. Far from benefiting from the “social flux” that Reuther has conjured up, tens of millions of Americans are condemned by race, age and sex alone to suffer permanently in abysmal living conditions while abundance overflows all about them.
Take, for example, the more than 19,000,000 Negro Americans (or Afro-Americans as some of them now prefer to be called). Most of them exist in a permanent depression – economically deprived, physically segregated, socially degraded and politically disfranchised. The Negro workers earn little more than half the average wages of the white workers, although few of the latter attain the blessed estate of a “modest but adequate” family income. As of 1958, half of the nonwhite male workers earned $3,368 or less compared to a median income for whites of $5,186. Secretary of Labor Arthur J. Goldberg reported on February 17, 1961, that 13.8% of all Negroes in the labor force were out of work in January 1961, compared to 7% of white workers. At this point, it is well to remind ourselves that there is one vast area of this country, the former Southern slave states with more than twice the population of fascist Spain, that has maintained a one-party dictatorship since the end of Reconstruction and denies civil rights to more Negroes than the entire black population of South Africa.
It is miserable indeed to be a Negro worker in the United States; but, strange as it may seem, it is even worse to be an aged worker, whatever one’s color. Life magazine, July 13, 1959, gave a shocking account of the plight of persons 65 years of age or older. There were 15.4 million people over 65 in 1959. Three-fifths of them, some 9.2 million, had personal incomes of less than $1,000 a year. Another fifth, about 3,000,000, received less than a $2,000 annual income.
Our society prides itself on being based on the Ten Commandments, including one that says: “Honor thy father and thy mother ...” Yet, the United States has well over ten million pauperized aged (mostly white) who are “badgered by economic worries, harassed by failing health ... for the most part in dire need,” write Robert and Leone Train Rienow in the January 28, 1961, Saturday Review. Their article, The Desperate World of the Senior Citizen, tells how these 10 million impoverished aged Americans hidden away in our dingy back rooms “are, almost without exception, cruelly lonely, suffering from feelings of rejection and neglect.” This plight of America’s aged, I might add, is a sufficient commentary on the highly touted “social security” system in this richest country of all.
Our dependent and orphaned young also subsist on mere dregs. Payments in many states for dependent children as well as for old-age assistance, “often represent little more than slow starvation,” admitted William L. Mitchell, US Commissioner of Social Security, in an address on September 10, 1959. More than three million youngsters are trying to survive on this aid to dependent children under the Social Security Act. Life magazine recently ran pictures of children in parts of the former Belgian Congo starving as a result of civil war and foreign intervention. But just as horrible sights were to be seen down in our own Louisiana. In August 1960, the Louisiana legislature struck 23,500 children off the state-administered aid-to-dependent-children rolls. They were deemed to be living in “unsuitable” homes – the mothers of many of them were unmarried. State Senator Jack Fruge of Ville Platte on November 8, 1960, pleaded unsuccessfully for repeal of the Louisiana law, saying that he knew many instances in his own parish (county) of Evangeline where “children are so hungry they go to garbage cans for food.”
 
BUT nothing quite equals the vile conditions of the two million hired farm workers. Their average income in 1960 fell below $900. The majority are Negroes, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans. They are denied even the meager protection of the minimum wage and collective bargaining laws.
As previously noted, average wages of our 23 million women workers are only two-thirds of men’s and provide only half the income necessary for a “modest but adequate” standard of family living. Many women are the sole support of their families.
No proletariat in America? I have just described scores of millions of proletarians – the impoverished aged and the dependent children, the racial and national minorities, the women workers and the farm hands. And I have not yet touched on the main body of proletarians – the white male wage-earners.
Two-thirds of all the gainfully employed are males – 90% of them white. An outright majority – 58.4% – of all employed males are in the manual, service and farm laborer classifications, according to BLS data for July 10-16, 1960. Factory operatives and kindred workers form the largest single group of male employees, 19.2%. Then come craftsmen, 18.7%; non-agricultural laborers, 9%; service workers (a wide category including domestic servants, repairmen, laundry workers, elevator operators, janitors, clothes pressers, garbage collectors, barbers, hotel, restaurant and bar workers, etc.) 6.5%; and hired farm laborers, 4.9%.
All income earners of both sexes totaled 68,689,000 in the above-cited BLS report. Of these, 37,449,000 – or a 54% majority – are in physical labor categories, including operatives, craftsmen, laborers, service workers and hired farm hands. Clerical workers number 9,907,000 and sales workers, 4,405,000. The latter two “white collar” groups total 14,312,000. They formed 20.8% of the employed working force in July 1960. Even if we add to them a mixed category listed as “professional, technical and kindred workers,” numbering 7,042,000, or 10.3% of the total, we cannot stretch the “white collar” workers to more than 31.1% of the gainfully employed. However, the “professional, technical and kindred workers” label is deceptive. In January 1960 an AFL-CIO Industrial Union Department seminar on the space-age industries heard a warning that many employers are trying to “bleed” the unions by labeling as “technicians” workers who do about the same tasks as other production employees.
The remaining classifications are “managers, officials and proprietors” and “farm owners and farm managers.” Together, they represent 14.4% of the total.
 
THERE is extensive manipulation of statistical data to exaggerate the number and social status of the so-called “white collar class.” Thus, the Census Bureau’s occupational classification system puts file clerks, typists, office boys, grocery wrappers and cashiers, variety-store sales girls and similar low-paid workers in the same general “white collar” occupational division as “managers, officials and proprietors.” Recently, the classification of “service workers,” who include many in the most menial physical labor jobs, has been shifted from the “Manual and Services” general category to the broad “White Collar Occupations” listing.
The great increase in clerical and “technical” workers in the past 20 years, due mainly to doubling of government civilian employment and expansion of the war industries, is being used to “prove” that “blue collar” workers are in swift decline, that the proletariat is vanishing and that the unions are disintegrating.
Under the headline, Union Membership Declines, a New York Times editorial on February 7, 1960, takes special note of a 300,000 loss in total union membership from the 18,400,000 peak in 1956. The Times attributes this 1.7% decline in part to the fact that “white collar workers now account for more than half of the labor force but only 12 per cent of American unionists were white collar workers in 1958 ...” The Times’ figure on the predominance of the “white collar” workers, as the Census data I have cited show, is false. There were almost three times as many wage workers employed in physical labor categories as in “white collar” in 1960, although mass unemployment has since cut down paid union memberships by as much as 1½ million.
It is true that union leaders themselves blame the over-all decline of union membership since 1956 in part on the “changing composition” of the nation’s work force. Yet some 20 million workers in the physical labor category – many in the South – remain unorganized. Every time there has been a slackening of union growth we have heard the plaint about the “white collar” workers. The fault lies, however, in the class-collaborationist policies, methods and outlook of the union leaders.
But before anyone hangs a wreath on the American labor movement to mourn the simultaneous demise of the American proletariat and its unions, let us review certain basic facts. Twenty-eight years ago – in 1933 – there were only 2,782,296 union members, or 7.8% of the organizable workers, after 47 years of AFL activity. In 1935, the year the CIO was formed, organized workers numbered 3,616,847, or 10.6% of potential unionists. By 1937, after the CIO went into action, union membership more than doubled, numbering 7,687,087, or 21.9% of organizable workers.
 
MOREOVER, during the first two years of the CIO’s aggressive drive to organize industrial workers, scores of thousands of “white collar” workers were swept into the CIO’s fold – a combined total of 90,000 in the State, County and Municipal Employees, the United Retail Employees and the United Office and Professional Workers unions. Some 15,000 editorial employees joined the new American Newspaper Guild. (Edward Levinson, Labor on the March, 1938, Page 309-315.)
Today, despite recent losses, organized labor represents between 16 million and 17 million members, almost five times as many as in the founding year of the CIO and two and a third times more than in 1937, when the almost-broke CIO unions, amidst a depression, crashed through for their first great victories.
In examining the contention that “there is no proletariat” in the United States, I have touched only in passing on the crucial point of mass unemployment. Despite more than a trillion dollars (1,000,000,000,000) of direct military expenditures in the past twenty years, we have experienced a series of recessions – 1945-46, 1949-50, 1953-54, 1957-58 and 1960-61. The unemployment peak in July 1958 reached 5,294,000. Eight million workers drew unemployment compensation at some time during 1958. In February 1961, a new post-war record of 5,705,000 full-time jobless was reached. Another 3,000,000 were on reduced work-weeks with corresponding loss of pay. Nearly nine million wage earners were suffering directly the consequences of falling production at the low point of the latest recession. About 45% of the unemployed are not covered by unemployment compensation. It is estimated that in 1960 not less than fifteen to sixteen million workers suffered some period of full unemployment.
In February 1961, one in every ten factory workers was unemployed – an outright depression ratio. Most heavily hit were steel, auto and textile workers. Coal miners have lost two-thirds of their jobs since World War II. Detroit unemployment in February 1961 reached a depression level of 11.8% of the city’s work force. The Michigan jobless rate was 10.8%. Mass layoffs accompanied sharp drops in production. Auto factories in February 1961 worked at only 44% of the February 1960 rate. The steel industry, from June 1960 through March 1961, operated at between 45% and 55% of capacity.
 
BECAUSE of their relatively high wage rates, coal, steel and automobile workers have frequently been cited as wage-earners who have been lifted above the proletariat. Compared to the $2.30 average hourly wage rates for all manufacturing workers in February 1961, the soft coal miners received $3.27; steel workers, $3.02; and auto workers, $2.87. But frequency of layoffs and short work-weeks in these basic industries have meant deep slashes in annual earnings. Moreover, welfare funds and “fringe” benefits are proving insufficient to meet the need during the current depressed conditions of these industries.
The independent United Mine Workers was forced in December 1960 to cut pensions of 65,000 retired soft-coal miners from $100 down to $75 a month because of “economic conditions that have caused a large decline in the revenues of the trust fund.” A supplementary unemployed benefit (SUB), combined with state unemployment compensation, was supposed to provide laid-off AFL-CIO steel workers with 65% of their normal weekly take-home pay for as long as a year. By February 1961, the US Steel Corporation had reduced its individual SUB payments 40% because of the heavy drain on its fund. AFL-CIO United Automobile Workers officials have reported an unspecified number of laid-off UAW members have lost their SUB payments. These are discontinued when state unemployment benefits end. American society is indeed “in flux” – but not in Reuther’s sense. It is “in flux” between employment and unemployment; between inadequate unemployment payments and none at all.
I have cited the statistics to prove beyond doubt the class divisions in the United States, the decisive numbers of the proletariat and the tremendous size of organized labor compared to earlier periods. These facts demonstrate that the widely advertised “people’s capitalism” is a myth based upon massive falsifications about the conditions of the working people and their struggles for existence in this richest and most favored of capitalist countries. The economy of the United States is neither owned by the people nor operated for their benefit. Our capitalism remains essentially what it has been from birth: a system of exploitation of the many for the enrichment and aggrandizement of the few.
May 1, 1961



American capitalism faces a new labor crisis in the period ahead. That crisis was foreshadowed last month by the stormy events of the Ninth Annual Convention of the CIO United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers of America. The UAW convention, representing over 1,200,000 of the most advanced and politically-conscious workers in the trade union movement, gave clear expression to those militant moods and ideas which in one degree or another are beginning to pervade the ranks of all labor.
Three decisive facts stand out from the events of the UAW convention. The first is that the organized American workers are emerging from the past period of enforced retreats and unfended blows with numbers not merely intact but increased, and with an undiminished spirit of confidence, militancy and resistance. That spirit lifted the UAW convention to its feet and ran roughshod over the conservative leadership which sought to harness it. The UAW delegates fought the defeatist moods of their leadership at every turn. If the auto workers are any indication – and they are – the American workers are getting ready for battle.
Secondly, the bitter struggle against the no-strike pledge, dominant conflict of the convention, signified that a decisive sector of the auto workers has passed beyond the stage of directing their discontent solely at individual anti-labor consequences of Wall Street’s war. In grappling with the basic issue of the no-strike pledge, the auto workers demonstrated their desire for a more fundamental solution to their problems.
The magnificent and still unconcluded battle to scrap the no-strike policy, waged by the ranks against both the entire top leadership of the UAW and CIO and the Roosevelt government, testifies to an advance in the political awareness of the auto workers. In seeking to dislodge the main prop of Roosevelt’s labor policy, the auto militants have embarked on a struggle leading inevitably into head-on conflict with the government and all the political agencies of capitalism. That struggle will pose ever more sharply before the auto workers the whole question of independent labor political action.
Thirdly, the UAW convention revealed that the coming general labor crisis will constitute a crisis as well for the labor bureaucracy. The conflict which raged at the UAW convention was a struggle between the ranks and the top leadership. The relationship between program and leadership for the first time received wide-spread recognition at this convention. This was demonstrated by the powerful beginnings of a newly organized rank and file group opposed to all the old leaders and factions and built upon an advanced, militant program. Making the first complete break from all old factional ties during the election for union president, the new group pointed the way to the coming struggle for union control against the present leadership on the basis of fundamental issues.
 
Unbearable Conditions
These major developments at the UAW convention have their roots in the conditions of American capitalist war economy. Less than three years of American direct participation in the imperialist war have sufficed to bring to the fore in potentially more acute form the basic capitalist contradictions which appeared to have been ameliorated by the monstrous expansion of war production. Elements of a new, devastating economic crisis are appearing.
Prices ascend, while wages remain frozen. Plants are being shut down owing to war-contract cancellations; cut-backs are eliminating overtime pay; the widespread practice of downgrading is reducing hourly wages. All this results in a steady decline of living standards. While the war is still in progress, the workers view the looming specter of mass unemployment.
The economic squeeze on the workers has found its reflection in the arena of open class struggle. Each year of the war has seen a progressive increase in strikes. During the past six months, save for a momentary slight decline following the invasion of France, strikes have been steadily increasing in number and scope. A large number of these strikes have been occurring in what. the capitalist press calls the very “strike center,” Detroit and Michigan, heart of the automotive industry and the UAW-CIO. These strikes symptomatize not only limited grievances but a growing opposition to the war labor policy of Roosevelt and his union lieutenants.
This new girding for battle and the beginnings of open class struggle by an undefeated, and intact labor movement in reality constitutes a serious setback for Wall Street in the attainment of one of its major war objectives. With the unleashing of its war for world domination, American capitalism unfolded its program for crippling and paralyzing the labor movement. “National unity,” the watchword of the entire bourgeois camp, meant above all unity between the conflicting interests within the capitalist class against a working class disarmed by its own leadership. Thus, under Roosevelt’s leadership, Democrats and Republicans collaborated in the furtherance of capitalism’s common war aims at home and abroad. The bombing of Pearl Harbor was the signal for labor heads to rush pell-mell to perform the shameful rites of surrender before Roosevelt, as the chief representative of American imperialism. CIO President Philip Murray was constrained to boast of this fact before the unresponsive UAW-CIO delegates, declaring that
“... on the 17th day of December, 1941, ten days after our country had become involved in the war ... without formal request upon the part of the President of the United States, we all voluntarily agreed to give our Commander-in-Chief, and through him to the people of our country our No Strike commitment.”
 
Labor Disarmed
Through this conspiracy of Roosevelt and his servile labor lieutenants, the workers were deprived at one blow of their most effective weapon of union struggle, the right to strike. The disarming of the labor movement was further effected by compulsory arbitration through the capitalist government agencies. Soon, fortified by executive orders, the War Labor Board and other government agencies were imposing the demands of Big Business on the unions by decree, backed by the exercise of police and punitive powers.
The auto workers, like the rest of labor’s ranks, were largely stunned and disoriented by the initial impact of the war. They were without leadership and program which might have continued to keep them securely anchored to their own class interests. Thus, for the moment, they passively acquiesced in the surrender of the strike weapon, especially since they were solemnly assured that this was part of an “agreement” of “three parties, labor, management and government,” all carrying reciprocal obligations. Only gradually did the labor bureaucrats transform this “agreement” into a “voluntary sacred pledge” of labor alone.
Immediately, the corporations seized advantage of the no-strike policy to violate contractual obligations, ignore collective bargaining procedure and reinstitute onerous plant rules and conditions. The WLB became the repository and burial vault of workers grievances, small and great.
Within four months, Roosevelt felt the time was propitious for his program of extorting major economic “concessions” from the unions. Advancing behind a corporation-Congressional barrage against all overtime pay, Roosevelt “requested” the unions to give up “voluntarily” their contractual rights to overtime pay for week-ends and holidays as such.
There was immediate wide-spread resistance to this pro-proposal among the workers generally, and especially among the auto militants. The UAW leaders hastened to convene a national “emergency” conference in April 1942 to gain a semblance of formal endorsement for both Roosevelt’s new “request” and their previous acceptance, without membership consultation, of the no-strike policy.
At this conference, a stubborn but unsuccessful rank and file fight was waged against surrendering “premium” pay.
The entire top leadership, previously torn by unprincipled clique feuds, united in pushing through endorsement of the no-strike policy and ramming the President’s subsequent “request” down the delegates’ throats.
The decisive weapon used to beat down the ranks was political. The conclusive argument used to put over the surrender of “premium” pay was the roaring challenge of UAW Vice President Frankensteen: “Are you going to tell President Roosevelt to go to hell?” The delegates were further horn-swoggled by the leadership’s fraudulent 10-point “equality of sacrifice” program, whereby the auto workers were persuaded to give up immediately certain of their basic gains on the assurance that Roosevelt would control prices, limit war profits and executive salaries, tax the rich and give labor a “voice” through “labor-management” committees.
Before another four months had passed, the dissatisfaction of the auto workers rose to new heights. Roosevelt had enunciated his 7-point “equality of sacrifice” program as a cover for his introduction of wage “stabilization” – that is, wage freezing. The War Labor Board stalled all wage demands in the face of soaring living costs.
At the August 1942 convention, the UAW workers once more demonstrated their militancy, their mistrust of the leadership and their jealous regard for union democracy. They fought bitterly against ratifying the leadership’s resolutions on surrendering “premium” pay and “strengthening” the WLB. But after rejecting these resolutions and sending them back to committee for “teeth,” the delegates finally adopted “compromise” resolutions embodying the essential contents of the originals. The “teeth” were “demands” that Roosevelt enforce his “request” on overtime pay against all unions “impartially” within 30 days and that the WLB establish “regional boards” to “expedite” the handling of grievances.
 
Rising Discontent
Thus, save for a few voices, the auto workers directed their opposition largely against the isolated consequences of the war and Roosevelt’s anti-labor program. Only on the organizational issues of union democracy which they fully understood, did they overwhelmingly reject the leadership’s attempts to pass constitutional measures intended to give the officialdom greater bureaucratic powers.
Roosevelt formalized wage freezing on the basis of the Little Steel formula by executive decree. Congress followed through with the Smith-Connally anti-strike law and the 20 percent payroll tax, while brushing aside all bills to limit profits, executive salaries and prices.
When the October 1943 UAW convention opened, the delegates were seething with discontent. But again they were unable to hurdle the political obstacles and come to grips with the basic issues. Moreover, it was at this convention that Vice President Walter Reuther played most effectively his traditional role of “left” cover for the leadership. Because the most advanced militants were aligned with Reuther’s caucus, he was able to behead the struggle over basic issues, confining the opposition to a fight against the Addes-Frankensteen-Stalinist unpopular proposal to approve the speedup “incentive pay” system. Once “incentive pay” was overwhelmingly rejected, Reuther joined with the rest of the leadership in side-tracking the fundamental questions, such as the no-strike policy, in favor of an unprincipled struggle over posts between the two top cliques. Then the two leadership factions demonstratively resolved their “differences” by uniting on all major resolutions, including support of a Roosevelt fourth-term and the no-strike policy.
The best of the militants left the convention thoroughly disabused of any illusions they had held about Reuther, who had ended up in a programmatic embrace with the very elements he had fought against for posts. The point had at last been driven home to many thinking delegates that what was needed was an organized fight for a whole new leadership committed to a new, militant program.
Events leading up to the 1944 convention deepened the cleavage between the ranks and the leaders and accelerated the development of an independent militant grouping. Unsettled grievances were piling mountain high. Collective bargaining had broken down. The corporations, emboldened by the continued retreat of the union, began a campaign of open provocations to wipe out local militant leaderships and undermine the unions. Roosevelt and Congress at the same time were busy squeezing the workers tighter in the vise of wage freeze and rising prices.
The auto workers found conditions increasingly intolerable. They began to take what appeared to be the only defensive course left, strike action. By April and May 1944, so-called “wild-cat” strikes were occurring in one plant after another. The UAW International Board moved with all haste to smash these strikes. At its meetings, it demonstratively reiterated its policy of unconditional surrender to the corporations and adopted threatening measures for punitive action against striking militants. The companies, thus further encouraged, intensified their provocations. Strikes, however, particularly in the Detroit and Michigan areas, continued to increase.
The top leadership responded by expelling local union officials from office and establishing dictator-receiverships over the locals. The companies eagerly followed up these bureaucratic acts by firing leading local union representatives.
The most experienced militants increasingly realized that isolated, sporadic strikes, which seldom ended in gaining the objectives fought for, were not the effective solution. Not infrequently such strike actions resulted in the victimization of the best union fighters.
This final impasse directly stimulated the organization of the new rank and file caucus. The search for basic solutions brought the militants to an acceptance of the program originally advanced by the Trotskyists alone:

rescind the no-strike pledge;
smash the Little Steel formula;
withdraw the labor members from the WLB;
build an independent labor party.

Coincident with the emergence of this new militant UAW caucus, came vital developments on the political field. The auto militants provided the impetus and base for the formation of a third party in Michigan, the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, as an important step in the direction of organizing an independent labor party.
With the formal organization of a militant caucus, the auto workers were able finally to come to grips with fundamental issues. At a recent UAW convention, the new caucus appeared as a powerful force. No longer bound by factional loyalties to Reuther or Addes, the militants could proceed boldly to the preparation and conduct of a show-down fight against the no-strike pledge, a fight directed, in essence, at the whole cowardly policy of the leadership and the labor program of Roosevelt himself.
That conflict ensued for four days. It was waged against the whole top leadership of the UAW and the CIO, with Philip Murray drawn into the fray for the express purpose of wielding the whiplash of his prestige and CIO power against the recalcitrant delegates. One parliamentary maneuver, one shoddy trick after another, was attempted by the leadership to prevent, side-track or disorient the fight. But for the first time, the leaders were contending with an organized opposition, which had a clear-cut program and experienced leadership, and which would not subordinate its program to factional fights over “posts.”
The very fact of the struggle and the primary position it occupied in the convention deliberations was of profound political significance. This issue swept aside the plans of the leadership to place the emphasis of the convention on preparations for the CIO-PAC campaign for the reelection of Roosevelt. That matter was dealt with almost in passing, largely as an apathetic reflex of past political conditioning.
The attack of the leadership against the insurgent ranks contained the usual flag-waving appeals, pleas to patriotic sentiments, exhortations for loyalty to “our Commander-in-Chief.” But, except for the speeches of the discredited Stalinists, who invariably were booed as soon as they took the floor, there was a significant restraint in the exposition of these types of arguments. There was no red-baiting, no slanderous references to “Hitler agents.”
The most effective arguments advanced by the leaders were those which appealed to the union sentiments of the delegates and their desire to safeguard their organization. Thus, from Murray on down, the leaders sought to arouse the fear of the delegates that to rescind the no-strike pledge would bring an avalanche of reprisals against the union and place its existence in jeopardy. The delegates were solemnly warned that if they scrapped the no-strike pledge they would “provoke” new Congressional anti-labor legislation, “isolate” themselves from the rest of the CIO, invoke the enmity of the soldiers, turn the “great majority of unorganized common people and middle class against you.”
But even these arguments, the most potent the leadership could muster, could not beat the militant opposition into submission. For what stood out especially in this convention was that quality which is so uniquely and highly developed in the UAW ranks – the consciousness of their own organized power, their confidence in their own united strength. It was this superb awareness and confidence in their own power which the leadership sought in vain to shatter and destroy.
In an attempt to disorient the fight, Reuther again played his shabby role of “Judas Goat” to lead the militants back into the slaughterpen of the no-strike policy. But it was a measure of the development of the auto delegates and the principled firmness of the new caucus, that Reuther could trap no more than a relative handful into support of his treacherous “compromise” resolution of the no-strike pledge.
Reuther presented his resolution with the obvious intent of preventing the introduction of a resolution calling for immediate unconditional scrapping of the no-strike pledge. His purpose was to confine the debate to a “majority” and “minority” resolution both reaffirming the no-strike pledge. This move was frustrated on the very first day of the convention, when the aroused delegates compelled a revision of the rules to permit the introduction of a “super-minority” – which almost proved to be a majority – resolution against the no-strike pledge.
Reuther’s miserable efforts to divert and circumvent the issue were thoroughly exposed. He was ground between the millstones of the right-wing Addes-Frankensteen-Stalinist faction and the new Rank-and-File Caucus. His reputation as a “militant” was considerably tarnished.
It was only after the Rank-and-File Caucus rolled up an impressive 36% of the convention votes to scrap the no-strike pledge and the majority resolution for reaffirmation had been defeated, that Reuther combined with the rest of the top leadership to push over a motion for reaffirmation by a shyster trick. Seeking to get a formal vote reaffirming the no-strike pledge on any basis, the resolutions committee majority, composed mainly of Stalinists, and joined by Victor Reuther, Walter’s brother, proposed a “procedure” to “resolve” the “impasse.” They put a motion to vote “up or down” a straight statement unconditionally reaffirming the no-strike pledge to be followed by a vote to hold a membership referendum within 90 days on the no-strike issue.
By means of a deceptive “explanation” on the part of Victor Reuther, who deliberately fostered the impression that a vote for reaffirmation was tied with a vote on the referendum, a 60 percent majority vote was finally secured to reaffirm the no-strike policy. Reuther joined with the whole leadership in supporting this motion. Then the Addes-Stalinist spokesmen stepped forward with a surprise motion not to hold a referendum.
The storm which broke loose from the delegates was a demonstration of rage at the attempt to trick them. They proceeded to throw the issue full-blown once more into the hands of the membership by an overwhelming roll-call vote in favor of a referendum. For the ranks at least, the motion to reaffirm, put over by deceit, did not settle the question; it merely brought the issue forward with renewed force.
On the sixth day of the convention, the leaders were finally able to focus their attention on their chief concern, getting back into office. That aim they achieved, but not because of any secure and loyal support from the ranks. Indeed, the suspicion, disgust and hostility of the ranks toward the leadership, individually and collectively, had been repeatedly demonstrated.
While the new militant caucus had been able to rally tremendous support of a fundamental issue, it recognized that a large section of the delegates was still unprepared to reject the old leaders. The time was not yet ripe for an all-out fight for the leadership. Many of the delegates would hesitate to throw out the old leaders, despite their program and record of betrayal, in favor of still largely unknown and untested new aspirants.
The Rank-and-File Caucus therefore deliberately confined itself merely to a single demonstration projecting the idea and laying the basis for a future struggle for leadership, elected not on narrow clique grounds but because it represents a genuine fighting policy and program.
The caucus supported the candidacy of Robert Carter, President of the Greater Flint Industrial Union Council, who ran for president on a program of opposition to the no-strike pledge and for withdrawal of labor members from the WLB, against R.J. Thomas, who had been reelected five years in a row without opposition. Carter received the unexpected backing of almost 20 percent of the convention. That vote constituted clearest evidence of the trend of the auto workers – toward a complete repudiation of the old leadership and the creation from the ranks of a genuinely new type of leadership, militant fighters for a program of struggle against the corporations and against the capitalist government.
That the auto militants were still unable to defeat the no-strike policy decisively and secure a new leadership at this convention is due, in the final analysis, to the political contradictions which remain the most formidable obstacle in their path. Their disillusionment with Roosevelt is profound, but not yet complete. They still support the imperialist war, although with increasingly sharp misgivings concerning the aims of the war rulers and the anti-labor consequences of the whole capitalist war program.
 
Moving to the Left
Politically, the auto workers are in a transitional stage, moving steadily to the left toward a complete break with capitalist politics, but still confused. That confusion was reflected in the fact that a large section of the auto workers are prepared to come into head-on collision with the capitalist government on a basic labor policy, but not to challenge the political power of the ruling class from which that policy stems. Thus, except for the most advanced section of the militants, the auto workers who fought against the no-strike pledge did not do so by resolving their political contradictions. While reconciling themselves to these contradictions, they tried to interpret them in favor of their own class interests. That, however, is but a step removed from a final definitive turn from the old capitalist parties and politics on the road to their own class party, a labor party.
No small indication of the political development of the auto workers is reflected in their wholesome rejection of Stalinism, which received further discreditment at this convention. The Stalinists, who in the formative stages of the UAW exercised tremendous influence, have been steadily losing ground, especially since their 1941 turn to the extreme right.
They remain a force in the UAW only in so far as they can hide behind the cover of the official leadership. Each time they sought to assert themselves independently at the convention they were roundly rebuffed. They lost considerable ground in the top leadership, when their West Coast UAW director and International Board Member, Michener, was placed under charges before the convention. A scandalous picture of Stalinist malfeasance in office was presented to the convention. Not even their own spokesmen could offer a defense. The convention voted against the election of a board member for the region and established a committee to take over the organizational conduct of the West Coast organization. This was a major setback for the Stalinists.
The coming period of increasingly acute economic dislocation can serve only to deepen the cleavage between the ranks and the leadership and accelerate the political development of the auto workers in the direction of independent labor political action against all the capitalist parties and leaders. The no-strike issue is bound to merge with the struggle for a new political program. The UAW leadership already is aggravating the hostility of the ranks still further by maneuvers to prevent or stall the no-strike referendum in brazen violation of the clear cut mandate of the convention. The pre-election political finagling of Roosevelt around the question of the Little Steel formula is adding its weight against the remaining balance of the auto workers’ illusions about the “friend of labor” in the White House.
The time is not far distant when the auto workers will be taking their rightful place in the vanguard of a new, great upsurge of American labor. The impending struggle will not be limited to the “economic” field. It will raise fundamental political issues and be fought out under political slogans and by political means.




Now They’re ‘Slackers’
Even the most benevolent of capitalists pay off with a lay-off. That’s what half the 8,600 employees of Jack and Heintz Company, Cleveland, found out last week. Some 4,300 of them were “requested” to “resign” because of war contract terminations.
It was quite, a shock to the workers, called “associates,” to find out how quickly the bosses would make them “disassociates” when they were no longer needed to make profits. Jack and Heintz were highly publicized as the “ideal” employers. By working 12 hours a day, seven days a week, the “associates” pulled down relatively high “take home” pay. The plant was run like “one big happy family,” – call the boss by his first name, music while you work.
On May 29, President William S. Jack broadcast over the plant loudspeakers asking women and professional workers particularly to “come to their foremen and say ‘Here is my resignation’.” He added: “You have done well by your country in its greatest trial and we appreciate it. The time has come for us to help your return to your families and professions.” When only 20 “associates” accepted this “help” to return to their families – jobless; Jack and Heintz “benevolence” evaporated. On May 31, the company announced that there were a bunch of “slackers” and “discord seekers” in the plant who were to be purged.
Although the AFL Machinists have a contract in the plant, the union is almost completely “housebroken.” The “purge” will be conducted through the union grievance committee, a company official stated. The union stewards, he said, have an “eye” on the “disrupters.” They don’t seem to have an eye on the contract, however, because the layoffs are being conducted in ruthless violation of seniority provisions.
* * *

No Union Conventions
The Office of Defense Transportation recently announced that for the next 12 to 15 months the government would hot permit conventions of more than 50 people. This decision was turned primarily at the unions, several of which were preparing to hold their annual conventions this summer and fall.
Hundreds of thousands of civilians use the railroads and buses daily, with most business men and their families still managing to take their vacations and trips. It would seem that a few union conventions, numbering usually from a couple of hundred to one or two with as many as 2,000 delegates, would not interfere appreciably with the transportation problem.
But the government doesn’t think union conventions are “essential.” Millions of workers are facing layoffs. “Take home” pay is being drastically slashed through reduced hours and loss of overtime, while prices and shortages mount. Meanwhile, the administration has put new rivets in the wage freeze.
The rank and file of the unions are beginning to put up a fight. All over the country they are starting to scrap the no-strike pledge in action. The workers ere demanding a real program against unemployment and wage cuts. And that’s the real reason Why the administration doesn’t want any conventions – especially big rank and file union conventions.
And its a mighty fine decision from the standpoint of the top union leaders. They’re having a hard time holding the ranks “in line.” They’re not anxious to hold conventions where “anything” might happen.
* * *

Avery Rides Again
Although the WLB rulings in the Montgomery Ward case go back several years, and several of the company’s 800 stores and warehouses were “seized” by the Army a year ago, the mills of the capitalist courts finally ground out a decision upholding the “seizure” only last week, on June 8.
In a two-to-one decision, the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals reversed a previous ruling of a Federal District Court and declared the “seizure” constitutional. The Army officers in charge then announced that they would finally put into effect the WLB orders which the company so far has defied successfully. This includes payment of $1,342,000 in retroactive pay to the Ward workers, members of the CIO Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Employees.
S.L. Avery, Ward’s board chairman and No. 1 Open-Shopper promptly announced the company would fight the latest court ruling to the Supreme Court. Company lawyers sought a stay of execution until the Supreme Court could act. Another long legal stall might mean the complete destruction of the union, which has already taken a terrific pounding. The plea of the company is that payment of the back pay due the workers would mean “irreparable injury” to it.
But only a few days before, Montgomery Ward reported that for the first quarter of 1945, it had upped its net profits, after all taxes and costs, 44 per cent over the same quarter in 1944 – $4,767,955 as compared with $3,439,324. That’s just for three months. And yet it claims it will he “ruined” by paying $1,342,000 in back wages stolen from the workers.
 



Big Business on June 20 introduced into the United States Senate a legislative “master plan’’ to paralyze and destroy the American labor movement in the post-war period.
This is the Ball-Burton-Hatch-Hill Federal Labor Relations Bill designed to abrogate the progressive features of the Wagner Labor Relations Act, the Norris-LaGuardia Anti-Injunction Act and other federal statutes for the protection of union collective bargaining rights.
Termed by its sponsors an “Industrial Peace” bill, the measure is actually a virtual declaration of war against the most cherished and hard-won rights of labor – free, unregimented unions, union security through the closed shop and, above all, the right to strike.
Its origin and sponsorship, the praise it has immediately evoked from the most rabidly anti-labor papers, the welcome embrace promptly accorded it by outspoken Congressional labor-haters are sufficient to brand the true character and purpose of this bill.
 
Bill Denounced
At the same time, not in many years has there been such immediate, vigorous and unanimous denunciation of a proposed federal statute as the blast unloosed against the Ball-Burton-Hatch- Hill bill by every single sector and prominent leader of the American union movement.
No more sweeping plan to strangle organized labor has ever been introduced into the federal legislature. Virtually every provision long sought by the corporate monopolies and their agents to crush unionism are incorporated in this measure.
In its broad features it embodies the infamous “five-point” program drafted by the National Association of Manufacturers and U.S. Chamber of Commerce. In its elaborate details, so complex that only a skilled lawyer can understand the tricky implications, it closes every conceivable loophole for free unionism. Among the basic features of the bill are the following:
1. It would virtually outlaw all strikes.
Prohibition of strikes and compulsory arbitration are dictated in all disputes “affecting public utilities or services such as milk, coal or oil.” This could be interpreted to include every basic industry – all of which affect the “public interest.”
 
Outlaw Strikes
Strikes arising from “grievance disputes,” involving the application of the terms of existing union contracts, are prohibited. This would permit employers to violate contracts with impunity, pending interminable mediation, arbitration, government “studies” and court action, all provided in the bill.
2. It would make impossible the maintenance of union security and closed shop contracts.
No closed shop contract could be granted unless the union secures, in a government-regulated vote, a 60 percent majority of all workers in a plant for such a contract and unless the union represents 75 percent of the workers employed.
Regulation of conditions of membership would be determined by the government. No union whose rules for membership did not meet with the standards of “democracy” held by the employers – including the admission of scabs and known company agents – could get a closed shop contract.
3. The bill calls for a sweeping federal “investigation” of all unions by a proposed new five- man’ Federal Labor Relations Board and the preparation of further laws, based on these “investigations.” to “clean up” the unions.
 
Based on Slander
This provision, based on the slanderous inference that all unions are “rackets,” would subject the labor movement to an unprecedented witch-hunt. All the hooks, records and confidential matters of the union would be thrown open for the inspection of the employers through their government agents.
From this “investigation” would stem laws for government regulation of union elections, inspection of union books, a ban on labor in politics, restriction of the use of union funds, as in strikes or political campaigns, restriction of dues and initiation fees.
A corps of federal inspectors would be established who could invade a union at any time, such as during a strike, seize its records, impound its funds, and harass its leaders.
4. It would “modify” the most progressive features of the Wagner Labor Relations Act.
Unions “as well as employers” would be subject to government restraint for so-called “unfair labor practices.” Under this heading, efforts of a union to organize workers, oppose company-union and anti-labor elements, eliminate spies and scabs, enforce union regulations, might be termed “unfair labor practices.”
 
Cannery Workers
Over 1,500,000 workers now covered by the definition of interstate commerce and protected by the Wagner Act would be deprived of this safeguard through a “narrowed” interpretation of the scope of the Wagner bill. A specific clause of the new bill would deprive cannery and packing workers – under the heading of “agricultural workers” – of Wagner Act protection.
5. It would cut the heart out of the Norris-LaGuardia Anti-Injunction Bill and subject unions to harassment by injunctions and suits.
The Federal Labor Relations Board proposed in the new bill would be permitted to seek court injunctions to halt any activities of a union. It would permit employers virtually unrestricted right to harass unions with court actions for “restitution, reparation ... or other relief.”
These provisions, as well as many others, make the new bill a “lawyer’s paradise.” It provides so many features for court review and suits that the unions could be tied up in endless litigation and be driven into financial bankruptcy.
6. The proposed Federal Labor Relations Board could impose harsh penalties.
If a union or union official failed to accept any decision of the board, it could withdraw recognition of the union or its officers as bargaining agents for the workers.
In addition, anyone whom the board declared to be “impeding” its work would be subject to a $5,000 fine and a year in prison.
No greater blow could have been dealt at this time to the phony capital-labor “peace charter” which the union officials have been trying to peddle to the workers, than the introduction of this vicious bill. It strips bare and exposes the real aims of the American plutocracy.
 



UNIONTOWN, Pa., June 8 – I am writing this in white-hot anger. Just a half hour ago I talked with a courageous, loyal and sincere union man, William Patterson, coal miner from Daisytown. He was locked behind the grey walls and thick black iron bars of the Fayette County prison here. He is American labor’s first imprisoned victim of the vicious Smith-Connally anti-strike act.
I hope I can transmit my feeling of protest and outrage to every worker in this country. Because after talking to him this morning inside his grim prison, I am more convinced than ever that not Bill Patterson but those who framed him up and conspired against him are the ones who should be behind bars.
“This is not a case just of personal persecution,” was the first thing he said to me in his quiet, firm voice with a trace of southern accent.
“This case involves all labor. It affects every laboring man who ever comes under the conditions of the Smith-Connally act. It would take his civil rights away, his freedom of speech and make him an industrial slave.”
 
Threat to Others
His very next thoughts were not about himself, but the 29 other union miners who have had a suspended sentence hanging over their heads since the 1943 national mine strikes when 30 miners from this area were tried under the federal anti-strike law. They were persuaded to plead no contest of the charges and convicted under the most vicious anti-labor law of modern times.
“The labor movement should contest the constitutionality of this bill. What I’m afraid of is the threat against the others who were involved in the 1943 trial. They treated me pretty salty when they said I violated my probation when my local went on strike last February and May. But what I’m worried about is the other poor devils. My case sets a precedent which may leave them in a hell of a shape.”
He then told me a few facts about his case.
“There were 27 of us called before a judge on August 27, 1943. There were 30 supposed to come up, but three had been hurt in the mine, and were not tried until later. We never did have any jury trial. We had been indicted by a grand jury that we never even saw. All the testimony came from other people. But we were advised by our lawyers to plead nolo contendere – no contest – and threw ourselves on the mercy of the court.”
He continued with the circumstances of his imprisonment after a hearing on June 1 for alleged violation of his probation.
“They had 11 strikes chalked up against me when I appeared at the hearing. There were a bunch of men from the mine (Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp’s Vesta No. 4, Richeyville, Pa.) to testify that I wasn’t responsible for the strikes, but the judge wouldn’t let them testify. I told the judge that every man was essential to the other in the mine, and I couldn’t work when a strike was on, even if I wanted to. But I guess they wanted a test case and I was a victim of circumstances, so I’m it.”
I knew every word he spoke was the truth. I had confirmed it in advance from the officers of UMW Local 2399 at Richeyville where I had attended the union meeting on June 3, the day after Bill was sent to prison. He had been snatched without warning from his wife and two children and shot off to jail after a speedy hearing on June 1.
As he spoke, I peered closely through the heavy steel screen and poor light at the man I had come hundreds of miles to interview so that he might have the chance for the first time to tell in his own words the story that the big-business press and anti-labor government officials have tried to misrepresent and bury.
He stood within a foot or so of me, with just the screen separating our faces, close so that we could see and hear each other. Against the dim background of the four-story barn-like prison interior, with its lines of cells in tiers along the sides, I saw a tall, slim, dark-haired man dressed in a green jacket and tan work trousers. His features were handsome even strong, and he looked much younger than his 39 years. His face revealed intelligence and firm character and his flashing black eyes looked straight into mine as he spoke quietly, but with deep conviction and feeling.
 
Rapid Interview
We had to talk fast, because the prison regulations permitted him only 15 minutes with a visitor, although the local prison officials stretched it. a bit to permit me to finish the interview. I shot a list of prepared questions at him. He answered every question without hesitation
During the entire interview there was not a trace of self- pity in anything he said. He was clearly a fighter and a man who understands that he went to prison for a principle in the cause of labor.
“I don’t regret a thing I did for the union,” he stated firmly. “I’m a victim of persecution, but I’d conduct the same fight all over again. And when I get out, I’m going to keep up the fight.”
At this point, his voice bad the only slight tremor in it during the entire conversation. He was obviously swept with deep emotion when he said: “I was always honest and sincere about everything I did for the union. And I’m going to continue to be so.”
From what his union brothers had told me about him, the respect they held for him, I knew he meant it from the bottom of his heart.
 
Patterson’s Life
Then he told me a few facts about his life.
“I’ve worked 22 years in the mines, since I was 17 years old. I’ve worked 17 years in that one mine at Richeyville. When I first started in the mines, back in 1923, I joined the union, and I’ve stuck with the union ever since.”
With justifiable pride in his fighting union record, he said:
“I’ve been in every strike in the mines since 1923. The longest I was ever out was in 1940 – six weeks. I’ve been through some pretty tough times and had plenty of close shaves in the mines, but I was lucky to get off with only slight injuries.”
He spoke about his wife, Ruby, who comes from a West Virginia miner’s family.
“I was never put out on the roadside myself, but my wife’s family was put out of their house in the 1922 strike and they lived in a tent on the mountain-side for seven months.”
His father was in the mines before him, Bill explained. He was born in Virginia, of old American stock.
“My ancestors came to this country long before the American Revolution. Why, they fought in the American Revolution. And no one can ever accuse me of any un-American activities.”
For all his courageous attitude, I could see that being in a prison was a terrible ordeal for him, a humiliating experience for a man of his self-respect, who had worked hard all his life.
 
Never Arrested
I started to ask, “Have you ever before been – “ He broke in, his lips smiling. “I know what you want to ask, have I ever been in jail before? No – never! I’ve never been arrested.” I could feel his deep hurt at the unjust blot which the enemies of labor have tried to put on his record.
Some people might say, well it’s only for six months. But that’s six months stolen from a man’s life, a man who values freedom and has fought for it all his life. I was in that prison only half an hour, and I confess I couldn’t wait to get out. I promised not to ask any questions. about the conditions there. But I could see it was no better nor worse than most county prisons. The prison attendant informed me that the Fayette County institution is over 50 years old. Outside, it is built like an imitation Gothic church. Inside, it is dim, bare, cold – a forbidding place of grey stone and iron. It’s a place where you do “hard time.”
But there was no complaint from Bill. The only time a note of bitterness entered his voice was when he spoke of the UMW district officials, who let him “take the rap” and have been maintaining a “hand’s off” policy. “It seems that the UMW officials are afraid to stick their necks out. The district officials (Dist. 5, UMW) have made damn fools out of themselves and possibly a martyr out of me.” He spoke not out of concern for himself, but out of pride for the union which he felt the top officials were hurting by their attitude in his case, which grew out of an anti-labor law that was directed in the first instance against the UMW itself.
Just before the time was up, he asked me to give a message to his union brothers of Local 2399 who have voted to back him 100 per cent and have established a fund to keep his family as long as he is in prison with the same amount of money they would have received if he had been working.
“Tell all the men to keep up the good fight. And tell them how much I appreciate their support and the help they are giving my family, who are being made to suffer for something they had no part in. Let the boys keep on pitching, and I will sure as hell run a few bases when I serve this time.”
That’s the spirit that has built the American labor movement, so a working man can lift up his head. That’s the spirit that the Smith-Connally law was intended to crush. For as Bill Patterson emphasized, it’s not just a “personal case.”
There will be many more Bill Pattersons, if the whole labor movement is not aroused to protest, if it fails to fight to free the honest union man, Bill Patterson, and to deal with the real criminals the profiteering crooks, labor exploiters and their political henchmen who conspired to make him an “example” and threw him behind prison bars.
 




Annual Wage – How?
When the union leaders, both AFL and CIO, raised the demand for a guaranteed annual wage, it was generally assumed they were seeking federal legislation requiring the employers to pay minimum security wages based on continuous employment. The demand was placed directly before the late President Roosevelt, who shunted it into the hands of a committee for “study.” This “study” has yet to begin.
But the CIO and AFL leaders have already beat a retreat. William Green says he wants the employers to agree to this demand “on a voluntary, not compulsory basis.” Philip Murray, who raised the biggest hue, and holler on this issue, now states, that “all the union (CIO Steelworkers) is asking with its request for an annual guarantee is that the steel corporations, which have their guarantee (of continued big profits), make a firm commitment to their employees.”
In effect, this means that the projected crusade for the annual wage will boil down to numerous disconnected skirmishes with individual employers, most of whom, we can be sure, will merely scoff at the idea. All it would mean would be a host of new cases to be buried among all the others by the War Labor Board, or some other government agency.
How does Murray propose to get any big corporation to “voluntarily” make a “firm commitment” on this or any other demand? The corporations have laughed in the face of the unions during the war on even the smallest demand and are mobilizing for an all-out assault on labor in the coming period. But Murray pursues the policy of “peace” and insists on the continuation of the no-strike policy.
There is only one way to win the guaranteed annual security wage. That is by a united, militant fight of all labor for a compulsory annual wage system. And if the profiteering employers – who continually demand government compulsion against the workers – can’t ensure steady work and wages, then let the government take over their plants and operate them under workers’ control.
* * *

Tobin’s Latest Outburst
AFL Teamsters President Daniel Tobin is the first and only prominent union leader, to our knowledge, who has come out in favor of Wall Street’s plan to Prussianize the country through peacetime military conscription. All the major labor organizations have gone on record in opposition.
Tobin’s personal organ, The International Teamster, in the June issue contains a featured leading editorial entitled Keep Military Conscription! This comes out at a time when armed troops are being used in an attempt to smash the Chicago truck drivers strike, involving among others thousands of members of Tobin’s own union – a grim forecast of what the employing class hopes to do, in part, with the peacetime conscripts.
Tobin’s “future war prevention” arguments have the familiar ring of the Wall Street propagandists of permanent militarism. He adds his own fantastic note about “a highly financed campaign against future preparedness,” “smarter people than the pacifists ... supplying the money,” etc. But it’s no secret who supplies the money for the peacetime militarism campaign – the wealthiest and most powerful anti-labor interests in the country. And it’s no secret, either, on
whose side Tobin is lined up!
* * *

“Go On Back Home!’
Millions of workers were lured by employer propaganda and the need for jobs to leave their home towns and go into the war industry centers. In many instances they had to live in shack towns; they were robbed right and left for the necessities of life; their wages were frozen and they were frozen to the jobs.
Now that the bosses want to toss them on the unemployed scrapheap, they are being told to “go back home where you belong.” If they have any savings, they are being pressured to use their last cent to return to their pre-war towns, broke and without any prospects for jobs.
We expect that from the employers. But now we have the example of a professed union leader, Frank X. Martel, president of the Detroit and Wayne County Federation of Labor, handing out this vicious line in a front page editorial of Detroit Labor News, June 9.
His advice to hundreds of thousands of CIO auto workers (he thinks in this fashion he may make it easier to maintain jobs for AFL members who pay their dues) is “for them to leave now, before their savings are used up.” He tells them “there never was before, and there is no hope now, of providing employment for all the people who have been brought to this community” – so pack up and scram! That’s how one so-called labor leader proposes to “solve” the growing unemployment problem.
 



Mass unemployment is no mere prediction. It is already a cruel reality. More than a million war workers are officially admitted to be seeking jobs. By the end of October, 4,800,000 war workers and returned veterans will be on the ‘no longer required’ list, according to WPB Chairman Krug. He hoped it would be only ‘temporary.’
Typical headlines of the past week proclaim: “6 Million War Workers To Lose Jobs V-J Day;” “12,500 To Be Fired By July 31 At Lockheed Plant In Burbank;” “First Mass Layoffs Hit Indianapolis; GM Fires , 5,000;” “Cutbacks Hit Reading.” Multiply these headlines for every city and town in the land. An appalling picture emerges.
 
A Grim Reality
There is no denying the grim reality. Nor is there any denying of the fact that Big Business which dominates American economy and politics, its government and political agents, have no program to provide either adequate relief for the unemployed or jobs.
Even Truman in his message to Congress two weeks ago was compelled to admit that present unemployment insurance standards are “clearly inadequate to protect unemployed workers against ruthless cuts in living standards.” As for any plans to provide full employment for all, most, government officials will agree that these are merely in the “preparatory” stage or, more truthfully, don’t even exist.
Thus, the authoritative acting commissioner of labor statistics for the U.S. Department of Labor, Dr. A. Ford Hinrichs, declared before the Institute of Labor at Rutgers University on June 5, that current plans of American business men “don’t add up to full employment” (PM, June 5) and envisage not more than 50,000,000 of the 60,000,000 jobs promised. Full employment without a genuine government program – which does not now exist – would be only “accidental,” he added.
Labor knows what leaving the question of jobs to “accident” means. That was Hoover’s program of 1932, as it was also largely Roosevelt’s. It was Roosevelt who larded over the plight of 11,000,000 to 15,000,000 unemployed with: a couple of million WPA jobs at from $19 to $60 a month.
The question of jobs, of adequate compensation during unemployment, is posed squarely before the entire American labor movement. Nobody but the organized workers themselves are capable, ready and willing to fight for a bold and radical program of JOBS FOR ALL which will brush aside the profit and monopoly interests of a handful of ruling profiteers and compel the government to operate the plants at full capacity.
But it is precisely at this crucial juncture that the leadership of the American labor movement has shown itself least capable or willing to offer an adequate program and to mobilize the forces of labor for the type of all-out fight, on the economic and political field, which can achieve it.
The real and official program of the top leadership of the CIO and AFL is summed up in their capital-labor “peace charter” with the Chamber of Commerce. This provides nothing less than a written guarantee from Murray and Green that labor will strive for the maintenance of monopoly capitalist “free enterprise” and “freedom from government interference” – the classic formula of the capitalist freebooters who insist on their “right” to exploit labor without restriction.
An even more graphic commentary on the “program” and conduct of the union officialdom ill this crisis is afforded by the antics of R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO United Automobile Workers, the nation’s largest union. In the single state of Michigan over 200,000 auto and aircraft workers have been fired; 21,000 have been emptied out of the $100,000,000 government-owned Willow Run bomber plant, operated by Ford during the war for his own profit.
Yet all Thomas can think of in this situation is to run off hat in hand from Detroit to the west coast to a fat war profiteer like Henry Kaiser, who can’t even keep his shipyard workers in steady jobs. Thomas can only plead with a Kaiser won’t he please get the government to hand him some free plants like Willow Run and “give” the workers some jobs producing autos or whatnot. So we are treated to the spectacle of Thomas running from the “industrial genius” Ford to the “industrial genius” Kaiser – a “genius” at wangling juicy government war contracts. But that angle’s played out. If there were a nickel in it for Kaiser or Ford, they wouldn’t be waiting for Thomas’ pleas.
What’s Thomas grovelling before the profiteering industrialists for? He has an official program adopted two years ago by the UAW-CIO – a program for full employment and security that he and the other UAW officials proclaimed lustily – when it wasn’t a question of an immediate, showdown fight.
Consider that program, which occupied nearly two full pages of the United Automobile Worker, July 15, 1943. Consider some of its basic proposals and premises. “Our industries can no longer be operated to serve private interests where those interests conflict with the public need,” it boldly asserted. Point one on its program for full production and employment of “every able bodied person in America,” read:
“Government or municipal ownership and operation of monopolistic industries and of industries strategically essential to the national safety” and;
“Government control and regulation of other industries to prevent the abuses of monopoly and to assure production in the public interest” and;
“Reduction of working week to thirty hours without reduction of pay, as a result of a full production program.”
There it is! That’s the program adopted two years ago by the UAW-CIO Executive Board! That’s the program that Thomas – and a lot of other leading union officials – said THEN they were going to fight for! That’s the minimum they said THEN was needed to provide postwar full employment and decent wages! Well, what’s wrong with it today?
Nothing – not a thing! What’s wrong is with the union leadership. Two years ago they were trying to clamp the no-strike, do- nothing policy on the workers who were beginning to resist the wage-freeze. Sit tight, take it, the union Officials like Thomas advised. Don’t worry, AFTER THE WAR we’re really going to town. No more knuckling under to the corporations. If they don’t provide jobs and the wages of decent living, we’re going to be the first, to say “the hell with ’em, take over the plants and the workers will run them better without a bunch, of profiteering parasites.”
That’s the kind of big talk, Thomas was spouting two years ago, before the issue really began to bang on his front door. Today he wants to forget all that – and hopes the auto and aircraft workers will, too.
 



RICHEYVILLE, Pa., June 3 – Part of the frame-up against William Patterson, union miner from Daisytown and first imprisoned victim of the Smith-Connally anti-strike bill, was the story spread by the corporation-dominated daily press that his union wasn’t in back of him.
This afternoon I attended the meeting of United Mine Workers Local 2399 here in Richeyville’s recreation hall. That’s the local to which Bill Patterson belongs and which he has served loyally for many years.
 
Members Outraged
No one was more indignant and outraged by the press reports than Bill’s fellow union members. The 1,400 union men who worked along with him in the Vesta No. 4 mine are back of him solid – to a man. Their actions on his behalf at the union meeting were a conclusive and inspiring demonstration of union brotherhood and labor solidarity.
When I arrived at the hall, the meeting was already in session. I inquired for one of the officers from the sergeant at arms. To my great pleasure, several of the workers who came out to examine my credentials were men I had met during the July 1943 strike and whose activities I had then reported in The Militant. Among those who remembered me and the support The Militant gave them two years ago were Steve Panak, president; John Harris, vice-president; Emil Maslow and a number of others.
They welcomed me warmly and were particularly glad I had come to them to get the truth about the frame-up against Bill Patterson. They were so eager to tell the facts and so indignant that they all seemed to talk at once. I caught one sentence that told what they all felt. “Bill Patterson? Why that’s the dirtiest, rawest deal ever pulled – a goddam frame-up just to make him an example.”
 
Militant Welcomed
As they invited me in to attend their meeting, a privilege not accorded to reporters of the capitalist press, they let me know that The Militant is its own best credential. One of the leading members stated with genuine enthusiasm as he greeted me, “Your paper’s all right. I read it right along. At first I thought you were just coming out strong for labor before the election. But now I see your paper comes out strong every week.”
There were a couple of hundred workers at the meeting. As I took my seat on a bench along the wall, I noticed a red and gold service flag hung behind the chairman. It recorded 469 members of Local 2399 in the armed forces. Noticing that I was observing the service flag, a worker next to me said: “That’s out of date. We now have 550 men in service. We’re down to 1,400 in the mine from 2,100.” This is one of the locals that the yellow press has been howling is “against the interests of the soldiers.”
The main business of the meeting was devoted to the William Patterson case. As soon as the meeting concluded its preliminary business, John Harris took the floor and gave a full report on the persecution of their union brother and the action so far taken by the union. This was the first chance the local had to meet since Patterson’s hurried trial and imprisonment just two days before.
 
Miners Testified
Every man sat still and tense in his seat as Harris told in simple words the background of the case and all the moves that were made to hound Bill Patterson to prison. The silence was so great you could almost reach out and touch it. You could read on the faces of every one present the deep feeling of anger and outrage they felt.
Harris told with special indignation how he and 23 others went to Pittsburgh to testify in the trial. He told how the judge refused to let them speak and how Patterson was “railroaded right through to prison.” He concluded with an appeal for every member to sign the petition on which over 600 names had been secured the day before.
“The way things are going on around here,” he warned, “we don’t know who’s going to be next!” The silence was suddenly broken by an explosive shout from a score of throats: “That’s right!”
One after another the workers took the floor and told their feelings about the case and what they knew of the deliberate efforts to frame Bill Patterson.
 
Caught Either Way
“We’ve got to do everything we can to get Bill out,” stated one member. “I was at that trial – and I’ve been at many a trial – but I never saw anybody rushed through like they did to Bill. They never even showed that he had violated his parole. If ever a man got a hooking, it was Bill.”
Another declared:
“He was caught either way, if he went to work or if he didn’t go to work during the strikes. He was framed in advance no matter what he did. They just wanted one man to be the goat. Then if the rest don’t keep in line, they can go after them.”
But the Local 2399 members didn’t express their sentiments in mere words. Every man felt his responsibility to Bill Patterson’s family to continue the legal fight on his behalf. One worker declared:
“He’s taken the rap for you and me. He was on the mine committee and he put up a fight for us. We got to raise one dollar apiece from every man in the local for a fund to take care of Bill’s family and to see that they get the same money coming in as if he were on the job.”
That motion was passed with a resounding, unanimous “Aye!” Another motion that was also enthusiastically endorsed was that “each and every pay day the officers of the local shall go up to the Uniontown jail and personally give Bill Patterson the money to send his wife.”
As the maker of the motion explained:
“He’s big enough to take the rap for us, and we have to be big enough to visit him personally every two weeks, and give him the money personally, and let him know that we’re behind him and going to do everything we can for him and his family.”
That’s the kind of union men Bill Patterson represents. That’s the kind of solid, loyal union he fought to build. It is for their sake, as well as his, that American labor must fight against the frame-up of Bill Patterson and the vicious law that threatens to put other good union men behind prison bars.
 



RICHEYVILLE, Pa., June 3 – What sort of man is William Patterson, the first American worker to be imprisoned under the Smith-Connally anti-strike law? Why did the capitalist government pick him as its first victim?
This afternoon, in this small mining town where UMW Local 2399 meets, I learned about Bill Patterson from the men who know him best, his union brothers, some of whom have worked in the mines with him since 1927.
Steve Panak, Local 2399 president, stated as a score of others crowded around the meeting platform and expressed their confirmation, that “ever since I’ve known Bill, he’s been a good union man, one hundred per cent.
 
Miner 17 Years
“He’s worked in this mine here (Vesta No. 4), why, I should say, for about 17 years.” Someone supplied the date. “Yes, that’s right, since 1927.”
To show the regard his fellow workers have for Patterson, Panak explained, “he’s served as mine committeeman off and on for four or five terms. He was always a man to put up a good fight for the rest of the men.”
As a committeeman, what kind of conditions was it his duty to fight against, I asked.
“Well, just to give you an idea of the kind of chiseling the company tries to put over all the time,” Panak explained, “we had to have the scales at the tipple checked six times in the past three months. And we found them off balance five out of six times. They’re always trying to short-weigh us.” .
Another worker interjected, “And how about the hard slate?” What was that, I asked.
“The company won’t pay us for when we have to work on hard slate where you can’t get the coal out. We have to pay for the powder to blast the slate where we can’t get any coal out.”
“If you want to know about chiseling, like Bill always had to fight against,” another stated, “it’s like the company putting supervisory monthly salary men, who’re non-union, to doing the jobs that’re under union contract – taking the work from the union men.”
Then they told me about the terrible accidents that are always happening in the mine. They told me case after case of men killed, maimed, seriously injured, in the past few months alone because the company doesn’t maintain proper equipment and safety conditions.
One worker was killed last Good Friday. Another was killed by a fall of rock on April 23. His brother had been badly hurt at the very same spot only the week before. Another man recently had his leg cut off. He was struck by a trip of coal – he had no man-way to go into on the haulage road. Another recently had his arm “cut clean off” by a fall of rock. Dozens of others have been injured – too numerous to mention.
Those are the conditions that Bill Patterson has fought against for 17 years. “He was a good fighter for the men – that’s why they made him the goat!” That’s how one worker summed it up, explaining why Bill Patterson is sitting in prison in Uniontown today.
I asked about Bill’s wife and family, because I was unable to get over to Daisytown to visit his home in time to get a report in to The Militant.
“Naturally, she’s very shocked and upset by what they put onto Bill,” said one of the men who’d been to see her to find out what the union could do for her.
“Bill’s wife, Ruby, is right with the union. She’s a real miner’s wife. Brought up in a miner’s family. She knows what the miners have to put up with. Why I bet you she’s been put out on the road three or four times with her family back in some of the strikes in the ’twenties.”
The miners here aren’t going to let Bill Patterson and his “real miner’s wife” down. And it’s up to the rest of labor not to let them down either.
 




Pent-House Blues
Residents in New York City’s swanky apartment house and pent-house belt are feeling blue these days. By a vote of 6,780 to 199, Local 82-B, AFL Building Service Employees, representing 13,000 elevator operators and maintenance workers, decided on May 26 to strike at 5,000 loft and office buildings in Manhattan. Some 13,000 other members of Local 32-B employed in residential buildings of over 6 stories are threatening to walk out with them.
This doesn’t worry the millions of poor workers in New York much, because most of them live in tenements and slums where there are no elevators and have to trudge up four, five and more flights of stairs.
The building service workers, who have to take much personal guff and abuse, are demanding shorter hours and higher wages. They have been stalled in negotiations with the big real estate interests since last February. The WLB has intervened at the last moment to try and head off the walkout.
One of the main union demands is for a 40-hour week for loft and office-building workers now working 46 hours at straight time, and for a 48-hour week for apartment building workers now on a 51- and 60-hour week.
Mayor LaGuardia has threatened to do his bit on behalf of the bunions of the fat-backs who aren’t accustomed to walking up stairs like the mothers and grandmothers in the tenement areas. He declared in his May 27 Sunday broadcast over municipal radio station WNYC that if the strike goes into effect he will get the Health Commissioner to declare an “emergency.” “I will issue a proclamation and delegate authority to the Health Commissioner to maintain elevator service deemed necessary,” he said. This is a threat to mobilize scabs, as was done during the 1936 walkout – a precedent LaGuardia did not fail to mention.
* * *

A Plan for Willow Run
How to maintain jobs for 140,000 auto workers threatened with unemployment by the shutting down of the Willow Run bomber plant has put the top leaders of the CIO United Automobile Workers in a dither. All they have to offer is a scheme to turn this vast government-owned plant over to some capitalist “genius” like Henry J. Kaiser, who can’t even provide jobs for his west-coast shipyard workers.
A lot of letters, many from onto workers, have been appearing in Detroit papers advocating that the union itself take control of the plant and operate it for the production of consumers’ goods. Finally, Hans A. Klagsbrunn, director of surplus property for the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, suggested in a conversation with UAW President R.J. Thomas and Vice-President Frankensteen that the UAW make an “offer” for the plant. He added, however, that the union must be prepared to put “cash on the barrelhead.”
From all reports, the UAW leaders were flabbergasted by this proposal. UAW Secretary-Treasurer George Addes hastened to issue a statement to the effect that the union is interested only in bargaining with capitalist employers, not in running plants. Thomas stated that some unnamed company is considering a plan to take over the plant to produce cars “that make 40 miles on a gallon of gas.” Not if Standard Oil has anything to say about it!
But what’s wrong with the plan for the workers themselves to take over the plant – and all the other plants that the bosses want to shut down? As for putting any “cash on the barrelhead,” the workers shouldn’t have to put up one cent for keeping these plants in operation.
These are plants built from the public treasury, paid out of taxes taken from the workers. Labor built these plants and has always run them. All the Fords and the Kaisers did was to milk profits out of them during the war.
It is the business of the unions to defend the interests of the workers. Their first interest is jobs. If the private monopolies can’t keep the plants going, it’s the duty of the unions to do so by demanding that the government operate them at full capacity. The government should provide all necessary materials and equipment – as they did for the capitalists during the war – and the workers should control them for the benefit of the people.
* * *

Propaganda Backfires
Ever zealous to issue anti-labor propaganda, Army publicists utilized the occasion of a WAC recruitment drive in Toledo, Ohio, to issue a smear against the Willy-Overland Unit of Toledo Local 12, UAW-CIO.
A local newspaper published an Army photograph of a former Willy’s office worker, now a WAC, by the name of Rachael Broter. Private Broter, slicked out in a natty uniform, was shown displaying herself in front of an x-ray machine. The caption under the picture read: “Disgusted because some of the employees of the war plant where she worked absented themselves from their jobs, Pvt. Rachael Broter ... decided to join the Women’s Army Corps.”
The union, much incensed, checked on her record and sent the following information to the press. In 22 months at Willy’s, Pvt. Broter herself had been absent a total of 108 days, 76 for which she was not paid, 32 for which she was, thanks to the union. The brass hats didn’t bother to check up on such facts – any anti-labor propaganda is good enough for them.
 




Open-Shop Victory
One of the most dangerous assaults against the trade unions is the campaign throughout the state legislatures for laws banning closed shop contracts. Two states, South Dakota and Florida, already have such measures.
Last week, on June 12, a three-man federal court in Tampa, Florida, dismissed a temporary injunction secured by the AFL and 56 of its affiliates against enforcement of the closed shop ban. The court ruled that such an anti-labor restriction was “constitutional.”
The big business interests are pushing laws banning the closed shop under the misleading title of “right to work” bills. They don’t mean the. right of the worker to be protected from arbitrary dismissal by the employer. They mean the “right” of the bosses to tear up existing closed shop contracts and hire non-union men to bust the unions.
The federal court decision in the Florida case is being immediately appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court by the AFL. This latest court ruling is already inspiring new and greater efforts by the open-shop corporations and their political agents to use reactionary state legislatures to impose the open shop by law.
* * *

Scandal of Willow Run
There is growing resentment in the ranks of the CIO Automobile Workers against the conduct of President R.J. Thomas and other top officials following the closing of the Willow Run bombing plant and the firing of 21,000 workers. Thomas has put forward as his “solution” an appeal to the war profiteer, Henry J. Kaiser, to secure he government-owned plant for a song and “give” the workers jobs,
An article in Spicer Unit News, organ of Spicer Unit, Toledo Local 12, UAW-CIO, comments:
“One of the planks in the program of the UAW Veterans Administration calls for the government ownership and operation of these government owned war plants. Why is not this solution brought forward by the International Board today? Or was that plank put in the program because it sounded pretty rough and might serve to convince a few people that there was fight in the old boys yet? The call for government operation with the full weight of the rest of the union pledging support to the displaced workers of Willow Run, demonstrations of solidarity with a program of fight, would place the blame squarely where it belongs. The government in spite of the pressure of its business ‘advisers’ would be forced to take action. The scandal of Willow Run and its thousands of cast-aside workers should be broadcast till it scandalizes the nation.”
* * *

Truman’s Plant ‘Seizures’
Since President Truman assumed office, he has ordered four plant “seizures.” In each case, the immediate issue was long-standing company non-compliance with WLB directives. And in each instance, the “seizure” was ordered only when workers went on strike because the government took no effective action over months, and even years, to enforce its own orders against powerful employers.
There is no evidence that these “seizures” have had any effect other than strikebreaking, as was the case with Montgomery Ward, which has successfully defied WLB rulings for years. What is equally significant is the admission of the WLB that there are still pending 102 cases of employer non-compliance with its directives. Some of the cases go back more than two years.
How quickly and harshly the government acts to crush workers on strike against unjust rulings of the WLB! How slowly and cautiously it moves against employers who defy the government by refusing to concede even the meager gains for workers that the WLB in a few instances has yielded under pressure.
 



As government propagandists and the Big Business press continue to pour out lying reassurances about employment prospects and speedy reconversion, the official war production agencies are swinging the axe of mass unemployment on the necks of more hundreds of thousands of war workers.
Over 450,000 workers in aircraft assembly, engine and parts plants are now slated for the unemployment scrap heap by the end of this year. This is the latest ominous announcement from the War Production Board in Washington. It declared on May 26 that this huge total of workers will be ‘released’ in this single industry as the result of Army aircraft production cutbacks.
By January 1, 1946 the number of unemployed in the aircraft and shipbuilding industries alone will total some 1,500,000. The previous announcement of President Truman and the action of Congress in slicing two-thirds from the shipbuilding appropriations of the Maritime Commission, it is officially admitted, will throw over 1,000,000 shipyard workers out of jobs.
In many other key industries, mass layoffs have been proceeding gradually, with the intent of avoiding publicity and concealing their true extent. Thus, according to R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO United Automobile Workers, employment in the Michigan auto industry has already been slashed 20 per cent, from the peak of over a million down to 800,000, with the really big and drastic layoffs slated for the immediate future.
 
Negroes Hit Hard
Unemployment among Negro workers, who constitute over 10 per cent of the nation’s labor force, threatens to be catastrophic. In the New York area alone, points out the New York daily PM, May 27, tens of thousands of Negroes, “especially in the shipbuilding and aircraft industries face unemployment as the result of postwar industrial discrimination.” Because the Negro workers were last to be hired in the war industries, they are the first slated to be fired now for lack of seniority.
The administration is attempting to quiet the fears of the organized workers and muffle the inevitable political, repercussions that will result when labor fully realizes the true prospects in store for it. Officials have been peddling a lot of vague talk about “speedy reconversion” and a big revival and expansion of various consumers goods industries, such as autos and household goods.
After it had inspired headlines about tremendous automobile and mechanical refrigeration production in the near future, the War Production Board, according to an item buried in the May 24 N.Y. Times, admits “shortages may hold up large scale reconversion of such civilian producers as the automotive and mechanical refrigerator industries.” The Times acknowledges this in a WPB build-up for “future announcements that earlier predictions of civilian goods production in 1945 were over-optimistic.”
The truth is that the capitalist government has no genuine plans to provide lasting jobs at decent wages for the millions who are being or are about to be thrown on the streets. Even those most immediately responsible for administering any official employment program are beginning to admit the bankruptcy of government planning
 
No Plans Ready
At a meeting on May 28 in New York City of the National Conference of Social Work, attended by some 4,000 manpower, labor, production and community welfare officials, one after another of the leading speakers warned that “unemployment figures will jump sharply soon because of ‘inadequate planning’,” (N.Y. Times, May 29).
Stephen Sheriden, New York area director of the War Manpower Commission, proclaimed government plans for full postwar employment are only “a hope and a prayer.” Victor S. Riesenfeld, employer member of the area War Manpower Commission’s Labor-Management Committee, revealed that “reconversion” plans are either “in the blueprint stage or just don’t make any sense.” New York City Welfare Commissioner Harry W. Marsh bemoaned the huge relief problem facing the largest city in the country and complained that unless the government took “extraordinary” measures not yet contemplated there would be a “substantial drop” in employment.
What then are the administration’s real plans? War Production Board Chairman Krug gave a pretty clear intimation on May 27. On the one hand, he proposed in effect that the problem of jobs and reconversion be placed entirely in the hands of Big Business monopoly, who are to be freed of a “myriad of rules and regulations.” He wants to “lift the ceiling on initiative, imagination and resourcefulness” by leaving to the private businessmen “the choice of what and how to produce, buy and sell.” Thus, the monopoly and profit interests of the capitalists alone are to rule the question of jobs, production and prices. This is a full swing back to Hoover’s program of 1932.
 
Leave It to “Time”
But what of the workers? Coldbloodedly Krug admits that many war-boom areas will be stricken with unemployment, but he opposes plans for public works projects or additional government contracts which “would merely postpone the eventual day of reckoning.” He advises that “we must not be stampeded by such dislocations into elaborate controls or special dispensations.” Smugly, he assures, “time will solve such dislocations.”
This is the true picture now emerging. The millions of workers who will be stranded in the new ghost towns and areas left in the wake of war production cut-backs are to be subjected to the tender mercies of “time.” How they are to live, where they are to go, will be no great concern of the Wall Street government. Like the “Oakies” and other dispossessed workers of the 1929–39 depression, the postwar unemployed millions will be left “free” to wander in hunger, misery and disease over the face of the land until they are absorbed by “time.”
 




Real Score on Stalinists
Appraising the significance of the ‘left’ shift in policy which the Stalinists appear to be preparing, the June 2 issue of Business Week, a leading big business weekly, admits the anti-labor role of the Stalinists and their union stooges during the war. Business Week has the function of telling the real score to the employers.
A Stalinist change of line from open support of American capitalism to more “militant” phrase-mongering “won’t come any too soon to protect the position” of the Stalinists in the unions, says Business Week. The Stalinists “have outdone all other factions in American labor in making patriotic appeals for more production, labor-management cooperation, ignoring of grievances, and observation of the no-strike pledge.” As long as the workers were passive, or greatly influenced by war propaganda, “this line paid good dividends.”
Now, however, “the temper of organized labor is changing.” For example, Business Week points out, “local elections held in C.I.O.’s United Auto Workers have shown Communist (Stalinist)-backed slates losing heavily. These losses are ascribed to the Communist-sponsored candidates’ continued adherence to their platform of employer cooperation end retention of the no-strike pledge.” Throughout the labor movement the same thing is occurring widely, and Communist influence is threatened.”
A “left” shift, says Business Week, “would be a direct result of Russia’s changing relations with the U.S.” and not any new concern for the working class. But the Stalinists in the unions are becoming so despised and discredited that they would “profit by being bidden to give leadership to, instead of frustrating, the new militance of American workers.”
Whatever shift the Stalinists make, however, we can be sure they will function not as genuine revolutionists, but as foreign agents of the Kremlin bureaucracy. Any “militancy” they may assume will be for the purpose of snatching the leadership of the workers’ struggles precisely in order to frustrate and behead them.
* * *

Just a “Mistake”!
By a 5–4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court on May 29 once more demonstrated the kind of “justice” the capitalist courts reserve for the workers.
That august body upheld a previous U.S. Circuit Court ruling which denied that the NLRB could rectify a “mistake” in computing an award of back pay to 209 lead and zinc miners of the Eagle-Picher Mining & Smelting Co. and the Eagle-Picher Lead Co.
The NLRB, by using a wrong formula, chiseled these miners out of over three-quarters of a million dollars in back pay to which they were entitled. A dissenting minority of the Supreme Court admitted that these workers should not be made to suffer because of a “mistake” of a government agency. “Approximately $800,000 is due these 209 employees instead of $5,400,” admitted dissenting Justice Murphy.
But the court majority used expert legal hair-splitting to rule that an NLRB decision is “final.” Of course, this court of corporation lawyers wasn’t thinking of saving the dough of the companies involved. – Oh no, they were just doing their duty in upholding the law – capitalist law!
* * *

“Muzzle Not the Ox ...”
“Muzzle not the ox that treadeth out the corn” is a Biblical injunction close to the hearts of the well-heeled craft union moguls dominating the AFL Executive Council. It’s a rare top AFL official whose salary and expense accounts don’t run into five figures annually.
So it’s understandable how they would react to the piteous plea of the Congressmen to get their annual $10,000 salaries raised by a tax-exempt “expense account” of $2,500. Just before adjourning their recent Spring session, reports the AFL Weekly News Service, May 15, the AFL council “went on record unanimously in favor of increased compensation for members of Congress.”
“The council, which previously had urged Congress to approve legislation increasing the basic pay of classified government employees, felt that Congressmen also deserve relief from increased living costs,” says the Weekly News Service.
The Congressmen, of course, didn’t need this support. They would have voted themselves a 25% increase in “take home” pay anyway. But it must have made them feel good to know that the “labor statesmen” who find it such tough going even though they are in the upper brackets, can appreciate the plight of those forced to exist on “only” $10,000 a year.
This just goes to show how far the AFL bureaucrats are removed from the conditions of life of the workers, and how close they are in sympathies and outlook to the agents and beneficiaries of the capitalist class.
 



PITTSBURGH, Pa., June 4 – William Patterson, 40-year old union coal digger from tiny company-owned Daisytown, 50 miles south of here, is the first American worker to be imprisoned under the infamous Smith-Connally anti-strike law.
Last Saturday this loyal union man, who has spent the past 17 years toiling down in the dark and deadly dangers of Vesta No. 4, the world’s largest soft coal mine owned by Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp., was thrust into the county prison at Uniontown, Pa.
Snatched without warning from his wife and two children, he has been condemned to six months behind bars.
Thus Bill Patterson, a mine committeeman whom his fellow workers yesterday at Richeyville described as a “fighting fool for the men,” has become the first victim of the most vicious federal anti-labor law of modern times.
Today, he is an outstanding symbol of American capitalist class “justice.” The American ruling class and its government have selected him to serve as an “example” and “warning” to all American labor.
 
The Truth Revealed
The truth about William Patterson’s case has been buried in slanderous misrepresentations. Yesterday I visited Richeyville, near Patterson’s home, where Vesta No. 4 is located. I had the privilege of attending a meeting of his local union, Local 2399, United Mine Workers of America.
From the lips of the officers and members of his union, who are behind him to a man, I have secured the first authentic account of this unprecedented and historic case.
Seated around a table on the platform of the Richeyville recreation hall where the local meets, Steve Panak, Local 2399 president, John G. Harris, vice-president, John Peters, secretary-treasurer, and a score of other officers and members indignantly related the facts behind this frame-up.
They described step by step how the government, aided by the courts, which in this area are controlled by the billion-dollar steel trust and the powerful mine operators, deliberately set out to “get” Patterson and make an “example” of him.
 
Took the Rap
Over and over again, they emphasized: “He took the rap for us.” They made it clear that Bill Patterson could have been any one of a half million miners who today might be standing in his shoes – or will be tomorrow, if the employing class and government get away with this first imprisonment under the anti-strike law.
The fact that Patterson was sentenced to six months, instead of five years as the law permits, is due solely to the “cautious” approach of the government in this first test case. A “light” sentence – throwing a worker into jail unjustly for six months and depriving his family of his support – they figured would not be apt to arouse “too much” protest.
Patterson was quickly railroaded to prison last week on the technical charge of violating his probation, after the original conviction and suspended sentence imposed on him and 26 other union miners of this area in the August 1942 trial for alleged violation of the Smith-Connally Act. They had participated in the general mine strike of that summer which was used as the pretext for pushing through the anti-strike law. On the advice of their legal counsel, they had been persuaded not to contest the charge. The government secured a conviction and, above all, a precedent.
Then the government and steel and mine bosses lay in wait for their first victim. They found him in William Patterson, who had continued to act as an elected mine committeeman and to defend the interests of his brother unionists despite the suspended sentence hanging over his head.
 
Mine Walkout
Last February 12 and 13 there was a walkout at Vesta No. 4. I have the direct testimony of scores of union men that Patterson had no direct or personal responsibility for the strike. I was informed that on last Saturday over 600 of Patterson’s fellow workers had signed a petition stating they were prepared to swear and testify that Patterson could in no way have been responsible for the February walkout.
Subsequently, however, the District 5 UMW officials, for reasons of their own about which the local rank and file are very angry, informed Patterson that he had been suspended from his mine committee post. Local 2399 refused to accept Patterson’s resignation under pressure and the subsequent suspension. They felt so keenly about the injustice of this act against Patterson that on May 14 they went on strike for seven days in protest.
But this was the pretext the government had been seeking. The workers yesterday informed me that FBI agents had been in the area since the walkout in April in the fight for the new soft coal contract. Members of Local 2399 were questioned and asked to give “evidence” against Patterson. His probation officer, George O’Brien, had even approached some of the other workers who had been convicted in August 1943 and tried to pressure them into “talking” against Patterson. All the evidence points to a deliberate plot to “get” Patterson.
 
Patterson Arrested
Without any prior warning, on May 21, a federal marshal walked into Bill Patterson’s home in Daisytown, a few miles from Richeyville, and arrested him on the charge of Probation Officer O’Brien that he had “violated” his probation because of the February and May strikes. The only “crime” he committed was simply not to be a rat and a scab when the rest of the men walked out. He was whisked away to the Alleghany County Jail here in Pittsburgh and held under a $2,000 bond.
For three days, his union brothers worked desperately to raise bond to release him. Those who owned little homes were ready and willing to put them up as bond. But the court refused to accept property mortgaged or owned jointly in the name of husband and wife. Every bonding company they approached turned them down. Finally, from one source and another they scraped together the – for them – enormous sum of $1,000 cash, which the judge accepted as temporary bond.
On Friday, June 1, Patterson was brought for hearing before Federal Judge F.P. Schoonmaker here. From all first-hand accounts of the proceedings that I gathered from the workers who had gone to the hearing as witnesses on Patterson’s behalf – although they were never permitted to testify – it was a judicial farce. As one worker put it, “That judge had his mind all made up in advance. Bill never had a chance.”
 
“No Bearing”
There were 24 union men who gave up a day’s pay and travelled at their own expenses to Pittsburgh in an effort to bring the truth into the federal court. They were forced to sit in angry silence while the judge, prosecuting attorney and probation officer went through the legal hairsplitting necessary to rush Patterson off to jail “strictly according to the law.”
The probation officer claimed that the mere fact that Patterson had acted as mine committeeman while he was on proba
tion was “evidence” that he had “violated” his probation. Whether or not Patterson had any direct responsibility for the strikes, the judge ruled, had “no bearing” on the case. The fact that he had not scabbed, that he had stayed away from work, meant he was “guilty.” Of course, the judge stuck to the technicality that this was a case of probation “violation,” in order to avoid a hearing on the real issue – the original frame- up under the unconstitutional Smith-Connally anti-labor law.
When Premo Columbus, a former assistant U.S. attorney and Patterson’s defense counsel, pleaded with the judge to permit the testimony of the 24 witnesses on Patterson’s behalf, the judge just brushed the plea aside.
Patterson sought to defend himself and showed that it was impossible, even if he had been willing to do so, to go to work during a mine shutdown. One local union officer explained that:
“... he told how he couldn’t go to work, even if he wanted to. There was no coal-loader, no motorman, no brakemen, no shot-fer, no cutter.
“But the way they put it in court, even if the men went on strike, Bill had to work or go to jail. They said he had to be a scab. He was in a hell of a spot. They had him coming and going. He couldn’t stay out when there was a strike or he would be sent to the jug. But he couldn’t work even if he wanted to, so they knew they had him.”
 
Denied Cigarettes
As one final dirty piece of reprisal, the men told me, they wouldn’t even let his fellow workers slip him some cigarettes before they rushed him off to jail after the judge finally ended the farce and ordered his probation revoked. He was shipped almost immediately to the Uniontown prison, some 65 miles south of here, where he will serve his sentence.
The union local and Patterson’s union brothers are doing all in their power to aid him and his family, his wife Ruby, a 15-year old son and a 20-year old daughter. Yesterday the local meeting decided unanimously to continue the fight for Bill Patterson’s release and voted a special assessment to provide his family with the full amount each month he would have earned on the job, so his dependents will not want.
But the obligation to defend Bill Patterson and to see to it that there are no more victims of the Smith-Connally slave-labor bill must not rest alone on the shoulders of the fine, loyal members of Local 2399. Patterson is “taking the rap” for every militant union man in this country.
From all the facts I have gathered on the scene here, I do not hesitate to state that this case stinks to high heaven from start to finish. Far more than local forces have conspired in Patterson’s persecution and imprisonment. It represents a conspiracy on the part of the most powerful federal agencies backed by the greatest anti-labor corporations in the land.
 
Labor Must Protest
Only a storm of united labor protest will tear the veil from this rotten conspiracy and open the prison doors for Bill Patterson. Every labor organization in the country should adopt resolutions of protest to the federal government and send their immediate expressions of support to Local 2399, United Mine Workers, at Richeyville, Pa.
Elementary labor solidarity for a victimized union man demands such action. But even more, the elementary defense of the entire labor movement requires it. For if one militant miner can be persecuted and imprisoned under the vile anti-strike law without thunderous protest from all labor – what worker, what loyal union man fighting for labor’s rights, can say today that he won’t be next?
 



William H. Davis, chairman of the pro-corporation War Labor Board,
last week came out with a prize example of hypocrisy. Trying to
conceal the Board’s function as the “graveyard of
grievances,” Davis complained that the Board is receiving too
many cases which could be settled by direct negotiations between
unions and employers.
“Too often,” he asserted with a straight
face, “the board finds a tendency among both unions and
employers to drop small differences into the board’s lap for
settlement rather than seek agreement through negotiations. This
delays the settlement of major issues, since the board refers back to
the parties issues it feels have not been adequately negotiated.”
The statement that, “both” the unions and employers
“drop small differences into the board’s lap,” can
evoke only a big horse-laugh from the workers. The very existence of
the compulsory arbitration board, dominated by the employers and
their “public” agents, has provided the pretext for the
corporations to brush aside direct negotiations with the unions.
The employers know that without the right to strike the workers
cannot clinch their bargaining power. They know that the WLB was
established to permit the corporations to stall the workers’
just demands. And they know that Roosevelt’s wage-freezing
policy has bound the WLB to the policy of forbidding wage grants to
the workers.
Of course, the corporations have not hesitated to make the best
possible use of this anti-labor board. As most local union grievance
committees can testify, the moment the board was put into operation,
the bosses answered: every grievance complaint with “Take it to
the WLB!” The workers were put on a merry-go-round, chasing
back and forth between, the board and the employers.
But suppose the companies and unions did agree beforehand to a
contract? Then the WLB insisted on its “right” to pass
upon the terms of such a contract. Wage concessions made to the
workers were often and promptly prohibited – and the board
didn’t spend a year or two years coming to a decision.
That’s what happened in the coal miners case two years
ago. After the union and the operators agreed to a contract, the WLB
intervened to rule the wage concessions a “violation” of
Roosevelt’s “wage-stabilization” policy. Just a
couple of weeks ago in New York, the WLB stepped in to order a wage
cut for 8,000 pocketbook workers after the manufacturers had granted
bonus and merit increases.
 
Sheer Hypocrisy
What Davis is trying to do with his hypocritical statement is to
whitewash the WLB and refurbish its tattered prestige. The workers
have come to understand its function. They are demanding that the
union representatives withdraw from the board. Davis is seeking to
prop up the board by disclaiming its pro-employer function as an
agency for stalling the workers’ demands. That is why he tries
to attribute its red- tape to “both” the workers and
bosses who “refuse” to negotiate “small
grievances.”
This hypocrisy stands doubly exposed in the light of the most
important wage cases now pending in the WLB. What has held up the
decisions in the packinghouse, auto, textile, glass, aluminum cases?
Some of them have been before the WLB for over two years. Were they
just swamped out by the volume of “small grievances”
pouring into the board? No, these cases have been deliberately
stalled by the WLB. And when this device became too crude and
obvious, Roosevelt tried to take the heat off his WLB by getting his
Director of Economic Stabilization Vinson to block any WLB wage
decisions.
For Davis to pretend that the Board would not continue to stall
grievances if it didn’t have so many is as absurd as contending
that a wild tiger devours raw meat not by preference but only because
it can’t get fresh vegetables.
 



Confronted by mounting labor opposition to his “National
Service” scheme for regimenting the workers and undermining the
unions, Roosevelt and his leading brass hats are pressing ever more
urgently for speedy enactment of the May-Bailey forced labor draft
bill, now before Congress. This bill contains features more harsh in
some instances than the original Nazi slave labor code on which the
Roosevelt plan is modeled and which inspired his cynical slogan,
“This is a war of free labor against slave labor.
The success of the administration’s conspiracy to enslave
American labor in the interests of the profiteering corporations
required the strategy of speed and surprise. Roosevelt’s plot,
therefore, was to shove through a forced labor bill before the labor
movement had time to mobilize its ranks for resistance and before his
sinister anti-labor intent could be fully exposed.
With this aim of speed in mind, Roosevelt timed his renewed forced
labor drive to go into high gear at the moment when popular fear of a
prolonged war slaughter was at its height, during the unexpected
military reverses on the Belgian front. Roosevelt unleashed a
fraudulent propaganda scare-campaign about munitions “shortages”
that was designed to play upon the fears of the masses for their
loved ones in the battle lines and break down their opposition to
labor regimentation.
However, despite the careful planning of the administration, its
forced labor blitz timetable has already been upset. It has run into
several unforeseen obstacles, causing delays which increasingly
imperil the administration’s original scheme.
 
Anti-Labor Amendments
One unanticipated snag has been created by the very eagerness of
reactionary Congressmen to respond in the same labor-hating spirit as
Roosevelt’s forced labor demand. In their desire to
“strengthen” the bill and eliminate any possibility of
loopholes, Roosevelt’s more unrestrained Congressional
colleagues, particularly from the Democratic South, are competing to
attach to the forced labor measure all sorts of cruder anti-labor
amendments. Their slobbering eagerness to embrace Roosevelt’s
plan and even “improve” it has not only delayed its
enactment but exposed the original bill for the viciously antilabor
measure that it is.
One amendment was designed to undermine union security by
abrogating closed shop union contracts for workers forced into jobs
in closed-shop plants. Another was intended to make all strikes
illegal. Differences arose among the Congressmen as to the most
effective means for enforcing the labor draft scheme. Some wanted
“work-or-fight” penalties. Some wanted to establish
“slacker work battalions” under Army rule. Others
preferred “civilian” penalties – $10,000 fines and
5 years imprisonment.
Fearful that all these amendments were stalling the bill and
exposing its real slave labor character, Roosevelt’s aides
rushed to Congress and insisted that it hold back all the trimmings
until the basic measure is passed. Under this pressure, the House
Military Affairs Committee eliminated the anti-strike, anti-closed
shop, “work-or-fight” and “slacker battalions”
amendments. The committeemen were aware that the bill as it stands,
which enables the administration to move workers in and out of jobs
at will under threat of huge fines and imprisonment, is sufficiently
broad and drastic to satisfy even the most hard-bitten,
fascist-minded employers.
The administration wants speed, in addition, because the change in
the military, picture, due especially to the Red Army offensive
toward Berlin, has reduced the popular fear of a prolonged war. Talk
of an immediate Allied offensive – with assurances that there
are now sufficient munitions for it – has reduced the effect of
the munitions “shortage” scare.
 
Fake Shortage
Most of all, the real facts about the “need” for
forced labor due to manpower shortages are coming to light. The Mead
Senate War Investigating Committee, for instance, has disclosed
“labor hoarding” and huge waste of manpower at the
Norfolk Naval Yard, where the officials had been clamoring for “4,000
more workers.”
The War Production Board report for December showed that despite
the holiday letdown substantial increases in all the major munitions
programs were registered. During the last half of 1944, the WPB
report admitted, “every one of the critical programs showed a
substantial gain” ranging from 20 to over 200 per cent.
 
Roosevelt’s Moves
And then came the startling disclosure by John L. Lovett, Michigan
Manufacturers’ Association general manager, that in the
allegedly key “tight spot,” Detroit, the factories are in
position to handle 20 per cent more war contracts and that 50,000
experienced workers are right now forced to live off unemployment
compensation.
CIO United Automobile Workers President R.J. Thomas put his finger
on the biggest flaw in the claim of manpower “shortage.”
He last week challenged the government estimate of 700,000
unemployed, declaring there were no less than 5,000,000 workers
seeking jobs. “The bureau (Labor Statistics) must be thinking
of 700,000 white men,” Thomas declared. “My estimate
includes what they overlooked – the women and Negroes able and
wanting to work in war plants and other essential industries.”
But the House Military Affairs Committee struck out from the
May-Bailey bill a clause prohibiting discrimination against workers
for racial, religious or similar reasons.
Without even waiting for legislation, the administration has
already begun to initiate its forced labor scheme. Allentown, Pa.,
has been selected as the first test spot. There last week, under
orders of the War Manpower Commission, a group of brewery workers
were fired from their jobs and forced to take work in designated
plants at lower pay and longer hours.
If the administration succeeds in achieving its aims in this
instance, it plans to spread the same scheme everywhere. By hook or
by crook, Roosevelt intends to impose industrial regimentation upon
the American working class. This Nazi-like scheme can still be
smashed, however, if the entire labor movement goes into united
fighting action against it.
 




Wage “Rollback”
A two-hour work stoppage last Friday of over 8,000 members of the
Pocketbook Workers Union (independent) in New York City served to
emphasize the fact that Roosevelt’s War Labor Board is not
merely a wage-freezing but also a wage-cutting agency.
The stoppage occurred when the union called a huge mass meeting to
protest a WLB order eliminating bonuses, “merit” raises
and other recent wage increases in this notoriously low-pay industry.
For a large part of the workers, this would represent a pay-cut of
approximately 15 percent, reducing basic wages to between 55 cents
and 65 cents an hour. The manufacturers had to grant the increases in
order to prevent labor from being attracted away to higher-pay jobs.
Back a couple of years ago, the CIO and AFL officials sought to
quiet the workers’ demands for pay increases to offset price
rises by a campaign for price “rollbacks.” The price
“rollbacks” never materialized; in fact the
cost-of-living soared higher than ever. The only “rollback”
the administration has enforced is a “rollback” of wages
like this one.
* * *

Paid Holidays
CIO representatives at a WLB hearing in Washington last week
charged a “gang-up” by employers to eliminate standard
contractual pay for holidays not worked. The hearings were called on
appeals of more than 30 corporations against a New York WLB Regional
Board ruling that the established paid-holiday practice be continued
in pending new contracts.
Typical of employer arguments was the contention by a United
States Rubber Company official that paid holidays “unstabilized”
industry. He contended that “absenteeism mounts and production
lags where workers receive a full day’s pay for not working
when those who are asked to work receive only half-time in addition.”
This “big-hearted” employer doesn’t want to
“discriminate” – so he’s all for cutting out
paid holidays. The additional profits – of course – are
no consideration. He’s just solely concerned about
“production.”
We didn’t hear any of these employers squawking about
“absenteeism” and “production lags” when
Roosevelt in 1942 ordered elimination of all premium pay for Sundays,
Saturdays and holidays as such. And we haven’t heard any
subsequent clamor about the widespread reduction of double-time pay
to time-and-a-half for work on Sundays and holidays that fall on the
seventh day of the scheduled work-week.
But if the bosses are so worried about “production lags”
because they pay only an additional halftime pay for holiday work,
there’s a very simple way for them to ease their minds. Restore
doubletime pay for work on all Sundays and holidays!
* * *

Forced Work Transfers
The New Jersey CIO, through its president, Irving Abramson,
last week announced that it planned to resist a War Manpower
Commission scheme to institute a forced transfer of 18,000 workers in
the Newark area to “more essential” jobs. The WMC has
refused to guarantee that transferred workers’ pay will not be
reduced and that they will not lose their seniority in their present
jobs. That is what happened in Allentown, Pa., to several hundred
workers, the first victims of this scheme to force workers into the
low-pay industries from better jobs.
A committee from the state CIO conferred with the WMC state
director on February 2, after he failed even to acknowledge a letter
from Abramson stating the conditions under which the New Jersey CIO
would accept the “referral” plan. These include absolute
guarantees of no pay-cuts or loss of present seniority.
The head of the Newark WMC, George Pfaus, stated that the WMC had
“no authority” to make the guarantees demanded by the
CIO. But it has authority to compel certain employers to fire a
percentage of their workers and force these workers into any job the
WMC commands them to take. Pfaus added the cynical comment: “If
some workers have to take pay cuts, they are just home-front
casualties.”
“Home-front casualties” is right – victims of
union-busting, wage-slashing forced labor for private profit in the
class war of the employers and their government against the workers.
* * *

<
Miners’ Demands
America’s coal miners are preparing for their biennial
struggle against the coal operators and the government. Their
contract expires this April 1. The United Mine Workers, has already
served notice that it is going to press for substantial wage
increases when contract renewal negotiations begin.
The UMW came very near to cracking the Little Steel Formula in the
four historic general mine strikes of 1943. It won some increases,
including partial portal- to-portal pay. Now it is reported, the
union intends to demand a 25 per cent hourly wage increase, from the
present $1 an hour to $1.25. The miners are also seeking full
portal-to-portal pay instead of the present 50 per cent for travel
time within the mines to and from work.
The coal operators, who are making the biggest profits in their
history, have already begun their propaganda campaign against wage
increases and particularly against another strike. One leading coal
baron publicly wailed “there can’t be a strike in the
coal mines, in the United States or Canada. If there is, the miners
will be prolonging the war. A coal strike would create international
chaos.” The miners will undoubtedly give the operators a chance
to avoid “international chaos” by agreeing to less
profits and more wages.
Coal miners in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick have already voted
to strike on April 1 if the Canadian National War Labor Board refuses
to reverse its refusal to grant increases to the Canadian miners,
organized in District 26 of the United Mine Workers. The District 26
convention recently voted for strike action in the event of a
“further unsatisfactory” board decision.
* * *

Fur Workers Fund
The international executive board of the Stalinist-dominated CIO
Fur and Leather Workers Union voted at a recent meeting to establish
a Million Dollar Defense Fund to defeat a recalcitrant employer of
8,000 workers in New York City.
It seems that the Associated Fur Coat and Trimming Manufacturers,
Inc., has refused to comply with a WLB directive covering arbitration
of discharges and paid vacations which was issued last December.
The million dollars for “defense” will be devoted,
we may be sure, not to strike action – Teheran forbid! –
but to keep the Stalinist officials travelling back and forth in
style while “fighting” on the Washington WLB front.
 



The International Executive Board of the CIO United Automobile
Workers, largest and most dynamic union in the country, last week
adopted a resolution calling on the CIO to withdraw its support from
Roosevelt’s War Labor Board. The resolution stated that this
government agency has now become “a useless instrument.”
This blow to the tottering prestige of the War Labor Board was
occasioned by a ruling of Director of Economic Stabilization Vinson,
who directed the WLB to make no further wage increase grants without
prior approval of the Office of Price Administration, This, in
effect, removes all final authority from the WLB to another agency on
which labor has not even formal representation.
The UAW-CIO leaders’ action came as the climax to a whole
series of rotten deals handed labor by the Roosevelt administration
in connection with a nod through the War Labor Board. In its three
years of existence, the WLB has earned among the workers the title of
“Graveyard of Grievances.” Major wage cases in auto,
packinghouse, textile, rubber, glass and aluminum, have been stalled
as much as two years; The steel wage case was “settled”
with all major wage demands denied. At the same time, the WLB
pussyfooted endlessly with powerful open-shop employers like Avery.
This has produced a violent revulsion among the workers; The
hostility to the WLB is expressed most sharply in the auto workers
union, where opposition to compulsory arbitration and the no-strike
surrender policy have forced the holding of a national referendum on
the no-strike pledge.
Today, almost every worker recognizes what The Militant has
contended since the WLB was first established – that the WLB
was designed to shackle the workers to compulsory arbitration, impose
the wage-freeze, curb independent militant labor action. From the
start, the “impartiality” of the WLB was a deliberate
fraud.
 
WLB Anti-Labor
The rising indignation of the auto workers and the complete
exposure of the WLB as a procorporation, wage- freezing,
strikebreaking instrument of the capitalist government has finally
compelled the UAW leaders to echo the demand of the ranks that labor
get off the WLB. This is a belated confession of the WLB’s
anti-labor function and character.
But the UAW leaders themselves share responsibility for foisting
the board on the workers. The UAW tops, along with all the other
labor lackeys of Roosevelt, were the original advocates and
supporters of the WLB. For three years, they have been selling the
WLB to the auto workers as a substitute for the strike weapon. They
assured the workers that the “impartial” WLB would take
care of labor’s just demands. They served on the board, lent
their names to it, gave it a “labor” cover, bolstered it
up for three years.
It was the Trotskyists in the unions who from the very beginning
conducted a tireless campaign exposing the real nature and purpose of
the WLB as a government instrument of the employers. The
Trotskyists have consistently called for the withdrawal of all union
representatives and support from this anti-labor government body.
For this, the Trotskyist workers were slandered as “obstructors”
and even “Hitler agents” by those very UAW leaders who
today call for the scrapping of the WLB.
However, the UAW executive board’s resolution on, the WLB
by no means indicates that these leaders really mean business. They
are making only another gesture to appease the auto workers’
wrath. If the UAW chiefs were serious about withdrawing labor support
from the WLB, they wouldn’t stop with mere appeals to Philip
Murray and the CIO. UAW President R. J. Thomas himself would take the
first step and demonstratively resign from the WLB. All UAW officials
on WLB regional bodies would be immediately instructed to leave them
flat.
 
Stay on WLB
Why don’t the UAW leaders get off the corporation-dominated
WLB ? Because the WLB – or some similar phony set-up with a
different title – is the only program these labor fakers have
to offer the auto workers in return for giving up their only
effective union weapon, the right to strike. The top UAW bureaucrats
are united in appealing to the auto workers to reaffirm the no-strike
pledge in the union’s current referendum. They have repeatedly
aided the corporations and government to break “unauthorized”
strikes provoked by the bosses. But if the WLB is an anti-labor
fraud, what then do these “leaders” offer in place of the
right to strike ?
Another government compulsory arbitration board! A freshly-painted
1945 model, with a different name, in which the bosses and
government can induce the auto workers to take another ride. That’s
what the executive board means by its complaint that the WLB now has
“neither the authority nor the standing it had when it was
created.” The WLB is so discredited that some other agency is
needed to hoax the workers. And that’s precisely what the UAW
board resolution proposes.
At the same time, by whining about the WLB and calling for the CIO
to withdraw its support, the UAW leaders are trying to refurbish
themselves as “militants” in the eyes of the auto
workers. However, their very admissions about the WLB expose the
bankruptcy of their whole past policy of servile compliance, with the
Roosevelt labor program. The auto workers can place not an iota of
trust in these bureaucrats!
Only a completely new, progressive leadership, controlled by the
rank and file, which will really fight for a genuine labor program,
can give effective, militant guidance to the auto workers. The auto
workers need a leadership which stands foursquare on a fighting
program.
The indispensable accompaniment to the withdrawal of labor
support from the WLB is to scrap the no-strike pledge. That is the
decisive issue before the auto workers – and all workers –
 today. That is the only way labor can disentangle itself from the
red-tape of government compulsory arbitration, halt the corporation
provocations, and take up in earnest the challenge of the
open-shoppers.
 




Gang-Up on Miners
The government agencies and coal operators are laying down, their
preliminary joint barrage in; anticipation of the impending struggle
against the mine workers. Negotiations for a union contract renewal
begin March 1 with the bituminous mine owners and April 1 with the
anthracite bosses.
An editorial in the February 15 United Mine Workers Journal
warns the miners that “poisoned publicity designed to arouse
the populace against any and all wage demands” is already being
widely peddled.
“The membership of the UMWA may just as well know
how the deck is stacked in advance of the policy committee meeting
and wage negotiations. It is a formidable opposition.”
All the government agencies are “backing the attack
against the UMW” declares the editorial.
“The lineup includes Director of War
Mobilization James Byrnes, Director of Stabilization Fred Vinson, the
WLB, the Solid Fuels Administration, the OPA, the Roosevelt
administration and the coal operators, all concentrating upon
utilizing an assumed authority under executive decrees and the
infamous Smith-Connally enslavement law to deny the mine workers’
wage demands on toto, regardless of the economic justice of the UMWA
wage proposals.”
The editorial charged Secretary of Interior Ickes with “planting”
statements in the public press designed to prejudice the miners’
case and discredit the UMW leaders. It further charged that one of
the primary reason’s for Vinson’s recent ruling requiring
OPA approval prior to any WLB grant of “fringe” wage
increases is “to stop the UMWA.”
It is reported that the UMW’s policy committee, which
meets to formulate demands on February 26, will consider a demand for
a 25 per cent hourly wage increase, from $1 to $1.25, and full
portal-to-portal pay instead of the present approximately 50 per cent
won in the 1943 general coal strikes.
* * *

UMW and AFL
Of great importance for the impending miners’ struggle is
the outcome of the negotiations for reaffiliation of the UMW, with
its over 600,000 members, to the AFL.
The AFL executive council meeting in Miami, Fla., last week voted
to accept the UMW’s request for reaffiliation with an apparent
major concession to the mine union on the chief issue previously
blocking the reaffiliation. That was the matter of jurisdictional
disputes, especially around the disposition of District 50, the UMW’s
organization for coal by-products workers. The AFL leaders agreed to
accept the UMW “as is,” with jurisdictional questions to
be ironed out after reaffiliation.
However, a further obstacle has arisen with the UMW’s
insistence upon a post on the AFL executive council. The council
members contend they have no power to give Lewis such a post without
approval of the AFL convention. This new issue, it appears, will not
halt further negotiations, as AFL President William Green is reported
to be getting together with UMW President John L. Lewis for
additional parleys.
* * *

Not Out Yet!
The CIO United Automobile Workers, through its executive board,
has declared “Three Strikes on WLB.” The union’s
official organ, the United Automobile Worker, February 15,
announces the decision of the board calling on the CIO to “quit”
the WLB. The paper states:
“The ‘little steel formula’ froze
labor’s pay and deprived the War Labor Board of any authority
to grant increases. STRIKE ONE! Current orders from ‘assistant
President’ James F. Byrnes, transmitted through ‘Stabilization
Director’ Judge Vinson, deprives the War Labor Board of the
right to grant labor any concessions on ‘fringe’ economic
issues, such as correction of inequalities, shift bonuses, severance
pay, etc. STRIKE TWO! Federal Judge Philip L. Sullivan, declaring
that government operation of the Montgomery Ward stores is illegal,
has ruled that War Labor Board decisions cannot be enforced, they are
merely ‘advisory.’ STRIKE THREE AND OUT!”
However the WLB is not “out” yet – and neither
are the UAW officials on the WLB. Three strikes doesn’t
disqualify in this game where the rules are made by the government
and the employers. In fact, the UAW, whose president R.J. Thomas and
other officials still function on the WLB, are still “playing
ball.”
This game should never have been started, because the rules were
all stacked against labor from the start. The UAW board just wants
the WLB to retire to the dugout, but offers to give the big business
government another chance at bat against labor with a new board.
* * *

NLRB Strike Polls
A real indication of the mood of the workers toward the no-strike
policy is shown by the record of strike votes conducted during the
past 12 months by the NLRB under the Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act.
Seventy-one percent of the 98,224 workers voting in 381 strike
polls favored strike action. Strike majorities resulted in 323 of the
381 voting units. Only 34 voted against strike. In 63 per cent of the
cases where unions filed notices for strike, the notices were
withdrawn before the vote, after mere notice of intent served to
speed up settlements. In many cases after strike votes were taken,
walkouts did not occur because settlements were hastily concluded.
These figures would indicate that the mere threat of strike backed
by a solid vote of the workers in a number of instances proved
effective in halting government and employer stalling on union
grievances.
* * *

Employment Decline
Another exposure of Roosevelt’s phony manpower “shortage”
claim, which he deliberately cooked up in an attempt to push through
his forced labor scheme, was presented by UAW Secretary-Treasurer
Addes to Senate committee hearings last week on, the May-Bailey slave
labor bill.
Addes presented figures showing a 16 per cent employment decline
in Detroit, key war-plants center. A survey of 192 major war plants
showed a drop of 57,000 workers from the level of 347,000 in
December, 1943, to the January 1945 level of 289,000. This would
indicate a total decline of 100,000 from the Detroit employment peak
of 700,000.
CIO Textile Workers President Emil Rieve disclosed that two
thousand textile workers in the New Bedford area are threatened with
unemployment because Army officials have demanded transfer of 800 key
workers, whose removal from their present jobs would jeopardize
production.
 



NEW YORK CITY, Feb. 2 – Over 800 unionists and
other progressive fighters for civil liberties this evening jammed
the Grand Ballroom of the Hotel Diplomat here to honor the 12
Minneapolis Labor Case defendants released last week after their 13
months behind Roosevelt’s prison bars.
Inspired by the imprisoned Trotskyist leaders’ courageous
stand for labor’s rights, this Welcome Home Mass Meeting,
sponsored by the Civil Rights Defense Committee, enthusiastically
pledged to continue the struggle for repeal of the infamous Smith
“Gag” Act under which the Socialist Workers Party leaders
were the first labor victim’s. The demand was issued for an
unconditional presidential pardon and restoration of their full
citizenship rights, now denied the defendants because of their
“felony” convictions.
 
Prolonged Ovation
A prolonged ovation was accorded to the three released prisoners
who addressed the meeting, Albert Goldman, Farrell Dobbs and Felix
Morrow, and to James P. Cannon, who was unable to attend because of
illness but sent a stirring statement to the gathering.
The released Socialist Workers Party and Minneapolis Truckdrivers
Local 544-00 leaders spoke with the fervor of the revolutionary
socialist convictions for which they were railroaded to prison and
which capitalist government persecution has only deepened. They
issued a militant call to all labor to unite in unceasing struggle
against capitalist reaction and in defense of the workers’
rights.
Outstanding labor and civil liberties leaders joined in greeting
the returned Trotskyist fighters. The welcoming speakers included
Osmund K. Fraenkel, counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union;
James T. Farrell, noted novelist and Chairman of the Civil Rights
Defense Committee; Benjamin S. McLaurin, International Field
Organizer of the AFL Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters and National
Secretary of the Negro March on Washington Movement; and B.A.
Gebiner, Assistant General Secretary of the Workmen’s Circle.
George Novack, CRDC National Secretary, was the chairman.
At this mass meeting, all the 18 Trotskyists originally
imprisoned, 6 of whom were released last October, demonstrated the
front of solidarity they have maintained throughout their trial and
imprisonment. Oscar Shoenfeld, Karl Kuehn and Al Russel, released
last October from Danbury, Conn., prison, sat on the platform with
their newly-released comrades from the Sandstone, Minn.,
penitentiary. A message of solidarity came from the other Minneapolis
prisoners, Grace Carlson, Jake Cooper, Oscar Coover, Harry DeBoer,
Vincent Dunne, Max Geldman, Clarence Hamel, Emil Hansen, Carlos
Hudson, Ed Palmquist and Carl Skoglund.
 
Cannon’s Statement
In his statement read at the opening of the meeting, Comrade
Cannon, founder of the American Trotskyist movement and SWP National
Secretary, paid special tribute to Grace Carlson, sole woman among
the defendants, who was separated from the rest of her comrades all
alone at the women’s prison in Alderson, W.Va. She is
affectionately called “The Senator” since the time in
1940 when she ran on the Minnesota SWP ticket for the U.S. Senate.
“Our hearts ached for our Senator there all alone
with such a ‘hard way to go,’ as the convicts say. But
she stood up and played her part and set us an example. We, are proud
of our Senator. All the rest of us did the best we could and we hope
you approve of the way we conducted ourselves,” Cannon
declared.
“If I were to be present at the meeting, the thing
I would like to say would be how deeply, how profoundly, I thank you
for your solidarity, your kindness, your friendship.”
He also expressed his “heartfelt gratitude” to Roger
Baldwin, National Director of the American Civil Liberties Union, who
aided the CRDG’s defense campaign from the beginning of the
case in June 1941.
 
Goldman’s Speech
Comrade Goldman, who made labor defense history as defense counsel
in the Minneapolis trial where he was also a defendant spoke with his
usual militancy. “Far be it from us to lay the least claim to a
martyr’s crown. Imprisonment is a terrible thing under the best
conditions.
“It is not, however, because of our treatment in
prison that you and thousands of others have protested and are
protesting. It is because of the fact that we were imprisoned for
propagating ideas which we believe offer the only path to the
liberation of mankind. Very few of those who supported us agree with
our ideas, but they understand that to permit reactionary forces to
imprison people for preaching ideas that have as their aim the
achievement of true liberty and equality for all men is dangerous
indeed for everyone who is dissatisfied with the world as it is.”
Calling for a continuation of the struggle against the Smith “Gag”
Act, Goldman stated:
“Our agitation against it may not result in its
immediate repeal but it will undoubtedly save many a potential labor
victim. Let all agitation against the Smith law cease and prosecutors
all over the country will be encouraged to use it. Our agitation
against the Smith Act becomes part of pur struggle to preserve and
extend democratic rights for the people. For we live in a period when
those rights are constantly threatened.”
 
CRDC Role in Helping Prisoners
Farrell Dobbs, who as a young coal yard driver helped to organize
and lead the great Minneapolis truckdrivers strikes in 1934 and rose
to the position of SWP National Labor Secretary and then Editor of
The Militant, told what it meant to the morale of the
prisoners to know that the CRDC and its supporters were taking care
of their dependent families.
He spoke with deep gratification of the “millions of
trade union fighters [who] rallied to the defense of the 18
throughout our entire case and particularly when we were in prison
and [who] rallied to the defense of Kelly Postal, Local 544-CIO
secretary-treasurer, who was railroaded to jail by Tobin in the
Minnesota courts. This defense movement has cut across political
lines and organizational boundaries. Virtually all of the
working-class parties have supported us – that is, all except
the Stalinist betrayers of the working class. The oppressed Negro
people sprang to our defense. And all liberal groups with the courage
of their convictions lent us their support. Over 600 labor bodies
have given their aid in this fight. They are so numerous it is
impossible to name them all tonight and tell them how much we
appreciate their support.”
 
Felix Morrow’s Speech
Felix Morrow, Editor of Fourth International magazine and
one of the most notable revolutionary journalists, declared:
“We went to prison for – a party in which
we have supreme faith – a trade union which had every right to
exist – and a principle of workers’ liberties which every
militant worker could understand if only our voices could reach him.
And we reached millions of such workers. What is important is that
several millions of workers learned to understand the principles
involved in this case and learned what a threat to the labor movement
is contained in the Smith Act and similar legislation.”
For the labor movement really to fight firmly against reaction.
Comrade Morrow pointed out, “means for labor to stand up as a
class, a class which recognizes its irreconcilable hostility to the
capitalist class – on the economic front, on the political
front, on the civil liberties front.” He concluded:
“We are confident that as we march together in
battle after battle for labor’s rights, the very logic of those
battles will weld together the kind of labor movement we believe
necessary for ultimate victory.”
 
Noted Novelist Greets the 12
James T. Farrell greeted the return of the 12 in the name of the
Civil Rights Defense Committee. He pointed out that the Minneapolis
Labor case was not a mere “episode.” Describing the
illusions about the case held by many liberals, their belief, doomed
to disappointment, that the “liberal” Roosevelt or the
“democratic” Supreme Court would reverse the convictions,
Farrell warned: “On the basis of these facts, one needs to be
ready for the future, ready in case other cases arise.” The
defense of civil liberties, he said, “rests most strongly on
the labor movement.” He called on the labor movement to
start work now “for broader defense work and broader struggle
ini the future.” Only a united front based on the labor
movement “can systematically carry on a struggle against the
Smith ‘Gag’ Act. Let us now say that we want no more
Minneapolis cases, and let us work to make this slogan a fact,”
Farrell also pointed out that the Trotskyists were prosecuted
because they “upheld Marxian views.” He showed how for
nearly a hundred years all the agents of capitalism have been
“refuting” Marxism. But despite the fact that “Marxism
is one of the most refuted of all tendencies,” the ruling
classes can only answer Marxism with repression, prison, murder. “And
in this case, Marxism has been legally attacked in the United States.
The expression of Marxian opinion has been held sufficient to send
men to jail. I will not stress the irony of this situation.”
 
Fraenkel Speaks for ACLU
The counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, Osmund K.
Fraenkel, who helped prepare the appeal for a hearing before the
Supreme Court, described the legal aspects of the Minneapolis case
and particularly the refusal of the Supreme Court on three occasions
even to hear the case, although the Smith “Gag” Act
directly violates the free speech amendment of the U.S. Constitution,
“I sincerely hope the organizations affiliated with this case
will succeed in wiping out the Smith Act,” Fraenkel said, for
it places anyone in jeopardy “for expression of opinions shared
by millions the world over and which may yet prove more correct than
the opinions of those who sent these people to prison.”
Speaking on behalf of the most oppressed section of the
population, the Negro people, Benjamin McLaurin brought greetings
from “the largest international union of Negro workers in the
world, the AFL Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, and from the most
radical organization of the Negro people in America, the March On
Washington Movement.”
 
Labor Spokesmen Call for Support of CRDC
He showed the parallel between the persecution and frameups
against the Negro people and the Minneapolis Labor Case.
“We realize what the Minneapolis case means,
perhaps more than any other group on the American scene. Let us give
support to the CRDC which has fought so heroically that the world
might know the truth in this case.”
B.A. Gebiner greeted the meeting and “all the defendants in
the case in the name of the Workmen’s Circle, the largest
Jewish labor fraternal order in the United States.” Despite
differences of political views, “these differences did not
preclude participation in the fight for the liberation of our
friends. A considerable number of our branches have given, and will
give, moral and financial support to this fight.” The defense
campaign for the 18, he said, has shown that “there are
progressive and liberal-minded people who do not merely give lip
service to civil liberties but are ready to fight for it.”
A high point of the meeting was the appeal made by George
Novack for financial aid to Kelly Postal. The CRDC National Secretary
described the ruthless persecution of the Local 544-CIO
secretary-treasurer by AFL Teamsters Czar Daniel Tobin, the Minnesota
government and the employers.
Kelly Postal, because of his militancy and devotion to union
democracy, was first placed on trial in the Minneapolis Labor Case,
but was one of 10 acquitted. Tobin’s agents cooked up charges
of “embezzlement” against him, because he had carried out
the mandate of the Local 544 members in transferring the local’s
funds from the AFL to the CIO affiliation. One judge threw the
case out of court. A more pliable judge was secured. Kelly was tried
on a different but similar count based on identical “evidence,”
framed and sent to prison for up to 5 years.
After serving more than a year, he was paroled as a result of the
pressure brought to bear through the CRDC defense campaign. He was
paroled to Seattle, where his wife, Mae, had moved. She was suffering
from cancer. She had to return to Minneapolis for treatment, but the
parole officers refused to permit Kelly to go. Mae was compelled to
make the long, difficult journey back to Seattle to spend her last
few weeks with her husband. She died several weeks ago. Kelly has
been left a big burden of debt for his wife’s medical care,
travel and funeral.
With a genuine demonstration of solidarity and generosity for a
persecuted union brother, the mass meeting contributed $468 in the
collection to aid Kelly Postal meet the debts accumulated because he
was sent to prison for his loyalty to the labor movement.
Scores of telegrams and messages greeting the released
Trotskyists were sent to the meeting. Among the Labor
organizations and leaders expressing their solidarity were Irving
Abramson, President of the New Jersey CIO; Thomas DeLorenzo,
President of Brewster Aeronautical Local 365, CIO autoworkers; Peter
Capitano, Representative of Local 160, AFL Ladies Garment Workers;
Aron S. Gilmartin, Chairman of the Workers Defense League. From
every part of the country, the branches of the Socialist Workers
Party sent their pledges of solidarity.
Demonstrating the international solidarity of the working
class, leading organizations of Mexican workers hailed the release of
the American Trotskyist leaders. These included the Mexican
section of the Fourth International; the Workers and Peasants
Confederation; Union of Construction Workers of the, Federal
District; Union of Tanning Industry Workers of the Federal District;
Union of Construction Industry Workers, CTM; Libertarian Federation
of Workers and Peasants; Union of Stage Employees (“Smima
Club.”)
The meeting concluded with the adoption of a resolution calling on
“the President of the United States to grant immediate and
unconditional pardon and restore their civil rights to the 18
Socialist Workers Party and CIO members who were singled out for
persecution and imprisonment under the Smith ‘Gag’ Act.”
 



Some workers undoubtedly still have the illusion that the
Roosevelt administration attempts to exercise “impartiality”
in arriving at wage decisions. But the reality is the exact opposite.
The rigmarole of War Labor Board hearings and other government
arbitration procedures is designed to conceal behind-the-scenes
conniving between the administration and the big employers.
The actual mechanics of one such conspiracy have been partially
disclosed by recent developments in the textile wage case, including
Director of Economic Stabilization Vinson’s intervention in
this and other pending cases. This intervention came in the form of
his letter to the WLB “requesting” that agency to grant
no wage increases of any nature without prior approval of the Office
of Price Administration.
By his action, Vinson succeeded in blocking a final decision of
the WLB after it had indicated its intentions of lifting slightly the
“sub-standard” wages of the terribly exploited textile
workers. Further, he established an entirely new basis for “settling”
wage disputes. Not the “merits of the case” are the
criteria, but whether wage increases, however paltry, “affect
costs and prices” – as the profiteering corporations
always insist they do.
Moreover, final authority in wage disputes is no longer to reside
in the official arbitration agency, the WLB, but in the “price
control” agencies, where the unions do not even have formal
representation. Thus, the administration has contrived a neat device
for nullifying wage increases even in those few instances where the
WLB, in order to preserve its prestige as an “impartial”
agency, is compelled to grant “fringe” raises.
Apart from the obvious general fact that Roosevelt’s
underlings and appointees, including Vinson, merely implement the
administration’s wage and labor policies, in this particular
case there is concrete evidence that Vinson acted in accordance with
White House directions. Moreover, as we shall show, Vinson had a
secret “understanding” with the leading textile
manufacturers.
The first public knowledge of the general contents of Vinson’s
letter to WLB chairman Davis came in a CIO statement of protest
issued in Washington on January 12. This statement also contained a
copy of a letter sent by Roosevelt to CIO President Murray.
Roosevelt’s letter – into which the CIO leaders
attempted at first to read a message of “hope” – 
clearly indicates that the inspiration for Vinson’s action came
straight from the White House.
In his letter discussing the administration’s broad wage
policy, Roosevelt emphasized just one point – the effect of any
wage increases upon prices. “Naturally, any proposals for a
change in our present policy must be considered in relation to their
probable effect upon the price structure and upon our general
anti-inflation program. The board (WLB), therefore, will submit its
report to Judge Vinson whom I then expect to advise me in light of
the board’s findings, as well as all other relevant
information. As to objectives, we are in perfect agreement. We must
not permit the price level to rise.”
It may be noted with reference to the last sentence that the
compelling reason advanced by the unions to demand wage increases has
been precisely that prices have already risen – at least 45
per cent since January 1941.
* * *
It can now be proved, further more, that Vinson acted not only
with Roosevelt’s approval but also upon secret agreement with
the textile bosses. That is why Vinson’s letter to the WLB was
timed to halt release of the WLB decision in the textile wage case.
The irrefutable evidence of this administration-employers
conspiracy to defraud the textile workers is contained in a document
made public on January 23 by Emil Rieve, President of the CIO Textile
Workers Union.
This revealing document is signed by William P. Jacobs, Executive
Director of the Print Cloth Group of Cotton Manufacturers, Clinton,
S.C. It is dated January 12, 1945. It is fittingly titled, Another
Progress Report.
The document begins:
“After spending another week in Washington, I
give you another confidential report on price ceilings and wages. On
this trip, I conferred with Judge Vinson, having previously conferred
with Justice Byrnes. He arranged the conference with Judge Vinson for
us.”
What a spirit of cordiality and cooperation!
The report goes on to confide: “On wages the judge seemed
better informed and more interested but still non-committal.”
“Better informed and more interested” here means
sympathetic to the sweat-shop operators’ view; “non-committal”
means cautiously refraining from any open commitments.
Then comes the real pay-off.
“This matter is now in his (Vinson’s) hands,
and from the pressure that we know has now reached him it is possible
that FOR POLITICAL REASONS he may be forced to indefinitely hold the
matter, or he may recommend a basis somewhat lower than the WLB would
authorize. From conferences which I held I know that Justice Byrnes,
Senators George, Maybank, Russell and Governor Gardner, and perhaps
others have insisted that he do nothing which will wipe out the
traditional North-South differential.”
To what “political reasons” does this Southern
sweatshop representative refer? Obviously the need of the Roosevelt
regime to preserve its political ties with the powerful Southern
Democratic Bourbons. The whole deal was engineered through
Roosevelt’s right-hand man, Byrnes, the so-called “Assistant
President.”
The report then observes:
“The interview (With Vinson) was satisfactory and
resulted in a hopeful conclusion, again indicating the effect of
pressure FROM HIGHER UP and perhaps from the letters which you have
written to members of Congress. I RAN INTO THAT AT MANY POINTS.”
Such understanding and co-operation from the “higher ups”
and legislators! Indeed, the textile manufacturers had every reason
to anticipate a “hopeful conclusion.” And they were not
disappointed.
* * *
It need merely be added that WLB chairman Davis is now engaged in
a bit of shadow-boxing with Vinson. Naturally, to prop up the WLB’s
tottering authority, Davis is compelled to disclaim responsibility
for the administration’s connivery. He is “disputing”
in a polite way with Vinson’s “interpretation” –
 although conceding Vinson’s authority to enforce his
“interpretation.”
However, Davis and Vinson have cooperated to keep their
skulduggery hidden from the workers. The United Press reported on
January 24 that the text of Vinson’s letter “was made
available despite efforts of both WLB Chairman William H. Davis and
Mr. Vinson to prevent it from being made public.”
 




Telephone Workers
Last month, inspired by the November strike of the Ohio, Michigan
and Washington, D.C., operators, 17,000 local and long distance
telephone workers in New York overwhelmingly voted to strike for a
general $5 weekly raise. Their demands had been stalled by the
companies and WLB for over two years. Before the 30-day “cooling
off” period imposed under the Smith-Connally Act was concluded,
a WLB telephone wage panel hastily recommended granting the $5
increase, and the company representatives conceded to a $4 raise.
Continuing their demand for the full $5, the local Traffic
Employees Association of the New York Telephone Co. and the
Federation of Long Lines Telephone Workers of the American Telegraph
and Telephone Co., agreed to postpone strike action pending a final
decision of the WLB’s National Telephone Panel in Washington.
WLB panels have also recommended increases for telephone workers
in other leading cities who had either participated in the
Thanksgiving week strike or threatened to follow this example.
The organized telephone operators have thus demonstrated that
the strike weapon is the only effective means of getting speedy
action from the government and corporations and securing the
possibility for workers to win their wage demands.
*

UAW and WLB
The Militant last week reported the action of the CTO
United Automobile Workers international executive board in calling on
the CIO to withdraw its members from the War Labor Board. The text of
the resolution has been made public in the current issue of the UAW’S
official publication, the United Automobile Worker.
While enumerating a long series of complaints against the WLB,
whose procedure is termed a “time-wasting, meaningless
rigmarole,” the UAW board still upholds the principle of
compulsory arbitration. Their grievance is not that the WLB was
specifically organized to curb labor, but that it “has no
authority to act.”
The UAW bureaucrats, who are united in fearful opposition to
rescinding the no-strike pledge in the current UAW referendum, are
clamoring for a “new” board. This will differ from the
WLB only in that its “prerogatives” would be more
“comprehensive, clearly defined.” That is, more binding
upon the workers.
The resolution makes so bold as to declare that Roosevelt
“cannot escape full responsibility for the present inaction and
indecision of the WLB.” When did these pro-Roosevelt lackeys
discover that? They denied that before the elections. They themselves
for three years bolstered and gave a labor cover to the WLB.
We repeat what The Militant wrote last week. The UAW
bureaucrats don’t mean business.
They are trying to put on a “militant” front and save
face among the auto workers who are becoming thoroughly aroused
against the cowardly policies of the officialdom.
The auto militants are demonstrating through their campaign to
revoke the no-strike pledge that they oppose the whole policy of
dependence on capitalist “friends of labor” and
government boards. They are learning to have faith only in their own
organized strength in action. That’s the only policy that can
win an iota for the workers in this period.
*

Westinghouse
The National Westinghouse Conference Board, of the CIO Electrical,
Radio and Machine Workers, representing 80,000 Westinghouse Electric
Workers, recently issued a demand to Roosevelt for a general wage
increase of 17 cents an hour.
They appealed to Roosevelt “to counteract the failures and
blunders of his subordinates by granting an immediate national
cost-of-living wage adjustment of 17 cents an hour retroactive to
Jan. 1, 1944.”
Of course, Roosevelt’s subordinates committed no
“failures and blunders.” They very capably fulfilled
their function of frustrating the demands of the workers in
accordance with the policies laid down by Roosevelt himself.
Nevertheless, this wage raise demand from an important section of
a union notoriously dominated by the reactionary Stalinists is a
significant sign. It indicates growing pressure from the UE ranks.
For the Stalinist UE leaders certainly would like to suppress the
embarrassing clamor for cost-of-living wage increases.
*

Secretary Addes
UAW-CIO Secretary-Treasurer George Addes must have been born with
two tongues in his mouth. One tongue could not possibly stand the
strain of the double-talk he pours forth.
Addes, as is known to all among the auto workers, represents the
extreme right wing in the UAW leadership and has for several years
maintained a bloc with the Stalinists. He is among the most
unrestrained flag-wavers and abject labor lieutenants of Roosevelt
trying to maintain the no-strike pledge.
So it might come as a surprise to those unacquainted with the
remarkable quality of double-talk put but by Addes, to read his
remarks on the Forced Labor Bill in his column, Secretary Addes
Says, in the United Automobile Worker, February 1.
Addes, a henchman of the Stalinists who support the “National
Service” scheme of Roosevelt, complains:
“When we wrote our column a month ago protesting
against those who were openly advocating a national service law, we
had no idea that President Roosevelt would once again join their
ranks ... Whether President Roosevelt actively Campaigns for passage
of a national service law or lets it die a peaceful death, as he did
last year, might possibly be the answer to some of the questions we
are today asking.”
Three lies in two sentences:

Roosevelt didn’t “join the ranks” of forced
labor advocates; he has spearheaded their offensive.
 
Roosevelt did not “let it die last year;” he just
shut up about it prior to the elections – as did Addes.
 
Addes never asked any questions about Roosevelt. But if he
has some, let him speak out.

 



Stalinist traitors in the CIO secretly button-holed Congressmen in
Washington and urged them to vote for the Roosevelt-sponsored
May-Bailey slave labor bill. This gave some House members a pretext
for “shifting” to support of the forced labor measure on
the grounds that “labor” was “split” on the
issue, it was disclosed by the New York daily PM, Jan. 31.
 
Stalinist Treachery
The Stalinist treachery, according to PM, “was
revealed by the shift of several New York City Representatives who
said they had been visited over the weekend by delegations
representing Left-wing CIO locals and the Greater New York Industrial
Union Council who urged them to approve the May-Bailey Bill now under
debate.” “Left-wing” is PM’s
customary misleading designation for the extreme right- wing
Stalinist reactionaries.
PM reports further: “‘I was nearly knocked off
my feet,’ one Congressman said. ‘I thought labor was solidly
opposed to the bill and I had intended to vote against it. With this
division of opinion, however, I intend to go along with the
Commander-in-Chief, unless the bill is amended to discriminate
further against labor.’”
Exposed by PM’s revelations, Earl Browder’s
Communist (Stalinist) Political Association and its union stooges are
frantically attempting to cover up their naked betrayal. The
notorious Stalinist hatchet-men, Michael Quill and Saul Mills, acting
president and secretary respectively of the Greater New York CIO
Council, issued a “denial” which denied absolutely
nothing. They simply pointed to a “for the record”
resolution passed several weeks ago in the Council as “proof.”
But they carefully refrained from denying that Stalinist CIO
officials had acted “unofficially,” as PM
reported.
A virtual confession of the truth of PM’s specific
charges is contained, however, in the Daily Worker, February
1, which devotes an entire page to an “answer.” The
“answer” does not attempt to deny PM’s
facts. It seeks to divert attention from the real charges by a
hysterical counter-attack against “the usual attempt of certain
elements ... to find ‘splits’ in the CIO.”
Not only does the Daily Worker slide around the specific
charges, but it tries to justify the treacherous act of its union
stooges. It claims there is a “considerable" difference of
opinion on the May-Bailey bill in the labor movement. “The
Daily Worker has often in the past differed with many labor
leaders, and labor leaders have even more often disagreed with the
Daily Worker. There is nothing so strange about that.”
Etc,
Not a line about whether or not Stalinist officials in the CIO
acted as strikebreakers against the entire labor movement by misusing
their union titles to lobby for Congressional votes for the most
dangerous piece of union busting legislation ever cooked up by the
American capitalists.
Most of the article is devoted to “our stand on the manpower
issue.” The Daily Worker brazenly touts the May-Bailey
bill and wants labor to embrace the bill as “its own.”
Labor is advised not “to allow initiative on the May bill to
its enemies.” Don’t wait for others to put the noose on
your neck, put it on yourself!
 
Deadly Enemies
The Daily Worker tries to claim that “national
service” is just the thing for labor. Didn’t the demand
for it come “from President Roosevelt, certainly not an enemy
of labor”? Moreover, the Daily Worker gives its own word
for it that “all the talk about national service being
‘slavery’ and violation of the freedom of contract is
just plain poppycock.” Rising to a frenzied crescendo, the
Worker howls: “How will Hitler and Hirohito take it if
such a measure is defeated?” Thus according to the Daily
Worker, Hitler and Hirohito are rooting to beat hell for the
American workers to remain free from forced labor.
Once more the Stalinists expose themselves as the deadliest
internal enemies of the American labor movement. They are ready to
commit any crime against the working class in the interests of the
Kremlin’s diplomatic alliance with Wall Street. In every
wartime defensive struggle of the workers, the Stalinists have yelped
with the reactionary pack trying to drag labor down. They advocate a
permanent no-strike pledge. They conduct the most vicious and
unremitting slander campaigns against union militants. They hail
every act of government strikebreaking. They boast of open finkery,
as in the Montgomery Ward strikes. Now they sneak behind the back of
the labor movement to help the capitalist government aim its forced
labor knife.
For its own safety, American labor must ruthlessly call to account
the sinister Stalinist traitors. Stalinism will poison and ultimately
destroy the unions if it is permitted to spread further through the
body of labor.
 




Mine Union Affiliation
The labor reporter for the New York Post, Victor Riesel, states from San Francisco in his May 9 column that “John L. Lewis will take his 600,000 followers back into the AFL within a few weeks.” The Post reporter was told this by AFL President Green, “who is here today to consult with U.S. delegates to the World Security Conference.”
Riesel quotes Green as stating: “The United Mine Workers will be a part of the AFL before long. This is my personal opinion based on the facts and occurrences of the past weeks.”
This is the first definite statement of this nature from any high AFL official. It would indicate that the AFL intends to admit the UMW once the hard coal strike is over.
The reaffiliation of the UMW would boost the AFL’s membership to over 8,500,000. Such a move is likely to presage an intensification of the conflict between the AFL and CIO, with the hand of the craft union chiefs strengthened against industrial union organization, Riesel contends.
* * *

How Not to Win
The workers at Macy’s Department Store in New York City, the largest department store in the world, have initiated a campaign for wage increases and against wage cuts. Department store employees are among the lowest paid workers in America, while department store profits have soared more than a 1000 per cent since 1939. However, their union, Local 1-s, CIO United Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Employees, is dominated by Stalinists, whose idea of putting up a fight is a leaflet distributed to customers after closing time asking the customers to write letters to the management. The most prominent feature of the leaflet is the heading, We Will Not Strike! That’s Why We’re Asking You To Help Us!
The only people inspired by such a headline are the employers.
* * *

Rieve Retreats
President Emil Rieve of the CIO Textile Workers has used the authority granted him by the union’s National Executive Council to re-impose the no-strike policy on the 100,000 cotton-rayon workers freed by the Council from the no-strike pledge last Feb. 20. This step backward was taken on April 10 in a letter to the local unions involved and the WLB, reports the May 1 Textile Labor.
The previous rescinding of the no-strike pledge together with Rieve’s resignation from the WLB got more real action out of the WLB and the administration in one day than months of prolonged hearings and pleadings. The WLB hastened to announce a 55 cent wage minimum and various other concessions previously withheld from the textile workers.
These concessions were at best pretty small and far less than the union had demanded. Certainly they were no warrant for once more putting the no-strike noose around the neck of the textile workers and bolstering the wage-freezing WLB.
This retreat is still less justified in the face of the general anti-labor offensive of the corporations today, which Textile Labor describes in the very same issue.
Moreover, Rieve’s action throws light on the whole bureaucratic manner in which the no-strike policy has been foisted on the workers. Rieve and the top union officials put over the no-strike pledge. Then they withdrew it. Then they arbitrarily re-imposed it. But what did the workers have to say in all this? Nothing. They were never consulted about the no-strike policy to begin with.
But if Rieve can withdraw the pledge when he sees fit, why can’t the workers? Especially since it was his pledge and not theirs.
* * *

Auto Firms Fire Vets
Ford, Chrysler and General Motors have started a campaign of firing returned veterans under the pretext that they are compelled to do so by the seniority terms of the CIO United Automobile Workers contracts.
The May 15 United Auto Worker, Service men’s edition, exposes this attempt to incite the returned soldiers against the workers and the unions.
At Chrysler Dodge in Chicago, for instance, 50 veterans were fired with the blame being thrown on the union. At Ford Lincoln in Detroit three were discharged with the same propaganda. The union paper reveals that both these companies, as well as General Motors, have for eight months refused to sign a Model Contract clause to protect veterans who have not previously worked in these companies and give them seniority for their time in service. Some 40 other companies have already accepted it.
In the cases cited at Ford and Chrysler Dodge, the paper reports that: “Neither Chrysler nor Ford had to lay off those veterans EVEN UNDER EXISTING CONTRACT PROVISIONS!” The contract provides that those not employed less than six months are probationary and have no seniority. The companies deliberately selected veterans for dismissal when they were free to lay off other non-veterans. This was done to initiate an attack on the unions and create anti-union sentiment among returned soldiers.
“As soon as the union exposed these facts, the veterans were offered reinstatement,” says the UAW paper. But not before the daily press made a lot of anti-labor capital out of the incidents.
 



War Mobilization and Reconversion Director Fred Vinson’s report on the economic outlook for the workers and returning veterans, analyzed in last week’s Militant, has touched off a volley of protest from virtually all sections of organized labor.
It is charged that Vinson’s report conceals more than it reveals. It deliberately distorts the prospects for employment and gives only glib reassurances and unsubstantiated “estimates” about the real extent of war production cutbacks. At the same time, it offers not a single detail of a genuine program to maintain employment and wages.
The reaction of the CIO leaders to Vinson’s vague and misleading optimism was expressed by Ted F. Silvey, chairman of the CIO’s Reconversion Committee. He charged on May 12 that Vinson’s report “gives no cognizance of the possible deep cutbacks and cancellation of war orders right now being determined by the military which are about to descend on the country in a rushing flood of unemployment.”
Vinson’s extremely conservative figures on cutbacks, Silvey declared, are “inaccurate” and thoroughly discredited” as “every informed person in Washington knows.”
 
CIO Protests
“It is ridiculous to use these figures,” said Silvey, “which the military procurement officers themselves know to be wrong, and in some pollyanna manner expect that unemployment will somehow or other work out all right if we don’t talk much about it. But the CIO will talk about it and shout the danger of mass unemployment from the housetops.”
Following Vinson’s report, in which he attempted to minimize the tremendous decline in weekly earnings facing the workers, CIO President Philip Murray on May 13 addressed a statement to Vinson reviving the CIO Steelworkers’ demand for a general 17 cents an hour wage increase “and similar amounts in other industries.”
In fact, stated Murray, a 20 per cent increase in hourly wage rates would be the minimum necessary “simply to restore prewar relationships between wage rates, prices and productivity per man-hour.”
Under pressure of the hundreds of thousands of aroused auto workers in the Detroit area, R.J. Thomas, CIO United Automobile Workers president, Walter Reuther, UAW vice-president, and other auto-union leaders, have added their voices to the growing clamor against the administration’s hunger and unemployment program for labor, and price-boosting and fat tax rebates policy for the war profits-bloated corporations.
Reuther declared in a letter to Vinson on May 12 that the administration’s “optimistic report ... finds no confirmation in the current experience of automobile workers.” He asserted that “sharp and disastrous curtailment of workers’ spendings is the fact, now and in the immediate future – deflation of total spending power is not merely a prediction for the Detroit area, it is here.” He recited the reduction in “take- home” pay of the Ford workers alone, whose weekly earnings have been cut $2,500,000 by a return to the 40-hour week.
 
False Propaganda
Vinson’s report, it is clear from the overwhelming testimony of all sections of organized labor, is part of a planned propaganda program to delude the workers and veterans about their immediate future under “free enterprise” monopoly capitalism. A prize example of the nature of this propaganda, campaign were the reports last week on “reconversion” plans in auto.
On May 16 Washington officials issued a statement that the auto industry would need eight months to produce at a rate of 2,060,000 cars a year, “enough to make money.” In 13 months, they would be producing at the rate of possibly 6,500,000 cars a year.
On May 17, the War Production Board issued further details. Actually its plan called for 200,000 cars by the end of 1945; 450,000 cars within the next 12 months. But the next day, James H. Marks, executive vice president of Packard Motor, termed the WPB’s figures “a little misleading.” They could turn out 200,000 or 450,000 cars “if the necessary materials can be obtained,” which he “doubted.” To which R.J. Thomas added: “The outlook for auto workers in Detroit is not promising.”
 
Outlook for Bosses
But the outlook is most promising for the big banks and corporations. Truman and Morganthau have given their approval to an excess profits tax- rebate and tax-cut program which will swell corporation coffers by six billions within the next two years. As for “price control,” the new OPA policy announced last week is summed up in the phrase, “in case of doubt, raise prices,” according to Donald Montgomery, chairman of the CIO Cost of Living Committee.
“OPA now changes the rule as to prices (to permit a profit on every single item produced),” said Montgomery, “while Vinson, Economic Stabilizer Davis and WLB Chairman Taylor unanimously announce that the wage freeze continues indefinitely.”
The top union leaders are not short of proposals on how to protect the workers from mass unemployment and big slashes in their “take-home” pay. The principal demand is for the spreading of work by reducing the work week and the maintenance of the workers’ weekly incomes by a big increase in hourly wage rates.
 
Latest Demands
This demand is expressed in the auto union’s program for a 40-hour week at 48 hours’ pay. It is the essence of Murray’s plea for a 17 cents an hour increase in steel.
The latter demand was first raised in the fall of 1943. It was stalled until January 1945, when the WLB, under the late President Roosevelt, flatly rejected it. Today Murray has no other way of attempting to secure this demand than the demonstrably bankrupt methods he has employed in the past.
Thus his latest bid for higher wages is accompanied with the assertion that “wage controls must be maintained, at least until V-J Day, if we are to maintain the no-strike pledge.” Also the WLB must be given “greater authority.”
In short, Murray’s demands and those of the other union leaders are just plain bluff if they are not accompanied by a fighting program which can enforce these demands.
 



The capital-labor “peace charter” which Philip Murray and William Green signed with Eric Johnston, Chamber of Commerce president, “finds no warm response among the owners and management heads of the automobile industry.” That is the admission which recent events in the country’s largest industry have wrung from the top leaders of the CIO United Automobile Workers. It is contained in the May 1 issue of the union’s official organ, United Automobile Worker.
On the contrary, states the paper of the largest union in the country, “the auto industry, spearheaded by the Automobile Manufacturers’ Association, General Motors and Chrysler Corporations, are fighting the peace pact and rallying other employers for an all-out war with labor.”
In addition, the article concedes a portion of the truth about the real nature and intent of the Murray-Green-Johnston “peace pact.” The auto barons oppose the pact “despite the general view that the agreement is exceedingly generous toward management.”
In exchange for “recognition” of collective bargaining rights “which is the law of the land,” the article points out, “the labor signers ... recognized the justice of the ‘free enterprise system,’ granted management’s traditional ‘prerogatives’ in the plants and expressed opposition to needless government ‘interference’ in industry.”
 
Aims of Auto Barons
The basic intent of the agreement is the “minimizing of strikes and lockouts.” That is, keeping labor tied hand and foot while the owners can enjoy their “prerogatives” of exploiting the workers and controlling the productive resources of the nation for their own profit and privileges.
What is the real program of the automobile moguls ? It is contained says the article in the “five-point declaration of war on labor,” drafted jointly by the National Association of Manufacturers and the Chamber of Commerce. This is the legislative program revealed recently by B.E. Hutchinon, Chrysler corporation vice president and a NAM director. It would outlaw strikes permanently, safeguard strikebreakers, illegalize the closed shop and impose government compulsory arbitration even in peacetime.
This program, states the UAW paper, “seeks a return to the old system wherein labor organizations were illegal conspiracies and participation in unions was punishable by jail sentences.”
“The attack on the proposal for post-war industrial peace fills out a pattern which the auto industry has been weaving for months. Coincidentally with its legislative drive on unionism, the industry is striving to stir up differences between labor and returned veterans. Unable to provide full employment for ail workers, the industry is trying to conceal its failure by making it appear that union seniority clauses will be responsible for failure of returning soldiers to obtain jobs.”
That is, the auto corporations are already carrying out their union-busting program in action.
 
Learned Nothing
At the conclusion of the article, there is a summary of the prewar record of the corporations and a description of how the UAW repeatedly fought them “to a standstill” by militant strike actions. But the hope of the UAW leaders that the auto corporations “had learned by experience” has not been fulfilled. “Present indications are that the industry has learned nothing.”
The UAW paper might have added: Neither have any of the other industry owners learned anything. The steel, rubber, shipyard, textile, aircraft, oil, lumber, meat packing and other capitalists are just as hard-bitten, anti-labor reactionaries as the auto bosses. It is sheer deception and treachery for Murray, Green and their lieutenants to seek to disarm labor with their unconditional surrender “peace charter.”
The UAW article concludes that if industry will not learn the “peaceful way” it will “be taught the hard way.” That’s just blustering talk so far as the UAW top leaders are concerned. They too, like the employers, have “learned nothing.”
For months now, the auto corporations have been engaged in a concerted drive of provocations to undermine and crush the UAW. This has included wholesale firing of local union officers and committeemen. Over 100,000 Detroit auto workers have gone on strike during the past two months.
 
UAW Leaders
The UAW leaders, instead of mobilizing for the defense of the local unions, have rained all their blows on the striking workers and their local leaders. While the corporations are openly engaged in cutting the local unions to pieces, the UAW leaders wring their hands in print, deplore the fact that the corporations don’t want “peace” – and frantically attempt to enforce the no-strike pledge.
The UAW international representatives have rushed into every strike situation to act as cops for the corporations and government. They have tried to herd the workers back on the job without any gains. They have passed international executive board resolutions Condemning and threatening union locals and their officers which have had the guts to stand up and fight for their rights.
Thus, while they cast suspicion on the “peace charter” IN WORDS, they enforce it upon the workers IN DEEDS.
 




Phone Girls OK Contract
Meetings of New York Local 101, Federation of Long Lines Telephone Workers, on April 24 ratified a wage contract, approved by the WLB, which grants average wage increases of $3.88 per week, plus retroactive pay amounting to $2,500,000. It will also give maximum pay of $37 weekly after 8 years service, instead of the former $34 peak after 12 years.
The new agreement, which is also being acted upon by the local operators in the Traffic Employees Association, was won after both unions voted overwhelmingly to strike against the flat $3 a week raise originally granted by the WLB. The unions had demanded $5; a special WLB panel had also recommended $5. The company had finally agreed to $4, but the national WLB pared it to $3.
A new schedule of wages gives beginners $23, plus certain fringe concessions, instead of $20 weekly. This increase is raised to $4 after 15 months, $5 after 35 months and $6 after 48 months.
The militancy of the telephone girls, who were just about to go on strike when the final contract was signed, forced the WLB to accede to the higher awards.
* * *

Less Take-Home Pay
Over 100,000 shipyard and ship repair workers in the New York area face large cuts in their weekly take-home pay as the result of an order by the War Shipping Administration directing operators to reduce hours and eliminate overtime and premium pay. The order was announced on April 24.
It was also revealed that there have been “moderate layoffs in recent weeks” although “no mass dismissals,” says the April 25 N.Y. Times, “are expected before three or four months.” That’s a way of breaking the news “gently” that there are huge layoffs pending during the summer.
All Sunday work at double-time is eliminated, except by special WSA order. This is a terrific sock at the workers’ weekly income. The shipyard workers depend upon this overtime to carry them through because of high prices, taxes and other war expenses. They will be permitted only one hour of daily overtime instead of two, which most of them worked before. This in itself means a loss of from $9 to $12 pay a week.
The CIO Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers is planning to demand wage increases in June when the present contract expires.
* * *

Six-to-One for Strike
Now that the War Labor Board has been compelled to approve the soft coal miners’ contract granting increases of around $1.25 per day, the hard coal miners, centered in Pennsylvania, are going after substantial raises when their contract expires at the end of April.
Like their brothers in the soft coal mines, the anthracite workers on April 27 showed they mean business by voting six-to- one in favor of strike action if the operators and government don’t agree to an acceptable contract. The United Mine Workers has demanded a 25 per cent wage increase.
The National Labor Relations Board reported the complete returns of the strike poll as follows: For strike, 41,952, against, 6,697.
When the coal miners take a strike vote, it’s no mere gesture or empty threat. That’s what the boss press said about the previous vote of the .bituminous miners – until they walked out by the scores of thousands even after the old contract was extended for a month. A lot of miners figured an old contract is no contract – and no contract, no work! Then the operators and government acted fast.
* * *

Textile Local Sued
A suit for damages of $259,680 from the United Textile Workers, AFL, has been filed by the American Enka Corporation, Ashville, North Carolina, in the Buncombe County N.C., Superior Court. The company is trying to knock down this huge sum from the union for alleged losses it claims it sustained during a strike of 3,000 workers last February. The company claims the strike, which ended in a government “seizure” on February 18, violated a no-strike clause in the contract.
The real intent of this suit is to smash the union. Since August 18, 1944, the company has been defying a regional WLB order directing it to arbitrate the union’s demand for shift differentials and paid lunch periods. The company refused, raising the pretext that by opening the contract for renegotiation of these issues it was reopening the whole contract. A second WLB order was likewise rejected. But it wasn’t until the workers struck, months later, that the WLB “got tough” – not against the company, but against the workers by initiating a strikebreaking plant “seizure.”
If this suit is successful, it may set loose a whole wave of attempts to bust unions by collecting strike “damages” through the help of pro-corporation courts.
* * *

What – No Peace Pact?
The April 6 Toledo Union Journal, organ of the Northwest Ohio CIO says editorially:
“Obviously if management does not have the intelligence, the tact and willingness to settle its unimportant differences with labor during these war years when the welfare of the country hinges upon unity and cooperation, how can we expect it to show a sudden birth of reason once the emergency has passed?”
We don’t know about those “unimportant differences.” That’s what the union leaders called them – but not the bosses, who have fought labor bitterly on every point during the war. But it’s a cinch, as the Toledo union paper states, that the corporations aren’t going to take it easier against labor with the war drawing to a close.
Philip Murray and William Green may sign their capital-labor “peace-charter” – but to the bosses that’s just a way to get labor to lower its guard and stick out its neck for a rabbit punch.
 




Thomas’ Bright Idea
After fumbling around with the problem of employment for the thousands to be laid-off with the closing of the huge Ford Willow Run Bomber plant, R.J. Thomas, president of the CIO United Automobile Workers finally burst into print with an “inspiration.”
The government claims it has no more war contracts for this government-owned plant. Henry Ford, who operated it most profitably during the war, says it would be a white elephant to him. So Thomas proposed on May 15 in Detroit that Henry J. Kaiser, shipbuilding tycoon and government contract promoter, buy up the plant and produce automobiles.
Evidently, Thomas has swallowed without even chewing the myth about Kaiser, the “industrial genius.” That “genius” consisted exclusively of the ability to wangle new plants and profitable contracts out of the government. On that basis, Kaiser ran a $100,000 investment up to a profit of $27,274,487 on just two of his west coast shipyards. Even Thomas himself, whom no one describes as a genius of any kind, could have done as much if the government had handed him the plants and stuffed the dough into his pockets, as it did with Kaiser.
It’s a funny thing, though, that Kaiser the “industrial genius” has run dry in the shipyard industry with the turning off of the tap of government orders. He can’t even provide jobs for the tens of thousands of shipyard workers he employed on war orders. Most of them will he on the street by the first of the year.
Why should Thomas ask that the government turn over the Willow Run plant, built with the people’s taxes, to some plutocratic profiteer like Kaiser? He ought to be shouting for the government to operate this and all other government-built plants to produce consumers goods. And the auto workers should control these plants to ensure their efficient and uninterrupted operation.
* * *

“Work or Quit” Order
Sixty-four soaking pit workers, members of the United Steel Workers, CIO, went on strike last week at the Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp., South Side plant in Pittsburgh.
It’s a sign of the times that the company didn’t howl for the government to drive them back to work. Instead it sent them individual telegrams to return to work within 24 hours or be considered as having “quit your job,” and forfeiting “all vacation, pension, seniority and other rights.”
Just a short while ago the corporations and their government were insisting that a worker couldn’t “quit” his job. There was a job freeze, draft threats, government plant “seizures” and even troops to force strikers back to work.
Evidently the corporations are now beginning to feel in position to revert to the pre-war pattern of pressure on striking workers. That is the threat that a jobless worker is standing outside the gate waiting for your job and if you strike you are merely “quitting” to make room for an eager job applicant.
* * *

How Low Can They Go?
How low can the Stalinists bend in order to lick the boots of the employers and capitalist government, is a question being asked more and more frequently these days.
The answer can be seen in the statement of Stalinist John Anderson, president of the Detroit East Side Tool & Die Local 155, UAW-CIO, before the emergency meeting of nearly 40 local UAW presidents in Detroit, May 15.
Anderson just spilled all over with the auto corporation propaganda about the high pay of the auto workers in attempting to refute R.J. Thomas’ absolutely correct statement that a return to the 40-hour week with no overtime pay would reduce average auto wages to around $32 a week.
Anderson called Thomas’ statement, substantiated by the other local presidents present, “eyewash” and “union propaganda.” He further expressed the fear that such “union propaganda” would hurt “labor-management relations” – thereby showing he prefers to expound the corporation propaganda.
* * *

What Price “Peace”?
An editorial in the May 18 Toledo Union Journal, organ of 60,000 Northwest Ohio CIO members, states:
“Today, to millions of American workers, the threat of sudden peace is almost as terrifying as the sudden coming of war, for many realize that at no time has peace ever provided an adequate number of jobs for the workers. The talk of 60,000,000 jobs up to now is just talk and headlines which mean nothing to the worker awaiting with misgivings the doubtful blessing of a peace which may again bring him unemployment and want.”
 



A partial picture of the ominous future awaiting the American workers and returning veterans was presented last week in a series of official actions and pronouncements by leading agencies and spokesmen of the Truman administration.
Its essential features include growing mass unemployment, wage slashing, increased shortages particularly in food, price rises and a continuation of the wage-freezing Little Steel formula.
At the same time, the government intends to continue its wartime restrictions on the independent actions of the unions. It will attempt to enforce the no-strike policy in all industries, whether or not they are on war production. It will continue to impose government regulation of collective bargaining through the employer-dominated War Labor Board and compulsory arbitration.
The profit-bloated corporations face an altogether different prospect. The government has given them substantial assurances that their profit and monopoly interests will be fully safeguarded. Within the next two years, the war profiteers are to be reimbursed with almost $8 billion in various types of tax rebates.
Price ceilings are to be fixed during the “reconversion” period to guarantee manufacturers not less than the abnormally inflated prices of 1942, the third war year. They are assured further price increases where “necessary.” These are the initial measures planned for the “relief of the greedy.”
The general features of the administration’s plans and prospects for the next year are embodied in a report prepared for Truman by War Mobilization and Reconversion Director Vinson and released on May 9. Vinson, who is now referred to as the “Assistant President,” outlined what was described by the N.Y. Times as a “Spartan regimen” for the American people.
He admitted that there are already one million unemployed and that there will be some 6,500,000 workers and war veterans seeking jobs during the next 12 months. However, he expressed the hope that many of these would be out of work “only temporarily” and thought that the unemployed “should not exceed” two to two and one-half millions at the end of 12 months.
 
Unemployment Forecasts
Vinson based these unemployment estimates on his extremely conservative forecast of a one- third cut-back in war production during the next year. Actually, as the May 5 Business Week reveals: “Washington talks publicly of a 35 per cent cutback in munitions, privately of 50 per cent.” It adds: “Maximum foreseeable unemployment is about 5,000,000.”
How will these unemployed survive? Vinson points to state unemployment insurance with “maximum payments” of from $15 to $22 a week. For the unemployed veterans, he pointed to maximum allowances up to $20 a week – equivalent to $10 in prewar purchasing power.
Two days after Vinson offered the prospect of this starvation handout, the U.S. Employment Service revealed that government officials are “puzzled” over the rapid rise in unemployed veterans. These already numbered 28,992 on April 28 – before the official end of the European war. About 2,000,000 more are to be returned home in the next year.
Shortages, the basis for price inflation and black marketeering, are to increase. Vinson admits there will be “no early improvement in the civilian food suuply.” On the contrary, total food supplies will be 5 to 10 per cent less next year, while military requirements will be 5 to 10 per cent greater. In general, there will be no great increase in civilian goods production.
The Vinson report nevertheless opposed the “removal of wage controls,” while admitting that “wages are likely to be forced downward rather than upward” and that “it will not be possible to assure every worker that his take-home pay will remain unchanged.” There will be an increasing return to the 40 hour week, elimination of overtime pay and a general drastic reduction of weekly wages.
On May 10, the day following Vinson’s report, the WLB followed up with a pronouncement indicating how this policy of wage slashing is to be maintained. WEB Chairman Taylor stated at a news conference that the government intends to shackle the workers with the no-strike pledge until the end of the war with Japan and that it “covers all plants” whether producing war goods or civilian.
 



The top national committees of the CIO, AFL and U.S. Chamber of Commerce have all hastened to formally adopt the so-called capital-labor “postwar peace charter” designed in secret and signed by the respective heads of these bodies, Philip Murray, William Green and Eric Johnston. On May 4, the executive council of the AFL and the Board of Directors of the C. of C„ following the previous action of the CIO National Executive Board, ratified the peace pact.
As on all other questions of major policy, the ranks of the labor unions were neither consulted nor permitted to vote on the “peace charter.” It is being thrust down their throats in the same fashion as the wartime “peace charter,” drafted in the week after Pearl Harbor. This deprived the workers of the right to strike while the employers remained free to undermine collective bargaining and amass colossal profits.
But even as the union leaders try to sell labor on the idea that the employers are changing their stripes and moving in the direction of “good will” toward the unions, they are compelled to register complaints. These belie the fiction that the capitalists are interested in anything but expanding their profits and intensifying their exploitation of labor.
 
Warns of “Conspiracy”
Thus, on May 8, Philip Murray addressed a letter to all CIO affiliates charging that a “dangerous and well-organized conspiracy” is being conducted to destroy the National Labor Relations Act. This basic law is supposed to guarantee the right of collective bargaining.
The sole “concession” made to labor in the “peace charter,” the recognition of collective bargaining rights, according to Murray, is being furiously assailed by the “representatives of the Michigan automobile lobby and the powerful food lobby, the same food lobby which has operated with such disastrous effectiveness in connection with the current OPA hearings.”
Murray need not have limited himself to these two major capitalist groups. The truth is that every single important section of industry – steel, rubber, oil, shipbuilding – is equally involved in this anti-labor conspiracy. Their most powerful organization, the National Association of Manufacturers, has openly admitted it is engaged in a legislative drive to outlaw strikes and the closed shop through a 5-point program drafted jointly with the Chamber of Commerce.
The “peace charter” is contrived as a smokescreen of benevolence behind which the employers can slam away at labor. Murray and Green, however, ballyhoo it as a prerequisite for postwar “prosperity,” “60,000,000 jobs,” “high wages,” etc. They contend that if only capital and labor would “get together” in the spirit of brotherly love – and on condition that the capitalists are guaranteed their “prerogatives” to control and run American economy as they please – then all would be hunky-dory for the workers.
 
Industrial War
This very basis of the “peace charter” is absurd. Only the past week, the government spokesmen for Big Business, as reported on the front page of this issue of The Militant formally revealed some of their plans and perspectives. They forecast rising mass unemployment, wage slashes, price inflation. They foresee not industrial “peace” but industrial war, which they propose to forestall simply by disarming the workers with the continued enforcement of the no-strike policy and compulsory arbitration.
Will mere “industrial harmony” under the monopoly “free enterprise” system ensure full employment? Even Senator George, author of the government’s bill on reconversion, on May 14 cynically rejected the possibility of providing 60,000,000 jobs. Such a goal, he claims, would require “the most rigid regimentation we ever had in peace ... we can’t reach any such arbitrary figure as. 60,000,000 jobs without controlling industry itself.” Naturally, he opposes such “regimentation.”
It is therefore a transparent fraud when Murray, Green and their lieutenants tell labor to submit peacefully to the anarchy of “free enterprise” and the “prerogatives” of the capitalist profiteers as a guarantee of security.
 




Union-Busting Pretext
George Romney, managing director of the Automotive Council for War Production, on May 2 revealed the scheme of the automobile monopolists to break up the CIO United Automobile Workers on the pretext that the union is creating a crisis in the industry which will result in widespread post-war unemployment.
This spokesman for the big auto corporations stated that they are “convinced it is time to scrutinize the operation of collective bargaining to determine why it is not working in the manner that promotes the national interest.” To Romney, the interests of the auto profiteers are identical with the “national interest.”
Hypocritically claiming “the industry, is not seeking the destruction of unionism,” Romney asserted that “we are alarmed at the decline in productivity and its far reaching effects on the post-war economy.” The auto barons demand that the “excessive power of the CIO must be decentralized” – that is, that the UAW-CIO must be broken up.
“Irrefutable evidence shows that productivity has declined continually,” added Romney.
But the Automotive Council For War Production boasted in its April bulletin that the industry had achieved a record $10-billion yearly production, “a ten-fold increase over 1941’s defense production.” In fact, “between the fourth quarter of 1943, when automotive employment reached an all-time high, and the corresponding quarter in 1944, deliveries of war materials ROSE approximately 11 per cent. During the same period employment DROPPED some 16 per cent.
Thus, Romney’s own organization has refuted the union-busting lie he and his associates are now peddling.
* * *

Cutbacks and Pay Cuts
The CIO and AFL, spurred on by the threat of huge production cutbacks and reduction of the work week once more have urged the War Labor Board to loosen the wage-freeze in view of anticipated drastic declines in weekly wages. The CIO has submitted proposals for a new “reconversion wage policy” to War Mobilization Director Vinson, who has consistently advocated the continuation of wartime labor policies in the “reconversion” period.
R.J. Thomas, UAW-CIO president, wrote from Detroit to WEB Chairman Taylor that “the wage policies of the WLB need immediate and marked revision, which will make possible maintenance of present overall wage levels, notwithstanding reductions in working hours.”
Thomas reported that 140,000 Ford workers have already been cut back to a 40-hour week, resulting in an average loss of $10 a week pay for those working 45 hours and considerably more for those working longer.
The CIO proposals to Vinson, it is reported, call for a minimum 20 per cent increase in basic wage rates, 10 per cent to provide for past living cost increases and 10 per cent for increased labor productivity during the war.
* * *

“A Family Affair”
On May 1 the War Labor Board in Washington held a hearing on the Detroit Kelsey-Hayes case, involving the reinstatement of 13 fired workers by order of the regional WLB after 5,500 workers twice went on strike.
While upholding the regional WLB order, WLB Chairman took occasion to assail “both” the union and the company because “it is not good business that if one man gets fired 10,000 others must lose a week’s work.” After the hearing, he stated he did not think the board should be called on to inject itself into a “clearly family affair.”
To Taylor the wholesale firing of union officers and committeemen which has provoked numerous auto strikes in the past three months is just a “family affair.” He conceals the fact that it is not a question of any “one worker” getting fired, but of the leading union militants being picked out and fired in a deliberate campaign to undermine the unions.
Even when it is compelled to make a concession to the workers, the WLB finds a way to smear the unions and cover up the dirty game of the employers.
 




UE Militants Expelled
For allegedly conducting a “slowdown” when the Matam Corporation, Long Island City, stalled contract negotiations, six workers were expelled last week from Stalinist-dominated Local 1227, CIO United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers. Eight others, including three women workers, were suspended and fined sums ranging from $25 to $100 each. This suited the company fine. It promptly fired all 14.
The Stalinists are very ferocious when it comes to fighting against union militants. But they have only the most cringing attitude toward the employers and their government agencies, like the War Labor Board. Thus, for over a year, the UERMW leaders have been trying to get wage increases for 200,000 General Electric and Westinghouse Electric workers by begging before the WLB. Last Thursday, the WLB contemptuously rejected all their major wage demands. It can be expected that the Stalinists will now put up a more stubborn fight – against the union ranks!
* * *

White Collar Workers
The CIO Economic Outlook, March 1945, gives a vivid description of the plight of the white collar workers.
Only 13 per cent of the estimated 7,000,000 white collar workers in private industries are employed under union agreements, as against 60 per cent of the manufacturing wage earners. Only 5 per cent of clerical and professional workers in manufacturing and financial establishments, wholesale and retail trade combined are protected by union contracts.
By the end of 1943, according to the OPA estimate, “real” weekly earnings of finance, service, government and trades employes declined up to 5 per cent over the already low levels of 1939. The Social Security Board reports that the average weekly income of 4½ million white collar workers was only $29 in 1943. The average real annual income of all public education employees declined from $1,461 in 1939 to $1,156 in 1943.
The women telephone operators, who have organized and put up a militant fight for better conditions, recently winning wage increases, have shown the way. Militant union organization – that is the only answer for the white collar workers.
* * *

State Anti-Labor Laws
Philip Murray and William Green may have signed their “peace charter” with Eric Johnston of the Chamber of Commerce, but the employers are continuing to press for union-crippling legislation through the state governments.
For instance, the Texas House of Representatives on April 10 passed the notorious anti-closed shop bill. It is one of those “right to work” bills whose purpose is to prevent the enforcement of closed shop contracts. However, the “right to work” principle does not operate when employers want to fire workers.
Six state governments have already quietly passed, and 12 others are now considering, a bill which would defraud hundreds of thousands of time-and-a-half pay
for overtime work and permit employers to “chisel” on wages of those earning less than $16 weekly. If passed in every state, as it already has in Ohio, Iowa, Alabama, Florida, Georgia and Oregon, it would affect some 21,000,000 workers under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act.
This extremely complicated law in effect reduces the time in which workers caw file claims for unpaid wages from six years to six months. Employers would be liable for only six months back pay instead of sums owed for several years. The amount of wage chiseling that goes on can be seen from the fact that the Wages and Hours Administration in 1944 alone collected $18,000,000 in back wages and overtime pay for workers. Since 1939, there have been over 250,000 such claims filed.
* * *

Two Kinds of Justice
In the March 31 issue of The Militant, this column described how for nine years – since 1936 – the Weirton Steel Company has successfully fought CIO unionism through murderous terrorism also how throughout all these years it has defied numerous federal court orders and NLRB rulings to grant collective bargaining rights to its employees. The company plans to defy these rulings for another seven years through the aid of friendly capitalist courts and slick legal maneuvering.
Last week, Circuit Judge J. Harold Brennan at Weirton, W.Va., sentenced 15 CIO United Steel Workers members to fines up to $100 and jail sentences of from 30 to 60 days on charges of “unlawful assembly” at the Weirton plant gates. Weirton is a company town, run by company officials and police, enforcing company laws. The CIO members were arrested for attempting to pass out union leaflets to the workers. Several of the CIO organisers were severely beaten by organized company thugs, armed with special clubs made in a special department of the plant.
Here is a typical example of class justice. A powerful corporation can violate federal laws – it can commit murder – with impunity. But its workers who seek to exercise rights recognized by federal law – are beaten and thrown into jail.
* * *

Double-Talk on WLB
Complaining against the CIO United Automobile Workers Executive Board’s resolution calling for the withdrawal of CIO members from the WLB, George Addes, UAW secretary-treasurer, writes in the April 15 United Automobile Worker:
“I disagree, for never let it be said that labor joined hands with Sewell Avery and his like in demanding that the WLB be scrapped or its power further weakened. If there must be resignations – and we believe there should be – let them come not from labor but from public members of the Board ...”
Linking the UAW opponents of the anti-labor WLB to Avery, who has his own special reasons for opposing the WLB, may be effective slander – but it isn’t an argument. Let Addes show where the auto bosses want to scrap the WLB. He can’t – because the vast majority of big corporations understand that the WLB is their agency which they have used effectively in enforcing the wage- freeze and curbing the workers.
What good would getting new “impartial” public members on the WLB do for the workers? All the old ones were also supposed to be “impartial.” Addes begs the real question. The WLB was designed to aid the bosses. It merely enforces official capitalist government policy. A change of public members would not change its anti-labor function.
 



Spokesmen for some of America’s most powerful corporations revealed in Washington this week that they consider the labor-employer “peace charter,” signed only two weeks ago by CIO President Philip Murray, AFL President William Green, and Chamber of Commerce President Eric Johnston, to be a mere scrap of paper.
While the union leaders seek to disarm the workers with the fiction of “post-war industrial “harmony,” the National Association of Manufacturers and leaders of the automotive industry disclosed on April 9 that they have no intentions of accepting the “labor-management accord.” In fact, they are pressing before Congress a five-point legislative program designed to outlaw strikes even in peacetime and destroy the unions.
This revelation was made by B.E. Hutchison, vice-president of the Chrysler Corporation and a Director of the National Association of Manufacturers, at a press interview, in the nation’s capitol. He declared that the labor-management code signed by Murray, Green and Johnston was “full of ambiguities and omissions” and expressed surprise that “Eric Johnston made the code public when he did.”
Hutchison further revealed that the NAM and Chamber of Commerce have a joint committee working on legislative measures which would so weaken the unions as to make them easy prey for total destruction.
The specific anti-labor laws being fostered by the employers’ organizations are: 1. outlawing strikes to “coerce” government agencies into speedy action on cases before them; 2. outlawing strikes against “technological advances” resulting in unemployment; 3. making individual union members “liable” for “unlawful” acts of the whole union; 4. penalizing workers who strike while negotiations are in progress or in jurisdictional disputes; 5. “protecting” employees who refuse to comply with a union decision to strike.
In short, this is a program to destroy the right to strike permanently. It would enable the government and employers to stall negotiations indefinitely without fear of effective union action, to frame up individual union members for the actions of the whole union, and to provide government protection for strikebreakers and scabs.
What the big corporations mean by “ambiguities” in the “peace charter” was explicitly stated by Hutchison, whose views were echoed the same day by C.E. Wilson, General Motors president, and other leaders of the Automotive Council for War Production.
Hutchison declared that the fourth point in the code – recognition by management of the right to collective bargaining – might mean to “freeze” the existing laws, specifically the Wagner Act. The employers are opposed to this. The bosses don’t mind the labor leaders agreeing to the “sacred rights” of private profit – but they have not and never will agree to the principle of collective bargaining rights.
The automotive barons were in Washington to fight the decision of the NLRB two weeks ago recognizing the right of collective bargaining for foremen and other supervisory employees. Far from accepting any “peace charter,” GE’s Wilson told press representatives that the auto corporations are going to do “everything in our power” to prevent unionization of foremen, even though the government itself recognizes the right of foremen to organize.
Thus, the employing class makes clear that any “truce” with labor is merely a cover for anti-labor operations.
 



APRIL 10. – The nation’s fighting soft-coal miners weren’t fooling when they voted two weeks ago by an eight to one majority to authorize strike action if they didn’t obtain an acceptable contract.
Last week, following termination of their old contract on March 31 and despite a 30-day further extension of the former contract, an estimated 100,000 miners in some 300 mines throughout eight states engaged in spontaneous strike actions to show the profit-greedy operators they mean business.
Many of the strikes were concentrated in the “captive” mines of the steel corporations, traditionally the worst hold-outs among the mine operators.
The boss press and government spokesmen had tried to picture the miners’ strike vote as a mere gesture. The press actually tried to conceal the extent of the walkouts during the early part of last week. But Secretary of Interior Ickes’ blustering demand last Thursday for a government mine “seizure” and his admission of the closure of over 200 mines disclosed the real situation.
 
“Tentative Agreement”
In Alabama, some 25,000 of 28,000 bituminous miners, members of the United Mine Workers, were out in protest against the operators’ delay in signing an acceptable contract. In Western Pennsylvania alone an admitted 57,000 were out. Roving pickets saw to it that there was no return to work.
Under this pressure, the hard-boiled mine owners rapidly softened. On April 9, with 200 mines still reported closed, spokesmen for the operators announced that a “tentative agreement” had been reached with the UMW negotiating committee, with only one union demand still in dispute.
According to the first reports, the proposed new contract will provide for $1.25 to $1.50 increased daily pay, through the payment of time-and-a-half for two hours overtime beyond the regular seven-hour workday in the mines. The operators are said to be balking still at the demand for contract coverage of all mine employees except one mine supervisor and one foreman.
 
WLB Steps In
On the day this was announced, the WLB intervened to declare that it has certified the mine dispute to Roosevelt, through War Mobilization Director Davis, recommending “seizure” of the 200 closed mines. During the strikes two years ago, such “seizures” meant simply making the mine operators government officials and running the mines still under their control.
Meanwhile, 72,000 hard coal miners whose contract expires April 30, are waiting for an NLRB strike poll on April 26. They have presented the anthracite operators with 30 demands, including one for a 25 per cent wage increase, because, as stated by John L. Lewis, they have received “only a 15 per cent increase since 1923,” and the owners are more “prosperous” than in all their history.
 



“It’s Industrial Peace for the Postwar Period!’’ shrieked the front-page headline of the April 2 CIO News to the startled ranks of the CIO. Thus did Philip Murray jubilantly proclaim the fact that he and AFL head William Green had signed a “peace charter” with Eric Johnston, president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
The surprised membership of the CIO and AFL learned that their top leaders, after months of secret meetings with Johnston and without any prior consultation of the union rank and file, had agreed to call off all struggle against the profiteering, labor-hating bosses.
Even more startling to the ranks were the conditions of this “truce.” Labor is pledged to recognize the “sacred right” of the handful of ruling capitalists to control American economy and resources forever and to exploit the workers for profit under the system of monopoly capitalist “free enterprise.”
The employers generously agree – in words – to recognize the right of collective bargaining – a right they are already supposed to respect by law.
 
The Real Situation
Up and down the labor movement, and in their official press, Murray, Green and their lieutenants have announced that labor must surrender permanently its traditional methods of militant struggle. It must clasp the hand of fellowship now supposedly thrust forth by the corporations.
The workers have looked around to see some practical evidences of this miraculous transformation of the bosses into apostles of “good will” toward labor. In auto, steel, rubber and every other major industry, all they can see are the blows of the corporations falling on their heads faster than ever in a rampaging offensive of aggression and provocation against the unions.
A “peace pact” with labor? The National Association of Manufacturers, representing the most powerful corporations in the country, has bluntly announced that as far as it is concerned it doesn’t know anything about a “truce” with labor. The leaders of the Automotive Council for War Production – speaking for he largest industry in the country – flatly state that the only “truce” they want is one based on the open shop and the abolition of the National Labor Relations Act.
In fact, announced B.E. Hutchison, Chrysler corporation vice-president and a director of the NAM, the NAM is working together with the C. of C. in pushing a 5-point legislative program which would outlaw strikes, guarantee government protection to scabs and strikebreakers and illegalize the closed shop. And, he asked, what was Eric Johnston doing signing a “peace pact” with Murray and Green?
These facts cannot be ignored even by some of the blind union officials. As they spout from the right side of their mouths about the new era of “industrial harmony,” out of the left side they are forced to wail about the embarrassing lack of “good will” being displayed by the employers. Thus, Richard Frankensteen, vice- president of the CIO United Automobile Workers, charged on April 11 that “certain” employers “have started an all-out drive to attempt to destroy or greatly impair the usefulness of organized labor.”
 
“Industrial Harmony”
The “certain” employers to whom he referred happen to be every single corporation in the automotive, aircraft and farm equipment industries – that is, the employers of about a fifth of the CIO membership.
It seems that so far all the “good will” is inside the heads of Murray and Green and any deceived workers who may be soft-headed enough to lower their dukes while the bosses are swinging hay-makers at their chins.
The open proclamation of the leading corporations that they are wheeling up their heaviest artillery for a further grand offensive against labor is not helping the Murray-Green sales campaign. It’s pretty tough trying to sell the workers a bill of goods about a “peace pact” when the workers are so busy trying to dodge the blows of the open shoppers.
So the labor leaders are shifting into a faster line of sales talk. It seems, according to them, there are two kinds of employers – “progressive and die-hards.” The workers must line up with the “progressive” bosses, represented by Eric Johnston of the C. of C, against the “diehards” like the NAM, the auto, steel, rubber barons, etc.
And that’s really something fishy! As a labor commentator for the New York Post – which hailed the “peace charter” – observed:
“Somebody is pulling a squeeze play on the nation’s usually shrewd leaders ... Everybody believes that at least one section of American industry has reformed and created itself in the image of the pleasant and progressive Johnston. Hardly. For Mr. Johnston’s C. of C. is tied closely to the NAM.
“One part of the day Johnstom’s men are pounding Green and Murray on the back with a hail-fellow-labor’s-swell benevolence. And later in the afternoon they are NAM leaders campaigning for the outlawing of strikes and what sounds mightily like a ban on closed shops.”
Who are these C. of C. leaders who are supposed to be so chummy with labor? “Some of the C. of C. key committees are headed by labor’s most bitter enemies – men who are working closely with the NAM to which they also belong.”
One of these is James Rand, of Remington-Rand, author of the notorious strikebreaking “Mohawk Valley Formula.”
“Another is the head of a huge publishing firm which has not knowingly hired Jews or union people; or one who has fought big AFL unions for years; another whose firm was cited for its employment discrimination policies and antilabor attitudes ... and one has defied a federal collective bargaining ruling since 1943.”
In short – the real leaders of the C. of C. are also among the leaders of the NAM who are avowed open shoppers and openly intent on smashing the unions.
“Who’s being kidded here?” asks the Post commentator.
Not Murray and Green, as he would have us believe. They know what they’re doing. They’re playing a conscious and deliberate role. They’re essential and willing part of the mechanism of this capitalist “squeeze play.”
It’s the old game of disarming labor to make it easier for the bosses to slug the workers. “You hold him – while I sock him!”
Certain spokesmen for the employers, with the connivance of the labor leaders, aim to tie labor’s hands with a phony “peace charter,” while the employing class as a whole winds up for a knockout against organized labor.
And just as Murray and Green have put over such treacherous policies as the no-strike pledge behind the backs of the union members and without their voice or consent, so now they are hastening to shove the “peace charter” – the charter of unconditional surrender – down the throats of the unwilling workers.
 




Addes and Thomas
In a personal interview in the Stalinist Daily Worker, March 28, George Addes, secretary-treasurer of the CIO United Automobile Workers, indicates the UAW leaders intend to use the majority vote for the no-strike pledge in the recent referendum as a further pretext for bureaucratic reprisals against the auto militants.
The fact that an unholy alliance of UAWand CIO leaders, the government and the corporations succeeded in pressuring a majority vote for the pledge “strengthens the hands of those union officers who believe in the CIO no-strike policy,” Addes is quoted. “This outcome,” he adds ominously, “ought to serve as a warning to all disruptive forces” – including, presumably, the 36 percent of the UAW voters who opposed the pledge and the 60,000 who have gone on strike in the past six weeks in Detroit.
However, states the Daily Worker, Addes “spoke bitterly of ‘demagogues’ who will continue to stir up trouble ... and let it be known that he has no illusions that the fight is over.”
UAW President R.J. Thomas also tries to make the most of the referendum results, which he terms a “mandate to me, as president.” After trying to squeeze some personal satisfaction out of this “victory” in his column in the United Automobile Worker, April 1, Thomas concludes:
“There are definite signs that the period ahead is to be marked by a vicious public onslaught against our union and against labor. The Automobile Manufacturers’ Association and its stooge, the ‘Automotive Council for War Production’ are filling the columns of the press with malicious falsehoods aimed at undermining labor ...”
The way to “silence these dishonest attacks,” Thomas opines, is to enforce the no-strike pledge. This is just what the auto barons want since they can continue their union-busting drive by firing local union leaders wholesale without fear of strikes. Tens of thousands of Detroit auto workers have demonstrated since the referendum that they have an opposite and more effective method than Thomas for “silencing these dishonest attacks.”
* * *

Recognize Foremen
Under pressure of the labor movement and recurrent foremen’s strikes, tlhe NLRB last week ruled that supervisory employees are entitled to belong to independent unions of their own choosing and to engage in collective bargaining under the Wagner Act.
The corporation owners, who fear the organized collaboration of supervisory workers with the rest of labor, have tried to contend that foremen are “part of management.” However, the NLRB majority was forced to admit that the foreman “now is an executor carrying out orders, plans, and policies determined above; he is more managed than managing ...”
This NLRB ruling, reversing its decision of two years ago, grew out of the Packard Motor case where the foremen, organized in the Foremen’s Assn. of America, went on strike in Detroit last May. The decision will have considerable bearing, it is believed, on the United Mine Workers’ demand for contract coverage of most of the mine foremen and supervisors.
* * *

More Stalinist Finkery
The Stalinists, operating through various local CIO Councils which they control, are continuing their vicious campaign against the coal miners now negotiating for a new contract.
Last week, the Cleveland CIO, long under Stalinist domination, passed an “appeal” to the miners “not to strike.” Previously, similar finky resolutions were passed by the Greater New York City CIO and the Detroit CIO, in which they called on Roosevelt to “seize the mines” to forestall an alleged “strike plot.”
The Daily Worker, March, 30, runs a big scarehead editorial, Not an Hour’s Stoppage! The Mines Must Be Seized, advising the capitalist government and mine owners that “no matter what Lewis thinks or would like the miners to do, he knows and the country knows that the coal miners will not strike against the government.”
The miners, who have voted eight to one in favor of strike in an NLRB poll, showed two years ago in their four strikes that they were unaffected by similar antilabor bleats from the Stalinists.
* * *

Telephone Strike Poll
Some 18,000 local and long distance telephone operators in New York City will take an NLRB strike vote on April 16, after filing notice on March 17 of intention to strike.
They are continuing to demand a $5 raise over their present $20 weekly minimum. The WLB rejected the recommendation of its own special panel endorsing the $5 increase sought by the 12,000 members of the New York Telephone Co. Workers’ Union and the 6,000 members of the Federation of Long Lines Operators, New York local. The national WLB instead awarded a $3 raise, $1 less than the multibillion dollar telephone trust itself finally agreed to pay.
The WLB has been giving the exploited women telephone operators a runaround for over two years. These women workers are now in a thoroughly fighting mood. And they are strategically situated in the very hub of the country’s communications system.
* * *

Prisoner-of-War Labor
Aiding the campaign to undermine wages and working conditions of the American workers, the government is extending the use of German and Italian prisoners of war by private employers in both industry and agriculture.
Both AFL and CIO unions, according to a report buried in a leading government war agency, have been objecting bitterly to “the use of war prisoners in foundries, canneries and for maintenance work on railroads.”
There are now some 400,000 POWs in the United States. Another 100,000 are being transferred here by the War Department. The unions charge that employers in low-wage industries – logging and lumbering, farming and canneries – are refusing to raise wages “in the hope the prisoners may be brought in to replace civilian labor at the existing wage scale.”
The report, whose existence was disclosed by the New York Post labor correspondent, Victor Riesel, states that “the Int’l. Woodworkers (CIO), the chiefs of the Standard Railroad Labor Organizations, the Southern Tenant Farmers Union are among the unions which have passed resolutions opposing the use of prisoners of war under private employers.”
 




Union Conventions
The Office of Defense Transportation’s War Committee on Conventions has denied the application of the CIO Textile Workers Union for permission to hold its fourth biennial convention, originally scheduled for May 7–11. The union is reapplying for permission to hold a convention in the fall.
The TWU’s original application pointed out that such conventions are required by the union’s constitution. “Regular conventions by labor unions constitute the assurance and preservation of the American internal democratic process.”
But the War Committee on Conventions isn’t bothered about preserving the “internal democratic process” – especially in the unions. Its action is a tip-off to the auto workers and other unions which also have filed applications for permission to hold their regular conventions this year.
The ban on union conventions comes as the rank and file workers everywhere are pressing for more aggressive policies against the wage-freeze, price inflation, cutbacks and unemployment, and the general union-busting offensive of the employers.
A lot of top union bureaucrats who are playing the bosses’ game and trying to curb the militancy of labor would secretly be very pleased if the government stepped in and denied the applications they have signed for conventions this year.
* * *

Not Closed – Yet!
We learn from the April 13 Dive Bomber, organ of Akron Local 856, CIO United Automobile Workers, that a WLB arbitrator has directed the General Tire and Rubber Company to rehire the last nine of 74 workers fired early last year after Sherman H. Dalrymple, president of the CIO United Rubber Workers, had arbitrarily expelled them from the union, Local 9, for participation in a strike.
Included in the arbitrator’s order are Raymond Sullivan and Howard Haas who were expelled by Dalrymple for helping to organize a rank and file protest movement against the original bureaucratic expulsions. The fired workers are to be rehired with full seniority – but no back pay.
The Dive Bomber states that “this famous case is now drawing to an official close.” It will not be drawn to a real close so long as Dalrymple, who continues to exercise arbitrary powers against the militant rubber workers, is heading the URW-CIO and acting as a cop for the rubber corporations against the union ranks.
* * *

Suspend Best Unionists
Resistance to the no-strike policy and anti-union company provocations is growing throughout the unions. In many instances, union officials who are more anxious to please the employers than to defend the union membership are retaliating against union militants with expulsions and suspensions.
Last week in New York City, the executive advisory board of Bakery Drivers Local 550, affiliated with Daniel J. Tobin’s AFL Teamsters, suspended six members and removed from office the shop committee at the Atlantic Avenue unit of Purity Bakeries, Inc. The “crime” of these workers was that they had refused to take out their trucks when the company fired a union shop steward in a move to undermine the union. The shop committee had then ordered a general stoppage.
The penalized workers have been denied their right to speak on the union floor and their eligibility in union elections. They are also threatened with “immediate suspension from the union” for “further violations.”
* * *

Railway Express Strike
A strike of 10,000 Railway Express Agency employees in the New York metropolitan area was authorized on April 18 at a huge mass meeting of the local Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship Clerks, AFL.
The meeting was part of a one-day strike demonstration involving 5,000 workers at express terminals in New York City, Long Island and northern New Jersey. The union adopted a resolution demanding prompt settlement of their mounting grievances, including elimination of company practices’ causing the loss of jobs, equalization of pay, discontinuance of the company’s compulsory group insurance plan, etc.
At the meeting, Alfred J. Mazanec, general chairman of the brotherhood, announced the union would begin immediate, full preparation of strike machinery to show the company the union means business if its demands are not settled within 30 days.
Mazanec also stated the union is raising general demands on vacation schedules, seniority rights, and severance pay for men inducted into the armed forces.
“We do not intend to stand a pushing around forever,” he said. “While we are taking action to clean up the principal grievances, we’ll clean up the whole mess at one shot.”
 




Auto Workers Fear Move to Scuttle Convention
Last week this column warned the auto workers to be on the alert against a move to scuttle the CIO United Automobile Workers annual convention, scheduled for next September. That this warning was well-founded is confirmed by a report in the April 6 Toledo Union Journal, official organ of northwest Ohio’s 58,000 CIO members, mainly auto workers.
In a special front-page story, the Toledo Union Journal reports: “Opposition to Grand Rapids, Mich., as the 1945 UAW-CIO convention city is on the increase. Announcement of Grand Rapids which was the scene of the 1944 convention as again having been chosen for this year’s meeting was made here last week by George F. Addes, International UAW-CIO secretary-treasurer.
“Some UAW officers see in the Addes move the preliminary to calling off the convention altogether. Application was made by the UAW-CIO secretary-treasurer to the Office of Defense Transportation for permission to hold the convention. It was felt by some union officials that the move would lead to a rejection by the ODT because of the government policy of discouraging conventions during wartime.
“One delegate from the 1944 convention speaking of the choice of Grand Rapids for the 1945 conference said, ‘I don’t imagine George Addes would care too much if the ODT refused to grant the permission for the convention. After all, it would mean that he wouldn’t have to worry about getting reelected and that in itself would make the refusal of the government to hold the meeting worth while’.”
Great dissatisfaction prevailed last year at Grand Rapids, because of the lack of housing and eating facilities for the delegates and visitors who usually number many thousands. First choice of available hotel accommodations went to the pals of Addes and other top UAW leaders.
* * *

Seamen Back Miners
The Sailors’ Union of the Pacific, West Coast section of the Seafarers’ International Union, AFL, has called for 100 per cent labor support to the coal miners in their present struggle for better wages and conditions;
A lead editorial by Harry Lundeberg, SUP secretary-treasurer, in the union’s official organ, West Coast Sailor, March 16, declares:
“If the leadership of the American Labor movement had any guts, they should come out NOW, 400% behind John L. Lewis and the United Mine Workers in their fight for their rights! It is the duty of the American Labor movement to stand behind the mine workers in their fight. They have a JUST fight!”
* * *

Father of Heroes – Fired!
As usual, the corporation kept: press hypocritically raved about the “boys in the foxholes” when almost 5,000 Packard workers, members of UAW-CIO local 190 in Detroit, went on strike on March 28. The strike was called when the company arbitrarily discharged a union shop steward, John Krulock, for allegedly “fomenting” a brief stoppage on March 12.
Just two days before he was fired, Krulock and his wife had been informed that one of their sons had been wounded in action in Germany. On March 13 they had received the sad news that another son was reported missing after a bombing mission over Germany.
Krulock’s fellow-workers were so incensed when the labor-hating dollar-patriots fired him that they protested by an almost solid walkout. A hell of a lot the bosses care about the “boys in the foxholes” – about their working fathers, mothers, brothers and sisters, either!
* * *

Annual Wage “Study”
When Roosevelt wanted to sidetrack union pressure for increased wages, he suddenly announced that he was assigning the chore of “studying” the guaranteed annual wage plan to a subcommittee of the advisory board of the Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion.
The head of this subcommittee is Eric Johnston, President of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, who last week signed a labor-capital “peace charter” with Philip Murray and William Green, heads of the CIO and AFL.
It is interesting, theretore, to note what this capitalist dove of peace, Eric Johnston, thinks of the annual wage idea which Roosevelt has assigned his committee to “study.” Last December 6, in a speech before the Wisconsin Chamber of Commerce, Johnston declared:
“I hope we can avoid learning the hard way. It is a mistake to force annual wages down the throats of management by government order ... By forcing business into a straitjacket the job regularity attained might be more than offset by the loss of our freedom. If everyone must pay an annual wage many will hesitate to engage in business. Then the government would be tempted to step in and become the employer, as is the case in Russia today.”
* * *

Severance Pay
One of the important union demands these days is for severance pay in anticipation of mass unemployment during the coming period of extensive production cutbacks. The War Labor Board two weeks ago, in a decision involving American Type Founders, Inc., Elizabeth, N.J., set the pattern for what it considers “reasonable” severance pay.
The American Type plan, approved by the WLB, calls for one week’s wages for employees who have worked for six months to one year; two weeks after one year, three weeks after two years, and four weeks after three to five years. Under this plan, a high percentage of the present war industry workers would receive not more than two weeks wages as severance pay to meet months of unemployment.
* * *

Peacetime Militarism
Condemning plans for peacetime military conscription as “a severe threat to the free activity of labor, because it can be used to break strikes,” the March Joint Board News, organ of the Greater New York Board of the CIO Textile Workers, declared:
“The smart boys who argue that a little exercise and military discipline will make our young men healthy sound amazingly like Hitler did, ten years ago. In case our political friends don’t know it, America’s youth could become strong and healthy if they were paid decent wages for decent hours, lived in homes instead of slums, and given access to recreational centers ... Peace-time conscription is the slick way of getting out of the problem of providing 60 million jobs, because we can stick our surplus labor into army camps and forget about them. But it is the dangerous way, the fascist way ...”
 



The death of Franklin D. Roosevelt has suddenly lifted into the office of the presidency of the United States a man who is little known to the majority of the American people. This comparatively obscure figure, Harry S. Truman, now stands at the head of the greatest military, industrial and financial power in the world. As the chief executive officer of the ruling capitalist class in the United States, his words and deeds will directly affect the lives of all American workers and the future welfare of the hungry, tortured, war-weary masses throughout the world.
Universal interest is now focused upon this political personage. Every thinking worker wants to know who Truman really is. What are his connections and background? Who are his advisers? What interests will he serve ? What policies will he pursue? American labor needs a clear and truthful answer to these questions as a guiding line for the period ahead of economic convulsions and world-wide social crisis.
One thing is certain at first glance. Truman commands the confidence of every sector of the capitalist class today. The entire capitalist press – from the extreme right wing to the so-called “liberal” – have hailed the new President. Their expressions of confidence and pledges of support are no mere products of sentiment and good-will. They are based upon a precise and well-founded appraisal of the policies they expect him to follow.
 
Wall Street’s Verdict
The New York Times, mouthpiece of the Morgan financial interests, on April 14 frankly headlined, “Turn To Right Seen.” It characterizes Truman as “imbued with basic conservatism,” “one whose philosophy is far more ‘a little right of center’ than the ‘little left of center’ of recent days.”
On this same theme, the New York Post, which professes liberalism, on April 17 indicated that the character of Truman’s advisers, who are expected to play a decisive role jn shaping his policies, “might be accurately described as ‘a little right of center’.” In more concrete terms, Ralph Hendershot, financial editor of the reactionary Republican New York World-Telegram, wrote on April 14: “The stock market yesterday gave President Truman a splendid vote of confidence ... businessmen have confidence in him.”
This confidence of Big Business is based on its conviction that Truman will effectively advance its program and protect its interests. This is amply demonstrated by a review of his background and political record.
More will be written about Truman’s boyhood on his father’s 600-acre Missouri farm and his activities as an artillery officer in the last war than about his political rise through the notorious Pendergast machine in Kansas City and his record as a loyal machine man in the Democratic Party councils of the big city bosses and Southern poll-tax politicians. The latter affiliations provide the real clue to his political role.
After the last war, Truman got his political start with the Pendergast gang – a number of whom, including the big boss himself, were sent to prison in 1937 for vote-fraud, graft and corruption. He was introduced to Tom Pendergast, the big boss of Kansas City politics, by Pendergast’s nephew who had served under Truman in the army.
 
Pendergast Protégé
Through Pendergast’s support Truman was elected as county judge, a post he occupied as a faithful henchman of Pendergast until 1934. In that year he was hand-picked by boss Pendergast for election to the U.S. Senate from Missouri.
To this day, as the New York Times points out: “Trained in the Tom Pendergast school of politics, President Truman is a party man, with small regard for dreamers in government who have no definite political affiliations.” Marshall Field’s professional liberal daily, PM, while trying to squeeze Truman into a “liberal” mold, confesses with misgiving that he is “fiercely loyal to old political associates... does not break old political school ties easily.” This was written apropos of his present connections with James Pendergast and reports of his intention to draw into influential posts a number of those machine politicians who helped boost Truman to the top.
In short, as one commentator expressed it with evident satisfaction, Truman will bring to his appointments the traits of a “good, shrewd horsetrader’’ – that is, of a practitioner of the political spoils system.
The liberal press and the union leaders are trying hard to represent Truman as a “practical liberal” on the scant record of his activities in the Senate from 1934 until his elevation to the vice-presidency after he got the backing of the late President Roosevelt, the big city bosses and the Southern poll-tax politicians at the 1944 Democratic convention.
 
Congressional Record
His record of routine support for “New Deal” measures does not weigh in the scale with his vote on two decisive measures. He voted originally for the Smith-Connally anti-strike law. He supported the last tax bill which Rooseyelt himself was compelled to characterize as “relief for the greedy.” He headed the Senate war investigation committee – which skimmed the surface of some of the more glaring scandals, but did little to halt the more than fifty-billions in graft that Comptroller General Lindsay Warren admitted has been made in this war beyond “reasonable profits.”
The real tip-off on Truman’s future policies lies in his associates and advisers and in his relations with Congress. The present Congress, in the opinion of almost every liberal and labor commentator, rates as one of the most reactionary in American history. Truman’s accession to the presidency, according to conservative commentator Arthur Krock, means “that Congressional influence will once again loom large in the American government, and the voice of the Senate will sway Executive decisions.” That is to say, Truman will act in harmony with the reactionary character of Congress.
This is more than borne out by the men associated with Truman and those he is expected to draw into his intimate administrative circle in the future.
 
Truman’s Close Advisers
First and foremost will be James F. Byrnes, former War Mobilization Director. He was the first man called back to Washington to advise Truman. A hardened Southern “white supremacy” reactionary, a target before his resignation of the most bitter attacks from all sections of the labor movement, Byrnes looms as Truman’s closest and most influential adviser, who is said to be slated for the key post of Secretary of State.
Others in the retinue of Truman’s advisers and possible new cabinet members include John Snyder, Hugh Fulton, Robert Hannegan. Snyder is a St. Louis banker, described by one of his friends as “holding about the same views as Emil Schram,” president of the New York Stock Exchange. Fulton was formerly associated with Cravath, de Gersdorff, Swaine and Wood, a wealthy New York corporation law firm associated with some of America’s most powerful corporations and cartel interests, including U.S. Steel and the House of Morgan. Hannegan is chairman of the Democratic Party National Committee, spokesman for the big city bosses.
These few facts cited here give a warning to labor of what it can expect of Truman.
 



If the CIO auto workers need any additional arguments for discarding the policies of their top leaders, who are heading the campaign for retaining the nostrike pledge in the current referendum, let them turn to page 29 of the Wednesday, September 13, 1944 Proceedings of the Ninth Annual UAW-CIO Convention. There they will uncover an argument provided by UAW Secretary-Treasurer George Addes in the wind-up of his speech pleading with the delegates not to scrap the pledge.
“I say to this convention,” Addes exhorted, “that if we go out and do the job on November 7th we will be able to secure from this Congress all of those things that the workers are entitled to. If we fail, if we mislead the American public by revoking the No-Strike Pledge, I am convinced in my mind we will have failed to elect a friendly Congress.”
This statement contained two deliberate deceptions. One was that the workers would help to elect a “friendly Congress” by retaining the no-strike pledge. The other is that, if they elected a pro-Roosevelt Democratic Congress, they would secure “all of those things that the workers are entitled to.” Then, of course, the workers would not “need” the strike weapon.
Events since the election have made Addes’ lies – which were also those of the whole labor bureaucracy – much more transparent. That new Congress hailed by the “triumphant” CIO-PAC leaders as a “progressive Congress” has gone into action.
Its very first “friendly” deed was to establish a permanent anti-labor Dies Witch-Hunt Committee. Before the opening week of the new session was ended, a flood of anti-labor bills was already pouring into the legislative hoppers. This “friendly,” this “progressive” Congress looms up today as one of the most brazenly reactionary ever to convene under the Capitol dome. The pro-Roosevelt labor flunkies themselves are wailing: “Who won the election?”
Yet this is the very Congress the CIO-PAC. campaigned for and even boasted of electing. Addes beat the UAW convention delegates over the head with the argument that they dared to revoke the no-strike pledge only under pain of not electing this very Congress. He trumped this argument – how fantastic it must seem now to every auto worker who heard him! – with the claim that by renouncing the strike weapon and electing the Congress now in session “we will be able to secure from this Congress all of those things that the workers are entitled to.”
The UAW leaders used this now obviously false political argument as a primary reason for advocating that the auto convention continue the no-strike policy. Now these leaders must substitute other and even cruder lies for those pre-election ones which they would be grateful to have left buried and forgotten. For Addes and his henchmen would be laughed out of court if they reminded the auto workers how they were once more swindled into giving up their most powerful economic weapon, the strike, in return for receiving the present PAC-elected "friendly” Congress.
Thus, the UAW leaders perpetrated one more little fraud in the truly monstrous swindle used to put over the no-strike policy from the beginning – the promise that the War Labor Board would “impartially” protect the workers’ interests, that the corporations would “bargain in good faith” and refrain from provocations, that Roosevelt would enforce “equality of sacrifice” from the rich and “take the profits out of war.”
* * *
The labor bureaucrats, who have been correctly called the “labor lieutenants of capitalism,” frequently employ “Judas goats” to help lead their memberships into policies which are against the workers’ interests. These “Judas goats” use “left” phrases in order to gain leadership over the militant ranks. At the crucial moment on every decisive issue, the “Judas goat” leaps openly into the camp of reaction, luring some of his followers with him and leaving the rest disoriented, leaderless and disorganized.
This special role of “Judas goat” in the UAW-CIO has been played traditionally by Walter Reuther, one of the two vice- presidents. Under cover of the bitter unprincipled factionalism and power politics among the leadership, Reuther has posed as a “militant.” But on every key issue in the struggle of the militant ranks against the bureaucratic officials, Reuther has always wound up in an embrace with his “opponents” and voted with them in support of sell-out policies.
The latest struggle in the UAW over the no-strike pledge proves to be no exception. Now that the referendum has posed for decision the basic question – for or against the no-strike surrender policy? – Reuther has leaped nimbly into the united front of reaction within and outside the union which is trying to browbeat the auto workers into retaining the no-strike pledge.
As usual, Reuther waited until the very last moment before revealing fully his treachery. This was done to permit the militants he has lured behind him no time to reorient and reorganize themselves. When the ballots for the referendum finally were being sent through the mails, then Reuther was compelled to take a position. He lined up publicly with the entire top leadership and called on the auto workers to vote “Yes” on the referendum motion to reaffirm the no-strike pledge.
Together with UAW president R.J. Thomas, Addes and Richard Frankensteen, another vice-president, Reuther last week spoke over a Michigan radio hook-up and told the auto workers to vote for the no-strike pledge. This radio program was sponsored by the Stalinist-organized and dominated UAW Committee for Retention of the No-Strike Pledge.
Subsequently, Reuther gave a special demonstration of hypocrisy. Having solidarized himself with the position of the Stalinists on the referendum and spoken under their auspices, Reuther self-righteously sought to disassociate himself from their committee because it contains “communists.” By descending to the sewer-level of red-baiting, he took a factional thrust at those he joined in principle, thereby still hoping to differentiate himself from more forthright reactionaries.
He added hastily, however, “I still support the no-strike pledge” even if “I won’t be associated with such people.” Reuther prefers to associate himself only with their policies of betrayal!
 



Two sharply opposed forces are locked in bitter struggle as the climax approaches in the CIO United Automobile Workers’ referendum battle over the No-Strike Pledge. The militant rank and file, local committeemen and officers, who daily feel the whiplash of corporation provocations, are mobilizing to scrap the no-strike surrender policy. Arrayed against them is the entire top bureaucracy of the UAW and CIO, backed by the corporations, the Roosevelt administration and the Stalinists.
Exploiting the vast resources arid prestige o£ the CIO, the pro-Roosevelt Murray-Hillman machine is how intervening directly in the UAW struggle. So powerful is the rising offensive of the auto workers against the no-strike policy which has placed them at the mercy of the corporations, that the CIO chiefs have been impelled to rush openly to the aid of the hard-pressed UAW leadership.
CIO President Philip Murray proclaimed his policy of open intervention in the UAW referendum in his letter of January 12 to UAW President R.J. Thomas, declaring that “this is directed through you to the membership of the largest union in the world.” A full-page reproduction of this letter appears in the January 15 CIO News.
 
Murray’s Lies
Murray resorts almost entirely to the most hypocritical anti-strike propaganda of the corporations and their political agents, who always advance their antilabor policies behind a “boys in the foxholes” smokescreen. He appeals to the auto workers to reaffirm the “sacred pledge made to the soldiers, sailors and marines.” Of course, this “sacred pledge” is the one-sided agreement – originally palmed off as a “three-way commitment between labor, management and government” – handed to Roosevelt after Pearl Harbor by the top labor fakers, who had never even consulted their memberships.
Murray’s flag-waving appeal, which reads as though it were plagiarized from an advertisement of the National Association of Manufacturers, is topped off by a truly fantastic claim. He asserts that the “peaceful pattern of labor relations” was responsible for “a year of progress on the home front.” He has the brass to put into public print the obvious and absurd lies that the labor movement has actually been strengthened because the “CIO helped to re-elect Roosevelt and elect a more progressive Congress. CIO unions, maintaining their no-strike commitments, have scored decisive gains for millions of workers.”
This fiction is dished out to the auto workers as rising wails emanate from the pro-Roosevelt labor leaders themselves asking “Who won the elections?” This “progressive” Congress already looms up as one of the most reactionary in United States history. Its first act was to establish a permanent Dies, Witch-Hunt Committee as a slap, in the face to labor. Since the start of the new session its members have been competing for the “honor” of drafting the most viciously anti-labor legislation.
The past year wound up with Roosevelt turning over the State Department and the leading government agencies to the direct agents of Wall Street. The year concluded with Roosevelt and his brass hats demanding a Nazi-like system of universal forced labor. It was the year during which the War Labor Board turned down all the basic wage demands of labor, most notably of Murray’s own steel union, and hardened the wage freeze. It was the year in which brazen corporation provocations led to the greatest volume of defensive strikes in four years.
 
Rank and File Talks
But Murray’s absurd arguments and downright lies are being most effectively answered by the auto workers themselves. The National UAW Rank and File Committee to Revoke the No-Strike Pledge is hammering home the truth in an organized campaign inside the shops, supplemented by leaflets, newspapers, radio talks, stickers, meetings, etc. One of the most powerful expositions of the reasons for rescinding the no-strike policy is contained in a typical rank and file leaflet, being circulated by members of Chicago’s huge Chrysler-Dodge Local 274.
Summing up the “balance sheet’’ of the no-strike policy, the leaflet shows:
“LABOR SACRIFICED: The right to strike, that is, the right to its most powerful weapon in the fight against the big monopolists who are ALWAYS working to lower our living standards and crush our organizations. The right to fight for higher wages – because wages were frozen. The right to look for or get another job or a better job – because jobs were frozen and we could move from place to place ONLY by the permission of the employer. The right to have our wages go up as the cost-of-living went up – because our wages were frozen by the 15 per cent ‘Little Steel Formula’ while the cost-of-living has gone up, since January 1941, by more than 45 per cent, according to the figures of our own International, President, R.J. Thomas. The right to collective bargaining – because all demands and grievances went to the War Labor Board, which denies our demands and ignores our grievances, or else buries them in its vaults for months and years.
“LABOR GAINED: Nothing!”
What is the no-strike “balance sheet” for the employers?
“INDUSTRY SACRIFICED: Nothing! Nothing except their comical pledge not to lock out labor at a time when a lock-out meant suicide for them. INDUSTRY GAINED: Land bought for them at government expense. Factories erected on this land at government expense. Machinery placed in these factories at government expense. Raw materials guaranteed to them by a hundred government agencies. An ample supply of labor guaranteed to them by the government, with jobs frozen and wages frozen and strikes frozen and grievances frozen.
“Juicy cost-plus contracts, with profits guaranteed by the government. A War Labor Board, set up by the government, which looks carefully and tenderly after their interests. The highest salaries in history for corporation executives, with NO ‘$25,000 limitation’ as was promised. The corporations moan and weep about the ‘high taxes.’ What are the facts? Let us quote just two simple ones from the statement by CIO President Philip Murray, and remember them well: ‘Corporate profits for 1944, AFTER TAXES, increased 198 per cent over the 1936–1939 peacetime era. Corporate profits for the same year, before taxes, show an increase over the peacetime era of 449 per cent.”
 
“Boys in the Foxholes”
Indignantly, the Dodge workers ask:
“What about the boys in the foxholes? Who shouts the loudest about this? The corporations chiefs, their spokesmen and tools, their paid editors and scribblers. Their nerve is almost as colossal as the profits they are making. They want to teach US patriotism! They are the same people who would not convert to war production, who would not produce a single airplane, tank, cannon, rifle or bullet for the ‘boys in the foxholes’ until the government guaranteed them their heavy blood-profits.
“Who are the ‘boys in the foxholes?’ They are OUR sons, brothers, OUR sweethearts or husbands, OUR fathers. We are a million times more concerned with them than the ice-hearted corporations who squeeze a brutal profit out of everything those boys wear and everything they use. We are so concerned with them that: We do not want them to come back to open shop conditions ... to low-paid jobs and back-breaking hours ... to smashed or paralyzed unions. When we fight to make our union strong and effective, we are also fighting for THEM!’”
That is the fighting auto workers answer to the spread-eagle and corporation-inspired anti-strike propaganda of the Murrays.
 



In the guise of a federal court action ostensibly directed against a recalcitrant employer in the Montgomery Ward case, the Roosevelt administration is attempting to fortify its legal powers for government strikebreaking through plant "seizures.”
That was the clear meaning of administration arguments before federal court hearings which opened in Chicago last Monday. The government is seeking an injunction to bar company “interference” with government operation of 16 Ward properties “seized” in order to halt strikes in Detroit, Chicago and Kansas City, Mo., as well as a threatened CIO “labor holiday” in the auto center.
In presenting the government’s brief Hugh Cox, Assistant Solicitor General, stated flatly that “the real question here is whether the United States has the power in time of war to take possession wherein a labor controversy threatens to interfere with the successful prosecution of the war.”
 
Not for Labor
“We are not here to argue the merits of the labor controversy,” he admitted, “because we are not here to assist labor or to vindicate the War Labor Board.” The main issue, he contended, was the threat to the “structure and organization of the War Labor Board,” that is, the government’s apparatus for preventing strikes through compulsory arbitration and for maintaining Roosevelt’s wage-freezing “wage-stabilization” program.
Cox argued the right of government “seizure” in the Ward case, where the government had failed previously to enforce longstanding orders against the company, specifically because of the strikes. He stressed particularly need for government action in the Ward strikes because of their “adverse effect” on the CIO United Automobile Workers referendum on the no-strike pledge.
Thus, Cox indicated, that non- compliance with a WLB order by an employer is not in itself a matter for government action. The government acts only where a “labor controversy” leading to a strike or threat of strike, to “interference with production,” occurs. This supported Attorney General Biddle’s previous admission that WLB orders, are only “recommendations.”
In reality, they are only “recommendations” so far as the employers are concerned. So long as the workers do not strike, the government admits in effect, the employer can disregard WLB directives when he doesn’t like them, or stall them with delaying court actions.
 
Aimed at Strikes
But the workers – against whom most of the corporation-dominated WLB’s decisions are directed – are compelled to accept WLB orders automatically. For the employers, who control wages, hours, working conditions, contractual relations, enforce these orders – except when workers go on strike. Whichever way the workers turn, their only recourse for self-protection is strike action. WLB orders against employers cannot be enforced without strikes – as the four-year old Ward case amply proves. Anti-labor decrees of the WLB cannot be resisted without strikes.
But it is precisely against strikes, under any and all circumstances, that the Roosevelt administration is directing its real attack. Strikes were the real motivation for these latest Ward “seizures.” It is the argument of strike prevention that the government is using in court to. justify these “seizures.” The net effect, regardless of the immediate outcome of the Ward case, is to reinforce the power of government “seizure” as a strikebreaking weapon.
This power will be all the more potent precisely because the “seizure” was demanded by the unions and directed, ostensibly, against an anti-labor employer. The most important instances of such “seizures” previously, particularly of the railroads and coal mines, were openly directed against the workers. This will be just as true in the future – with this addition: The government will be able to point to the Ward case in order to claim “impartiality” in its strikebreaking.
What is basically involved is the administration’s endeavor to reinforce WLB authority, challenged by Avery. But that authority is not needed because of the employers. Fundamentally, it is needed against the workers, because the very purpose of the board is anti-labor – to impose compulsory arbitration, bury labor grievances in red tape, and, above all, to enforce the wage freeze. That has been conclusively demonstrated in all the decisive wage cases, coal, railway, steel, auto, packinghouse, rubber, textiles. etc.
Avery, by his actions, was tossing a monkey-wrench into the very machinery for controlling labor that the employers as a class themselves require. Hence, the big business government was finally compelled to act – although “reluctantly,” as it admitted – against an employer who broke the discipline of his own capitalist class.
But only to be in better position ultimately to squeeze the vise tighter on labor!
 



The corporation-dominated War Labor Board has come to the rescue of CIO United Rubber Workers President Sherman Dalrymple in his ruthless bureaucratic drive against the militant ranks of his union.
On January 17, the entire board of employers, “Public” members and union representatives in Washington directed the United States Rubber Company to deduct $10,582 from the wages of 572 workers who had engaged in a strike last October in Detroit.
This $10,582 is to pay union fines and reinstatement fees levied by Dalrymple because of the striking workers’ refusal to obey his arbitrary back-to-work order. Dalrymple had imposed on each of 800 strikers a $12.50 fine which had to be paid by a certain date or they would stand automatically expelled.
The 572 militants who refused to pay this fine were expelled from the union. Then Dalrymple, with a “militancy” he never displays in fighting for the union membership against the corporations, demanded that the company take action against the expelled workers under the provisions of the contract maintenance of membership clause.
The company didn’t find it expedient to fire so many experienced workers at one clip. It referred the issue to the WLB, which decided that “the urgent need for tire production as well as necessity for reinforcing” the no-strike policy required a different action than dismissing 572 workers. The company against whose provocations the strike was directed will deduct from wages the $12.50 fines and $6 union reinstatement fees exacted by Dalrymple.
While the representatives of the employers on the WLB have always voted against maintenance of membership or any other type of union security clause, they were more than happy to oblige in perverting its use to strike a blow at union militants. And even if Dalrymple can’t win any gains for the union from the WLB, he secured 100 per cent cooperation from it to strengthen his reactionary hand against the rank and file.
* * *
The WLB, which proved helpless for years in enforcing its directives against recalcitrant open-shop employers like Sewell L. Avery, does not lack punitive powers, or the will to employ them, against workers who refuse to accept the dictates and conditions imposed by the employers.
Under the guise of an “impartial” decision directed against “both” the Federal Shipbuilding and Drydock Co. and Local 16 of the CIO Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers, the WLB’s Shipbuilding Commission has granted only “conditional” maintenance of membership and check-off provisions to the local because of “unauthorized strikes.”
The WLB placed the union on “probation” for six months, during which time the former contract clauses will apply. At the end of the six months, the WLB Shipbuilding Commission will “reconsider” its decision in the light of the union’s “conduct” in the “trial” period. Thus, the WLB is using the threat of withholding union security to force the Local 16 workers “into line.”
The WLB decision indicated why the Federal workers were forced to go on strike. The decision first complains that the “union has almost literally ‘scraped the bottom of the barrel’ in its demands.” The union, you see, is first blamed for asking “too much.” But then, it is conceded, “the refusal of the company to grant any union demands, even of those issues where the commission action is known in advance by everyone in the industry, leaves it open to charges of refusal to cooperate with the union in meeting the common problems of the parties.”
In short, the company flatly refused to concede anything to the union, even provisions contained in the previous contract and customarily sanctioned by the WLB. This subsidiary of Bethlehem Steel corporation conducted a viciously anti-union policy which provoked repeated work stoppages. The WLB rewards these provocations by further undermining the union’s security.
That is a prize example both of the WLB’s “impartiality” and its exercise of punitive measures against the workers.
* * *
Over a thousand members of CIO United Automobile Workers Local 661 engaged in what, to our knowledge, is the first “sit-down” strike in this country since Pearl Harbor. Their two-day action last week at the Ranger Aircraft division of the Fairchild Engine and Airplane Corporation, Farmingdale, Long Island, was directed at “wage decreases” imposed by the company through the method of reclassifications.
The strikers argued that since they could not obtain wage increases without prior approval of the WLB, the company should not be permitted to reduce wages without agreement with the union and WLB.
This sound logic did not prevent the Army from intervening and forcing the end of the “sit-down” by threatening the strikers with the harshest punishment in its power.
* * *
In a recent 5 to 4 decision, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld UAW-CIO President R.J. Thomas in his appeal against a conviction under a Texas anti-labor law requiring the licensing of union organizers.
As a test case, Thomas had spoken at a meeting of Houston CIO oil workers and urged non-members to join the union. He was arrested and convicted. Thomas appealed against a $100 fine and 8-day jail sentence which had previously been upheld by the Texas courts.
The Supreme Court majority based its decision on the particular circumstances in the Thomas case, which they contended violated the free speech provisions of the Bill of Rights in the Constitution. At the same time, the Court did not invalidate the “right” of the state governments to pass laws regulating unions and union organizers.
On the contrary, the majority opinion, delivered by Justice Rutledge, said such a “right” could “hardly be doubted,” provided more was involved than mere verbal endorsement or solicitation of union members. If, however, a union organizer sought to collect funds or obtain subscriptions, the opinion declared, “he enters a realm where a reasonable registration or identification requirement may be imposed.” In such cases “solicitation would be quite different from the solicitation involved here.”
That is to say: it’s all right to talk favorably about unionism in Texas, but don’t try to do any real organizing without a license from the anti-labor government!
 



A nationwide united front of reaction, both outside and within the CIO United Automobile Workers, has been mobilized for an attempt to propagandize and pressure the 1,200,000 organized auto workers into reaffirming the no-strike pledge in the union’s referendum which began January 4.
Every agency which the corporations, the Roosevelt administration and their bureaucratic CIO lieutenants can muster is being used to bolster the UAW-CIO leadership’s defense of the no-strike surrender policy. Big Business views the referendum, which provides the militant auto workers with an opportunity for scrapping the no-strike pledge, as a tremendous threat to its wartime program for shackling the unions and paralyzing labor militancy.
In Detroit and Michigan, center of the upsurge against the no-strike policy, the capitalist press has unleashed a strident campaign, threatening dire consequences to the auto workers if they dare to revoke the pledge. The Detroit Free Press, voice of the auto corporations, led the attack with an editorial stink-bomb against the rank and file militants for opposing “labor’s solemn vow,” saying nothing, however, about Roosevelt’s “solemn vow” to curb war profiteering. The Stalinist Daily Worker, January 10, which quotes most of this anti-labor diatribe approvingly, nevertheless complains because the Free Press “editorial is weakened by the fact that it goes all out to champion management.”
In their attack on union militancy, the profiteering corporations and the labor bureaucrats are even seeking to enlist the churches. The Detroit Council of Applied Religion, whose co-chairmen are the Reverend Ellsworth Smith, emergency chaplain of the Detroit Council of Churches, and Shelton Tappes, Stalinist secretary of Local 600, has issued a public appeal to all clergymen to “use their influence to convince” the auto workers to vote for the no-strike pledge.
 
Roosevelt Intervenes
Roosevelt himself has intervened to use the power and prestige of his office to influence the vote of the auto workers. He sent a letter recently to UAW president R.J. Thomas “congratulating” the latter on pushing through, at least temporarily, a continuation of the no-strike pledge at the last auto convention and expressing the hope that the pledge “will always be reaffirmed by responsible men of labor.” The CIO and UAW flunkies of Roosevelt promptly featured his letter in the official CIO and UAW organs.
The Murray-Hillman bureaucracy is throwing the CIO’s resources and prestige behind the hard-pressed UAW leaders. Dipping generously into the CIO treasury, the CIO officials have rushed to the auto workers hundreds of thousands of copies of the January 8 CIO News, a special no-strike pledge edition including an extra four-page two-color insert demanding “patriotic” adherence to the no-strike policy and replete with pictures of Roosevelt and his leading generals. State and local CIO councils, dominated primarily by the Murray machine or the Stalinists, have been confronted simultaneously with resolutions calling on the auto workers not to “violate” the “sacred pledge.”
Earl Browder’s Communist (Stalinist) Political Association, the only group within the labor movement to attack the Montgomery Ward strikes and publicly endorse Roosevelt’s National Service forced labor demand, is attempting to curry further favor in the eyes of the American capitalists, Roosevelt and the CIO “labor statesmen” by taking the lead in the slanderous campaign against the auto militants. What the Stalinist Daily Worker lacks in influence among the auto workers, it seeks to make up by the volume and hysteria of its attacks on the militants and its fawning support for the anti-strike CIO and UAW leaders.
 
Stalinists Take Lead
The Stalinists, regarding the referendum struggle as a golden opportunity for strengthening their position in the CIO and UAW bureaucracy, have mobilized their resources behind the UAW leadership. They are rallying all their forces within the union movement to defeat the auto militants. Much of the finances for the UAW Committee to Uphold the No-Strike Pledge, formed by the Stalinists and adopted as the official caucus of the UAW no-strike forces, comes from Stalinist sources.
Treasuries of unions under Stalinist control are being utilized to finance this committee. Stalinist Joseph Curran, head of the CIO National Maritime Union, has publicly announced his donation of $500 from union funds which he has sent to George Addes, UAW secretary-treasurer and “honorary” secretary of the UAW anti-strike committee. Every Stalinist-dominated union local or CIO council is rushing through resolutions in support of the UAW no-strike caucus.
Propped up by outside forces of reaction and spurred by the referendum’s threat not only to their cowardly policies but ultimately to their posts of leadership, all the international UAW officials have united to resist the offensive against the no-strike pledge. They have thrust to the background their secondary differences of factional power politics. Peeling the rising cold wind of militancy at their backs, Thomas, Addes, Reuther and Frankensteen are huddled together for mutual warmth and protection.
This protective alliance was formally acknowledged last week when the four spoke jointly under the auspices of the Stalinist Committee to Uphold the No- Strike Pledge over a Michigan radio hook-up. Thus the auto workers were treated to the spectacle of Addes, Frankensteen, Thomas and Reuther – bitter factionalists in the struggle for posts – joining hands under Stalinist sponsorship to hold the line for the no-strike policy ip the referendum.
 
UAW Heads
While a convention motion prohibits them from using the union’s resources or institutions for propagandizing their partisan position in the referendum, the UAW heads have uncovered enough loop-holes to evade the intent of the motion. Under the technical heading of “news,” the United Automobile Worker, official UAW organ, has printed huge slugs of CIO President Philip Murray’s speeches for the no-strike policy, CIO resolutions, Roosevelt’s anti-strike letter, etc.
This is but a minor example of the ability of the leadership to get around the restricting motion. All the payrollees and porkchoppers of the international, beholden to the officialdom for their cushy jobs, are being pressed into service – or else. Under the pretext of performing union “business”, and travelling at union expense, the officials find time to do a “little” anti-strike caucus organizing “on the side.”
Last week, they called a National UAW Educational Conference in Milwaukee. The assembled local and district officials and porkchoppers, after going through the motions of a formal session, adjourned to an anti-strike caucus meeting in the same hotel. This meeting was openly announced by leaflet. Addes himself flew to Milwaukee to address this pep meeting for the no-strike pledge.
 



During the past three weeks through their press and union stooges, the Stalinists have been conducting their most virulent strikebreaking campaign to date. These rats have been busily trailing their slime across the magnificent strike struggle of the Montgomery Ward workers which has won staunch support in the ranks of the labor movement.
One of the most shameful acts of treachery perpetrated by the Stalinists was the stab in the back dealt the Detroit Ward Workers by the Stalinist officials of Local 65, CIO United Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Employes in New York. They belong to the very same international union which has been directing the strikes in Detroit, Kansas City and Chicago.
The Stalinist stooges in this local, headed by Local 65 President Arthur Osman, issued a public denunciation of the Ward strikes. In their statement opposing the struggle of the Ward workers for a union contract and increases beyond their 39 cents an hour wages, these finks slanderously linked the Ward workers with the “treasonous activities” of Sewell L. Avery, the open-shop plutocrat who for four years has been successfully defying scores of WLB and other government agencies’ orders.
These deliberate strikebreaking moves of the Stalinist stooges have of course been applauded by the Daily Worker. But these finks have become so brazen that they even boast of the praise of the bosses for their activities. In the December 24 issue of the Local 65 paper, New Voices, right next to a double-banner, double- cross headline attacking the Ward strikers, was “proudly” displayed a letter declaring “we are in complete accord with the views set forth by Mr. Osman” against the Ward workers. This statement was signed by Sidney B. Felsenfeld, Executive Secretary of the Shoe Wholesalers Employers’ Association!
* * *
While the Stalinists have joined with the open-shoppers against the Ward workers, almost every other section of the labor movement, including the bulk of the URWDSE-CIO members throughout the country, are giving tacit or open support to the strike. The infamous conduct of the Stalinists has aroused so much indignation that over 30 leading locals of the URWDSE-CIO have issued public statements condemning their strikebreaking in the Ward situation.
* * *
Anger against the Stalinists has been simmering ever since the Chicago Ward strike last May when Harry Bridges, head of the CIO Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union, ordered the members of his organization in the company’s St. Paul branch to handle “hot goods” from the struck Chicago mail-order headquarters. At the start of the Ward strike in Detroit Bridges’ attorney, Douglas Hall, appeared before WLB hearings in Washington to boast that “there is no strike at St. Paul” despite Avery’s “non-compliance with every directive of the Board,” including directives affecting the St. Paul members of the ILWU.
While Bridges and his henchmen were pursuing their servile policies of surrender to the open-shoppers, the Roosevelt administration was prodded by the militancy of the Detroit Ward strike into issuing another WLB “last warning” compliance order to Avery. This order also included Ward’s St. Paul establishment along with those in several other cities.
Thereupon the Daily Worker had the gall to bray in a headline on Dec. 16: “Bridges Wins Order on Ward Without Strike.” To be sure, Bridges didn’t call any strike; he did his damndest to break the strike that was going on in Detroit. But that didn’t prevent him and his pack of Stalinized scabs from trying to steal a little credit for themselves by cashing in on the very Detroit strike he assailed.
* * *
The officers of Local 327, URWDSE, have filed formal charges against Harry Bridges’ ILWU lieutenants accusing them of direct collusion with the Ward management in an attempt to sabotage an impending strike at the Baltimore Ward plant. These charges were filed with the national CIO last week. In a letter to Secretary-Treasurer James B. Carey, Maurice J. Niestadt, assistant business manager of Local 327, urged the CIO to take action against the strikebreaking Stalinist union officials.
Niestadt declared that on December 20 a committee of workers from Ward’s retail store in Baltimore solicited the aid of Local 327 in a strike planned for December 22. This committee also asked assistance in securing the backing of other CIO unions in the area.
The strike had to be postponed a day because of bad weather. On the originally scheduled day, an ILWU international representative, Jas. More, “with management assistance made a personal survey throughout the entire plant questioning the workers on their attitude toward a strike.” Also, that same day, the company sent an individual letter to each employee with intimidating propaganda against the projected strike.
“This act of collusion on the part of the ILWU and management completely destroyed the morale and terrorized the people in the retail store where our people had been working,” Niestadt stated. He also declared that the action of the ILWU officials who were carrying out Bridges’ strikebreaking policy, constituted interference with the internal affairs of another CIO union.
* * *
A final note. Last week Washington correspondents, including members of the CIO American Newspaper Guild which backed the Ward strike, interviewed a committee of Stalinists and their front men from the Stalinist-dominated, Wayne County (Detroit) CIO Council. This committee had hot-footed to Washington to beg the government to halt the strike.
The committee boasted of “emphasizing” unyielding devotion to the no-strike pledge. “Do you regard the Ward strike as a breach of that pledge?” a reporter asked. W.G. Grant, Ford UAW Local 600 president, replied, “Yes.”
“Did you notice,” a reporter shot back, “that the WLB made an exception when it did not order the Ward strikers back to work?” Grant was taken aback. “Are you sure?” Several reporters, who had covered the WLB hearings, replied, “Absolutely.” Grant could only answer feebly, “I think I’d check to make doubly sure.”
As the reporters were clearly intimating, the Stalinists display a new low in finkery when they attack a strike WHICH NOT EVEN THE CORPORATION-DOMINATED WLB DARED TO CONDEMN OPENLY!
 



The CIO United Automobile Workers’ national referendum on, the no-strike pledge is an extraordinary event in the American trade union movement. This referendum, for which the mailing of ballots began January 4, involves the vote of over 1,200,000 workers on the most immediate and vital issue confronting the labor movement, the no-strike pledge.
Membership referendums are not unique in the unions. But almost invariably they have dealt with problems which are largely organizational, such as affiliations, dues increases or elections of officers. In this instance an entire union membership – of the most powerful and dynamic union in the country – is being polled on a basic policy affecting the entire organized labor movement.
Today, the UAW-CIO is a battleground of contending forces. On one side, fighting for revocation of the no-strike pledge, are the militant men and women in the ranks, local officers and committeemen, who daily feel the whiplash of corporation provocations. Against them stand the top bureaucrats, drawing down comfortable salaries, more at home in the waiting-room of the employers and capitalist government officials than among the workers and their struggles in the shops. Around these bureaucrats are lined up the most treacherous agents of capitalism within the union, notably the Stalinists.
Within the past four weeks these opposing forces have been increasing the tempo of their struggle. The Detroit Ward strike gave an unexpected impetus to this struggle. Reports from the center of the auto industry disclose that the Ward strike inspired a wave of labor militancy, reminiscent of the days of the great auto strikes. This response of the ranks in support of the Ward strike in turn aroused frantic fear among the UAW tops and their Stalinist henchmen. Both forces have geared up their propaganda campaigns, utilizing every means at their command to reach and influence the membership. The referendum fight over the no-strike pledge in the UAW appears to be developing into a momentous struggle.
* * *
The Rank and File Caucus, which organized the magnificent four-day battle against the no-strike pledge at the last UAW convention, has become the rallying center for the militants in the referendum campaign. It has established a large and powerful committee in Wayne County (Detroit) and initiated an increasingly aggressive drive to mobilize the votes against the no- strike surrender policy.
Last week, the Rank and File steering committee issued a strongly-worded pamphlet for circulation to the auto workers throughout the country. The pamphlet called on the auto workers to “restore the fighting strength” of their union by rescinding the no-strike pledge for which “labor sacrificed everything and gained nothing.”
The imposition of the no-strike policy on the workers, states the pamphlet, meant the sacrifice of labor’s most powerful weapon “in the fight against the big monopolists who always seek to lower living standards and crush our organization.” At the same time, the employers’ “no lock-out pledge” was a “cruel joke played on us ... Companies needed labor to maintain the highest salaries in the history of corporation executives, and the largest, fattest, bloodiest profits the world has ever known.”
The pamphlet effectively answers the flag-waving propaganda of the labor-haters that militant defense of labor’s rights is “against the interests” of the the “boys in the foxholes.” “The boys in the foxholes are our relatives ... When we fight to make our union strong and effective, we also are fighting for them.”
* * *
While the militant rank and file must depend solely on their own resources and strength to spread the message of their opposition to the no-strike pledge, the UAW heads have found powerful allies outside their own union to aid their attempt to rivet the no-strike shackles more securely on the membership.
The Murray-Hillman machine in the national CIO has thrown its influence behind the UAW top leadership, Thomas-Addes-Frankensteen-Reuther. The capitalist press from coast to coast has opened its columns generously to the no-strike rantings and down-right slanders against the militants issuing from the bull-frog throat of R.J. Thomas, UAW President.
The radio monopoly has placed a state-wide Michigan hook-up at the disposal of Thomas, Addes, Frankensteen and Reuther, according to the Stalinist Daily Worker. They are scheduled to speak in favor of the no-strike policy next week over station WXYZ. Walter Reuther, whose game of “left cover” for the top bureaucrats is rapidly playing itself out, is no longer able to straddle the fence. He is lining himself up openly with the camp he has always really served, the servile leadership against the militant ranks.
The main organizers and campaigners for the leadership’s reactionary policy are the Stalinists. Whole pages of the Daily Worker are being devoted every day to slandering the UAW militants, publicizing the anti-strike statements of the UAW officials, and clamoring for continuation of the no-strike pledge.
Inside the UAW, the Stalinists initiated the Committee to Uphold the No-Strike Pledge, which they and their front-men control and activate. This has become the principal machinery for whipping up support for the no-strike policy. Thus, the Stalinists are spearheading the no-strike drive and have thrown their tremendous material resources behind the UAW tops.
* * *
The UAW leaders find themselves dependent in the referendum battle on shameless finks and strikebreakers. For alone in the entire labor movement, the Stalinists openly attacked the Montgomery Ward strikes.
The Daily Worker, January 6, publishes a letter from Nat Canley, Stalinist business agent of UAW Local 155, to John W. Gibson, President of the Michigan CIO Council, assailing the latter’s support of the Ward strike.
Every worker knows that Roosevelt stalled for over four years on the issue of Avery’s repeated defiance of WLB directives. The only time he acted was after the workers went on strike. Yet Ganley dishes out the astounding argument that “the strike did not compel President Roosevelt to act, but made it harder for him to act.” That’s the stuff the Stalinists are trying to peddle to the auto workers!
 



President Roosevelt last Thursday intervened to halt the Montgomery Ward strikes by ordering War Department “seizure” of company properties in seven cities where the administration previously had failed to enforce long-standing WLB directives against Open Shopper No. 1, Sewell L. Avery.
The administration’s action, similar to the one which broke the Chicago Ward strike eight months ago, was taken after nearly three weeks of the bitter Detroit walkout, which spread to Chicago and Kansas City and inspired the threat of a CIO “labor holiday” in the Detroit citadel of the mighty auto workers union.
Roosevelt’s statement made it clear that his “seizure” was dictated by his desire to prevent the spread of such strikes to the war industries and by the need to bolster up his wage-freezing War Labor Board’s authority, seriously undermined by Avery’s long and contemptuous defiance of WLB directives.
While admitting that Montgomery Ward “has waged a bitter fight against the bona fide unions of its employees throughout the war,” and “for more than a year” has successfully defied WLB directives affecting the “seized” establishments, Roosevelt did not motivate his “seizure” order on the fact of Avery’s non-compliance in itself. In fact, the administration has tolerated this for over four years.
Roosevelt complains only because Avery’s anti-labor recalcitrance has “threatened” the “confidence” of the workers in the government’s “structure for the impartial adjudication of disputes” and has led to the “distinct threat” of sympathetic walkouts of war industry workers in support of the Ward strikers. Roosevelt released a letter from WLB Chairman Davis, who gave as his first and main reason for advising government seizure the fact that Avery’s “persistent non-compliance” threatens the maintenance of the “no-strike pledge in Detroit” in the forthcoming UAW-CIO referendum.
 
Easy on Avery
It is already apparent that the latest Ward “seizure” will yield the Ward workers only the barest minimum of the WLB concessions originally granted. They will receive a raise from 39 cents an hour to 46 cents – which Avery himself had already agreed to pay as a result of the strike. But since Roosevelt’s order permits wage payments only out of current revenue there is admittedly little likelihood that the Detroit Ward workers will receive some $500,000 due them in retroactive wages. Nor is there any assurance that Roosevelt, as he did after breaking the Chicago Ward strike, will not restore control of the seized properties to Avery without the signing of a union contract.
The administration is carrying out the “seizure” order very gingerly, observing all legal precautions and making no move which might infringe on Avery’s “property rights” or further antagonize the big business open- shoppers. The boldness and ruthlessness which has characterized Roosevelt’s assaults on striking workers is completely lacking in his treatment of the union-busting plutocrat Avery.
There has been no spectacular removal of Avery from his Chicago offices, such as occurred eight months ago. Avery has not budged an inch, issuing the defiant statement that “I’m still in charge.” Avery’s underlings have refused to cooperate with Army officials in the operation of the business. Moreover, Montgomery Ward’s profits are fully safeguarded by the government and Avery is assured ultimate restoration intact of his property. Meanwhile, he is still free to operate his other 800-odd open-shop establishments and to continue his fight against the unions. So patently timid have been the government’s moves, that Attorney General Biddle tried to pass off the government’s obviously pussyfooting “caution” by facetiously claiming that Avery is “perfectly harmless.”
 
Tough Toward Labor
But the administration has never exercised similar “caution” in its attacks on labor. Roosevelt had no hesitancy or legal scruples when, six months before Pearl Harbor, he ordered Army occupation of the North American Aviation plant and drove strikers back to work at the bayonet point. He observed no legal fine points when he “seized” the railroads last December to head off a threatened strike. In his attempts to break last year’s mine strikes, he repeatedly took over the coal mines with no apparent reluctance.
Attorney General Biddle has conceded to Avery that the WLB directives are only “recommendations,” defending the “seizures” solely as a strikebreaking requisite. But the administration has never treated WLB directives to workers as mere “recommendations.” Such directives have been enforced promptly and firmly, and the WLB itself has been armed with punitive powers. In addition to siding with the employers 99 times out of a hundred, the WLB has penalized strikers by delaying concessions, withholding union security clauses, reducing retroactive pay grants, etc.
The workers can be certain that, whatever the ‘immediate consequences of the latest Ward “seizures,” they will operate in the long run only to reinforce Roosevelt’s fundamentally anti-labor policy, his kid-glove treatment of the labor-hating open-shoppers, and his club-wielding against workers defending their elementary rights.
 



Earl Browder’s strikebreaking Communist (Stalinist)
Political Association recently published a pamphlet entitled the
Trotskyite 5th Column in the Labor Movement, written by the
Daily Worker’s specialist in anti-Trotskyist
red-baiting. George Morris. It is being distributed wholesale,
especially in Minnesota where the Trotskyists won great renown as the
organizers and leaders of the famous Northwest drivers movement.
This latest anti-Trotskyist stink-bomb, as its title indicates,
compiles all the lies and slanders previously peddled against the
Trotskyists and the militant labor movement generally, with some new
poison-pen inventions for good measure.
Why have the Stalinists issued this pamphlet and intensified their
ferocious slander campaign at this time?
 
Stalinist Motives
The Stalinists have sold their services to American Big
Business, its government and chief political agent Roosevelt, as part
payment for the diplomatic and military accord between American
imperialism and the Kremlin bureaucracy. They are frantically
endeavoring to convince Wall Street that they can be its most
reliable' tools within the labor movement.
This traitor’s chore has become increasingly difficult
because the worker’s resentment against the imperialist war and
its consequences, particularly the antilabor policies of the
Roosevelt administration, grows fiercer each day.
With the growth of this resentment, the ideas and program of the
Socialist Workers Party appear more clearly as the only answer to the
workers’ problems. For the Trotskyists represent the only
serious political opposition within the working class to the
labor-hating capitalists, their government and imperialist war
program.
The Trotskyist prestige, moreover, has been tremendously enhanced
as a consequence of the Minneapolis Labor Case frame-up in which
Roosevelt railroaded to prison 18 leaders and outstanding trade
unionists of the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party who refused to
surrender their socialist principles or to suspend their fight in
defense of the workers’ interests.
 
Attack All Militants
Now that the Trotskyist leaders have been released from prison,
the Stalinists are more than ever alarmed and fearful. They are
hysterically attempting to counteract the growing influence of the
ideas and program of Trotskyism and the widespread working-class
admiration for the courageous stand of the Trotskyists. This has been
especially evidenced by the support given the imprisoned Trotskyists
by over 600 labor unions, representing more than 4,500,000 workers.
Morris even has the audacity to present as his chief witness
against the Trotskyists the AFL Teamsters Czar, Daniel J. Tobin, who
inspired the frameup of the 18 Trotskyist leaders. Tobin last week
further distinguished himself as the only high union official to
openly advocate continuation and enforcement of Roosevelt’s
wage-freezing Little Steel formula.
The Stalinist attack is directed not only against the Trotskyists
as the most conscious vanguard of the working class, but at every
militant endeavor of the workers to better their conditions and
defend themselves against the union-busting offensive of the
corporations.
This is shown by the pamphlet’s emphasis on the particular
aspects of the Trotskyist program which coincide with the militant
sentiments of increasing numbers of American workers. The
Trotskyists, Morris complains, want to “smash the no-strike
pledge,” “sneer at joint labor-management committees as
‘speed-up’ instruments,” condemn the War Labor
Board. They “shout loudly that management and labor cannot
possibly have joint interests” and are “guided by a
conviction that a new and sharp depression will follow the end of
hostilities.” And – imagine! – the Trotskyists are
even the leading proponents of an independent labor party. It is
these ideas, ideas to which millions of the best unionists are
becoming sympathetic, which Morris tries to smear as “fascist.”
 
Unholy Alliance
But the agents of Stalin are seeking to bridle not only the
American workers. They are also aiding the Anglo-American
imperialists to suppress the war- weary masses of Europe who are
beginning to rise in revolutionary wrath against the capitalist
war-makers and their system of exploitation. Today, in any country
where the workers engage in independent struggle against their
oppressive overlords, capitalist reaction labels them as
“Trotskyites” and foully slanders the revolutionary
workers who are the chief victims of fascism, as “agents of
Hitler.”
Thus, the most appropriate name Churchill could think of for the
Greek workers whom the Allied troops had massacred was “Trotskyites.”
He claimed they were “worse than the Nazis.”
Churchill joins the chorus of the Stalinists who perfected this
technique in the Moscow trials. These frameups were organized by
Stalin’s secret police, the GPU, to discredit and falsify the
real ideas of Bolshevism and to smear the genuine Marxist
revolutionists as “Hitler agents.”
This latest scurrilous Stalinist pamphlet is therefore part of a
worldwide campaign by the Allied imperialists and Stalin against the
developing working- class upsurge and the predestined Trotskyist
leadership of this revolutionary struggle.
To this end Morris spreads the infamous lie that the “Trotskyite
Fourth International is shaping into a Nazi instrument.” To
mention no other fact, this malicious invention is shattered by the
report from France, published only last week in The Militant,
which lists the names, dates and places of the imprisonment and
executions of hundreds of Trotskyist fighters – French, German,
Greek, Belgian – at the hands of the murderous Nazis.
Morris concludes with the threat that anyone associating with
Trotskyists will be accused of “consorting with the enemy.”
But workers who know the score are not likely to be fooled or
intimidated by such threats or slanders. For they can see with their
own eyes that it is the Stalinists who today join with the
profiteering capitalists, the real enemies of labor, in every attack
on the workers. The Stalinists advocate the permanent no-strike
pledge. They support Roosevelt’s slave labor demand. The
workers are fast learning that the Stalinists themselves are the most
cunning and sinister agents of Wall Street within the labor movement.
 



The CIO Textile Workers Union of America, representing over
500,000 members in the country’s lowest-wage industry, on
February 20 withdrew the no-strike pledge for some 100,000
cotton-rayon workers. This is the first formal revocation of the
no-strike policy by any CIO international union since Pearl Harbor.
The action was taken by the TWU Executive Council at a meeting in New
York City just prior to release of the War Labor Board’s
long-delayed decision in the textile wage case.
At the same time, the union’s President, Emil Rieve,
resigned from the WLB “in protest against the usurpation of its
functions and the plain fact that the Board has now been reduced to
little more than a rubber stamp.” This is especially
significant because Rieve was one of the union leaders who originally
committed organised labor to the no-strike policy and helped
establish the compulsory arbitration WLB.
These simultaneous actions are the most serious blows struck at
the union-shackling no-strike policy and Roosevelt’s tottering
WLB since the coal strikes two years ago. They are a big advance over
the action of the CtO United Automobile Workers’ executive
board, which several weeks ago called on the CIO to withdraw its
members from the WLB, but did not recall its own members and
continues to uphold the no-strike surrender policy.
In response to the TWU action, the WLB hastily announced its
decision in the textile wage case. This was a rejection of the 10
cents an hour general wage increase demanded by the union. The board
also halved the union’s demand for a boost from 50 cents to a
60 cents an hour wage minimum, conceding only a 55 cents wage floor
for an industry which the board itself admitted “pays the
lowest wages of any basic manufacturing industry in America.”
However, this concession, plus some meager “fringe”
awards, are not going into immediate effect. The board simply
referred them as “recommendations” to Economic
Stabilization Director Vinson. He must first determine whether such
increases will mean price increases – the administration’s
most recent pretext for stalling wage awards and upholding the
wage-freeze. ”
This belated WLB statement has not altered the TWU actions.
Following the WLB announcement, Rieve issued a press statement
declaring that the union’s decision “still stands.”
He scored the WLB ruling as “meaningless” and stated it
would “not raise the wages of a single cotton- rayon textile
worker.” The case, he charged, “is still where it was two
months ago – in Vinson’s vest pocket.” He frankly
predicted that withdrawal of the no-strike pledge for a large section
of the industry would lead to strikes.
That the TWU top officials were influenced in making their
decision primarily by the terrific pressure of the union’s
ranks was clearly indicated by Rieve. He admitted that the union’s
officers had been “deluged by request for walk-outs in
telegrams by the bushel.”
The textile union’s action is all the more significant
because it is part of important developments reflecting general rank
and file pressure throughout industry for scrapping the no-strike
pledge and scuttling the pro-corporation WLB.
Just prior to the TWU decision, a national gathering of CIO
Packinghouse Workers representatives meeting in Chicago threatened to
revoke the no-strike pledge if the WLB did not immediately release
its decision in the PWU wage case which had been stalled for 19
months. This brought a speedy response with the issuance of a WLB
order denying a general wage increase but recommending “fringe”
grants. These however must still await approval by Vinson.
The CIO United Automobile Workers, largest and most dynamic
union in the country, has urged the withdrawal of labor
representatives from the WLB. This union has just concluded a
national referendum on the no-strike pledge. While the results have
not yet been published, it is conceded that hundreds of thousands of
militant auto and aircraft workers, if not a majority of the union,
have voted to rescind the no-strike policy. A new wave of strikes has
broken out in Detroit, key war industry center, with the
Chrysler-Dodge workers now taking the lead.
Moreover, within a few weeks the over 600,000 members of the
powerful United Mine Workers may be enforcing their traditional “no
contract, no work” policy. The UMW policy committee on February
26 at its opening session to prepare demands for forthcoming contract
negotiations indicated the possibilities of another general mine
strike by sending formal notice to Secretary of Labor Perkins, the
NLRB and WLB that a dispute exists in the industry – the 30-day
notification of strike intent required under the Smith-Connally
Anti-Strike Law.
Important as all these developments are, they do not yet
constitute a genuine, definitive break with the union leadership’s
basic policy of reliance on government agencies and compulsory
arbitration to win the workers’ just demands. Even Rieve, who
has taken the boldest stand to date of all the CIO leaders, still
holds out the hope of advancing labor’s interests by
collaboration with the employers and their government through a
differently constituted board.
 
Time for Action
Thus, the TWU’s executive board did not attack the WLB for
what it is – a government agency deliberately constructed by
Roosevelt, with the aid of the union officials, to curb the unions
and enforce the wage-freeze. The TWU resolution urges CIO withdrawal
from the WLB “unless the WLB’s original function as a
decision-making body, acting in the interest of equal justice, is
re-established.” Of course, the WLB never had and was not
intended to have such a function. That was merely a fiction used to
gain the worker’s support for the, board and their surrender of
the strike weapon.
Nevertheless, the TWU decisions are further confirmation, of
the correctness of the policies consistently advocated by the
Socialist Workers Party and The Militant. From the very first,
the Trotskyists have warned of the disastrous consequences for labor
in the no-strike policy and support of the WLB. Today workers
everywhere are learning the truth of the Trotskyist contentions
through their own bitter experiences. They must now demand that the
lessons of these experiences be translated into decisive action. The
union leaders must be compelled to resign immediately from the
anti-labor WLB. The no-strike policy must be scrapped. A united
militant union offensive must be launched to smash the wage-freezing
Little Steel Formula.
 




Treason to Labor
Daniel J. Tobin, AFL Teamsters’ Czar and initiator of the
Minneapolis Case frameup, has maintained himself in the forefront of
the labor traitors by endorsing the wage-freezing Little Steel
Formula through an editorial in the March International Teamster,
the personal organ he operates in the name of the union.
Tobin’s mouthpiece spouts that “you can’t
scrap the Little Steel Formula without scrapping the entire
stabilization program.” It moans that politicians and
profiteers who “want to see all economic controls removed”
are “encouraging some labor leaders to break the Little Steel
Formula” and advises that “labor better do some serious
thinking” before attacking Roosevelt’s wage-freezing
formula.
Evidently, Tobin was subsequently quickly apprised of the fact
that labor has already done “some serious thinking.” The
workers think that the Little Steel Formula was designed by the
corporations and Roosevelt to put the squeeze on labor while
protecting the war-profiteers. At any rate, Tobin issued a hasty
“repudiation” of the editorial, claiming it had “escaped”
his attention before publication.
* * *

Knifing the Miners
The same Stalinists in the New York CIO who secretly lobbied for
Congressional endorsement of the May-Bailey slave labor bill have
tried to stick a knife in the nation’s mine workers at the
opening of the United Mine Worker contract negotiations. At a
shop-stewards meeting of the Stalinist-dominated Greater New York CIO
Council, the finky leadership shoved through a resolution calling on
Roosevelt to “seize” the mines because of an alleged
“strike threat” by John L. Lewis.
Singing the tune of the most vicious labor-haters, the Stalinist
resolution charged the Mine Union leaders with a “strike plot
against the nation” and called on “every citizen”
to “denounce and defeat the sabotage of John L. Lewis.”
This anti-labor action was denounced last week by Martin Gerber
and Charles H. Kerrigan, eastern regional directors of the powerful
CIO United Automobile Workers, at the UAW executive board meeting in
New York. Gerber stated:
“I am not a follower of John L. Lewis, but I
support the legitimate wage demands of any groups of American
workers. The miners should not be sabotaged by any organization and
when they are sabotaged by a CIO Council, as was done by the New York
Council, I feel ashamed.” Kerrigan observed: “Apparently
some elements think unconditional surrender means unconditional
surrender by labor.”
* * *

Phone Strike Vote
A huge overflow joint mass meeting of New York City’s
organized local and long distance telephone operators last week voted
unanimously to file a 30-day strike notice with the NLRB. This vote
followed a WLB decision granting only a $3 weekly wage increase after
the telephone companies agreed to $4 and a special WLB panel
recommended the full $5 demanded by the unions.
So aroused were the members of Local 101, Federation of Long Lines
Telephone Operators, and the local New York Telephone Traffic
Employees Association, that the leaders had difficulty persuading the
workers not to strike immediately, but to follow the procedure under
the Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act. Many militant young women
operators took the floor amid cheers and applause to urge “an
immediate strike, starting right away.”
These operators, who are making wages as low as $20 a week, had
been stalled by the WLB for over 2 years. They evidently mean
business. The WLB has announced that it will render a decision this
week on the petition of the unions for a reconsideration of its $3
wage award.
* * *

Textile Strike Vote
Over 100,000 cotton-rayon textile workers, member of the CIO
Textile Workers Union, will take a strike vote in 150 Southern mills
on March 18. The announcement of this largest strike vote of any CIO
union during the war was made by Emil Rieve, the TWU’s
international president, on March 8.
This is a sequel to the recent decision of the TWU Executive
Council revoking the no-strike pledge for this large section of the
exploited textile workers, and the resignation of Rieve from the WLB.
The WLB after 19 month’s of stalling released “recommendations”
– not yet approved by the Economic Stabilization Administration
– granting meager “fringe” increases and a 55¢ an
hour minimum wage. The union had demanded a 10¢ hourly general wage
increase and a 65¢ minimum wage.
* * *

Lockout in Detroit
The latest union-busting corporation provocation against UAW
locals in Detroit is the firing of 35 officers and shop stewards and
the “disciplinary” layoff for one week of 140 workers, at
the Thompson Products plant for alleged responsibility for a strike
10 days previously. Thompson Products is headed by Frederick
Crawford, former President of the National Association of
Manufacturers and a leading open-shopper.
The UAW-CIO international executive board, meeting in New York,
when informed of this move to smash the Thompson Products Detroit
local, declared the firings and lay-offs a lockout by the company and
stated that unless all workers are reinstated plant operations will
not be resumed. The board also called on Roosevelt to “seize”
the plant.
* * *

Where Was PAC?
The lead editorial in the February 28 Midwest Labor World,
official organ of the St. Louis Joint Council, United Retail,
Wholesale and Department Store Employees, CIO, asks the question
“WHERE WAS PAC?” during the height of the Roosevelt-brass
hat campaign to put over the forced labor bill.
“There is a phase to the labor draft fight that
will surprise many workers. It is a fact that up to the time this was
written, after weeks of struggle in Congress by CIO, AFL, the miners
and the railroad brotherhoods, PAC – the political arm of CIO –
was silent. They have money, organization and paid spokesmen. Why
weren’t they used? The millions of workers who supported PAC
with their dollars are due an explanation of why the bureaucrats of
this organization sat on their expensive hind ends when labor’s
liberties were at stake.”
 



Sitting comfortably atop the greatest pile of profits in their
history, the country’s soft coal mine operators last week
flatly rejected six of the nine wage demands of the United Mine
Workers of America and contemptuously countered with an offer of a
few crumbs amounting to 28 cents a day increase.
The UMW’s 200-man policy committee promptly instructed the
union’s negotiating committee to reject outright the operators’
counter-offers and to continue negotiations on the basis of the
original 18 demands made by the miners at the opening of the new
contract parley. The UMW’s wage increase demands, carefully
designed to avoid conflict with the formal restrictions of the Little
Steel Formula, are estimated to total over $1.60 a day.
 
Strike Vote
If the present contract terminates within two weeks, on March 31,
without an extension of the old contract or a new agreement being
reached, the over 425,000 soft coal miners may resort to their
traditional policy of “no contract, no work.” The NLRB,
in response to the miners’ petition under the Smith-Connally
anti-strike law, has announced that it will conduct a nationwide
strike vote on March 28.
How the militant miners will vote is a foregone conclusion, as
their whole past record demonstrates. In the first sampling of
opinion among West Virginia’s 100,000 miners, 300 officials and
representatives of local unions on March 18 expressed unanimous
approval for an affirmative strike vote.
Government representatives and the Wall Street press, lined up
solidly behind the profiteering coal barons, have been circulating
dire threats of a government “seizure” of the mines in
the event the miners vote to walk out. The Smith-Connally act makes
strikes illegal in government-operated properties.
 
Seizures a Fraud
Roosevelt’s “seizure” two years ago simply meant
the appointment of the mine owners and their supervisory agents as
“government representatives.” The private operators
remained in control – they were just wrapped in an American
flag.
The wage “concessions” of the operators were an offer
to consider increases in travel time (portal-to-portal) pay, a
fourth-shift differential and vacation pay. This included an offer of
straight-time pay for one hour of travel time instead of the present
two-thirds for 45 minutes; a four and six cents an hour premium
increase respectively for the second- and third shifts, instead of
the demanded 10 and 15 cents. Up to $50 vacation pay was offered for
those with one to five years service and a $100 maximum for all over
five years, instead of the flat $100 for all miners asked by the
union.
 
Operators Unyielding
The operators refused the demand for a 10 cents a ton royalty to
the union’s welfare and unemployment fund, claiming this was “a
new social theory and philosophy.” The WLB itself, however,
approved such a fund for the American Federation of Musicians. The
clothing workers, both AFL and CIO, have similar provisions in their
contracts.
All non-wage demands – including coverage for most
supervisory employees, the right to strike to prevent shipments of
coal to plants where a “legal” strike is in progress, and
the right to terminate the contract on 20 days’ notice –
were rejected. Encouraged by the Roosevelt administration and the
press, the operators are displaying their typical unyielding and
highhanded attitude.
 



As Detroit shook with the mightiest auto strike wave since Pearl Harbor, the CIO United Automobile Workers’ International Executive Board hastened into a three-day special session last week at the Hotel McAlpin, New York City. The frightened and hard-pressed UAW leaders faced a crisis of major proportions.
This acute crisis resulted from events on both the national labor scene and in the industry. Roosevelt’s War Labor Board had just placed its seal of approval on the wage-freezing Little Steel Formula. Over 500,000 General Motors and Chrysler workers were denied long-sought general wage increases and were granted instead a few picayune concessions. Business Week, a leading organ of Big Business, crowed: “CIO’s United Auto Workers gains very little.”
On top of these blows came a concerted, savage campaign of corporation provocations in the plants designed to cripple the most militant UAW locals. Against this assault on their organizations, over 40,000 Detroit auto workers had gone on strike in defiance of their own national leaders and the no-strike surrender policy.
This opposition and pressure of the ranks was reflected in the first wartime division within the UAW executive board over a major policy question. That was the question of the War Labor Board, whose pro-corporation actions had exasperated the auto workers to widespread revolt.
The minority of the UAW board, which opposed the idea of withdrawing the labor members from the WLB, was led by R.J. Thomas, President,. and George. Addes, Secretary-Treasurer. The majority, which renewed a recommendation passed originally several weeks ago for withdrawal of the CIO members from the WLB, was headed by Walter Reuther, a vice-president.
 
Basic Agreement
An examination of the opposing position, however, reveals that their differences are minor compared to their essential agreement. Both groups agreed that the WLB as now constituted and functioning is a detriment to labor. Both condemned corporation provocations. Thomas declared, “Chrysler Corp. accepts unions in the same way an individual accepts smallpox.” But both proposed a continuation of some form of tripartite government compulsory arbitration board and enforcement of the no-strike policy.
Thomas, who had just returned from the London World Labor Congress more inflated than ever and more closely tied to government policy, voiced the position of the minority. In a press interview, he opined that “at first” the WLB did a “splendid job.” But then the WLB members just got “too busy to know what is going on.”
The whole trouble lay in the four “public” members. “I think all the public members of the WLB should resign to give the President an opportunity to appoint new public members who are unbiased.” Thomas gave no assurances that the new Roosevelt appointees would be more “unbiased” or less “busy” than the old.
But he opposed scuttling the WLB as such by withdrawal of the labor members – because then “there would be no means for adjusting grievances.” Thomas just closed his eyes to the method of direct and independent collective bargaining with the employers, through which all the major union gains have been secured and maintained.
Reuther and his followers had no fundamental disagreement with the Thomas-Addes group. They wished, however, to ride the crest of the auto workers’ dissatisfaction while achieving the same aims as the executive board minority. Their resolution called for resignation of the CIO members from the WLB and urged Roosevelt, who founded the WLB and dictates its policy, to replace the WLB “with a new tripartite agency, representing labor, management and Government, which shall have full authority to grant labor equity.”
 
A New WLB
However, the UAW board carefully refrained from withdrawing its own representatives front the WLB. Such an action, like the miners’ withdrawal from the National Defense Mediation Board in 1941, would have toppled the WLB. The Reutherites were interested in a verbal gesture, not effective action.
Moreover, though the mechanics of achieving it would be slightly different, Reuther’s proposed “new” compulsory arbitration board would be identical with a WLB reconstituted along the lines proposed by Thomas. It would have the same labor and corporation members. It would merely replace one set of Roosevelt’s “public” members, for another set of “unbiased” stooges.
Its “authority to grant labor equity” would not be increased – because the very purpose of such boards is to frustrate the demands of the workers. In fact, a “new” arbitration board, differing only in name from the old but free from the latter’s tarnished reputation, might be even more effective in curbing the workers and enforcing the wage-freeze.
And even while seemingly attacking the WLB, Reuther sought to cover up for his own bankrupt policy of dependence upon it. As the UAW’s GM Division Director, Reuther hailed the WLB’s GM decision, denying all major demands of the union, as representing “substantial contract gains ... lays the basis for dealing with basic economic problems.” Actually, as Business Week approvingly reported, the WLB granted only a few fifth-rate concessions – after, stalling 18 months. The only wage concession was a slight boost in the night- shift premium at a time when “third-shift operations are currently greatly reduced.”
 
Roosevelt’s Reply
On the very day the UAW heads were calling upon Roosevelt for a reconstituted war labor hoard, he gave them his contemptuous reply. He announced his appointment of WLB Vice-Chairman Taylor, author of the Little Steel Formula and main target of the CIO attack, as the new WLB Chairman to replace Davis, who was promoted for his wage-freezing services to Director of Economic Stabilization.
The real program of the UAW tops, to stifle all independent struggle of the ranks, was expressed by the executive board’s action against the leaders of the 10-day Chrysler strike. The local leaders of this struggle to defend the Detroit Chrysler union against corporation assault were “severely condemned.” They would have been expelled and a receiver-dictator appointed over the local, as happened in previous cases, except that the UAW heads did not dare take such a step in the face of the anger of the Detroit auto workers.
In themselves, the board’s decisions were deceptive and meaningless. But the fact that the gesture against the WLB was made and that a division was provoked in the Board indicates the tremendous opposition of the ranks and the wide cleavage between, them and the leadership.
The crisis within the UAW, however, cannot be resolved under the present program and leadership. That leadership is utterly cowardly and bankrupt. Only a fighting leadership. from the ranks, committed to a militant program, can beat off the corporation attacks.
One group alone today offers the program and leadership required. That is the Rank and File caucus which has led the fight for revocation of the no-strike pledge, withdrawal of labor support from the WLB, a rising scale of wages to meet rising prices, and the building of an independent labor party. With such a program labor, including the auto workers, will no longer be reduced to whining before capitalist government agents for crumbs. Only with such a program will labor march forward to new gains.
 




UAW Convention
The CIO United Automobile Workers, whose annual conventions always
make labor history, faces difficulty in holding a convention this
year because of the government ban on conventions not in the interest
of the war effort.”
George Addes, UAW-CIO Secretary-Treasurer, has filed a request
with the War Committee on Conventions for authorization of the
union’s convention next September 10 at Grand Rapids, Michigan.
His petition stated:
“Only through such a convention can there be
achieved the unity and cohesion necessary for sound planning,
discipline and the establishment of peaceful labor relations making
for continuity of production and full participation by the workers in
the war effort.”
At the 1942 and 1943 UAW conventions, however, Addes and the
other top leaders tried to push over resolutions to suspend the
annual conventions “for the duration” because they
claimed conventions “interfered with full participation by the
workers in the war effort.” The real motive, of course, was to
prevent the rank and file conventions from “interfering”
with the bureaucratic designs of the leadership.
So the UAW ranks had better be on the alert for a fast move to
block their convention – with the government carrying the ball
for the UAW leaders, who took a terrific shellacking at the last
convention when the rank-and- file delegates almost defeated the
no-strike policy.
* * *

Quislings in Labor
The March 15 Justice, organ of the AFL International Ladies
Garment Workers Union, publishes a slashing denunciation of the
Stalinist leaders of the Greater New York CIO Council for their
resolution which attacked the United Mine Workers Union in the
current UMWA contract negotiations. The Stalinists called for
government “seizure” of the mines to prevent a “strike
plot.”
Entitled Quislings In Labor, the editorial points out that
the “miners’ demands, viewed in their entirety, are quite
moderate.” It states that both the ILGWU and the CIO
Amalgamated Clothing Workers have long enjoyed contract provisions
for a “royalty” on pay polls to provide a union welfare
fund similar to what the miners are now demanding. It further
concedes that ‘“any other union under similar
circumstances, doubtless, would have performed the same gesture”
of filing a formal 30-day strike notice under the Smith-Connally Act
provisions.
It is against this background that tho Stalinists made their
anti-miners attack, described by Justice “as dastardly a
piece of sabotage as has disgraced the American labor scene within
recent memory.” Justice charges the resolution of the
Stalinists spoke “in the language even a Girdler or a Weir
would have hesitated to use” and provides “generous moral
support to the mine operators.”
“We are just wondering,” concludes the
editorial, “how Philip Murray, himself a coal miner and for
thirty years intimately linked with the woes and struggles of the
coal miners, feels about this latest quisling job perpetrated by some
of his New York associates on his own lifelong fellow-unionists.”
* * *

Avery Carries On
Roosevelt’s army “seizure” of a tiny fraction of
Montgomery Ward’s vast mercantile network didn't interfere with
the company’s profits, although the CIO unions are still
without a contract after the “seizure” broke their
strikes.
Sewell Avery, chairman of the company’s board and leading
open-shopper, announced last week that “all divisions of the
business operated profitably for the year.” He reported
$21,285,839 net profits for the year ending January 31, 1945, as
compared to $20,677,098 for the previous year.
After the army “seizure” last December 27 – an
action since ruled illegal by the Chicago Federal District Court –
“the Army by Jan. 31 had paid from its own funds $2,306,474.36
more than it had appropriated” from cash on hand and sales
according to Avery. The army had a tough time operating, due to the
refusal of the Ward officials to cooperate. But the brass hats made
sure that the company didn’t go into the “red,”
even to the extent of making up losses with government funds.
The Army however has not enforced the WLB decisions whose
rejection by the company led to the strikes and the “seizure.”
* * *

Terror at Weirton
A long string of former employees of the Weirton Steel Company,
which has successfully resisted unionization by the CIO Steelworkers
since 1936, last week testified to the ruthless physical terrorism,
intimidation and illegal firings for union membership that has
prevailed at the company’s plants.
The hearings were being held before a special master of the Third
Federal Circuit Court of Appeals in contempt proceedings against the
company filed by the National Labor Relations Board. The NLRB charges
the company with refusal to abide by the board’s orders not to
interfere with the union, and specifically accuses Weirton with
maintaining a company union in violation of a federal court order of
1943.
Actually, the case goes back to 1936! Through slick legal
maneuvering, delaying tactics and the assistance of hair-splitting
judges, the company stalled off a decision for seven years until
October 1943. The company then filed a lengthy and complicated “bill
of exceptions.” The present hearings were petitioned last
August.
By these means, it will be possible for the company to string the
case out for another seven years. This is a further illustration of
the futility of the workers relying on the capitalist courts for
justice. The workers have only one reliable weapon – their own
independent organized strength in action.
 

Shipyard Layoffs
Henry J. Kaiser, shipyard tycoon who is proclaimed an industrial
“genius” for his capacity to get tremendous government
handouts, recently admitted to a press conference that the
government’s shipbuilding program may wind up within a year.
Over a million shipyard workers face mass unemployment.
Since November 1943, when private shipyard employment hit a
peak of 1,293,000, the number of shipyard workers has declined to
1,035,000 in January 1945. The rate of decline has increased since
the first of the year with a steady decrease in production schedules.
 



Two weeks ago before the Senate hearings on the price control
act lobbyists of the Meat Trust threatened to impose a “meat
famine” upon the country unless OPA “inconsistencies,”
meaning price ceilings, were promptly removed. They issued this
ultimatum even though the packers have boosted their profits almost
eight times during the war and their spokesmen admitted that the
country has the raw beef.
Last week the Roosevelt administration promptly yielded to the
profit-greedy meat barons’ brazen threat of enforced scarcity.
OPA Director Chester Bowles announced to the Senate Banking and
Currency Committee that the government is granting an additional
subsidy of 50¢ a hundred pounds to the cattle slaughterers. He
further revealed that previously the government had quietly granted a
subsidy of 75 cents a hundredweight on hogs.
 
Roosevelt’s Pretext
At the same time, Roosevelt himself provided a cover for the
existing scarcity, in part deliberately created by the food
profiteers to force up prices. He declared that the American people
must “tighten their belts” because, he falsely claimed,
the “humanitarian” capitalist government intends to
“feed” starving Europe. Actually, during 1944, only 6.8
percent of all the nation’s meat, and but seven-tenths of one
percent of the beef, was shipped in Lend-Lease to all the “United
Nations,” according, to official government figures.
The government’s generous treatment of the meat profiteers,
who openly admitted that 90 percent of the civilian meat supplies
have been diverted into black market channels, is in striking
contrast to the Roosevelt administration’s ferocity against
workers forced to strike for a few cents more wages to meet the
insatiable demands of the price-gougers.
Instead of throwing the criminal meat profiteers into prison
for withholding supplies and diverting a major food necessity into
the black market to force up prices, the government gives them
another fat subsidy out of the public treasury.
Instead of answering the meat profiteers’ vicious meat
“famine” threats – already half fulfilled –
with government seizure of all meat supplies and meat packing
facilities, Roosevelt actually conceals their role in the meat
shortages. Moreover he appeals to the people to accept them without
protest and offers a hypocritical justification for the greater
profiteer-created food scarcity to come.
But these latest government concessions to the meat packers has
not quieted their clamor. On the contrary, they returned to the
attack on price ceilings last week with redoubled fury before the
Senate price control hearings.
 
Huge Profits
The Senate committeemen wagged their heads in open sympathy and
interjected expressions of approval as the meat trust lobbyists
sniffed scornfully at the flush subsidies handed them by the
government. They lamented about how price ceilings are “bankrupting”
them and demanded nothing less than removal of all price control bars
to their “fair” profits.
Here is what these parasites, who thrive on the desperate needs
of the people, mean by “fair profits.” Between 1940 and
1944 the eight largest meat packing firms secured total net profits
equalling 80 percent of their total capital investments!
Bold as brass, the chief spokesman for the National Independent
Meat Packers’ Association confessed to the Senate committee
that “many honest” meat packers “felt the OPA
regulations were unjust and unlawful and concluded that they would
not be bankrupted by unlawful regulations.”
The worthy Senators listened to this confession of wholesale
law-breaking by rich businessmen without blinking an eye. Not a peep
was uttered in protest, much less a call for investigation and
punishment of the offenders.
 
Hide Records
Further, the meat packers’ representative renewed the threat
of a meat famine unless the meat packers had their way on price
ceilings. “We believe the policy of OPA in maintaining present
maximum price ceilings is one of the main causes of maldistribution
of meat,” he said. In short, the meat shortage will be remedied
just as soon as the government permits the food profiteers
unrestricted prices!
One of the most astounding facts presented to the hearings by
the OPA was that, despite the “bankruptcy” wails of the
meat packers, they have persistently refused to let OPA examine their
detailed financial records.
Deputy OPA administrator Brownlee disclosed that OPA officials
attempted “for several years” to gain access to the
packers’ books, but were refused. The meat packers’
spokesman answered that the OPA wanted figures “as far back as
1943” but “some companies have felt that they should not
be called on to supply historical figures.” The government, of
course, goes back to the “historical” figures of January
1941 living costs to impose the wage-freezing Little Steel Formula.
The farce of these hearings equalled anything ever seen in the
Senate. Instead of cross examining the meat packing lobbyists, the
Senators submitted OPA head Bowles to a three-hour grilling intended
to bring out an admission that the OPA was “interfering”
with “legitimate” profits.
 
Heckled by Senators
Bowles, for his part, protested that the OPA wasn’t
interested in how much profits were made and cited reams of facts and
figures to show how much richer the profiteers have become precisely
during the period of price “controls.”
The Senators took delight in heckling Bowles all over the lot.
Only once did Senator Wagner, of New York, touted as the “consumers’
representative,” plaintively interject, “we’ve got
to think of the consumers, too.” After this brave sally, he was
silent.
The Senate committee ended the hearings and retired to secret
session. There they are expected to mourn the sad plight of the
profit-gorged meat packers and figure out some new ways to help them
reach deeper into the wage- earners’ pockets.
 



History will record that the true heroes and heroines of our time
are not the rich, the mighty, the “successful,” but those
now obscure working-class fighters for socialism who lived out their
lives in poverty, suffering and unyielding struggle for a better
world, it will be the Helen Judds whom the free emancipated society
of the future will remember with love and honor.
Many who are new and young in the revolutionary: Marxist movement
did not know Helen Judd, the 71-year old pioneer American Trotskyist,
who died in Chicago on February 17. Many who met her for the first
time during the past few years may recall only an elderly woman in a
loose house-dress, a wisp of graying hair hanging down over her
forehead, who greeted almost everyone entering the Chicago
headquarters of the Socialist Workers Party and who was always busy
at some party chore.
This grandmotherly woman, so warm in her welcome to all comrades
and workers seeking enlightenment, so eager and busy at her “little”
tasks, was one of the most heroic and noble figures of the American
working class. Her accomplishments? Her whole life was an
accomplishment, for from early youth to her last breath it was spent
in the struggle to build the proletarian party, the party of
scientific socialism, the party which alone can lead the exploited
and oppressed to the lasting peace, security and freedom of
international socialism. For over half a century, in the face of
persecution, social pressure, personal tragedy, physical suffering,
she devoted all her strength, will and energy to the battle which to
her was all of life itself.
Helen was the daughter of a prominent St. Paul family. Her father
– a fact she never mentioned – had once been mayor of
that city. She had been well- educated and trained for the teaching
profession. An old photograph of her in her youth reveals a face of
extraordinary beauty and character. In the normal course of events
for a girl of her time and background, she might have lived in
comfort, reared a family, died as a “respected” matron of
her community.
 
50 Years of Struggle
But Helen chose a different road. Early in her youth, she turned
her back upon “respectable” society. She entered the
young socialist movement of the 1890’s, joined the working
class and its struggles, and never once during over 50 years of toil
and travail did she ever look back.
All the great events and figures of the developing American labor
and socialist movement before World War I were a part of her life.
All the defeats and victories and tragedies burned in her heart. The
bloody strikes and the great martyrs, they were all a part of her.
The Ludlow massacre, Coeur D’Alene, Lawrence – these were
her struggles and she aided them. When the copper bosses shot Joe
Hill and the prison doors closed behind Gene Debs, she was among
those who fought unremittingly against these murders and frame-ups.
Almost from the first, Helen allied herself with the left-wing of
the Socialist movement. She studied Marxism – the great works
of Marx and Engels and all the socialist classics. She was no mere
sentimental socialist. Her devotion was to the revolutionary party
and its program, to the disciplined, organized, conscious expression
of the working-class vanguard in action. Against any and every
revision of Marxism, she fought all her life.
During the first imperialist World War, Helen was among the Debs
socialists who actively opposed the war. For this “crime”
she was ousted from her teaching position in the public schools. And
in the infamous Palmer “Red” Raids that followed the war,
she was indicted for her revolutionary activities and held under
$10,000 bail.
 
Pioneer Communist
In 1919, with the left-wing split of the Socialist Party inspired
by the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, Helen became a founding member
of the new and persecuted Communist Party. She had been the secretary
of the North Side English branch of the Socialist Party, one of the
largest sections in Chicago. Against the opposition of some of the
most powerful leaders of the SP, she helped to swing her branch into
the new revolutionary party founded on the principles of Lenin and
Trotsky.
During the next two years when the government was hounding the
underground communist movement, Helen served as secretary of Chicago
Local of the National Defense Committee. Through the twenties she
occupied numerous important local posts of the party and devoted
herself to indefatigable work on its behalf. In 1928, she was the
secretary of Nucleus 81, one of the largest and most active in
Chicago, and a member of the District Control Commission.
Then came the campaign against “Trotskyism.” True to
her lifelong struggle against falsified Marxism and revisionism,
Helen was among the first courageous few who opposed Stalinist
degeneration in the party. On November 24, 1928, as recorded in the
second issue of The Militant, December 1, 1928, she was
expelled for “Trotskyism.”
For the next 16 years, Helen threw herself into the struggle for
the revival of genuine Marxism and the building of the Trotskyist
party. Twice her hopes had been frustrated. But she faced the new
tasks with optimism and unbounded courage and loyalty. She gave
everything to the party – her small teaching salary, her time,
her energy. No task was too humble for her to do. With the tiny group
that made up the first Trotskyist branch in Chicago, she went out on
the streets with leaflets and papers, dodged police persecution,
confronted Stalinist hooliganism.
 
Helen’s Latter Years
Those were the hard years. To hold the little Trotskyist group
together in a period of rising reaction and tremendous slander was a
terrible ordeal. The little group had to fight physically for mere
survival. At one early meeting – Helen was in her middle
fifties – she helped to beat off a Stalinist assault in which
at least one invader suffered a serious headache from a large, heavy
platter that split in Helen’s hands.
Six years ago, Helen was retired from her teaching job with a
small pension. It was the realization of her life’s dream –
to be able to devote all her time to the party. Never will the
Chicago comrades forget her in those last years, when, old, sick and
tired, she worked without letup for the party.
Every day she did her tasks, quietly, unassumingly, efficiently.
She would come in with her shopping bag full – and there was
always some little addition for the headquarters, some office
supplies that no one but she remembered to get, a prized book from
the library of socialism that she had read, new pamphlets for the
literature shelf, or just some candy or fruit for the comrades. She
swept, she dusted, she cleaned the woodwork. Few comrades may have
noticed – but the headquarters were kept clean. And in cold or
rain, she trudged out with her shopping bag full of Militants
– to the day of her death. As she would be leaving after a hard
day, she would cast one last look around as though she hated to go,
even for a minute. Perhaps she saw a bundle of literature that some
other, younger comrade had failed to distribute. Into her bag it
would go. “Well, I know just the place to leave these on my way
home.”
 
True to the End
Hardly a one is left of those who entered the socialist movement
when Helen did. Many other women were flaming and prominent figures
in their day. Most of them fell by the wayside in the course of the
bitter struggle, retired to easier existence, succumbed to
opportunism, yielded to pressure of their families (Helen was
estranged from her own). But Helen stayed straight and true to her
course to the end. She was the epitome of the most heroic people of
our time, the enduring, women proletarian revolutionists.
It was the Helen Judds who marched in the forefront of the
Parisian masses storming the Bastille of 1789, who defied the
grapeshot on the barricades of the Commune of 1871, who opened the
revolutionary struggle leading to the Russian October of 1917. It is
the Helen Judds, armed with the weapon of Marxism, who in their
thousands and millions will snatch the very lightning from the
heavens, before whom the mighty will tremble and fall, whose hands
will build the socialist future.
 




Textile Strike Poll
Without one dissenting vote some 50,000 New England cotton-rayon
textile workers last week in a poll conducted by the CIO Textile
Workers Union empowered the TWU officers to demand an NLRB strike
vote under the Smith-Connally anti-strike law provisions.
In Fall River, Mass., 3,500 union members went even further. They
empowered the TWU leaders to call a strike without going through the
formality of a government-supervised election and an additional
30-day stalling period.
The TWU executive board several weeks ago revoked the no-strike
pledge for 100,000 cotton- rayon workers. They acted after a
long-delayed WLB decision granting “fringe” increases and
raising the minimum wage from 50 cents to 55 cents an hour was
blocked by Roosevelt’s former Economic Stabilization Director
Vinson. TWU President Emil Rieve at the same time resigned from the
WLB.
An editorial on The No-Strike Pledge in the March Textile
Labor, official organ of the TWU-CIO, explains why the union
scrapped the pledge. After describing the
administration-manufacturers conspiracy to deprive the exploited
textile workers of their just demands, the editorial says:
“While all this was going on, no attempt was made
to ‘stabilize’ cotton manufacturers’ profits, which
were continuing at the rate of $365,000,000 a year, five times
pre-war figures ... But there are other considerations back of the
action ... Nearly 100,000 TWUA members are now in the armed forces.
Are they to come back to $24 a week wages? Are they fighting for
another chance to be ill-fed, ill-clothed, ill-housed? If we do not
fight their home-front battles for them, if we capitulate to
reaction, what else can they come home to?”
* * *

UAW Dues Decline
Dues-paying membership in the CIO United Automobile, Aircraft and
Agricultural Implement Workers, largest union in the country,
declined by 113,741 during the period between May and November 1944
according to the latest report of UAW Secretary-Treasurer George
Addes.
The monthly average of dues-paying members during the reported
period was 1,008,159. Over half the membership is in Michigan, with
528,429 members, 345,127 of them concentrated in Detroit.
A primary reason for the sharp membership decline – over 10
per cent within six months – is unemployment due to cut-backs
and layoffs, despite the Roosevelt administration’s claims of a
“labor shortage” to bolster its demand for a forced labor
bill.
Unemployment compensation claims since December 1, 1944 in
Michigan have been averaging between 18,000 and 20,000 weekly.
* * *

Hush-Hush in Auto
Every newspaper from coast to coast headlined the great strike
wave the past few weeks in Detroit. During a period of three weeks
some 60,000 auto workers, the greatest number since Pearl Harbor, hit
the picket lines to defend their unions against the union-busting
provocations of the corporations.
A microscopic examination of the United Automobile Worker,
official organ of the UAW-CIO, for the past two issues, March 1 and
15, reveals not a word about this tremendous development of such
importance and interest not only to the auto workers but to the whole
labor movement. There is not even a line in protest against the open,
savage, concerted campaign of the corporations to break the unions by
wholesale firing of local union officers, committeemen and shop
stewards.
During the recently concluded UAW referendum on the no-strike
pledge, the UAW top officials did not hesitate to use the union’s
paper, in violation of a convention mandate, to plug for the nostrike
pledge by printing whole pages of CIO President Philip Murray’s
anti-strike speeches under the heading of “news.”
But when the auto rank and file themselves make real news by
militant defense of their unions, the UAW leaders stupidly try to
play ostrich. They soft-peddle the struggle and bureaucratically
deprive the membership of the aid of their own paper.
* * *

AFL Asks 11% Boost
The AFL, through its members on the War Labor Board, answered the
WLB’s endorsement of the wage-freezing Little Steel Formula by
petitioning Roosevelt with a demand for a general immediate 11 per
cent wage increase.
This petition refutes the lying “statistics” of the
WLB “public” members about wages rising “faster”
than the cost of living.
“Since the war wage rates have increased by 19 per
cent,” the AFL representatives pointed out, “while the
cost of living has increased – based upon official figures –
by 30 per cent. To correct the maladjustment between wages and the
cost of living – when measured by the same standard that was
used when the Little Steel Formula was adopted – an adjustment
of approximately 11 per cent is justified.”
The only thing wrong with the AFL’s demand is that it gives
away too much to the government and employers. The government’s
cost-of-living figures are as phony as a nine-dollar hill. The cost
of living has gone up nearer to 50 per cent than 30. On this real
basis, labor is justified in demanding not an 11 per cent but a 30
per cent wage boost.
* * *

Philadelphia Aftermath
Twenty-seven company-union members and leaders of the Philadelphia
transit walkout last August against the upgrading of Negro workers
took the rap in federal court last week for the company-inspired
action. They were each fined $100 under the Smith-Connally Act after
reversing their not guilty pleas to no defense.
Among the questions the court failed to answer were these. Why was
the Jim-Crow stoppage organized on company property and strike
meetings freely held there? What company officials advised the
workers to initiate the walkout by getting “sick” in a
body in order to prevent the use of Negro workers as motormen and
conductors? Why was the walkout organized by leaders of the PRT
(Philadelphia Rapid Transit) Employees Union, the old company union,
just after it had been defeated by the CIO for collective bargaining
representative? Why did the company say not a word against the
walkout – aiding it by cutting off the subway power?
One defense attorney bluntly declared:
“The race question was dragged in by officials
of PTC (Philadelphia Transportation Co.). They were out to smash the
bridgehead that organized labor has finally succeeded in holding in
PTC.”
A hand-picked grand jury which brought down the original
indictments against the misled workers who were made the scapegoats
of this affair simply covered up for the company and turned the
proceedings into an attack on the CIO and a defense of company
unionism.
 



The militant auto workers have run up a smashing 35 per cent vote
for scrapping the No-Strike Pledge in the CIO United Automobile,
Aircraft and Agricultural Implement workers referendum held during
January and February, according to the first unofficial returns
announced by Ben Garrison, referendum committee chairman.
Approximately 300,000 votes were sent in by mail, according to
Garrison, out of 1,200,000 ballots distributed. Over 105,000 were for
rescinding the pledge, while 185,000 voted for it, and some 6,000
ballots were voided.
Neither the corporation daily press nor the top CIO and UAW
officials take the formal majority for the pledge as a victory for
the no-strike policy. On the contrary they correctly view the
tremendous minority vote rolled up for scrapping the pledge as the
true indication of the trend of the ranks.
As Business Week, a leading mouthpiece for the
corporations, commented, the UAW leaders are “embarrassed in
making the results public. The vote was counted while more men were
on strike in Detroit’s auto plants than at any time since the
war began.”
The vote for smashing the nostrike pledge is particularly
impressive because it was cast in the face of an unprecedented
campaign of pressure and intimidation by a united front of the
corporations and their press, the Roosevelt administration, the
Murray-Hillman machine of the CIO, the entire top UAW leadership and
the Stalinists.
 
Unholy Alliance
All the reactionary forces inside and outside the UAW combined in
an unholy alliance against the auto ranks. The daily press and radio
poured out an endless stream of lies and threats. Roosevelt
intervened personally with a letter to UAW President R.J. Thomas.
Murray issued a special anti-strike edition of the CIO News
addressed to the auto workers.
The International Executive Board and top officers of the UAW
unitedly appealed to the membership to retain the pledge. They
mobilized their large machine of paid functionaries throughout the
union on behalf of the pledge. The Stalinists milked the treasuries
of the unions under their control and poured huge sums into the
reactionary drive.
In addition, there were serious irregularities in the conduct of
the referendum. Reports are coming in of large numbers of auto
members who received no ballots. Non-members, including corporation
officials, as in Lansing, Michigan, were the recipients of ballots.
The militant Rank and File Caucus, initiated only six months
before the referendum began, did not have sufficient time,
organization or resources to reach a large section of the members.
Nevertheless, in the face of tremendous obstacles, it mobilized a
powerful minority vote against the pledge.
Events in the past month since the completion of the referendum
confirm the real significance of the vote to rescind. The UAW
executive board has been compelled to call for withdrawing the CIO
members from the WLB. The corporations have launched a savage
offensive against the unions. Over 60,000 auto workers have hit the
picket lines in Detroit in the past five weeks.
These events fallowing the referendum vote indicate the
fighting mood of the ranks. They disclose the substantial base that
exists for a powerful caucus that will lead a showdown fight for a
militant program and a new, aggressive leadership. The task ahead for
the Rank and File Caucus is to make serious, organized preparations
to extend and strengthen its forces in the ranks for the coming
inevitable battle to reestablish the UAW-CIO as the vanguard union in
the American labor struggle.
 




U.S. Steel Contract
A “model” agreement containing no major improvements
over previous contracts, and, of course, none of the basic wage
demands of the steelworkers, was finally signed last week between the
CIO Steelworkers Union and the United States Steel Corporation,
leading steel trust. Five U.S. Steel subsidiaries signed the contract
which is expected to be the pattern for the rest of the industry.
The contract includes the so-called “fringe” demands
granted by the WLB at the time it turned down all the major demands
of the union after stalling the steel wage case for over a year. This
includes a four to six cents an hour premium for the two night
shifts, one week’s vacation with pay for service up to 5 years,
and some dismissal or severance pay. None of these concessions,
however, are up to the Standards customarily maintained in the best
organized industries.
The big “selling” point of the contract for the union
leaders is a clause providing for a permanent three-man arbitration
board with power to make binding decisions in disputes arising over
application of the contract. This board, the usual “impartial”
body selected by agreement of company and union officials, is hailed
by the union officials as “a momentous advance in management-
union relations.” It is actually nothing more than an
additional means for stalling the workers’ demands and keeping
them from taking independent action to enforce the contract. The
previous contract provided for such a board only on a temporary basis
from case to case.
CIO Steelworkers President Philip Murray crowed about a “great
victory” when the WLB turned down the union’s basic
demands. The tightening of compulsory arbitration is now hailed as a
“great advance.” A few more such “great victories”
and “great advances” and the steel workers will find
themselves completely at the mercy of the corporations and back to
their previous low level of living conditions.
* * *

Army and Ward ‘Seizure’
Army officials in charge of operating units of Montgomery Ward
“seized” by the government to halt strikes provoked by
WLB delay in enforcing its orders against the company, last week
relinquished control over the two main units, the warehouse and
mail-order house in Chicago. These are the central purchasing and
distributing agencies for Ward’s 650 outlets, including the 13
now under Army control.
By a fancy method of bookkeeping, the government was debited with
purchases of merchandise to stock the “seized” retail
outlets while all sales receipts were turned over to the company.
This meant that the government was constantly going “into the
red” – everything going out, nothing coming in.
Naturally, the government, which is loathe to infringe upon
“private property rights,” has found it almost impossible
to operate the tiny segment of Ward’s under its control while
the vast structure of the company remains in the control of Sewell
Avery.
The recent federal district court decision declaring the “seizure”
illegal gave the Army officials sufficient pretext for gradually
withdrawing from their uncomfortable position of having to enforce
WLB orders against an open-shop employer whose antilabor views
generally coincide with their own. Thus, Sewell Avery is still
successfully refusing to obey the WLB rulings after years of
defiance.
* * *

Auto Barons Assail UAW
Charges of deliberate company provocations leading to numerous
strikes in the auto industry made by CIO United Automobile Workers
Secretary-Treasurer George Addes in a statement before the Senate War
Investigating Committee have brought a counter-attack from the
automotive barons.
Trying to cover up for the companies which have been emboldened to
ever greater anti-union acts by the continuance of the no-strike
policy, George Romney, managing .director of the Automotive Council
for War Production, last week howled that the strikes are part of a
scheme to “usurp management’s functions and
responsibilities.”
“While Mr. Addes and other leaders feign a pious public
attitude and pretend they do not want to control production, their
union representatives in the plants are trying to muscle in on
management for the greater aggrandizement of labor monopoly,”
proclaimed Mr. Romney.
This is not a new argument. The auto corporations fought unionism
in the industry from its earliest beginning by claiming that the
unions intend to infringe on their “god-given”
prerogatives to control production and boot the workers around any
way they see fit. So far as the bosses are concerned, any attempt of
the workers to have something to say about their conditions of work
is “usurpation” of the “rights of management.”
Besides, what’s wrong with the idea of the organized workers
assuming the whole function of capitalist management? The capitalists
are only profiteering parasites and a brake upon production’.
Guaranteed job security and uninterrupted production will be achieved
only when the automotive and other basic industries are taken over by
the government and operated under workers’ control.
* * *

CIO Newspaper Guild and Bridges
When Milton Murray, President of the CIO Newspaper Guild and
reporter for the New York daily PM, exposed the Stalinist “traitors’
lobby” in, the CIO which secretly approached Congressmen urging
them to vote for the May-Bailey slave labor bill, he did a service to
the labor movement.
But he makes a mistake when he. permits his justified and
understandable contempt for the Stalinist traitors to influence his
position on the question of the government’s attempt to deport
Harry Bridges, Stalinist leader of the CIO Longshoremen’s
Union. Last week Murray and the Guild executive board turned down a
resolution of protest against the Bridges deportation proceedings on
the grounds that Bridges is a “misleader of labor” and a
“quisling in our ranks.”
Everything the Newspaper Guild says about Bridges as a treacherous
union leader is true. But neither the government nor the employers
are attacking him for that reason. In fact, they praise his pi»sent
policies. They instituted proceedings against Bridges because he is a
union leader who is a non-citizen and once held radical views. His
deportation could then be used as a precedent to harass and victimize
other militant union leaders.
The job of eliminating elements like Bridges from the labor
movement cannot be handed over to the capitalist government, whose
motives are entirely anti-labor. That job belongs solely to the
organized workers themselves, who need to rid the unions of the
Stalinist blight in order to strengthen and protect their
organizations against such employer and government attacks.
 




Murray “Fights” Back
CIO President Philip “Bleeding Heart” Murray greeted
the WLB’s approval of the Little Steel Formula with his typical
blustering display of verbal indignation.
Murray, who has been beating his gums for a couple of years about
the “inequity of the Little Steel Formula” While doing
all in his power to curb any independent action of the CIO workers to
smash the formula, declaimed that “the situation in which labor
now finds itself is simply intolerable.”
In his very next sentence, however he proposes to continue the
very union policy that has brought labor to this “intolerable
situation.” He declares: “Now, more than ever, it is of
the utmost importance to our war effort that there be maintained
uninterrupted production. The CIO and its members are fully conscious
of this need and therefore shall observe their no-strike pledge.”
Murray believes in the policy of “turning the other
cheek” – only it’s the workers who always get
slapped. But not forever and not for long. The CIO members are
becoming “fully conscious” of the need, not to “observe
the no-strike pledge,” but to scrap it. That’s the
significance of the Textile Union’s revocation of the no-strike
pledge for 100,000 cotton-rayon workers and the growing strike wave
in Detroit.
Incidentally, it is appropriate to recall how Murray helped disarm
the workers about the WLB and its position on the Little Steel
Formula. In his appeal for continuation of the no-strike pledge
before the rebellious delegates at the CIO. United Automobile Workers
convention last September, Murray asserted “I am just as sure
as I am living that the Little Steel Formula is going to be revised.
I don’t think I would be far from correct.”
At that time Murray demanded support for the no-strike policy
because he claimed the Little Steel Formula was sure to be revised.
Now he insists on the same policy because the formula hasn’t
been revised. The one thing Murray is sure of is that no matter how
the workers are kicked around, they must not fight back with their
most effective weapon, the strike.
* * *

Telephone Pay
Reversing the recommendation of a $5 a week increase made by its
own special panel, the WLB in Washington last week granted increases
of only $3 to the local and long distance telephone operators in New
York City who overwhelmingly voted to strike in January but postponed
a final strike vote under the Smith-Connally act pending a ruling of
the national WLB. Washington, D.C. operators who participated in the
Thanksgiving week strike along with Ohio and Michigan workers were
awarded a $4 increase. Louisville and Memphis operators were granted
$3.
The New York operators were induced to call off their strike in
January, when the American Telephone and Telegraph and New York
Telephone companies hastily made an offer to pay $4 a week more. This
was $1 less than the Federation of Long Lines Telephone Workers and
the Traffic Employees Association (local operators) were demanding.
The unions continued to press for their original demands before the
WLB.
Union representatives have declared they are going to petition the
WLB for a reconsideration of the case in an effort to secure the $4
raise the companies agreed to pay. If the petition is rejected
another strike vote will very likely be taken. The telephone workers
are particularly indignant because the WLB made its decision without
giving the unions a public hearing.
WLB Vice-Chairman Taylor conceded that a “mistake may have
been made” by the failure to hold such a hearing. However, it
is always the corporations and never the workers who benefit by such
“mistakes.”
* * *

Unionism Grows
During the past year, according to the annual National Labor
Relations Board report, 1,072,694 unorganized workers voted in NLRB
elections for union collective bargaining representation. This brings
the nine year total to 5,220,983.
The number voting last year was the greatest in the NLRB’s
history, and the number of elections held registered “an
increase of 3,000 per cent over the number received in the first year
of the board’s operations.”
Despite all the anti-labor propaganda, the workers in the past
year voted union in greater numbers than ever before.
* * *

55-Cent Minimum IF —
After issuing its decision “recommending” a 55-cent an
hour minimum wage in the textile case, the War Labor Board last week
granted its regional agencies authority to approve a minimum wage up
to 55 cents for all “substandard” wage earners,
admittedly numbering over 4,000,000.
However, WLB Chairman Davis hastened to assure a press
Conference that “this action by the board does not mean,
unfortunately, that 4,000,000 workers are going to get a 55-cent wage
tomorrow.” All it does is merely “open the way for the
workers to get that amount.” In short, they’ll get it if
they raise enough hell!
The ruling has the usual loopholes enabling the administration to
deny in practice what it grants in principle. The workers can secure
a 55-cent minimum IF —

the employers agree to it and request it;
no price increase is involved;
an increase to the new minimum does not conflict with the
“appropriate prevailing rates” in given areas and
communities.

The administration’s intent in making this new ruling is far
from benevolent. Its purpose is to take the curse off the WLB’s
prior “recommendation” upholding continuation of the
wage-freezing Little Steel Formula. In addition, the administration
is seeking to head off growing union pressure for passage of the
Pepper resolution which would fix the minimum hourly wage at 65
cents. The labor members of the WLB had proposed a 72-cent minimum,
basing their demand upon the government’s own figures for a
minimum health and decency income required by the average worker’s
family.
Even when the pro-corporation WLB does make a seeming
concession to the workers, it is so full of “if, ands, and
buts” that the workers can generally expect to get “nothin’
for nothin’ and damn little of that.”
 



The miners in World War II faced a powerful combination that included the owners, union bureaucrats, leaders of the Communist Party, the government. Yet they managed to win
THIS national strike of the soft-coal miners [May 1-4, 1943] was not only the largest coal strike this country had seen up to the time. It was the largest single strike of any kind the land had ever known. It was carried out with a dispatch, discipline and single-minded determination that had never been surpassed in the American labor movement.
The big business press did surpass itself in the volume of vituperation, slanders and threats hurled at the miners and Lewis. Lewis was linked with Hitler in newsreels, on the radio, in countless newspaper cartoons. Union leaders who could not reach up to the top of Lewis’s shoes joined the chorus of anti-labor forces who were screaming for nothing less than the destruction of the miners’ union under guise of aiding the war for “democracy.” UAW President R.J. Thomas said the miners’ walkout was “a political strike against the President.”
Roosevelt himself on May 1 ordered government “seizure” of the struck coal mines and their operation under Solid Fuels Administrator Harold L. Ickes. Ickes “seized” the mines by promptly ordering the American flag to be flown over all mine properties and directing all mine owners and managers to run the mines as government agents in the name of the government – all profits to continue as usual. Ickes then declared the miners were working “for the Government” and ordered them back to work.
The miners didn’t budge. They waited for the decision of the union. On Sunday night, May 2, Roosevelt was scheduled for a nationwide radio address to the miners. Just before the President’s broadcast, Lewis called a press conference and announced that starting Tuesday morning, May 4, another fifteen-day truce would be observed to give the government time to show whether it would make a just settlement with the miners. Right after the radio networks had flashed this news, Roosevelt, speaking in a savage tone, attacked Lewis and the miners, claiming that the strike involved “a gamble with the lives of American soldiers and sailors ...” This was a baseless accusation. At no time during that strike and the three subsequent ones was there less than a full month’s supply of coal aboveground, as the US Bureau of Mines records show.
This writer was an eyewitness to the response of the miners after Roosevelt’s diatribe, I toured the Western Pennsylvania mining area near Pittsburgh and wrote on May 3 for the May 8 Militant:
“The hope of the mine operators and every other boss in the country that President Roosevelt’s speech last night would send the coal miners scurrying back to the pits this morning in a demoralized rout has been completely smashed.
“Sticking by their guns in a magnificent display of union discipline and solidarity, and in the face of an unparalleled barrage of government threat and intimidation, the miners throughout this key soft coal area today held hundreds of local meetings and in an organized, deliberate fashion voted to return to work tomorrow pending the outcome of the 15-day mine truce announced by United Mine Workers President John L. Lewis.”
It must be noted that the Militant’s was the only significant press voice, in or out of the labor movement, that spoke unconditionally in defense of the mine strike.
The wartime miners’ strikes became the touchstone by which to judge the real loyalty of every union leader and working-class group toward the American workers. It revealed great masses of CIO workers in strong sympathy with the coal miners. But the whole top layer of the CIO bureaucracy opposed the miners in fear lest a UMW victory might force them to take more vigorous action against the wage freeze, in defense of their members, and thereby come in conflict with Roosevelt.
In Detroit on May 2, the day of Roosevelt’s radio call to the miners, a thousand delegates representing 350,000 members of the United Auto Workers in Michigan overrode their national officers and adopted by overwhelming vote a resolution to support not only the UMW’s demands but the miners’ strike. The UAW national leaders, including President Thomas and Vice-President Walter Reuther, introduced and backed a minority resolution opposing the strike. Thomas, Reuther and the Stalinist delegates spoke against Lewis and the strike. But the delegates would not be swayed. Only a half dozen or so, recognized Stalinists, openly voted against the majority resolution to back the coal strike.
An East Coast UAW conference of some 1,000 delegates, meeting in New York City on May 6, adopted a resolution which declared that “the fight against John L. Lewis is not the issue in this case” and that “it is evident that the miners’ fight, involving as it does the struggle against lowering the living standards, is actually the fight of every working man and woman in America ...”
An outpouring of similar resolutions from hundreds of local CIO unions in auto, rubber, steel, etc., and of thousands of individual messages of encouragement from CIO members revealed the true sentiments of the industrial workers toward the miners’ battle.
The government-employer “blitz” against the miners was designed to arouse a veritable lynch spirit against the UMW leaders, Lewis especially. Here is a sample from the May 10 Time magazine:
“In Orlando, Fla., an Army flying ace with 13 Jap planes to his credit, Col. Robert L. Scott, former aide to Major General Claire L. Chennault in China, boiled over in anger: ‘I know I could do one service – this service would be the destruction with six fifty-caliber machine guns on an American fighter plane of John L. Lewis ...’”
These bloodthirsty threats, purporting to represent the views of the men in the armed forces, were directed not only at Lewis. The press prominently featured such morsels as: “I’d just as soon shoot one of those strikers as Japs.”
Buried under this landslide of violent threats and abuse was the fact that the miners every year, in peacetime and war, suffered a higher rate of casualties in proportion to their number than the US armed forces during World War II. Every day, every hour, every second down in the pits the miners faced the cruelest forms of death and injury as a matter of course, as part of the routine of their livelihood. If Roosevelt had been so anxious about the effect of the mine strike on the war, if the war had been his overriding consideration, then he would have granted the miners their meager and just demands. The operators had already been granted a price increase more than covering any possible added cost of wage increases sought. The truth is that Roosevelt was using the war as a pretext for a campaign to crush both Lewis and the miners’ union.
This union-busting campaign whose success could have opened the way for a savage offensive against the whole labor movement and particularly the industrial unions received encouragement from those who should have been resisting the attack most fiercely – the top leaders of the CIO. During the week of May 15, the CIO Executive Board met in Cleveland and found no more important matters to take up than denunciation of Lewis and the mine strike. Ex-miner Philip Murray, CIO President, claimed the strike was nothing but part of Lewis’s “political vendetta” against “our Commander-in-Chief.”
 
IT WAS during the first of the series of wartime coal-mine strikes that the Communist (Stalinist) party revealed to what depths of treachery to the working class it could really sink in order to demonstrate to the US capitalists how useful the CP could be to them if American capitalism would make some kind of permanent deal with the Kremlin.
When the American Stalinists shifted from their brief Stalin-Hitler pact period of isolationist and pacifist opposition to the war, they swung all the way over to the extreme right of the labor movement. They opposed even the most elementary and feeble defense of labor and Negro rights as “aid to Hitler.”
They became so flagrant in their betrayal of the workers that not even the most conservative, hidebound, pro-war union leaders dared to go along with them – at least, not openly. An Extraordinary Conference of the top CIO leaders in Washington in March 1942 featured a clash between Murray and the Stalinists. The left-liberal New York daily PM reported on March 25, 1942:
“Murray and CIO left-wingers [Stalinists] clashed briefly for the first time since the Nazi-Soviet war began. The dispute arose over a speech by Harry Bridges, West Coast longshore leader, who charged, it is understood, that the CIO has not fashioned an adequate war program.
“Bridges is said to have deprecated agitation over current anti-labor legislation and labor’s economic status, demanding greater emphasis on production.”
Bridges had spelled out precisely what he meant by “an adequate war program” for the CIO in a speech he gave, shortly before the Washington conference, to the San Francisco CIO Council (subsequently published in Labor Herald, organ of the California CIO). Bridges said:
“If we place stress on hours and wages so that we interfere with the fighting we’re slackers and selling out our unions and our country ...
“The majority of the time of officers, of grievance committeemen, of the unions as a whole must go to winning the war. How? Production. I’d rather say speed-up, and I mean speed-up. The term production covers the boss, the government and so on. But speed-up covers the workers – the people who suffer from speed-up are the workers.
“To put it bluntly, I mean your unions today must become instruments of speed-up of the working people of America.”
At the time Bridges was declaring that “I mean speed-up,” the Stalinist-controlled leadership of the CIO United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers demanded that their members increase their individual production fifteen per cent. They made clear that “this increase shall be by the direct additional expenditure of energy and effort, over and above such increases as will be effected through improved methods or techniques instituted by our war production councils.”
The speed-up urged by the Communist party and its followers in the unions was attractively packaged in what the CP in early 1943 called the “wage incentive plan,” which it adopted as an official plank of its program. This was simply the old-fashioned sweat-shop piece-work system. The CIO Executive Board in February 1943 at a Washington meeting voted down a motion to advocate this “incentive wage” plan. The Michigan state convention of the Communist Party in March 1943 voted to send a letter to the FBI, demanding that it “discover and expose” the sponsors of leaflets, being distributed at war plants in the Detroit areas, which denounced the Stalinist “incentive pay” plan as a return to the notorious “Bedaux piece-work system.” Michigan CP state secretary Pat Toohey wrote that “the leaflet is actually an attack on the wage incentive plan issued by the War Labor Board ...” Before FBI Chief J. Edgar Hoover even got this letter, UAW Ford Local 600 President Paul Ste. Marie issued a statement saying that he took responsibility for the leaflet and he again denounced the Stalinists for trying “to bring back the stretchout and speedup which the UAW has eliminated from most organized plants.”
Subsequently, in March 1943, the UAW International Executive Board unanimously rejected “incentive pay” and the UAW convention in October defeated it overwhelmingly.
The May 1-4 national soft-coal strike brought the anti-labor, strikebreaking activities of the Communist party to a peak of ferocity that the vilest capitalist enemies of the unions did not surpass. On April 29, the Daily Worker had carried a front-page appeal by CP National Chairman William Z. Foster, urging the miners not to respond to their union’s strike call. He claimed:
“If Mr. Lewis ... had given support to Roosevelt’s seven-point program for economic stabilization, the miners and other workers would not be finding themselves in their present difficult economic situation.”
This referred to nothing but Roosevelt’s wage-freezing program.
The May 1 Daily Worker editorialized that Lewis’s refusal to submit the miners’ demands to the War Labor Board on the grounds that their case had been prejudged was “false and demagogic.” On May 4, the Worker featured a headline: “Lewis Stirs Up Wave of Anti-Labor Legislation” – a reference to the anti-strike bills being rushed through Congress under the prodding of the administration and the Democrats. After the miners returned to work under a truce, the Worker gloated that the “Lewis line” of militant mass action in defense of the miners had been checked and demanded that it be “utterly defeated.”
This strikebreaking agitation was not confined to the columns of the Daily Worker. The Communist party sent organizers and speakers into the coal fields to try to mobilize such scab elements as might be found for a back-to-work movement. Among these Stalinist mine-field tourists was Louis Budenz, managing editor of the Daily Worker. His articles falsely attempted to portray widespread wavering among the miners.
On May 2, Foster himself invaded the chief coal state, Pennsylvania. He addressed a meeting at the Town Hall in Philadelphia where he urged the miners to return to the pits and submit to what Lewis had called the “headsman’s axe” of the War Labor Board. A Stalinist May Day meeting, held in the Yankee Stadium in New York City, was used to whip up hatred of Lewis and the striking miners. “The boos at the mention of Lewis’ name were as loud as any expression of displeasure that ever came from a Yankee Stadium audience,” approvingly reported the May 3 Daily Worker. The CP even bought radio time to spread its strikebreaking propaganda. Charles Spencer, CP secretary in the Wilkes Barre, Pa., anthracite area, spoke over a local station on May 2 to tell the miners “not to follow Lewis into a treasonable strike.”
 
ROOSEVELT’S threats, the lynch cries of the press, CIO President Murray’s stab-in-the-back attacks, the Stalinist strikebreaking attempts – all these did not make a dent on the miners. For the next six months they were to carry on a bitter, tenacious struggle, a succession of four national strikes conducted with such matchless solidarity and discipline that the massive assault upon them finally cracked up and broke to pieces.
No sooner had the miners returned to work after their first strike in early May than Ickes, the administration’s agent in charge of the “seizure,” announced that the miners would not negotiate with the ostensible new operator of the mines, the government, but with the regular owners. Then, they would have to submit any agreement to the War Labor Board.
Every effort was made, every maneuver contrived, to force the miners to acknowledge the authority of the War Labor Board and submit to its decrees. On May 17, the UMW policy committee announced an extension of the strike truce until midnight, May 31, at the special request of Ickes. The WLB that same day denounced Lewis for “defying the lawfully established procedures of the Government.” The operators simultaneously announced that the WLB had “forbidden” them to resume negotiations with the UMW.
As the date for the new strike deadline approached, there were plenty of indications that the miners’ sentiments of revolt were shared by wide sectors of American workers. In Detroit, some 30,000 Chrysler and Dodge auto workers struck for four days ending May 24 in protest against an eleven-month accumulation of grievances and demands. In Akron, Ohio, some 50,000 rubber workers struck for five days, May 25-29, when the WLB conceded only a three-cent increase after a year’s delay. These strike actions were smothered by the combined efforts of the WLB, Army and Navy officials, FBI, the raging press and radio and, above all, the top union leaders of the CIO, United Auto Workers and United Rubber Workers. Unlike the miners, the auto and rubber workers did not have the support of their own leadership and this contributed decisively to their defeat. Indeed, the UAW and URW leaders publicly attacked their striking members.
The successful strikebreaking by government and union officials in the auto, rubber and other strikes during the interim of the coal-mine truce further emboldened the operators to sit back and wait for the government to smash the miners and their union. On May 25, the WLB had denied the miners all their major demands, making only two minor concessions. After the WLB ruling, which was based on hearings attended only by the operators, a leading operator told the press: “I don’t see any point in sitting around the table any longer.”
The operators began to get the point when the truce deadline, May 31, passed. On the morning of June 1, some 530,000 miners refrained from entering the pits “without any special strike call being issued and with casual matter of factness,” as George Breitman, the Militant’s correspondent, wrote from the mining area around Pittsburgh.
Roosevelt thundered at the striking miners that they “are employees of the Government and have no right to strike.” Ickes telegraphed the union that Lewis “cannot escape responsibility for the cessation of work.” But Ickes conceded that “there are a few powerful operators who from the beginning had deliberately opposed any compromise which might lead to a reasonable settlement.” This was true – but not the whole truth. The Roosevelt administration and Democratic Congress had virtually commanded the operators to make no concessions.
What was decisive, however, was the attitude of the miners, their belief in their rights, their understanding of their organized power and their strategic position in the economy. George Breitman, in a May 26 dispatch from Uniontown, Pa., to the Militant, summarized the results of his numerous interviews with miners in the important UMW District 4:
“The question I asked was: ‘Do you think you will obtain a substantial portion of your demands?’ And always the answer was an unhesitating yes. When I asked why, their answer generally went like this.
“‘Because we’re the only ones who can mine coal and they’re not going to make us do it unless they give us enough wages to do it right and feed our families on at least the same standard we had before the war. You know you can lead a horse to water but you can’t make him drink’.”
This was the adamant positions of the miners as Roosevelt, on June 3, threatened to call out the troops unless the miners returned to work by June 7 – and, as Saul Alinsky noted in his biography of Lewis, the President no longer referred to “my friends, the miners.” The miners merely shrugged and repeated their classic phrase: “You can’t dig coal with bayonets.” Roosevelt added a further threat – miners of draft age who did not respond to his “order” would be reclassified for military service. This made no impact either.
For the first time, some of the coal operators began to question the ability of the government to terrorize the miners into submission. They also were fearful of the principle of government “seizure” of their property, even though they were aware that in this instance it was a farce and strictly a strikebreaking device.
Lewis had proposed that the miners be paid $1.50 a day more as portal-to-portal travel pay and the operators began what appeared to be some serious consideration of this compromise proposal. At this point, the WLB ordered the negotiations to end until the miners went to work. The Board’s labor members, CIO included, voted for this order. Aware that the operators were beginning to weaken, the UMW again pulled a truce move. The union’s policy committee voted a return to work on June 7 – but only “up to and including June 20” unless a satisfactory agreement had been reached.
The closer the miners moved to wresting an acceptable settlement from the mine owners, the more desperately the government tried to beat the miners down. Congress pushed through the first federal anti-strike bill in the country’s history, the Smith-Connally War Labor Disputes Bill, whose major provisions had been proposed by Roosevelt as early as November 1941. This drastic anti-labor measure evoked such protest inside labor’s ranks that both William Green and Philip Murray felt impelled to plead for Roosevelt’s veto.
Green, in militant language rare for him, wrote the President:
“The workers of our country would never become reconciled to this legislation. They would protest against it and rebel against it in the event it would become the law. This legislation is fascist in character.”
If timid Green had known how promptly and effectively the workers would rebel against the Smith-Connally act by their strike actions, he might have spoken less inciting words. Murray wrote Roosevelt that the bill would “set aside the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution.”
 
PRIOR to passage of the anti-strike bill, demonstratively pushed through as a threat to the miners, Lewis and the operators had come to a verbal agreement on $1.30 a day for travel pay in the mines. At this point, Ickes announced he was levying a $5 fine on every miner who had participated in the June 1 to 5 strike. This would have represented a collective fine of more than $2,500,000. So immediate and violent were the miners’ reactions that Ickes speedily backtracked. In the face of hundreds of meetings of mine locals that voted immediate strike action, Ickes lamely explained he was leaving the collection of fines up to the individual operators – who promptly said they preferred to let bygones be bygones.
The Smith-Connally bill, although not yet law, emboldened the WLB members. This bill would give the WLB power to subpoena union leaders and make it a felony for union leaders even to advocate a strike in any government “seized” plant or industry. On June 18, two days before the strike deadline, the WLB turned down the agreement on $1.30 portal-to-portal pay reached between the UMW and operators.
The Board’s report claimed that the miners were getting sixty-five per cent more average weekly take-home pay in March 1943 than in January 1941, due to the greater average number of hours per week worked in 1943. This contention was based entirely on data furnished by the operators. Besides, even if true, it still left the miners earning only $42.97 weekly including more than three hours of overtime. The WLB majority announced that the portal-to-portal issue must first be handled by the Wage and Hours Administrator and the courts. But even if these decided favorably for the miners the WLB reserved the final decision.
Despite the fact that the Illinois operators had agreed to $1.50 and the Pennsylvania operators to $1.30 portal-to-portal pay daily, the CIO and AFL members on the WLB voted to grant only eighty cents a day for mine travel time. AFL Teamsters President Daniel Tobin actually hailed the WLB majority’s denial of portal-to-portal pay. The Stalinists, as usual, went all the way in aiding the administration’s and WLB’s campaign against the miners. The June 20 Worker printed a portion of CP National Secretary Earl Browder’s speech before the National Committee of the Communist party, in which he said that Lewis headed the CP’s list of “the main enemies at home” and that “our main task is to isolate John L. Lewis in America and in the labor movement and to make him so unpopular that nobody will dare have their names associated with him.”
The WLB’s labor members, including the CIO’s Van Bittner and John Brophy, ex-UMW officials now on Murray’s payroll, issued a statement that the no-strike pledge
“... must be carried out today as it was the day we made it. And further, since this decision has been rendered by a majority vote of the WLB, it is our position that it becomes the decision of the WLB and in this instance the decision of the Government of the United States.”
Thus, the representatives of the CIO and AFL sought to reinforce the position of the Board against the miners. These bureaucrats, who never consulted their own ranks on any issues great or small, bowed to “majority rule” in the case of a hand-picked government board, each and every one of whose employer and “public” members had demonstrated public hostility to the miners and their union.
On June 19, the miners began to walk out. 58,000 of them beat the deadline. The next day all bituminous and anthracite miners in the country stayed away from the mines. This writer reported the strike for the Militant. I noted the difference between the frenzy in Washington and the newspaper headlines and the quiet, orderly conduct of the strike itself:
“PITTSBURGH, June 21 – Today has been like a peaceful Sunday in the scores of coal mining towns in this area. It has been hard to realize that in these quiet communities, set amidst sunny, rolling countryside marred only by the inevitable tipples and ugly slag heaps, one of the greatest and grimmest struggles in American labor history is in progress.
“There was no outward sign of conflict as the third nationwide wartime coal strike paralyzed the hundreds of mines in this vital Western Pennsylvania region. The mine workers just remained at home – to a man. There were no pickets. None were needed. Early this morning at a few key pits sleepy-eyed cameramen and reporters lounged around the collieries. They looked dejected and lonely waiting in vain for even one scab whose picture might be plastered over the front pages as a ‘back-to-work’ movement.
“Those whose ears have become accustomed to the daily noise and clatter around the mine works notice the silence. A big, burly miner with whom I was walking down the road in Library, Pa., site of one of the biggest mines of Mellon’s Pittsburgh Coal Co., stopped once and cocked his ear over to one side. A smile both sly and wistful crossed his face. ‘At last we can hear the birds sing.’
“All the tumult and shouting of this tremendous struggle are confined to the columns of the capitalist press, the halls of Congress, the corridors of federal buildings, and the hysterical strikebreaking Stalinist sheets and meetings. Here in the mining towns the calm and quiet are a sign of and a tribute to the unsurpassed solidarity and confident determination of every worker who goes down into the pits.”
Two days after the strike officially started Lewis once more announced a truce – this time until October 31 – and instructed the miners to return to work. A UMW Policy Committee statement said:
“This arrangement is predicated upon operation of the mines ... by the United States government and will automatically terminate if government control is vacated prior to the above-mentioned date.”
This announcement came just a few hours after the WLB had urged Roosevelt to employ “all powers of the government necessary” to put the Board’s decision on the miners’ case into effect. Roosevelt, in turn, issued a hysterical attack on the miners after they had already started to return to work following the latest UMW Policy Committee directions. He threatened to force the miners to work as military conscripts and stated he had initiated measures “to set up the machinery” to draft strikers into the armed forces and compel them to mine coal under military orders, subject to courts-martial for refusal.
Nothing could have been more calculated to infuriate the miners. It is estimated that forty per cent of the miners continued their strike for from four to six days after Lewis had asked them to return to work because of their indignation at Roosevelt’s threats and at the enactment into law of the Smith-Connally Act on June 25.
Roosevelt’s threats to force the miners to work under military regulations, as one UMW official in Pittsburgh told this writer (The Militant, July 3, 1943), was like “throwing gasoline on a hot fire.” This same report described a meeting of UMW Local 73, at Library, Pa., the day after the third truce was announced, and the bitterness of the workers at Roosevelt’s labor conscription law threat. One old mining veteran said:
“Going into a mine is no easy thing. Every time you go in, you never know if you’re coming out. If they want to pass such a law on us men, let ‘em pass it. We’ve worked in these mines and risked our lives and damned near at times had to eat grass and frozen apples to stay alive. But we’re still living and we’re still fighting.”
The bulk of the Western Pennsylvania miners voted not to return to work until June 28, six days after Roosevelt’s threat. It was a deliberate demonstration of defiance and contempt from men who had voted for Roosevelt in ’32 and ’36 and even in ‘40, after Lewis himself had broken with him.
On June 25, Roosevelt vetoed the Smith-Connally bill, but it was enacted over his veto within two hours by a Democratic Congress. Among other things, this bill made it a crime punishable by one year imprisonment and $5,000 fine to “coerce, instigate, induce, conspire with or encourage any person to interfere by lockout, strike, slowdown or other interruption with the operations of plants in possession of the government.” The bill authorized the “seizure” of plants for strikebreaking purposes, required prior notice and a thirty-day “cooling-off period” before all strikes and a provision for government-supervised strike votes.
 
BOTH Philip Murray and William Green, overlooking the fact of Roosevelt’s incitation and the role of his political colleagues in Congress, hastened to write messages of effusive thanks to Roosevelt for his veto and, as Murray put it, “to assure you that our organizations will maintain their no-strike pledge.”
So eager were these union leaders to represent Roosevelt’s action as a sign of his “pro-labor” attitude, that they overlooked the real point of his veto message – he had openly stated the bill wasn’t tough enough to suit him. He thought it had loopholes which still opened the way for strikes. In his veto message to Congress, he said he approved of seven of the bill’s nine points – including those that provided for government plant “seizures” to break strikes, a ban on strikes in “seized” industries, jail for strikers and strike “inducers,” fines on unions and impounding of union treasuries. “If the bill were limited to these seven measures,” said Roosevelt, “I would sign it.”
He objected only to the provisions that would permit strikes after a declaration of intention, a special vote and “cooling off.” These, he said, were ineffective anti-strike provisions or “irrelevant.” He also objected to the fact that his own special proposal – to place all workers between the ages of eighteen and sixty-five under the provisions of a labor draft law, a labor conscription act – was excluded from the Smith-Connally Act.
We can get some idea of the reaction to the Smith-Connally Act in the CIO ranks from the debate and decisions of the 1,800 delegates to the Michigan State CIO convention in Detroit a few days after the anti-strike law was passed. These delegates, representing 700,000 industrial unionists, adopted by a two-to-one majority a resolution “recommending to all of the affiliated unions and to the CIO that unless assurances that were made to labor are immediately and effectively put into operation, we consider our ‘no-strike’ pledge no longer binding ...”
This resolution was bitterly opposed by CIO National Organization Director Allan S. Haywood, representing Murray; John Brophy, head of the Industrial Union Councils Department of the CIO; UAW President R.J. Thomas; Michigan State CIO President August Scholle and all the Stalinist delegates. The Stalinists sought a reconsideration of the resolutions and on the fourth and final day of the convention they put on a demonstration of their personal affirmation of the no-strike pledge regardless of any convention decision. As individuals and groups they took the floor and repeated parrot-like the phrase that they would “follow Brother Philip Murray .in the no-strike pledge which he gave to our Commander-in-Chief.”
An additional response of the convention to the anti-strike law was the adoption of a resolution which, while still favoring support of Roosevelt, said this “can best be served by an independent labor party.” This resolution proposed a referendum vote by affiliated unions on whether or not they “favored setting up an independent labor party.” The vote for this resolution was 2,519 to 1,909, with the Stalinists again offering the bitterest opposition.
The convention also passed a resolution which declared that the Smith-Connally Act “made a mockery out of avowed claims that this is a war for democracy.” Stalinist floor leader Nat Ganley, business agent of UAW Local 155, asserted, “Regardless of what reactionary legislation is passed, this still remains a just, progressive war against fascism” and he asked how the convention could pass a resolution on the Smith-Connally Act “without praising our Commander-in-Chief who vetoed this bill.”
Emil Mazey, head of UAW Briggs Local 212, replied that “the only reason Roosevelt vetoed the bill was that it gave us the right to strike at the end of thirty days. Those who follow Roosevelt in Congress led in overriding the veto. The veto was only a smokescreen.” Even Victor Reuther, going along with the predominant sentiment, said: “It is not a war for democracy if we allow fascists to destroy our democratic rights at home.”
Most indicative of the sentiments of these delegates – representing workers in auto, steel, glass and many other CIO unions – was their overwhelming adoption of a resolution of unconditional support to the miners. In doing so, they brushed aside the attempts of the Stalinists to insert an attack on Lewis in the resolution. “You cannot pass on the miners’ question and ignore Lewis. You cannot win the war and strike as you damn please,” complained John Anderson, Stalinist President of UAW Local 155. To which one delegate replied amid applause: “If Lewis pulled the strike to protect the rank and file, hats off to Lewis.”
Following the Michigan CIO convention, the Murray-Hillman-Stalinist forces drew even closer together in their opposition to the militant ranks and in their enmity and fear of Lewis. A special meeting of the CIO National Executive Board was held in Washington, July 7 to 10. This meeting resolved to fight the Smith-Connally Act, which Murray had said set aside the Bill of Rights, by “a complete mobilization of the people in support of the war program of our Commander-in-Chief” and by reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge. When Emil Rieve and George Baldanzi, President and Vice-President respectively of the United Textile Workers Union, objected to an attack on Lewis and the miners in the no-strike resolution, they were subjected to fierce denunciation by the other board members. Murray raged particularly against the actions of the Michigan CIO convention and mysteriously hinted at “outside influence” at work.
The miners drew their strength from their own just cause, the solidity of their union and the support of millions of other union workers, like those in the Michigan CIO. They could ignore with equal calm the rantings of a Murray and the ultimatums of a Roosevelt.
The War Labor Board called on Roosevelt either to force Lewis to sign the WLB-dictated contract or to seize the UMW treasury as a punitive measure and cancel the checkoff of union dues. The Board, including its labor members, also demanded that Lewis be prosecuted under the Smith-Connally Act. A federal grand jury was convened on July 14 at the behest of the Western Pennsylvania operators and federal agents were sent into the mine fields by Attorney General Biddle to investigate charges under the anti-strike law. “Unauthorized” strikes, which followed the WLB threats, continued in some instances until July 5.
 
WHEN Roosevelt was asked on July 9 what he would do to force Lewis to sign the WLB’s contract, he finally conceded he could not force Lewis to do so. A day later, Edward R. Burke and R.L. Ireland, Jr., leading spokesmen for the operators, revealed they were at the point of capitulation when they said that Roosevelt’s statement proved “Mr. Lewis, through his defiance of the Government, had gained his point.”
During the four-month period of uneasy truce, the Roosevelt Administration and its WLB did all in their power to prevent and upset any and all agreements between the United Mine Workers and the operators that provided for pay increases in any form. In the middle of July, Lewis had announced that an agreement had been reached and a contract signed with the Illinois Coal Operators Association for $1.25 daily portal-to-portal travel pay, fifty cents of it retroactive to October 24, 1938, when the Fair Labor Standards Act went into effect. With other provisions, including extra hours, this would have raised the Illinois miners’ pay by $3 instead of the originally-demanded $2 a day.
With this contract in writing and signed by the Illinois operators, Lewis discontinued his boycott of the WLB. On August 3, Lewis appeared personally before the WLB hearing and defended the Illinois contract. On August 25, this “court stacked against labor” flatly rejected the Illinois pact and called the portal-to-portal agreement a “hidden wage increase.” The Board members were emboldened by Roosevelt’s August 16 executive order which provided drastic sanctions against striking unions and strikers – including the withholding of “any benefits, privileges and rights” – in industries “seized” by the government, like the coal mines.
Even the right-wing Social-Democratic New Leader, strongly pro-war and pro-Roosevelt, complained in its August 21 issue that Roosevelt’s sanction order was “the high wave of reaction.” It lamented: “The President appeared to serve notice that he has come to an open break with the New Deal.” (Later, on December 28, he himself was to declare that the “New Deal” was over.)
Once more the UMW officials and the Illinois operators went into a huddle. They finally agreed on a contract providing $2 a day more for a five-day week with overtime allowances, omitting the portal-to-portal issue. Fuel Coordinator Ickes took this occasion to announce ending of the mines “seizure” on October 13. The fiction of government operation was removed. Promptly, the miners began striking without any instructions from Lewis and the UMW policy committee. Some 22,000 Alabama and 3,500 Indiana miners were the first to defy the Smith-Connally Act and Roosevelt’s executive sanctions.
Lewis wired the strikers and asked their locals to meet and vote to go back pending a WLB ruling on the revised Illinois contract. The WLB threatened the miners with sanctions and the penalties of the law. The Indiana miners reluctantly returned; the Alabama miners refused.
“According to reports from the striking areas,” said the October 19 New York Times, “the miners were refusing to attend meetings lest they incur the penalties of the Connally-Smith Act and they had somehow set up some form of a ‘silent understanding’ with each other whereby they did not even need to speak, but would act as individuals as long as their wage grievances were not redressed.”
Lewis had hinted that the WLB might bring forth a favorable decision. But new groups of strikers – in Ohio, Pennsylvania, Indiana, West Virginia, Kentucky and Illinois – followed the lead of the Alabama workers. The WLB again “poured gasoline on the fire” when it rejected the second Illinois pact on October 26. By the time the official strike deadline, November 1, had arrived, all 530,000 coal miners were out, for their fourth official national wartime strike within one year.
Now Roosevelt was at the end of his rope. He could not arrest 530,000 miners. He could not force them to go down in the pits at bayonet point, and even if he could, they need not mine an ounce of coal. He could not jail Lewis and the UMW leaders, for the miners swore they would strike “until Hell freezes over” (this was a considerable extension of their jurisdiction) if Lewis were victimized in any way. The President re-”seized” the struck mines and authorized Ickes to negotiate a contract. The Ickes-approved contract gave the miners $1.50 a day more – $8.50 a day. Where the miners previously made $45.50 for a 42-hour week, they would now receive $56.74 for a 48-hour week. The WLB on November 20 finally agreed to a contract acceptable to the union and contractors. This fixed the mine wage at $57.07 a week and provided $40 payment to each miner for retroactive payment for travel time.
The UMW Policy Committee ratified the new contract on November 3 and instructed the miners to return to work. They had cracked the wage-freeze and broken through the barrier of the Little Steel Formula. Except for a reduction of fifteen minutes in their lunch time, the contract was virtually the same as the second agreement reached with the Illinois operators. Of the total increase, $1 to $1.25 a day was an actual increase in terms of the previous work-week. The rest of the increase was due to more hours of work.
 
AS THE final mine walkout was going into full swing on November 1, Philip Murray was calling the CIO convention to order in Philadelphia. Murray made an unrestrained attack on Lewis and intimated that the miners, the men who had first raised Murray to a position of influence in the labor movement, were nothing less than agents of Hitler and the Japanese Mikado. A round of tirades against the miners followed Murray’s slanderous attack, with the Stalinist elements thrusting themselves to the forefront of this onslaught. Frederick Myers, Vice-President of Curran’s Stalinist-controlled National Maritime Union, on November 2 called the struggle of the miners “the greatest treason against America.”
Murray had opened the CIO convention by his attack on the miners and by pushing through a resolution reaffirming the no-strike pledge “without qualification or condition.” But when word was received that the miners had won, that they had cracked the Little Steel Formula ceiling, then Murray and his lieutenants were in a dither. They knew Lewis’s prestige would rise high among the CIO workers. Quickly, Murray introduced a resolution to open a labor drive for higher wages, above the Little Steel Formula. He even had the impudence to call on the coal miners (whose magnificent struggle had already penetrated the Little Steel Formula ceiling) and the railroad workers (who at that moment were taking a nationwide strike poll) to join with him in the fight – non-strike, of course – for higher wages.
Although the United Mine Workers was no longer in the CIO and the CIO leadership had bitterly attacked the mine strikes, the wartime struggle and victory of the coal miners was of incalculable importance for American unionism, particularly the CIO. In a way, it may be said that the CIO had two “Gettysburgs,” the Flint General Motors sitdown of 1936-7 and the 1943 coal-mine strikes, although during the latter the CIO leaders were sniping from the enemy lines.
Until the miners fought back in 1943, the war brought with it one measure of repression after another, and ever-increasing assaults on the living standards and liberties of the workers. The ruling class looked on the war as their supreme opportunity to destroy union contractual conditions and even unionism itself.
We have only to ask ourselves, “What if the miners had not waged their fight?” or “What if they had lost?” to realize the enormous stake the whole American labor movement had in the outcome of the miners’ battles. If the miners had not fought and won, if they had been defeated, it would have meant not only the crippling and possibly the crushing of one of the most powerful industrial unions, the UMW, but a demoralizing blow of shattering proportions for the auto, rubber, steel, electrical equipment, textile, glass and other CIO workers. In the wake of a miners’ defeat, the corporate interests and their government agents would have fallen like a ravenous wolf-pack on the most vulnerable unions. The government would have introduced new “formulas” to slash wages, increase hours of work and intensify the exploitation of labor in the name of patriotism and the “needs of the war.” The defeat of the miners would have become another and more convincing pretext for the union leaders, like Murray and Hillman, to give away the workers’ rights and conditions and to restrain every impulse of the CIO workers to fight back.
Instead, the miners’ victory opened a whole new wave of labor struggle, mounting steadily through 1943, 1944 and 1945 and reaching a titanic climax in the winter of 1945-46. The employers’ postwar plan to turn the war veterans against the workers and smash the unions was never able to get going. The miners themselves were able to go on from victory to victory in the war and immediate postwar period, winning many new gains, such as health and welfare funds, retirement pensions and other conditions, which then became objectives of the CIO unions as well.
Above all, the miners demonstrated as never before the fact that nothing can produce coal – or any other form of wealth – but the labor of workers. When the miners said “you can’t dig coal with bayonets,” they were saying that organized labor, united and determined to defend itself and its rights, is invincible. That is why, in hailing the miners’ victory, the Militant of November 13, 1943, said:
“The miners’ strikes of 1943, taking place in the midst of the Second World War, will forever remain a landmark in the history of the American class struggle.”
 
Editor’s Note
1*. This is a chapter from Labor’s Giant Step, a history of the CIO, which Art Preis, for many years labor editor of the Militant, is now completing.



The Vatican and its vast priest-caste pursue as their most immediate objectives: 1. the destruction of the Soviet Union; 2. the preservation of the capitalist profit system. With its incalculable wealth and its centralized, professional army of clerics the Vatican is attempting to dragoon its 350 million followers into imperialism’s “cold war” against the Soviet Union and to divide and disorient the working-class struggle for socialism.
These aims coincide directly with those of the ruling American capitalists, mainly Protestant. Although capitalism rose to power in centuries of revolutionary struggle against the Catholic hierarchy and its feudal order, today the capitalists recognize in the Vatican an aggressive, ruthless, cunning and immensely potent force for the defense of capitalism. These two once-mortal enemies are linked now as allies.
The Vatican is an especially welcome ally of American imperialism because of the Roman Church’s ideological sway over hundreds of millions. It is using its religious influence today to compete everywhere for hegemony of the working class and control of the labor movements. Under the banner of “anti-communism,” the priests are attempting to bore from within the labor unions, divide them along religious lines, crush the proponents of class struggle and place an iron clerical grip on the workers’ mass organizations. In the United States too, the Catholic hierarchy is concentrating its major efforts on the, unions.
The deep penetration of the Catholic hierarchy into the American unions, particularly the CIO, is receiving favorable attention in the Big Business press. Under the title of The Labor Priests, the Jan. 1949 Fortune magazine reports:
“The new campaign launched by Pres. Philip Murray to drive out the Communists also brings to the fore another development within the CIO – the rising force of Catholicism in American labor.”
Noting that a quarter of all American union leaders are Catholics, Fortune states:
“Most of these men, and even non-Catholics such as Walter Reuther of the United Automobile Workers, have welcomed Catholic support in battling Communists. Yet all of them carefully avoid public support of organised Catholic labor activity. Even without such approval the open influence of individual Catholic clerics has been considerable, especially in the CIO.”
Fortune does not fail to note the duplicity of the top CIO bureaucrats who pretend not to recognize this organized “outside influence” in the CIO while they work hand-in-glove with it. The national CIO convention last November affords a striking illustration of this.
The convention was opened with an “invocation” by Rev. Thomas Tobin, Vicar General for Archbishop Howard of Portland, Ore. This “invocation” was a lengthy exposition of the Catholic hierarchy’s program of “industry councils,” called “corporative units” by Pope Pius XI and first established by Mussolini in his “corporative state.” The most brazen part of Rev. Tobin’s performance was when he said, “The philosophy of the Industrial Council program are thus admirably summarized on the masthead of a Detroit paper,” and then he read from this “anonymous” paper the full program printed in the Wage-Earner, official publication of the Detroit chapter of the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists (ACTU).
Far from expressing resentment at this, Murray opened his keynote address by declaring his “grateful acknowledgment of the most remarkable and inspirational address” of Rev. Tobin, adding, “His speech encompasses the program of the CIO.” Thus did the CIO head publicly link the program of the industrial unions, built by workers of every creed united in titanic class battles, with the ultra-reactionary program of the priest-ridden power machine, the ACTU.
That power machine which operated so conspicuously at the CIO convention, where a squad of priests roamed the convention and steered their faction, today boasts of significant influence and, in some instances, outright control in at least a dozen international unions, mainly CIO.
In the United Automobile Workers, where the ACTU has been in a bloc with Walter Reuther since 1947, its members or close associates hold posts on the International Executive Board, a number of top appointive posts and many offices in local unions. The Wage-Earner, Detroit ACTU paper, acts as the unofficial voice of the Reuther-ACTU bloc.
ACTU’ers are a force in the Steelworkers, where they are coddled by Philip Murray and hold important posts. They are dominant in the American Newspaper Guild. Paul Weber, founding editor of Wage-Earner and former head of the Detroit ACTU, is executive secretary of the Detroit Newspaper Guild and a vice president of the Michigan CIO. ACTU’ers hold top posts in the New York Guild local. They control the CIO Utility Workers and the independent Communications Workers, organization of telephone employees.
 
Worming into the TW
Their most recent triumph is in the CIO Transport Workers Union where they formed the motive power of the Quill machine that broke the control of the Stalinists who had ruled for 14 years. A Nov. 1948 Harper’s article, Priests, Workers, and Communists by Jules Weinberg, is devoted to a description, based on interviews with ACTU leaders in the TWU, of how they operated.
Catholic office workers at the New York Omnibus Company, on the “advice” of Rev. Philip A. Carey, S.J., director of the Jesuit Xavier Labor School in Manhattan, set up an independent union in competition with the “communist” TWU in 1944. After a year of “special speed-up courses” at Xavier, they took their outfit into the TWU. Here they began building a “tight, tough, trained unit” and “a stream of these men attended the Xavier Labor School. Every one of the present officers of the New York Omnibus unit is a graduate.”
Now the ACTU, backed by top CIO circles, particularly Secretary-Treasurer James Carey, is going after bigger game – the 400,000-member, Stalinist-ruled United Electrical Workers. The Jan. 17, 1949 Labor Leader, ACTU national organ, reports new triumphs of the “anti-Communist wing,” which in recent local union elections captured 13 more locals, including large General Electric and Westinghouse units.
 
The Catholic “Labor” Schools
Jules Weinberg, in his Harper’s article, glowingly describes the mechanism of this “most militant and successful Labor program ever engaged in by the Catholic Church in the United States.” The Catholic hierarchy, starting in 1935, began a system of “labor” schools.
“They have been established in every industrial city in the nation: one hundred permanent schools, twenty-four directed by Jesuits, thirty-two by diocesan authorities, and the rest sponsored by Catholic fraternal organizations, colleges and the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists,” reports Weinberg. “Most of the schools came into existence between 1936 and 1944 ... And each year 7,500 men and women ... are graduated into the ranks of labor.”
The Fortune article says that the Catholic “labor” schools “have grown up since 1934 through the active interest of ‘labor priests’.”
The “labor” schools and the ACTU are part of the same machine, but have separate functions. The schools provide selected and trained cadres for colonizing the unions. The ACTU operates inside the unions to put the Catholic hierarchy’s program into action. Rev. William J. Smith, Jesuit priest and director of Crown Heights “labor” school in New York, described the division of function in the Jan. 1947 Labor Leader. The ACTU is for “direct action,” he said, while the Jesuit schools are “confined” to indirect action, education technique, labor school organization and over-all indoctrination.” He added, “There is plenty of work and plenty of room for both movements and both methods.”
An elaborate pretense is maintained that there is no connection between the schools of the priestly orders and the ACTU, which is represented as an “independent” organization, run by its members without hierarchic direction. Roger Larkin, editor of Labor Leader, even goes so far as to publish a special statement in the Jan. 17, 1949 issue, trying to disassociate the Jesuit “labor” schools from the ACTU by falsely claiming that “the first Catholic labor school was established ... by the ACTU” and “antedated any other Catholic labor school by at least one year.” However, the first school was the Xavier Labor School in New York City, established by Jesuits in 1911 as the Xavier Institute of Social Studies, and reorganized under its present name in 1935. The ACTU was founded in 1937 and its first school was established in Jan. 1938, “with the kind assistance of the Jesuit Fathers of Fordham,” states John C. Cort, one of the ACTU founders. (Nine Years of the ACTU, in the Jesuit weekly, America, April 6, 1946)
Larkin’s petty fraud is part of the bigger fraud systematically perpetrated by the ACTU to fool unionists about whose, hand directs the ACTU. Labor Leader describes the ACTU as an “association of Catholic unionists” that “does not believe in Catholic unions in America” and “does not seek to divide the workers on religious grounds or create ‘a Catholic bloc’.” It does add, however, that its purpose “is to promote the teachings of Christ and His Church in the American labor movement” – that is, to promote Catholicism in the unions.
In a more forthright way, the Jesuit weekly America, Jan. 7, 1939, in an article, Leadership in Labor a Goal for Catholic Workers, instructs Catholics on how to build a “Catholic bloc” in the unions. It states:
“All the tricks of organization, of pressure politics, of dissent, of ‘controlled bloc’ voting can be readily absorbed by any willing labor student.”
It calls for “the erection of a strong philosophy within the union which will bear heavily upon union leaders, so heavily as to be at last controlling ... the admonition of the Encyclicals, that Catholics should form Christian unions, as far as possible, is morally obligatory upon us ...”
The ACTU Articles of Federation (Labor Leader, July 25, 1947) states:
“The Association takes as its charter the following mandate of Pius XI in the Encyclical, Quadragesimo Anno: ‘Side by side with these unions, there should always be associations zealously engaged in imbuing and forming their members in the teaching of religion and morality so that they in turn may be able to permeate the unions with that good spirit which should direct them in all their activities.’”
It deceptively omits the first part of Pope Pius XI’s injunction, which stated,
“Wherever it (is) impossible for Catholics to form Catholic unions ... they (Catholics) seem to have no choice but to enroll themselves in neutral unions ... Side by side with these trade unions, there must always be associations, etc. ...” (Michigan Catholic, Nov. 28, 1946.)
It is clear that the ACTU was set up under a papal mandate as an expedient where the Church finds it “impossible” to keep Catholic workers from joining “neutral” unions. But Catholic doctrine insists on the ultimate objective of separate Catholic unions.
No one is eligible for ACTU membership without specific approval by a priest. The ACTU national constitution provides for a chaplain – a priest – to “advise” all local chapters on all matters, and states: “All members of the ACTU shall be Catholic and the Catholicity of members shall be determined by the Chaplain of the chapter.” By his authority to decide who shall belong or who shall be blackballed, the priest is the real power in the ACTU.
The constitution of the Detroit ACTU makes the controlling power of the hierarchy even more explicit. Article V, Section A, begins: “The officers shall be: a Chaplain appointed by the Archbishop,” and then enumerates all the other posts. Article V, Section G, states:
“It shall be the duty of the secretary-treasurer to ... submit a financial report each month to the Chaplain ... The Chaplain shall act in an advisory capacity and as a spiritual director of the association. He or any other priest designated by him shall be an ex-officio member of all committees.”
Finally, Article VII states:
“In the event of insoluble dispute over any question of policy, tactic, principle or leadership, the counsel of the Archbishop shall be the final determinant.”
While to non-Catholics or indifferent Catholics the ACTU emphasizes that it is an association of Catholic trade unionists, to the devout Catholic workers it stresses that it is a Catholic association of trade unionists. Thus, all ACTU literature bears the imprimatur – official sanction – of a high Catholic cleric. Its leaflets to the Wall Street strikers last year even boasted that the ACTU was “blessed by Pope Pius XII.”
Any claim that the ACTU is “democratic,” “independent” or “American”, is proved spurious by the very oath all members must sign: “I hereby pledge to abide by all the teachings and practices of my Catholic faith, including those teachings expressed in the social Encyclicals of Leo XIII, Pius XI, and Pius XII in their entirety. (ACTU Articles of Federation) In short, the ACTU is an arm of the Catholic Church.
 
The Power and Program of the Pope
To know the real aims of the ACTU and its program, we must examine the structure, methods, activities and doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church itself, particularly its authoritarian head, the Pope. The Catholic Church is ruled by its priestly hierarchy. The inner structure of this hierarchy is totalitarian, with the priest chosen by the bishop, and the bishop chosen by the Pope on recommendation of his own hand-picked Congregation of the Consistory.
In 1870, the Pope was declared “infallible” in “defining doctrine regarding faith and morals.” Faith and morals, explained Pius XII on June 2, 1948, are not confined “within the sphere called ‘purely religious,’ meaning by the phrase exclusion from any penetration into public life.” Accordingly the popes have decreed exactly what the economic, social and political order must be.
Thus; Leo XIII ordained in his Human Liberty that even a “democratic” government might be tolerated, “if only the Catholic doctrine be maintained as to the origin and exercise of power.” And wherever “ecclesiastical and civil” authorities conflict, says the Catholic Encyclopedia, ‘the jurisdiction of the Church prevails.” Pius XI, in his Reconstructing the Social Order, added that “the truth entrusted to Us by God and Our weighty office ... demand that both social and economic questions be brought within Our supreme jurisdiction ...”
First of all, “God’s truth” as laid down by Leo XIII in The Condition of the Working Class, from which the Catholic labor program stems, is: “Our first and most fundamental principle ... must be the inviolability of private property.” Pius XII, in his Sept. 1944 Vatican radio address, proscribed any social order “that denies ... the natural right to ownership of commodities and means of production.”
Secondly, “The Church condemns the various forms of Marxian socialism,” banned by all popes since 1848, said Pius XII; while Pius XI anathematized even socialist groups that “have abandoned class war and no longer attack private property” because they “do not repudiate the basic socialist idea, merely repudiate it in practice.”
Thirdly, Leo XIII, in his famous Encyclical, ordained fixed classes like those of feudalism under the medieval church-state, saying, “Let it be laid down ... that humanity must remain as it is ... There naturally exist among mankind innumerable differences ... and unequal fortune is a necessary result of inequality of condition” which “must accompany man so long as life lasts.” Therefore, rich and poor do not form classes “intended by nature to live at war with one another ...”
 
Basic Doctrine of the ACTU
The ACTU is an organization, therefore, to impose the following basic doctrines on the unions:

the Roman Catholic Church is the supreme authority on all matters and stands above all governments, and the Pope is the “infallible” authority of the Church;
the system of capitalist private properly and profits is “inviolable”;
the “basic idea” of socialism and communism contravenes “God’s truth”; and
there must be no basic social change, all classes must remain fixed and each person must stay in his class.

Since the pontiffs laid down these doctrines as nothing less than Divine Revelations, they never felt required to meet the scientific analysis of Marxism showing the internal contradictions of capitalism, its decline and decay and its replacement, through working-class struggle, by the classless socialist society. ACTU members, of course, may not examine Marxism for themselves, for the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky and other great working-class teachers are on the Vatican’s Index librorum prohibiiorum. This is the list of thousands of great books that Catholics are forbidden to read, for “excommunication, specially reserved to the Holy See, is incurred, ipso facto ... by those who knowingly read or keep such books without due permission.” (Moral and Pastoral Theology, by Rev. Henry Davis, imprimatur Archbishop of Birmingham.)
But since the papal social pronouncements were all issued in times of capitalist crisis to pacify the workers and discourage class struggle, the popes had to offer a substitute for Marxism which would promise to alleviate poverty and exploitation. A major point of this substitute, as stated in the ACTU Articles of Federation, is: “a share in the profits after a just wage and a just return to capital have been paid.”
First let us see what the popes had in mind by a “just wage” and a “just profit.” According to Leo XIII’s Rerum Novarum, it is the “dictate of natural justice” that “wages ought not to be insufficient to support a frugal and well-behaved wage-earner.” That says it all! A “just” wage is enough to keep a man alive and fit to return to work the next day – provided he is “frugal” and doesn’t buy a couple of beers, go to a movie or purchase “dangerous” literature like the Fourth International or The Militant.
What is a “just” profit? The most explicit definition to be found in Catholic writings is in the book, Distributive Justice, published in 1942 by Monsignor John A. Ryan, who is called “the father of the church labor program in America.” He said the Church advocates “profit-sharing,” whereby the worker, in addition to his “frugal” wages, would get “a part of surplus profits.” But first of all “owners of capital must be assured the prevailing rate of interest. It is not feasible to give any part of profits to workers until owners of capital have obtained this prevailing rate.” The “prevailing rate,” of course, is always the average maximum rate the capitalists can squeeze out at any given time.
If there is any “surplus” profit left, says Father Ryan, this should go, “to the workers exclusively” (original emphasis), which sounds mighty generous until we read “that is, to persons who do any work in any capacity, whether subordinate or directive ... from president down to office boy. The distribution should be in proportion to salaries and wages.” So – if there is any “surplus” profit after the “just” profit has been paid – the head of a corporation, who is paid $300,000 a year would get 100 times more of the “surplus” than a worker who gets $3,000. Some “distributive justice”!
We can understand still better the kind of “profit-sharing” schemes the ACTU has in mind when we read in Labor Leader (Dec. 27, 1948) praise for such anti-union propositions as those of Eastman-Kodak and other non-union firms. The June 28, 1948 Labor Leader praises a speech by Charles Luckman, head of Lever Bros., to the American Management Association, in which he offered a plan to raise production and wages simultaneously, saying: “American industry can well afford to increase a worker’s wage by 30% in return for 30% more output ...”
Most employers will buy that. But in the years between 1900 and 1929, the American workers got their bellies full of these phony “profit-sharing,” “multiple-partnership” and similar “carrot-before-the-donkey’s-nose” devices used by the employers to speed up production and keep out unionism.
 
Industry Councils, the Cure-All
The ACTU’s big cure-all for capitalist depressions, inflation, war, exploitation and mass poverty is “industry councils” where “representatives of management, labor and the government might sit down together and work out regulations for each industry.” (Resolution of ACTU 1947 convention.) The 1948 resolution complains that ACTU opponents are “trying to pin the label of ‘Fascism’” on this scheme and claims that Murray and Reuther have publicly admitted that the CIO’s “industry council” plan is “similar to that proposed by Pope Pius XI.”
If that is the case, it is indeed a sinister development in the CIO. That can easily be seen when we study what Pius XI and Pius XII had in mind when they proposed “corporative units” – they never used the term “industry councils,” which the ACTU has employed only in the past few years to identify its scheme with that of the CIO.
Monsignor John A. Ryan, in his previously quoted Distributive Justice, explains that “the conflict between classes can be controlled only by the state. ‘Where We speak of the reform of the social order,’ says Pope Pius XI, ‘it is principally the state we have in mind’.” Rev. Ryan hastens to explain that “the Holy Father does not want state ownership and operation of the means of production.” No, the vicar of Christ “would eliminate class conflict not by a futile effort to abolish classes, but by bringing them into a practical scheme of co-operation.”
That cooperation, said Pius XI, must be “re-establishment of occupational groups”; and Rev. Ryan explains, “He takes as a model the guild system, which united master, journeymen and apprentices in one association.”
There is one “small” difference, however, between the relations of the master, journeyman and apprentice of feudal days and the capitalist and worker of today. The apprentice and journeyman were masters in training and after a fixed time became masters themselves, owning their own shops. The modern worker is a proletarian – a “propertyless one” – who lives by selling his labor power to a capitalist who owns the means of production but does not work himself. Moreover, the apprentice and journeyman had no independent organization. They were bound by the rules of the guild. Such a system today would deprive the workers entirely of any independent organized power.
Further, explains Ryan, “the occupational groups would not be entirely independent of government,” for the state, “says Pius XI, would perform the tasks which it alone can effectively accomplish: those of ‘directing, watching, stimulation, and restraining, as circumstances suggest or necessity demands’.” By “state,” of course, the Pope means the capitalist state.
 
Spawned by Fascism
Where have we seen such a system in operation? First of all, in the “corporative state” of Mussolini, in Franco’s Spain, in Salazar’s Portugal. More recently, in a letter addressed to a French Catholic society and made public on July 20, 1946, Pope Pius XII expressed disapproval of proposed nationalization measures in France and called instead for “the institution of corporative associations or units in every branch of the national economy.” Sure enough, the Catholic would-be Franco of France, de Gaulle, now calls for “a fundamental change in trade unionism” and for “associations of labor, capital and management.” The ACTU’s Wage-Earner greeted de Gaulle’s scheme and pleaded editorially that unionists should “learn more” about it “before we go roaring out and condemning Gen. de Gaulle as the apostle of a new fascism.”
But so completely identified is the papacy’s “corporative units” with fascism, that it is understandable why a meeting in Oct. 1948 of 140 bishops and archbishops of the American hierarchy issued a statement saying:
“American Catholic students of the social encyclicals have expressed their preference for the name ‘Industry Councils’ to designate the basic organs of a Christian and American type of economic democracy ...”
They “prefer” not to call these “organs of democracy” by their right name – the well known fascist “corporative units.”
Writing on the “industry council” scheme in his book, Spotlight on Labor (published in 1946), the Rev. William J. Smith, S.J., shows what the hierarchy has in mind by citing the “5,000 successful union-management committees”
during the war. He forgot to add that most of these committees fell apart when the worker found out they were just speed-up committees to work out ways of squeezing more production out of the employees. Rev. Francis J. Haas, well known as a government mediator, in the Oct. 1944 Acolyte (now The Priest), relates the “industry councils” to the “tripartite system” which has “worked with more than average success ... in railroads under the Railway Labor Act ... and perhaps more dramatically under the War Labor Board.” American labor has an opposite opinion about these notorious strikebreaking, wage-freezing “labor-management-government” agencies.
All such schemes of “partnership” and “cooperation” are designed to persuade the workers that they do not need to engage in class struggle, that the owning class and the propertyless class have the “same interests,” that exploiters and exploited need only “sit down and plan together” under the “guidance” of a benevolent capitalist government and all the inherent evils of capitalism will disappear.
Describing the founding of the ACTU (Nine Years of the ACTU), John C. Cort writes:
“In the encyclicals of Leo XIII and Pius XI, in the writings of Monsignor John A. Ryan and other Catholic authorities they (ACTU founders) already had a program. It was simply a question of applying it to the American scene.”
He adds with unconscious humor:
“As it finally came out, the program was probably the most extraordinary combination of radicalism, conservatism and plain common sense ever seen in the American labor movement.”
Whatever the ingredients of this stew, it has a capitalist flavor, because the Roman Catholic Church is a capitalist institution – the wealthiest in the world outside of the US government itself. Its mortal hatred of socialism, its frenzied defense of private profit flow not from spiritual considerations, but material self-interest. For the Vatican is a gigantic banker, landlord and industrial capitalist combined.
The poor in the slums and tenements of cities like Rome, Paris, Madrid and New York, may riot know it, but when they curse the extortions of their landlord they are quite often cursing the Vatican, which is the greatest real estate owner on earth. The colonial slaves in Indonesia, Indo-China, the Philippines, North Africa, and Latin America who are fighting against imperialism are also fighting the Vatican, for it owns immense tracts of farmlands and plantations in these lands, grinding profit from the poorest of the poor. In Hungary, it is not only the issue of the schools that has aroused the Vatican and its allies, but expropriation of the 1,500,000 acres of Church-owned land on which tens of thousands toiled in virtual feudal serfdom. The Church owns a third of all land in Spain, as well as a third of its industrial shares.
As a result of the scandal involving Vatican agents in the illegal manipulation of French currency, it was disclosed in the French National Assembly last year that the Vatican controls directly or indirectly scores of investment, land and credit banks in Italy and France. These banks in turn control numerous industrial firms. The disclosures revealed that the Vatican controls one-third of all Italian savings – 400 billion lire! It has investments of more than 30 billion francs in France and similar sums in Belgium, where, in addition, the Church receives state subsidies. In the United States, the Vatican collaborates closely with the House of Morgan and owns hundreds of millions worth of real estate and industrial stocks and bonds.
The Vatican publishes no balance sheets, gives no financial accountings. Its top inner circle alone knows the extent of its property and income – on which it pays no taxes. It extracts contributions of hundreds of millions each year just from its faithful. The Vatican is BIG BUSINESS.
 
Fundamentally Opposed to Unionism
As an exploiter of labor with a vast vested interest in capitalism, the Vatican is fundamentally opposed to unionism. It prefers the destruction of all unions, as in Spain and Portugal, both countries where the Roman Catholic Church is a state-supported religious monopoly. Next to no unions, it prefers Catholic unions, as in Italy, France, Belgium, Holland and Canada, although only a minority of the Catholic workers are in these unions which are generally despised as strikebreaking outfits. Only when the Catholic workers flock into legitimate class organizations in defiance of .the Church, does the hierarchy resort to “parallel” organizations like the ACTU.
The Church has never shown any interest in “aiding” the workers until the workers turn to class-struggle methods and threaten capitalist interests. Leo XIII’s famous encyclical on labor in 1891 followed the formation of the Second (Socialist) International and the great upsurge of the eight-hour day struggle in America and Europe. Shortly before, in 1886, Leo XIII had decreed a “spiritual death sentence” – excommunication – for Catholic members of the Knights of Labor in Canada and was persuaded to withdraw the ban only when Cardinal Gibbons protested that there were many thousands of Catholic Knights in the United Slates and that
“... you cannot let thousands of Catholic workingmen be driven from the Church without trying to save them. If we allow the ban to exist, the results will be disastrous.”
Neither the Catholic unions nor such outfits as the ACTU have ever been the form of organization demanded or created by the Catholic workers themselves. On the contrary, even in countries where the workers are almost 100% Catholic, as in Italy today, they have always fought for their own class organizations. Nowhere in the world has the Church been able to force more than a small proportion of Catholic workers into its priest-controlled unions.
The American hierarchy’s first intensive interest in labor was in 1919, during the great postwar strike wave. Then, the bishops issued their Program of Social Reconstruction, which included in its 12 points a proposal for the peacetime continuation of the strikebreaking War Labor Board. After the victory of the open shop in the mass industries, the bishops settled back and forgot about “social reconstruction.”
It was not until millions of Catholic workers had already joined the CIO in the 1930’s and fought successfully in mighty class battles, that the hierarchy again decided to intervene. But the Catholic “labor” schools and the ACTU made little headway between 1936 and 1946. Catholic unionists, both leaders and rank-and-file, looked with hostility on the Church’s “labor” activity.
James Carey, when head of the United Electrical Workers, wrote strong protests against the interference of the hierarchy and the ACTU in the UE’s affairs. Michael Quill, president of the Transport Workers Union, publicly denounced the ACTU as “scabs” and “strikebreakers.” Philip Murray was attacked many times in the ACTU press for “playing ball with the Commies.” Daniel J. Tobin, head of the AFL Teamsters and a devout Catholic, issued a blistering attack in the International Teamster against the interjection of religion into the unions.
How Catholic workers reacted to the ACTU is stated by Ray Wescott, ACTU leader in the TWU, as quoted by Jules Weinberg in his Harper’s article:
“I could always talk to a Jewish or Protestant worker ... but as soon as I’d approach another Catholic, before I could say a word, he’d tell me, ‘Look here, Ray, let’s leave religion out of this’.”
During the rise of the CIO, the ACTU’s program of virulent red-baiting didn’t go down with the militant CIO workers. Moreover, the role of the Catholic hierarchy in fascist Italy, Spain, Hungary, and Portugal was well known.
The fortunes of the ACTU began to turn after the war with the shift in US foreign policy and the break-up of the Washington-Moscow honeymoon. As the Truman administration began to whip up the “cold war” against the Soviet Union and the anti-red witch-hunt at home, the atmosphere became more favorable for the ACTU.
For just as the top CIO leaders had collaborated with the Stalinists when it suited the State Department’s policy, so they launched their own “cold war” against the Stalinists with the change in the State Department’s line. And just as Truman collaborated with the Vatican and the Catholic parties in Western Europe against the Stalinists, so the CIO leaders began to collaborate more and more with the “labor” priests.
A big boost was given to the ACTU in 1947 when Walter Reuther’s faction blocked with it in order to defeat the Thomas-Leonard-Addes caucus at the UAW convention. It gained further strength when James Carey’s faction in the UE blocked with it in the still continuing fight for control of the UE. Finally, last November, when president Philip Murray at the CIO convention opened war to destruction on the Stalinists with ACTU support, the way was paved for the ACTU to push its program openly in the CIO. It was only after Murray’s tacit approval of the ACTU and his declaration of total war on the Stalinists, that the ACTU was able to score its subsequent triumphs in the TWU and UE.
The growing influence and strength of the Catholic hierarchy in the labor movement is due not to its own attractive power and the response of the ranks to its social program, but to the aid and comfort given the ACTU by the labor bureaucracy. Protestant, Catholic and Jewish alike, these bureaucrats have shown themselves ready to collaborate with any “outside influence,” however reactionary, in their eagerness to serve the interests of US imperialism and its Department. And that is where the gravest danger lies for the American labor movement.


Copyleft:  Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (marxists.org) 2010.
Permission is granted to copy and / or distribute this document under the terms of the Creative Commons license. Please cite any editors, proofreaders and formatters noted above along with any other publishing information including the URL of this document.

FOREWORD
American labor is closely watching the conflict in the CIO National Maritime Union. What is being determined in part, is the future influence of the Communist Party (Stalinist) in the American trade unions. In no other major union have the Stalinists exercised such complete control for so many years. A balance-sheet of their leadership in the NMU is therefore an accurate gauge of their record throughout the labor movement.
In this pamphlet we have gone into painstaking detail, with fully documented evidence, to record the specific crimes of the Stalinists against the American workers, and particularly against maritime labor.
Many workers observing these crimes; and repelled by them, are confused about the Stalinists’ motives. They often arrive at the false conclusion that Stalinism is Communism, and· therefore say, “If that is Communism, we want no part of it.”
Capitalist propagandists try to reinforce this false notion in order to discredit the very idea of Communism, by identifying it with the repressive rule of Stalin in the Soviet Union. This enables Wall Street to pose as a “defender of democracy” in its preparations for war against the Soviet Union.
For their part, the Stalinists welcome the capitalist lies about their “revolutionary” aims. They operate under cover of the monstrous lie that they represent genuine Communism.
In order to conduct a progressive struggle against Stalinism, it is first of all necessary to expose this lie and treat the Stalinists for what they are – a reactionary current in the labor movement.
It is the aim of this pamphlet to disclose the political roots of Stalinist policy in the American trade unions and the record of their betrayals growing out of these roots.


 

Art Preis
Labor Editor of The Militant




THE STALINISTS ON THE WATERFRONT
A Documented Record of Betrayal
The Communist Parties are a world-wide agency of the bureaucracy which usurped power in the Soviet Union after the great Lenin’s death in 1924. This bureaucracy, headed by Stalin, represents the privileged layers of Soviet society.

The Soviet Union was founded by a workers’ revolution that wiped out Czarism and the rule of the capitalists and established a workers’ state based on nationalized property. It is like a giant trade union. The Stalinist regime in this workers’ state is similar to a corrupt, bureaucratic machine that takes control of a trade union, destroys its internal democracy and fattens off its treasury.
While the workers fight the bureaucratic machine, they do not cease to defend their union on the picket line against the bosses. That is why we defend the Soviet Union from imperialist attack in spite of and against Stalin.
In the Soviet Union, the real Bolsheviks, who opposed the Stalin bureaucracy, were led by Leon Trotsky, founder of the famous Red Army and co-leader with Lenin of the Russian Revolution. The Trotskyists are the sole heirs and continuators of Lenin’s program of world socialist revolution.
 
ROOTS OF STALINIST POLICY
The Stalin regime destroyed Lenin’s Bolshevik Party. The real leaders of the Russian Revolution, and hundreds of thousands of the best revolutionary fighters, were systematically wiped out in vast bloody purges. Trotsky, who fought hardest to preserve Lenin’s program of international socialism, was driven into exile and finally assassinated by a Stalinist secret police agent in Mexico in 1940.
Along with the founding of the Soviet Union, Lenin and Trotsky had founded the Third (Communist) International to extend the workers’ revolution begun in Russia on a world scale. When Stalin usurped power in the Soviet Union, he also proceeded to convert the Third International into a mere pawn to serve his foreign policies and diplomatic maneuvers with the capitalist powers.
Although Stalin formally dissolved the Third International during his wartime alliance with U.S.-British imperialism, the Communist Parties of the various countries continue to function as pliable instruments of Stalin’s foreign policy.
These parties are used as political pressure groups to bolster Stalin’s current diplomatic moves and deals with the capitalist governments. When Stalin wants to put pressure on some other government, the Communist Party in that country starts to talk “militant:” When Stalin wants to conciliate some imperialist power and make a deal with it, the Communist Party is instructed to play ball with the capitalist rulers.
The constant shifts and somersaults in the “line” of the American Communist Party therefore directly reflect Stalin’s diplomatic zigzags. At all times the interests of the workers are sacrificed to the Kremlin’s temporary diplomatic needs.
Thus, when Stalin made his pact with Hitler in July 1939, the Communist Parties ceased their clamor for “collective security” of the “democratic” imperialists against the fascist imperialists. They yelled that the war, which Hitler launched after Stalin gave him the green light, was due only to British and French imperialism. In this country, they raised the slogan, “The Yanks are NOT coming!”
When Hitler turned on his ally Stalin and invaded the Soviet Union, the Communist Parties overnight changed their “line”. They discovered that Hitler alone was responsible for the war, while the British, French and American imperialists were waging a “non-imperialist, progressive war of liberation”
 
Class Character of War
All the great Marxists, including Lenin, had always taught that the character of a war was determined by the class character of the state conducting the war. If a monopoly capitalist state waged war, it could be only a war which pursued monopoly capitalist aims. Thus, all the capitalist powers in the Second World, War, as in the First, were engaged in an imperialist conflict for markets, colonies and spheres of influence.
Because Stalin had entered a military and diplomatic alliance with American and British imperialism against German imperialism, the Stalinists said that Wall Street, ruler of the richest and most powerful country on earth, was conducting a “progressive” war. They called on the workers to support Wall Street’s war and give up all their rights, in order to maintain “national unity” with the Big Business war profiteers.
The Stalinists supported the most reactionary elements against the labor militants. They placed themselves at the disposal of the American capitalist class as its most loyal and abject servants. No anti-labor crime was too foul for them to commit – including open strikebreaking – in order to further “unity” in the imperialist “war effort.”
Today it is clear to every thinking person that American and British capitalism didn’t fight a war for the “Four Freedoms” and “liberation” of oppressed peoples.
The people of Germany and Japan, who suffered so long under fascism and military dictatorship, are ruled by conquering armies. The German capitalists who put Hitler in power still remain, protected by Wall Street and London. In Japan, U.S. imperialism upholds the hated Emperor Hirohito on American bayonets. In Greece, the British, armed with American lend-lease weapons, have restored to power the bloody Greek monarch. I n China, the butcher Chiang Kai-shek, murderer of millions of Chinese peasants and workers, has been kept in power by U.S.-trained and equipped armies.
 
What World War II Brought
More than half a million American troops are stationed in 55 lands all over the globe. Wall Street has become the great treasury and arsenal for the suppression of colonial peoples fighting for their independence. American arms in the hands of French, Dutch and British troops are slaughtering the people of Indo-China, Indonesia and India. United States loans are financing reactionary regimes and wars of colonial suppression. Nowhere did the war bring the “Four Freedoms” – only repression, starvation, ruin and death.
Here at home, the first fruits of “victory” have been a ferocious anti-labor drive; a wave of lynch-terror against the Negro people; a terrible housing crisis affecting millions of veterans and workers; monumental government debt, mounting taxes and inflation; the looming shadow of another depression; and the growing threat of military regimentation. Over all hangs the threat of another World War in the not distant future – a war of atomic annihilation.
This is what World War II has brought – not the “liberation” promised by the Stalinists. Their betrayal of the workers to the imperialists in the war constitutes their greatest and most monstrous crime.
It is only in the light of this real understanding of Stalinism, what it is and how it operates, that the specific record of Stalinist crimes presented in this pamphlet takes on full and clear meaning. It is only with this understanding that the maritime workers, as well as all other sections of American labor, can conduct a progressive and effective fight against the sinister influence of Stalinism.
 
MARITIME UNIONISM’S GREAT TRADITION
American seamen have a great and honorable tradition in the struggle for labor’s emancipation. Maritime workers for the past century have fought and sacrificed and died to build unionism.
The twelve years between 1934 and today, when American labor rose to mighty organized stature, found the maritime workers in the front ranks of union struggle.
These twelve years began with the historic 1934 West Coast waterfront strike that gave a great impetus to maritime unionism. They reached a magnificent climax in 1946 with the greatest maritime strike in history.
These twelve years have seen the maritime workers solidly organized. They have raised their wages far above what they dared even dream of in the old days. They have eliminated some of the worst conditions that once made the industry a living hell.
From a virtual slave without any rights, the American seaman has become a union man, standing on his own feet and fighting back against his enemies.
It is a tribute to the militancy, union loyalty and self-sacrifice of the seamen that they have made these giant gains despite especially difficult conditions.
They are confronted by a ruthless and powerful combine of shipowners at whose side has stood the capitalist government. And an industry where workers are scattered in small groups always on the move, is a lot tougher to organize than one where workers are concentrated in large plants.
To these, great obstacles was added another – the enemy within. Prior to 1934 the maritime unions were cursed with the weight of a reactionary union bureaucracy. The workers had to advance every step of the way in spite of and against the phonies and bureaucrats. These bureaucrats kept the maritime workers separated into many unions and craft divisions. They stifled the voice of the rank and file. They opposed militant policies and collaborated with the employers and their government agents.
 
Rise of the NMU
The CIO National Maritime Union arose out of the seamen’s struggle to establish a fighting union free of the bureaucratic machine that dominated the old AFL International Seamen’s Union. Following the lead of the insurgent seamen on the West Coast, a section of the East Coast seamen fought against the sell-out policies of the ISU-AFL bureaucrats and broke from the grip of these bureaucrats after the 1936-1937 strike. In May 1937, they founded the NMU and joined the main stream of industrial unionism, the CIO.
The NMU’s birth coincided with the government’s policy of direct intervention against the seamen on behalf of the shipowners, who had proved unable to push back the tide of unionism. It was the beginning of the government’s legislative attack on the seamen and the attempt to put over the Copeland Fink Book.
Thus, the NMU was originally founded on a policy of struggle against the ship operators, the government and the labor bureaucrats.
Despite the policies that inspired the founding of the NMU, the seamen did not achieve their desire to be rid of a strangling bureaucracy. In the course of an internal struggle during the formative stages of the NMU, another bureaucratic clique came to power.
 
The Stalinist Clique
This ruthless, anti-democratic clique was the waterfront section of the Communist Party (Stalinist). From 1939 on, the Stalinists held iron control over the N M U. Only in the past year has there emerged any serious challenge to their rule.
Thus, for seven years the Stalinists have had a truly enviable opportunity in the NMU to prove in practice their claim to be the “vanguard of the working class.”
Instead of uniting the seamen around a fighting program, they have been vicious opponents of a militant policy. They have been shameless collaborators with the employers and reactionary government agents. They have been disrupters of maritime unity. They have been corrupt bureaucrats, crushing any seaman who dared to speak for a progressive policy.
Their crowning treachery came during the war. Because they supported the imperialist war, they sold themselves body and soul to Wall Street and its government. As volunteer scabs and strike-breakers throughout the labor movement, they earned the workers’ contempt.
But Big Business paid tribute to the Stalinists’ fink role. The Wall Street organ, Business Week, on March 18, 1944, observed that the unions “identified as Communist-dominated” have “moved to the extreme right-wing position in the American labor movement”.
The Stalinist union leaders, said Business Week, have “the best no-strike record”, are “the most serious proponents of labor-management cooperation”, the “only serious advocates of incentive wages”, the “last to call for smashing the Little Steel Formula”, and their unions “are the only unions which support the President’s call for a national service act (labor conscription)”.
One working-class voice alone spoke out boldly and truthfully about the real role of the Stalinists – the Socialist Workers Party (Trotskyist) and its weekly paper, The Militant. The Trotskyists opposed the profiteers’ war and militantly continued to defend labor’s interests.
The Stalinists made the Trotskyists their special target for slander and physical terrorism. The Communist Party spread up and down the waterfront tens of thousands of books and pamphlets smearing the Trotskyists.
 
Trotskyists’ Wartime Defense of Labor
The Socialist Workers Party opposed playing ball with the employers and their government. We
fought the no-strike pledge, and called for labor to get off the employer-dominated War Labor Board. In maritime, we opposed establishment of the Recruitment and Manning Office and every attempt of the government to undermine the union hiring hall. We assailed the attempt to impose Coast Guard rule over merchant seamen.
Because we defended the rights of labor during the war, the Stalinists slandered the Trotskyists and all union militants as “fascists” and “Hitlerite-agents”. The CP issued a pamphlet, The Trotskyite Fifth Column in the Labor Movement by the Daily Worker’s poison-pen specialist, George Morns. This, pamphlet has been withdrawn, because today it serves as a confession of Stalinist crimes.
According to this pamphlet, our greatest “crime” was to oppose labor’s surrender of its rights during the war. The Trotskyists, lamented Morris, “oppose national unity and all common labor-employer government action”. They “ridicule a postwar outlook of national unity and full employment and pin their hopes on a sharp crisis”. They “oppose labor’s wartime no-strike pledge” and “sneer at joint labor-management committees as ‘speed-up’ instruments”. They “shout loudly that management and labor cannot possibly have a joint interest.” And, horror of horrors, the Trotskyists have a “feverish interest in a ‘labor party’”.
Morris further complains that “the Trotskyites know that they can be effective only if they exploit real dissatisfaction and grievances”. He does not explain what the Stalinist union leaders were doing about “real dissatisfaction and grievances”. For the Stalinists would like their ‘wartime’ union record – and postwar record – kept as a book sealed with seven seals. Their whole strikebreaking record constitutes one of the most shameful chapters in the history of labor betrayals.
 
“COMMUNISTS ON THE WATERFRONT”
In the January 3, 1947 NMU Pilot, President Curran states that the Stalinist clique “propose to use the same tactics which have been used in our Union for the past two years, when they attempted to jam down our throats collaboration policy, with the shipowners and anybody who voted against it was slandered and smeared”.
This statement is true – except for the time element. The Stalinists have been practicing their treachery not just for “the past two years” but throughout the NMU’s history. That treachery is but a small part of their crimes against all labor. For the real record, we must go back to the war years themselves.
Let us study the wartime record of Stalinism by starting with a 112-page pamphlet the Communist Party published in May 1946, and distributed all over the waterfront. This document is misnamed Communists on the Waterfront. Every line contains a lie, and sometimes two.
Only four of the pamphlet’s 112 pages deal with, the Stalinist role on the waterfront after July 1939 – when the Stalin-Hitler pact was signed. From July 1939 to December 7, 1941, the pamphlet is a complete blank. The Stalinists don’t want the seamen to be reminded of that period.
After skipping the Stalin-Hitler pact period completely, the pamphlet’s author, Herb Tank, hurriedly rushes over the period from December 7, 1941. He boasts how the super-patriotic Stalinists urged the seamen to “keep ‘em sailing” for the benefit of Wall Street’s war and profits. He complains only that “when the seamen turned their energies toward fighting Hitler the shipowners began breaking down conditions”.
What, did the Stalinists do about this? Tank tells in two sentences: “DON’T LET THE SHIPOWNERS PROVOKE A STRIKE! The Communists [read Stalinists] fought for a no-strike policy in the marine industry”. That is, the Stalinists held the seamen’s arms, while the bosses socked them!
In these same four pages, Tank is compelled to admit the Stalinists “made serious errors” under “the leadership of Earl Browder”, who “claimed American capitalism was progressive – that the workers could solve their problems by collaborating with the bosses”.
But all that, we are assured, has been “corrected”. Browder was expelled for “opportunism” and the Communist Party is now led by William Z. Foster. We are told that Foster had always held that “the basic nature of capitalism and imperialism had not been changed by the war”.
But all through the war, when he was National Chairman of the Communist Party, when he went around attacking strikes and calling for collaboration between the workers and the bosses, Foster was silent about Wall Street imperialism. His mouth was opened, as Tank admits, only after “the American Communists came in for severe criticism from leading European Communists.
Only then did the American Stalinists suddenly discover that their leader for 16 years was an “opportunist” and “revisionist”. In the Communist Party, it seems, one man could keep the whole party, including Foster, meekly chained to an “opportunist” policy for years. That speaks volumes for the kind of party it really is.
But Browder’s “opportunism” and “revisionism” expressed themselves not only in the realm of theory. They led to specific acts, carried out by the whole present Communist Party leadership.
These acts stand as crimes in the eyes of every honest trade unionist. The Stalinist crimes were the most despicable of all – scabbing and strikebreaking.
 
Strikebreaking Record
To fully understand the role of the Stalinists in wartime, it is first necessary to review their record on the general labor front during the past years. Their actions in the NMU are but one reflection of a national and international policy.
During the war more than 2,000,000 American workers were forced to go on strike to defend themselves from employer attacks, protect their unions and maintain their living standards against wartime inflation.
The Stalinists, in the name of “national unity”, placed themselves at the disposal of the anti-labor forces as direct streak-breakers.
They tried to break the miners’ strikes and the West Coast machinists’ strike, and earned the condemnation of the whole labor movement for their scandalous conduct in the Montgomery Ward strikes. In every instance where the workers fought for their rights, the Stalinists intervened on the side of the employers.
The actions of the Communist Party during the 1943 coal miners’ strikes are remembered with hatred by every miner. The Daily Worker ran columns of abuse against the miners and John L. Lewis, The Communist Party held public meetings in every large city, including the Yankee Stadium in New York, to mobilize strikebreaking sentiment. Communist Party leaders toured the mine districts urging the miners to go back to work without a contract.
William Z. Foster, on April 29, 1943, wrote a front-page article in the Daily Worker attacking the impending mine strike on May 1. He spoke on May 2 in Town Hall, Philadelphia, calling on the miners to submit to the War Labor Board.
When the first strike was halted for a two-week truce, the Daily Worker gloated that the “Lewis line” had been “utterly defeated”. But when the second strike began in June, the June 11 Daily Worker demanded that “under no circumstances should the government give way to the Lewis conspiracy”.
A minor but very revealing incident happened near Pittsburgh. Two officials of the Communist Party were picked up by police outside Washington, Pa., and charged with illegal use of gas coupons for pleasure driving. Michael Saunders, Pennsylvania state CP organizer, pleaded that it was a business trip “to see some of our members and do everything we could to start a back-to-work movement”. The OPA ration attorney Richard L. Nassau ruled that use of gas coupons for strikebreaking was “legitimate”.
Two years later, the Daily Worker was again screaming in headlines: “Not An Hour’s Stoppage! The Mines Must Be Seized!” (Daily Worker, March 30, 1945).
In The Militant of November 18, 1944, we read an editorial denouncing Stalinist strikebreaking in another labor struggle. “During the recent strike of 2,500 San Francisco machinists, the traitorous West Coast Stalinist CIO leaders called on the capitalist government to use ‘armed forces and the appropriate government agencies ... in any action necessary to halt this or any other strike’”.
Turn the guns on workingmen – that was the Stalinist line!
 
Bridges Scabs on Ward Strike
You will find no CP publication circulated today that mentions the Montgomery Ward strikes. And for good reason.
The Montgomery Ward strike in April–May 1944, evoked the support of the whole labor movement, with but one exception – the Communist Party. Everybody knew that the Ward workers were forced to strike or see their union smashed by America’s No. 1 Open-Shopper, Sewell Avery.
But Harry Bridges saw nothing wrong with scabbing against 40-cent-an-hour workers. When the CIO Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union appealed to Bridges to halt CIO warehousemen in Ward’s St. Paul unit from handling scab goods from Chicago, the answer was: “We will handle Chicago orders eight hours a day, call it scabbing if you
want to”.
The Daily Worker launched a red-baiting attack on the Montgomery Ward strike leaders and slanderously linked them with their most hated enemy, Avery. “Mr. Avery owes his success in provoking the strike in large measure to a group of Trotskyites who, are in the leadership of the striking local”, said the Daily Worker, April 17, 1944.
When union after union passed indignant resolutions demanding the ouster of Bridges for his scabbing in the Ward strike, the Daily Worker, June 19, 1944, turned the charge of “scab” against the STRIKERS!
“Those who violate the no-strike pledge are scabs and should be so treated. Scabs were never handled with kid-gloves.”
How pleased every rat who ever crossed a picket line must have felt to hear militant strikers fighting the bosses called “scabs.”
 
Stalinists Back “Slave Labor” Scheme
The direct strikebreaking of the Stalinists was coupled with their eager endorsement of every government move to shackle and cripple the unions. This reached its low point when the Communist Party rushed to embrace Roosevelt’s proposal for universal labor conscription – a proposal that was denounced by the leaders of every national labor organization as a “slave labor” scheme.
But that didn’t stop the Daily Worker, January 22, 1944, from lying that, “One fact stands out beyond a shadow of a doubt when we talk of labor’s sentiments on the President’s message to Congress, ALL LABOR (original emphasis) is behind it.”
“All Labor” turned out to be the Stalinists’ chief union spokesman Harry Bridges, and the Stalinist leadership of the NMU. The February 5, 1944 New Leader revealed the inside story, never denied by Bridges or the Daily Worker, about what happened when CIO President Murray and AFL President Green went to the White House to protest Roosevelt’s slave labor scheme.
“Roosevelt’s reply was to tell Murray scornfully that he could not speak for the CIO on that view ... and in proof showed Murray a telegram from Harry Bridges endorsing a labor conscription act”.
Stalinist Howard McKenzie sought to whitewash Roosevelt’s draft-labor scheme at a meeting of 2,500 NMU members in New York City. As reported in The Pilot, January 14. 1944, page 1, McKenzie said: “The President didn’t say draft labor, he said ‘every adult.’ ... What the President did was to say we’re going’ to draft both capital and labor”.
The climax of Stalinist betrayal during the war was their proposal to put American labor in no-strike handcuffs permanently. Here again it was Bridges who first offered to deliver labor hog-tied on a platter to the bosses after the war.
Addressing a meeting of CIO Warehousemen’s Local 6 in San Francisco on May 25, 1944, Bridges said that the “strike weapon is overboard, not only for the duration of the war, but after the war”. At the same meeting the Stalinists jammed through a resolution that called strikes “treason”, offered to back the government “in any actions to prevent strikes”, and urged employers to “refuse to give consideration to the demands of any section of labor” that went on strike, not merely during the war but “indefinitely thereafter”.
The Stalinist clique in the NMU spilled the same kind of bilge in the pages of The Pilot. A typical example was the following statement in the February 18, 1944 issue: “Among the great industrialists there are many who believe in and will fight just as sincerely and effectively as ourselves, for enduring peace. These are our allies and we must learn to work with them honestly and wholeheartedly”.
The first thing these “allies” did as the war approached its close was to launch the most savage anti-union drive in modern American labor history – a drive that has steadily increased in ferocity.
 
POSTWAR SCABBERY
Now the finky Stalinist defenders of Wall Street’s imperialist plan of plunder tell us that maybe they made “some errors” during the war, but when Foster took the CP helm, everything changed overnight. Actually, the only thing that changed was the phrases. Fake-militant words were used to cover up continuing Stalinist betrayals.
Two classic examples of Stalinist postwar scabbery – under Foster’s leadership – were the General Motors strike and the AFL-CIO joint machinists’ strike in San Francisco and Oakland.
When the CIO United Automobile Workers struck General Motors in November 1945, the UAW General Motors Conference appealed to the Stalinist leaders of the CIO United Electrical Workers to pull out some 30,000 workers in GM’s Electrical Division.
For more than two months the Stalinists ignored the desperate plea of the GM auto workers who were fighting against the world’s greatest industrial corporation. When the GM electrical workers themselves voted to strike and finally walked out, the UE leaders hastened to conclude an agreement with General Motors in the midst of the UAW negotiations and undercut the wage demands of the GM auto workers. That is how these professional “unity shouters” practice labor solidarity.
 
What CP Members Revealed
But now we come to the evidence of a group of former Communist Party members from the “liquidated” CP machinists’ club in San Francisco. They were expelled for refusing to organize a strike-breaking back-to-work movement in the November 1945 AFL-CIO machinists’ joint strike.
Their statement, published in the October 28, 1945 NCP Report, organ of a group of CP dissidents, speaks for itself:
“After issuing perfunctory approval of the machinists’ strike demands as ‘just’, CP began to break the strike. It issued leaflets and had articles published in People’s World openly advising machinists that they couldn’t win the strike and urging them to go back to work.
“The best CP branch here, made up of machinists and having the best reputation in the whole country, was directed by CP to attack the strike leaders as Trotskyite (which was a damned lie, as usual) and to demand a rank-and-file committee to lead a back-to-work movement.
“Naturally, the machinists’ branch would not go along with CP policy, and so the branch was liquidated in the usual smart way; at the end of a meeting called for another purpose, the liquidation of the branch was announced, with a ruling: ‘There will be no discussion of this’. Expulsions came thick and fast”.
Here is the real picture of Stalinism in action under Foster, as under Browder.
 
BETRAYAL IN MARITIME
The wartime record of the Stalinists in maritime equals their record of treachery against all other workers.
If American merchant seamen today face the threat of militarization, government regimentation, coast guard “discipline”, destruction of the union hiring hall, let them remember that it was the Stalinist union leaders who not only welcomed but invited government intervention during the war.
It was the Stalinist leaders in the CIO waterfront unions who called for the establishment of government boards to rule the maritime industry. In a speech to the Industrial Relations Section of the Commonwealth Club, April 8, 1942, at San Francisco, Harry Bridges boasted:
“The International Longshoremen’s and Warehousemen’s Union ... proposed to its employers and to the government a plan to have the entire longshore industry on the Pacific Coast operated exclusively under the control of a joint management-labor-government board. We devised the plan and we pushed for its adoption”.
Bridges further admitted that he was prepared to surrender any and every provision of the union contract at the behest of such a board. “In proposing the establishment of such a board, the union agreed to set aside any and all provisions of its entire collective bargaining contract if any such provisions of the contract in any way blocked an all-out war effort”.
Bridges glorified the War Labor Board, and at the 1942 California CIO convention he declared: “One agency in the U. S. Government today that is doing a good job is the National War Labor Board”.
The WLB was doing a good job – for the bosses! It froze all wages with the infamous “Little Steel Formula”.
 
Treachery in the NMU
Bridges’ actions and statements were duplicated, with minor variations, by the Stalinist clique in the NMU.
Right after Pearl Harbor, the Stalinist leaders in the NMU rushed to Washington with proposals for shackling the union and placing the seamen at the mercy of employer-dominated government boards.
At a government-sponsored conference or maritime union leaders and ship operators, Frederick Myers, then a chief Communist Party spokesman in the NMU, presented a memorandum for “insuring uninterrupted shipping facilities to guarantee the success of our war effort”.
It called for the “establishment of a board consisting of representatives of all the labor organizations, the shipowners and the interested government agencies”. On this board, “the shipowners and the labor organizations shall have an equal vote, with the appropriate government agency casting the deciding vote”. That is, the deciding
vote would go to a government stooge of the ship operators.
At a follow-up conference in Washington (see The Pilot, April 10, 1942) the Stalinists introduced a further proposal on “the problems of recruitment, discipline and the maintenance of efficiency” for merchant marine personnel. This covered:
“a) Availability of personnel, including manning, training and promotion; b) Discipline, on board ship and in domestic and foreign ports; c) The systematic elimination of disloyal elements; d) The waiving by mutual agreement of such collective bargaining provisions as may be found to interfere with the war effort”.
This was to be done not through a union agency, but “by definite fixing of responsibility as well as authority” for handling personnel problems in a Maritime Personnel Board to be set up by the government under the shipowner-controlled War Shipping Administration. On this hand-picked government board of 10 members, the Stalinists proposed to put exactly one representative of rank-and-file seamen.
With this go-ahead sign from the Stalinist union leaders, the government proceeded to tighten its bureaucratic grip on the seamen through special agencies: the Maritime War Emergency Board; the Coast Guard; the Recruitment and Manning Office; etc.
The Coast Guard became, and remains to this day; the instrument for regimenting the seamen under military discipline. Through the MWEB the wages of seamen were frozen and the war risk bonuses were arbitrarily slashed and finally eliminated. The RMO shipping pool provided a reservoir of non-union personnel to man unorganized ships and was held as a constant threat over the union hiring hall.
 
Stalinists Supported Regimentation
Every one of these anti-union agencies was supported by the Stalinist clique heading the NMU. They went out of their way to cooperate with these agencies and enforce their decisions against the seamen.
Militant NMU members must feel sick at their stomachs when they recall the wartime issues of The Pilot. Look at a typical issue, like that of Jan. 21, 1944 (pages 3 and 14), reporting how anti-labor officials of the Maritime Commission, RMO and Coast Guard attended a meeting of the NMU National Council and “received a standing ovation”.
Read how Admiral Waesche of the Coast Guard at this meeting defended the Hearing Units (Coast Guard kangaroo courts for seamen) and how “several of the agents (NMU) came forward to commend the Coast Guard for the fair, impartial job it was doing”.
Read in the same column how The Pilot editors glow over praise from Admiral Land, head of the crooked Maritime Commission and author of the slogan, “Union organizers should be shot at sunrise”.
It took an unsurpassed record of labor betrayal to win such commendation from a union-hater like Admiral Land.
Instead of opposing Coast Guard “discipline” for merchant seamen, the Stalinist NMU leaders welcomed it. They acted as fingermen against union militants who opposed their sell-out policy.
At the July 1943 NMU convention, Captain Edward Macauley, deputy administrator of the WSA, spoke of “a minority in the union who constitute a potential powder keg” and threatened the maritime unions with “loss of many of their present rights unless these elements are weeded out”.
 
Fingermen Against Seamen
Instead of denouncing this vicious ultimatum, the NMU leaders promptly pushed through a resolution endorsing the Coast Guard Hearing Units and pledging to aid the Coast Guard in “weeding out the undesirable elements”. They also promised the RMO full cooperation in ferreting out seamen employed in shoreside industries and forcing them back to sea.
The Stalinist-dominated NMU National Council went so far as to endorse the scheme to give the Coast Guard permanent control over the merchant seamen. In July 1944, they adopted a special resolution offering “high commendation” to the Coast Guard and praising the Hearing Units as “unbiased, nondiscriminatory and unprejudiced”. This resolution, published in The Pilot, July 28, 1944, page 13, stated:
“The National Council is in favor of the continued jurisdiction of an impartial agency such as the Coast Guard, over the questions of safety, navigation and inspection in peacetime as well as in war.” (Our emphasis).
The Stalinist clique jettisoned union shipping rules in favor of onerous government shipping regulations. They spied out alleged violators and turned them over to the draft boards.
Most NMU members well recall the Principal Wartime Shipping Rules of the National Maritime Union, which read in part:
“All men between the years of 18 and 30 who persist in turning down ships, or continually overstay their time on the beach, will have their names turned over to Draft Board as provided for under Selective Service law.
“All men over 30 years of age who persist in turning down ships, or continually overstay their time on the beach, will have their names turned over to War Manpower Commission as not being bona-fide seamen”.
This meant that seamen torpedoed or bombed on repeated dangerous runs were forced back on the ships before they had recuperated, under threat of being drafted. Older seamen were turned over to the War Manpower Commission, deprived of certificates of availability and virtually blacklisted in the industry.
Seamen whom the Stalinists charged with violating government rules were driven to ship on non-union lines. Frederick Myers, then NMU vice-president, complained in a letter to the WSA about the increase in shipping crimps and company “hiring halls”:
“The union has even gone so far as to taking drastic action against men who violate our shipping rules ... After the Union takes this action, however, its hands are tied because the individual penalized for violating these rules is free to go to anyone of the few unorganized companies”. (The Pilot, May 5, 1944, page 3).
Commenting on the stoolpigeon role of the Stalinists, The Militant, organ of the Socialist Workers Party, said on July 8, 1944: “The policies of NMU leaders in supporting the government and its bureaus have become so oppressive that seamen are driven away from the Union hall to the protection of – the shipowners and their crimps. This is virtually what The Pilot itself says”.
While the Stalinist NMU leaders were acting as cops and stoolpigeons against the seamen, union conditions won in years of bitter struggle rapidly deteriorated.
 
“Readin’, Writin’ and No Strikin’”
When it came to enforcing government restrictions, the Stalinists were tigers. When it came to defending seamen’s rights and conditions, the Stalinists crawled like worms. Their role was summarized by a leading reactionary magazine, Collier’s, in an article that scandalized the American labor movement.
Loyal, progressive NMU members must burn with rage at the thought of the ridicule and contempt brought on their union by the Stalinists when the April 21, 1945 Collier’s published Readin’, Writin’ and No Strikin’.
This article recorded the depth of Stalinist-shipowner collaboration. Stalinists in the NMU should be made to read this article out loud every time they take the floor to slander an opponent or boast of their union “victories”.
The authors of the Collier’s article expressed amazement at the degree of collaboration between the NMU officials and ship operators.
“We had to be shown”, they begin, “when we heard that the shipping industry and the National Maritime Union, which only a few years ago were constantly at each other’s throats, were now as cooperative as a brace of lovebirds. So friendly are they that some of the larger companies have agreed to send their port captains and agents to a ‘leadership’ school run by the union”. (Our emphasis)
The title, Readin’, Writin’ and No Strikin’, was derived from the fact, reported by the authors, that the NMU was “the first and one of the very few unions which has already made a postwar no-strike pledge”.
The Stalinist permanent no-strike program was the main subject taught by the “professor” Danny Boano. One of the union students, after listening to Boano, declared indignantly, “What the hell is this? Are you working for us or the shipowners?”
Boano, reports the article, rose to defend the poor, misunderstood and abused shipping magnate who, after the war, find he
“has invested all his money in the ships, got contracts with these foreign countries to deliver the goods they need, and, just when he’s all set, the seamen, like the impatient brother back there, go on strike; they pull the pin.
“Where’s the shipowner going to find himself? His money is all tied up, his ships are tied up and the foreign governments are screaming for goods. And if we don’t deliver the goods, foreign seamen will. Then where are we? We’re on a picket line. The shipowner loses his contracts, his dough is all tied up. And then where will we ever get the $200 a month we want for A.B.’s?”
We are not surprised to read that while this was going on, “Mr. Basil Harris, the country’s largest shipowner, walked in and sat down among the students”. Upon the special invitation at the Stalinist teaching staff, Basil Harris, head of the union-hating United States Lines, addressed the class. When he finished his talk, dripping with honeyed protestations of shipowner love for the seamen, one deluded student was heard to remark; “He’s a real union capitalist, a regular union man”.
 
TROTSKYIST RECORD IN MARITIME
While the Stalinists were helping to put handcuffs on the seamen, the Trotskyists told the truth about the dangers facing the seamen during the war and postwar periods.
The full position of the Socialist Workers Party is contained in Frederick J. Lang’s Maritime, first published in March 1943, and re-issued in October 1945, by Pioneer Publishers, 116 University Place, New York City.
Maritime is a conclusive answer to the Stalinist slanders about the Trotskyists on the waterfront. Published in the very midst of the war, Maritime exposed and attacked the ship operators and their government stooges and called for a militant union defense of the seamen’s rights.

Against the retreats and betrayals of the union leaders and the government-shipowner plot to shackle the seamen under military rule, Maritime called on the seamen’s unions to fight militantly for their independence. The Trotskyist slogans were:

“Let the unions maintain discipline! Hands off union affairs!
 
“One book for all seamen – the Union Book! No Fink Books for American seamen!
 
“Defend the union hiring hall! No pool! No government halls!
 
“Defend union independence by maintaining the right to strike!
 
“No union hostages in government war boards!
 
“Train new seamen at government expense under trade-union control! No fink ships!
 
“Workers’ control! Open the shipowners’ books! All maritime subsidies controlled by union committees!
 
“Stop the mismanagement of the ship-‘owner’ parasites! Let the men who man the ships control the industry!”

That’s the program the Stalinists slandered as a “Hitlerite” program. That’s the working-class program the Trotskyists fought for while the Stalinists turned militant union seamen over to the Coast Guard and Draft Board; broke strikes; hob-nobbed with the shipowners; enforced the RMO rules; supported the wage-freezing government boards; told the seamen not to strike even after the war; and urged postwar “labor-management” collaboration so that “we would not be giving up our system of private profit but would be, in fact, bolstering it up”. (The Pilot, December 24, 1943, page 2)
 
FRUITS OF STALINIST SELL-OUT
The fruits of the Stalinist sell-out policy were harvested by the seamen in 1945 when they were caught in the squeeze of soaring wartime inflation and drastic reduction of take-home pay.
In April 1945 the MWEB set in motion its program for quickly reducing and finally totally wiping out the war-risk bonus. Faced by the threat of a bonus cut on July 15 for seamen on the North Atlantic and Mediterranean runs, the NMU leaders could only whine to the MWEB that “the NMU has asked the Maritime War Emergency Board for time to prepare the membership for a $40 bonus cut proposed by the Board. We knew that a slash was coming as the end of the war neared, but we think the proposal was badly timed”.
The proposal was badly timed! That’s what The Pilot wrote editorially on May 4, 1945.
They also argued with great indignation that “the Dumbarton Oaks and Bretton Woods Plans calls for higher standards of living – not wage cuts”.
Since the NMU seamen didn’t put much faith in “Dumbarton Oaks” and “Bretton Woods”, the Stalinists also put forward a $200 Wage Program to make up for the bonus cut. This turned out to be a plea to the War Labor Board for a 55-cent an hour minimum wage that would bring A.B.’s wages up to $144.50 a month – not $200. The extra $65.50, the Stalinists claimed, would come from “political action” to pass the Pepper 65-cent Minimum Wage Bill that had been defeated in Congress only a few months before, and other unenumerated benefits.
Exposing the demagogy of the Stalinist $200 Wage Program, The Militant, April 28, 1945, wrote:
“The wage program of the NMU is nothing more than an empty gesture, because it is backed up by no policy of militant action. Point Number One in a serious program to get wage increases would be to revoke the ‘no-strike pledge’. Point Number Two would be the preparation of the union for militant action”.
This statement – completely confirmed by the experiences of the 1946 general maritime strike – became the subject of one of the most fantastic union meetings ever held. At the April 26, 1945 NMU membership meeting in New York, the Stalinist leaders staged a three-hour orgy of “Trotskyite”-baiting.
Stalinist Howard McKenzie led the pack, howling: “The workers are being given the impression that the way to win things is through strike action. But these Trotskyites don’t tell you what is going to happen to you after you strike. The fascists would move in and put you back to work at the point of a gun, and you would be forced to work for $30 a month”.
A year later – after the seamen had lost millions in wages – the NMU did call a strike, and Truman did threaten to put them to work at the point of a gun. But it was Truman who backed down!
 
A Crack in the Bureaucratic Crust
In all the years of Stalinist treachery and betrayal, didn’t the NMU members realize what was going on? Many of them did. But any member who dared to “talk out of turn” was immediately attacked, slandered and victimized by the ruthless Stalinist machine. Resentment was gradually boiling up among the NMU militants. But it found no outlet, until a crack opened in the bureaucratic crust.
The NMU members discovered that a conflict over basic policy had been in progress for a year and a half only when the NMU National Council was forced to print in the November 23, 1945 Pilot the letter of resignation of National Director Ralph Rogers.
Rogers revealed that in July 1944 a conflict arose in the NMU national leadership over acceptance of the July 15, 1944 WLB decision on wages. The headlines of the July 14, 1944 Pilot proclaimed: “Council, Membership Hail ‘Best’ Agreement.” Howard McKenzie was quoted as saying “This is the best contract ever negotiated by the NMU”.
Rogers’ letter declared however, that he and several other Council members took the position that in fact the WLB decision “contained practically no gains whatsoever for our membership. It did not contain an actual increase in wages, increased overtime rates, standby pay, increased scales, or many of the other demands that we felt could have been won by a real mobilization of the membership behind a fighting policy increased overtime.
The Stalinists smeared all who suggested that this sell-out agreement wasn’t the “greatest ever achieved”, Rogers reported. Myers, McKenzie, Smith, Stack & Co. began to “assassinate the character and integrity of all those who opposed the decision”. They spread the word that Rogers himself “was a phony, that I had sold out to Lundberg and that I was a Trotskyite”.
Once Rogers’ letter was published, more and more facts came out. They were supplied, significantly, by top NMU leaders who had themselves been members or close associates of the CP.
 
Rift in NMU Leadership
Finally, the NMU members got a first-hand revelation from NMU President Joseph Curran at the February 18, 1946 New York membership meeting. Curran openly charged that “the union is in the hands of a machine ... a machine that is going to tell you are going to work or else ... The machine tells you who is a phony in the union, the machine tells you who elect, who to fire. The machine tells you who to bring on charges.” Anyone who uttered a word of criticism, he said, was subjected to a vile slander campaign and hounded from the union and forced to resign from office.
This rift in the top leadership coincided with a developing internal conflict inside the Communist Party. A wave of expulsions had begun against CP workers for criticizing the Foster leadership.
Foster stated at a CP National Committee meeting of February 5, 1946, that
“We have a very dangerous situation in the NMU. We have done our best to try to adjust the situation and have been unable to accomplish it. The principal reason is our own comrades in the NMU. They are not carrying out the party line or we would have a different situation in the NMU. There has been a little surgery in the NMU, but apparently not enough. If these comrades continue to defy the party line, we will have to do some more surgery”.
Foster’s lieutenants in the NMU tried to carry out this “surgery” with the greasy knife of slander and bureaucratic repression but were stymied by a rising tide of revolt against their misrule.
 
The Fake “Unity” Maneuver
It was under the circumstances of this challenge to their hitherto tight control, that the Stalinists conceived one of their most sly maneuvers. That was the formation of the Committee for Maritime Unity – more appropriately known as the “Committee for Maritime Disunity”.
Through the CMU, the Stalinists planned to strengthen their slipping grip on the NMU and consolidate their machine on the waterfront. The Stalinists misused the seamen’s genuine desire for unity. Not only a large section of the members, but a number of non-Stalinist maritime union leaders, were taken in by this fake “unity” maneuver.
From the very beginning, the Trotskyists exposed the scheme. Just prior to the CMU founding convention, the April 27, 1946 issue of The Militant declared:
“The Stalinists are motivated primarily by their desire to strengthen their stranglehold over the unions now under their domination and to consolidate their forces for a jurisdictional struggle against rival AFL unions”.
The immediate result of the CMU Conference was not unity, but further disunity. The conference, as The Militant
reported, “is regarded by the AFL unions as a hostile move directed against them, They, in turn, are talking of organizing an AFL maritime council for protection and mutual aid against any CIO invasion of their jurisdiction ... The Stalinist moves have strengthened the hand of the elements within the AFL unions who welcome a jurisdiction fight as an opportunity to expand at the expense of the CIO”.
The Militant called instead for “unity of the maritime workers in agreed-upon joint actions” as the “only honest and realistic approach. Such joint action is the indicated elementary step in any program looking toward eventual and genuine unification of the waterfront unions”.
Events and experience since have confirmed to the hilt the Trotskyist appraisal of CMU, The disruptive activities of CMU became so scandalous that its national co-chairman, Joseph Curran, felt impelled to resign and denounce the CMU.
In a statement to the NMU Council, Curran affirmed that the “CMU has been used for the purpose, number one, of controlling our union, and number two, for promoting warfare on the waterfront with the American Federation of Labor and the independent unions”.
The fake “unity” maneuver of the Stalinists reached its lowest point when the CMU Port Committee in San Francisco “gave to the Masters, Mates and Pilots, who were on strike, a 24-hour ultimatum to pull their pickets off the dock or have them smashed”, as Curran reported to the NMU membership meeting in New York on December 30, 1946.
“My name was attached to that ultimatum, and I did not approve of it”, he said with justified indignation, “and the NMU does not approve of strikebreaking or smashing picket lines”.
In the light of these facts Curran demanded that the question of continued affiliation to the CMU be submitted to a referendum vote of the NMU membership. This demand for a democratic solution of the dispute was rejected by the Stalinist majority on the NMU National Council. A mud-slinging campaign was unleashed against the opponents of CMU. Dire prophecies were circulated in the ranks of imminent disaster that would befall the NMU if it withdrew from CMU.
But the Stalinist campaign backfired. The NMU membership was aroused over the bureaucratic rejection of their right to decide the question by referendum vote. The tide of opposition mounted into a mighty wave of rebellion against the Stalinist clique.
Executing a sudden tactical shift the Stalinist executive committee of the CMU met in secret session and voted to dissolve the organization. For the Stalinists the question was no longer one of utilizing CMU to tighten their grip on the NMU but of preserving their machine in the National Maritime Union. Faced with sure defeat they executed a strategic retreat, proclaiming it was all done in the name of “unity”.
 
HOW STALINISM RETAINS ITS INFLUENCE
This documented record of Stalinist crimes against American labor, and the maritime workers in particular, is a vivid example of how Stalinism has disoriented and disarmed the workers and led them to tragic defeats in country after country.
Why then does Stalinism still retain such powerful influence in the world labor movement?
Stalinism has appropriated to itself the glorious tradition of the Russian Revolution and the prestige of the Soviet Union, the first workers’ state. This state, despite its degeneration under Stalin, remains a symbol of revolutionary hope for hundreds of millions throughout the world. Stalin exploits this sentiment for his own reactionary ends.
At the same time, he has used the resources of a great state to conduct an unparalleled campaign of slander, falsification and terror against the real communists. As part of this campaign, Stalin has perverted the whole meaning of communism and misrepresented the program of the real Leninists as its opposite.
 
School of Falsification
The Stalinists are masters of distortion. That is the core of their method. They call black white, and white black. Here are a few examples.
We told earlier how during the war the Stalinists tried to twist the word “scab,” which was correctly applied to them, to mean not a fink who goes through picket lines, but a militant worker on the picket lines.
Right now they are reversing the meaning of “red-baiting”. Those who attack the Stalinists for serving the shipowners are being labeled “red-baiters.” We read in the November 1946 issue of The Maritime Worker, issued by the “Waterfront Committee of the Communist Party” in San Francisco, that workers expelled from the Communist Party are conducting “a new kind of red-baiting campaign”.
The Stalinist sheet explains:
“Of course their red-baiting sounds different than that used by the shipowners ... They say the Communist Party isn’t ‘radical’ enough for them ... They say that the Party is ‘too conservative’. They say that we are ‘reformist’ ...”
According to this logic, anyone who attacks labor traitors is a “red-baiter”.
During the war, Harry Bridges gave a classic demonstration of this Stalinist method in a statement on former U.S. Attorney General Francis Biddle, who was trying to railroad Bridges out of the country. Bridges, in the August 11, 1944 Dispatcher, called Biddle “Number One on the list” of “people who pal around with the Trotskyites and go a long way to protect them”.
At that very moment, 18 leaders of the Socialist Workers Party and the Minneapolis CIO truckdrivers were in Federal prison. They were railroaded by Biddle and his Department of Justice in the famous Minneapolis Labor Trial. Prosecuted under the infamous Smith “Gag” Act for opposing imperialist war and advocating international socialism, the Trotskyists were charged, among other “crimes”, with circulating the Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels.
Scores of CIO and AFL unions, representing nearly six million members, sent resolutions to President Roosevelt demanding the freedom of the SWP leaders.
The only elements in the labor movement who supported the imprisonment of the Trotskyists were the Communist Party and AFL Teamsters Czar Daniel J. Tobin, who helped engineer the frameup.
 
THE GREATEST FRAMEUP OF ALL
The fountainhead of all the Stalinist slander about the Trotskyists being “agents of Hitler” was the Moscow Frameup Trials. These trials were staged by Stalin to besmirch the real Bolsheviks, particularly the incorruptible Leon Trotsky, founder of the Red Army and co-leader with Lenin of the Russian Revolution of 1917.
In these “trials” from 1935 to 1938, a number of Lenin’s leading co-workers were forced under physical and psychological torture to “confess” fantastic plots to overthrow the Soviet Union in alliance with the Nazis. The chief target of this frameup was the exiled Trotsky, who warned that Stalin was framing and murdering his political opponents as a cover for his own behind-the-scenes preparations for a pact with Hitler. That pact was signed in 1939.
 
Moscow Trials Exposed
The Moscow Trials “confessions” invented by the Stalin secret police were completely exploded by the exhaustive investigation of the Dewey Commission, headed by Professor John Dewey. Its findings that the Moscow Trials were frameups are contained in a monumental report, Not Guilty, published by Harper & Bros.
The conclusions of the Dewey Commission were confirmed by the Nuremberg trial of the Nazi leaders last year. Every living Nazi leader was in Soviet and Allied hands. Tons of Nazi confidential documents had been seized. Yet the Soviet prosecutors could not find ONE THING to back their frameup accusations against Trotsky and the other Bolshevik leaders whom Stalin had murdered.
One of the Nazi defendants in the Nuremberg trial was Rudolf Hess, who had been named in the Moscow Trials as the “direct link” with Trotsky. Trotsky’s widow, Natalia, demanded that her attorney be given the right to cross-examine Hess. This demand was ignored, for the Stalinist prosecutors knew this would expose the frameup nature of the Moscow Trials before the whole word.
It is on the basis of these proven frameups that Stalinists for years have tried to discredit and smear the Trotskyists. These same methods of slander and frameup are used against every honest working-class opponent of Stalinism in the labor movement. They are the methods used by the treacherous Stalinist leaders in the NMU today.
In their fight against the reactionary and disruptive role of the Stalinists, the progressive NMU rank and file are helping to cleanse the labor movement of the sinister methods of slander; vilification and frameup.
 
HOW TO FIGHT STALINISM
The documented facts in this pamphlet show that the roots of the NMU’s internal conflict grow deep in the sub-soil of basic union policy and program.
For years the Stalinist bureaucratic clique has ruthlessly trampled underfoot the elementary rights of the rank-and-file and collaborated with the employers and their government.
Thus, the basic issues are the defense of union democracy and the fight for a militant class-struggle program against the seamen’s main enemy, the shipowner-government combine.
These are the issues the Stalinists want to bury. They want to drag the discussion into a blind alley of petty personalities and side issues. They seek to poison the atmosphere, and prevent a discussion of the real issues. They thereby give an opening to the reactionaries to launch a red-baiting drive.
Nothing would help the Stalinists – and the employers – more than to have the discussion derailed from basic issues by any form of red-baiting.
Today the danger of red-baiting is especially acute. The employers and their press are trying to inspire an “anti-red” campaign inside the union movement to divide and disrupt it. Their ultimate victims are the real union militants.
The employers are anxious to divert the progressive struggle of the NMU members against the Stalinists into reactionary red-baiting channels. They fear that a fight for union democracy and a militant class-struggle program will strengthen the union against the shipowners and government. They would like to see the reactionary, but discredited, Stalinists replaced merely by another reactionary clique who will serve Wall Street with undivided loyalty.
 
Red baiting Serves the Bosses
Red-baiting serves Wall Street imperialism in its war preparations against the Soviet Union. During the war the Stalinists spread the myth that the alliance of the Kremlin with Allied imperialism provided the basis of permanent peace and universal prosperity. The end of the war found a speedy realignment of Stalin’s erstwhile “allies”, who immediately began to lay the foundations for World War III against the Soviet Union.
For this reason, the employers do not consider the Stalinists to be sufficiently reliable today as labor lieutenants of American capitalism.
To defeat the Stalinists AND the bosses, the NMU ranks must fight for a real progressive, militant union policy and program.
 
FOR A CLASS-STRUGGLE PROGRAM
An effective program must answer the basic problems that have always faced the seamen. These problems are internal division, economic insecurity, shipowner parasitism and government regimentation.
The maritime workers are divided among more than a score of unions, separated along both craft and jurisdictional lines. In addition, a number of the unions practice racial discrimination against Negroes, thus dividing the workers on color lines.
While the maritime workers are divided, their enemies are united. The shipowners and their government agents are conducting a concerted offensive to smash all maritime unionism.
The great maritime strikes of 1946 again demonstrated the burning need for maritime labor unity. Unfortunately, inter-union hostility and suspicion have been sharpened by long years of jurisdictional strife. The problem of unifying the maritime workers cannot be solved overnight or by some slick “unity” maneuver like the Stalinist CMU, which only created further disruption and division.
 
Establish a Solid Maritime Front!
The first step toward real and lasting unity is to dispel the atmosphere of hostility and suspicion. Without being called upon to give up their present affiliations, the maritime workers must establish a solid front against their common enemy.
This can be achieved through carefully worked out, agreed-upon joint actions of all unions in defense of their mutual interests – against the shipowner-government forces. In the course of such joint actions the existing mutual distrust and suspicion will be broken down and a firm foundation laid for genuine unity.
The ultimate objective of the maritime workers is organic unity, the fusion of the separate unions into one. One of the most serious obstacles to the achievement of this objective is the policy of race discrimination particularly in the AFL seafaring unions and the independent Marine Firemen’s union.
While this is a barrier to organic unity with the non-discriminating NMU, it should not prevent joint actions. The Stalinists, however, seized upon AFL Jim Crow practices as an excuse to bolster their policy of sharpening jurisdictional division on the waterfront. The Stalinists use this seemingly plausible argument to oppose even joint actions, falsely claiming that these by themselves will lead to the imposition of Jim Crow policies on the CIO unions.
But it is precisely joint action of all seamen in struggle against the common enemy that offers the best means to break down racial prejudice. When seamen of all races and all affiliations join together in common action, racial and organizational prejudices will be dispelled in the heat of the struggle against the real enemies of all the workers, the capitalist exploiters.
Immediately after V-J Day the old problem of economic insecurity again loomed large before the seamen. Unemployment and reduced wages struck double blows. Soaring prices further slashed living standards.
Under the so-called “free enterprise system” or capitalist anarchy, the maritime industry is unstable, disorganized and chaotic. Once the artificial war boom was over, thousands of seamen were tossed on the beach as the government put hundreds of ships in “cold storage”.
The immediate answer to the growing unemployment in the maritime industry is the demand
 
FOR A FOUR-WATCH SYSTEM!
It is necessary to create more jobs by reducing the number of hours worked with no reduction in pay.
The elimination of the war bonuses and skyrocketing prices forced the seamen into strike action to regain a portion of their lost take-home pay. But within three months after the strike, inflation had already wiped out wage increases. By January 1947, the seamen were forced to demand new increases under less favorable conditions. These demands were placed in arbitration.
The seamen must defend their living standards and wage gains against the menace of inflation. If they are not to be forced out on strike every few months trying to keep up with rising prices, they must demand
 
A SLIDING SCALE OF WAGES!
This is a demand for an escalator clause in the contract providing that wage rates shall rise automatically with every rise in the cost of living. Under such a clause the basic wage scale stands as the guaranteed minimum. But the real wage at the start of the contract is safeguarded by automatic increases when prices rise.
The economic insecurity of the seamen is particularly acute because the industry is controlled by and run solely in the interests of a completely parasitic group of capitalist racketeers.
Most of the wartime ships were government-built and government-owned. The so-called ship-“owners” were merely operators who fattened off huge subsidies paid out of the public treasury.
Now thousands of government merchant ships, built and paid for by the American people, have been turned over to the profiteer-parasites for a song. While the capitalist government uses every means to keep seamen’s wages down, it continues to pay tremendous subsidies to the ship-“owners.”
If the government ceased feeding these parasites, then the added costs of the four-watch system and a sliding scale of wages could easily be met by demanding
 
ALL GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES FOR THE SEAMEN! NOT A PENNY OF PUBLIC FUNDS TO THE SHIP-“OWNER” PARASITES!
To ensure permanent security and decent conditions, the stranglehold of the tiny group of ship-“owners” must be completely broken. These useless and greedy blood-suckers must be eliminated from the industry by
 
NATIONALIZATION OF THE MERCHANT MARINE UNDER WORKERS CONTROL!
The men who run the ships, who do the work, must control the ships and the industry.
The greatest immediate threat to the seamen is government regimentation. Under the pretext of codifying the numerous maritime laws, the ship-“owners” seek to tighten the restraints upon the seamen and further restrict their freedom of action. The Coast Guard, which was imposed on the seamen under the pretext of “wartime necessity”, has become a permanent adjunct of the government’s program for militarizing the merchant marine.
At the same time, Congress is preparing a host of anti-labor laws to outlaw the closed shop union hiring hall, limit the right to strike and impose compulsory arbitration.
Against this conspiracy to put the seamen in a government straitjacket, the maritime workers must fight
 
FOR THE COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNIONS FROM GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION, REGIMENTATION AND CONTROL! DEFEND THE RIGHT TO STRIKE! NO COMPULSORY ARBITRATION!
The vicious scheme to place the seamen under military discipline must be smashed. Joint action of all unions must be launched to break the grip of militarist control exercised over the seamen by the Coast Guard. The seamen must stand four-square on the demand
 
FOR UNION CONTROL OF ALL DISCIPLINE ABOARD SHIP!
The whole history of the American seamen has been a continual struggle for their rights against the capitalist government. To this very day seamen are denied elementary civil rights accorded to citizens ashore. Under every Administration, Republican or Democratic, the government has intervened on the side of the bosses against the maritime workers.
The struggle of the seamen for emancipation and permanent security is above all a political struggle. This fact was again demonstrated and underscored when Truman threatened to use the Navy against the impending CIO maritime strike in June 1946.
Labor has no voice whatsoever in this government. The policy of supporting so-called “friends of labor” from the Republican and Democratic parties of Wall Street has left labor politically helpless today. If the government attacks on the seamen and all labor are to be stopped, company-unionism in politics must end. Seamen must call
 
FOR AN INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY!
An independent party of labor, based on the trade unions, can mobilize the workers, oppressed minorities and impoverished lower-middle class. Such a party will represent the overwhelming majority of the people. With a militant program, it could lead a victorious struggle against the rule of the tiny minority or capitalists who· dominate this country and exploit the people for their own profit and privilege.
Once the power of the capitalists is destroyed, the working majority can establish a government in their own interests, a real government of, by and for the people
 
A WORKERS’ AND FARMERS’ GOVERNMENT!
The Socialist Workers Party advances this program as a solution to the problems confronting the seamen: We have no interests separate and apart from those of the working class. The struggle of the seamen is part of the general struggle of the American working class for emancipation from capitalist exploitation and wage slavery. Our goal is the final victory of the working class and the establishment of a socialist society which will bring lasting peace, plenty and security for all.
 
JOIN IN THE FIGHT FOR THIS GREAT GOAL – JOIN THE SOCIALIST WORKERS PARTY!
 



Bernard M. Baruch, Wall Street’s master-planner, confidently predicted in April 1945 that during the immediate post-war period American “free enterprise” would enjoy not less than five to seven years of continuous boom.
By September 1946, this widely-heralded prophecy was being washed down the drain of the third longest and deepest stock market slump in American financial history. Only October 1929 and August 1937 saw steeper stock price declines. One year after the end of the war, the exuberant outlook of American Big Business had turned into Wall Street’s vote of no-confidence in the future of its own system.
Most Wall Street spokesmen and financial commentators took a very sober view of the situation. W. Randolph Burgess, vice chairman of the board of the National City Bank of New York, told a gathering of the American Bankers Association on September 25 that American economy was entering the “phase of bitter disillusionment.” He warned:
An immediate economic problem is whether we can avoid a boom and bust. We are set for it, just as after World War I. It did great damage then and set the world back on its heels. It would be still more dangerous today.
By October 5, the Truman administration joined the admonitory chorus. Reconversion Director Steelman admitted in his report, ironically entitled Second Year of the Peace, that the economic system faced “great danger” and “acute threat.”
At the same time, all the mouthpieces of Big Business hastened to assure that we did not face “another 1929.” Analogy was most frequently drawn rather with 1919-20 and the “small depression” of 1921.
No one can positively predict at the present time whether the particular economic decline generally foreseen for 1947 or 1948 will be a “1921” or a “1929” depression. But it can be safely prophesied that regardless of any temporary upturns or downturns, American capitalism is heading toward a titanic economic debacle in the not too distant future.
American capitalism today retains all the basic and malignant contradictions that produced the economic breakdown of the pre-war decade – but with the addition of six years of the most devastating and costly war in all history.
If World War II provided an interruption of the 1929-39 crisis of American capitalism – it was an interruption that prepared the way for a resumption of that crisis on a scale that will dwarf the pre-war catastrophe.
What were the basic factors leading to the chronic economic depression between 1929 and 1939? What were the factors that relieved this depression – if only temporarily? What effect did the latter factors have on the long-term prospects of American economy? And finally – the main content of this analysis – is there any reason to believe that the basic factors that created the pre-war crisis have now so altered that they promise an expansion of the economy, rather than a new and drastic contraction?
The pre-war economic breakdown followed the classic operation of the laws of the development of capitalism as uncovered by Karl Marx. Social production had raised the productivity of American capitalism to unprecedented heights by 1929. But the system of individual appropriation by the capitalist owners of the products of labor had caused a tremendous diminution of the purchasing power of the masses in relation to the output of goods.
This was accompanied by a tremendous accumulation and concentration of capital in the hands of American Big Business. This capital could not be profitably invested. The inevitable tendency was to seek outlets for goods and capital in other lands, at a time when the world-wide crisis of capitalism had intensified the struggle for markets and fields of investment. The resultant competition was the irresistible impulsion toward World War II.
The chief expression of the contradictions of capitalism that produced the 1929 collapse was overproduction in terms of the available market. The productive machine ground almost to a halt, choked with the glut of goods that could not be sold. By 1932 there was an estimated 18,000,000 to 21,000,000 unemployed. No matter how much production was reduced, the mass purchasing power was reduced even more speedily.
This process was slowly altered only with the gradual liquidation of surpluses, involving tremendous losses to the bulk of capitalists, the shrinkage of their capital and the final bolstering of the market on a low level through the expenditures of public monies and the sharp increase of government debt.
Government spending proved to be of decisive importance. The pouring of tremendous funds into the hands of businessmen and farmers through government loan and credit agencies; expenditures for relief and public works; assumption of private debt through mortgage loans, etc., by the federal government – all these served to give a brief upward impetus to production.
But by August 1937, the machine started to creak to a halt again. There was the famous Roosevelt “recession,” when in a brief three months, production fell half way back to the bottom point of 1932. It would have fallen all the way, and further, but for the pouring in of new government funds to prime the pump. And these new funds, expended on an ever more lavish scale, came under the heading of: War preparations. Even so, unemployment in 1939 remained at from 11,500,000 to 13,000,000.
The rate of government pump-priming and the growth of public debt can be seen from the following table:



Years


Federal Expenditures
(In Billions of Dollars)


Federal Debt
(In Billions of Dollars)




1929


  2.958


15.7




1937


  7.754


31.3




1939


  8.361


34.8




1940


  8.824


36.7




1941


13.862


47.6



Between 1942 and 1945, the years of United States direct military participation in the Second World War, annual federal expenditures increased seven times over the 1941 rate, hitting 98.1 billion dollars in 1945. The federal debt increased at almost as fast a pace, reaching 279 billion dollars by March 1946.
This was the titanic burden of public debt foisted on the American people in order to achieve a slightly more than double production by the peak war year of 1944. This increase in production was achieved, moreover, by an increase in the industrial labor force of less than 50 per cent – from 15,639,000 industrial workers in 1939 to 21,325,000 in 1944.
During the period between 1933 and 1939, the government provided a growing market for the capitalists. This market increased more than ten-fold in the next five years. By 1944, two-thirds of the nation’s total production was being diverted to war purposes.
But what the government bought, it bought mainly on credit. And the bulk of what it bought was wasted and destroyed in the war. Only a small fraction of the staggering output of the war years remains to add to the total wealth of the country.
The end of military hostilities also ended the single greatest market and source of profit for American capitalism: Government war purchases. Now, instead of being a market, the government is turning into a drain upon the productive resources. Government expenditures continue at a rate five times as great as in 1939, at more than $41 billion for the fiscal year 1946-47. But this is not providing primarily a market for goods, as it did during the war. It is true that about $18 billion is going for military appropriations. But another $18 billion is going to payment of debt.
 
An Acute Dilemma
Thus, the end of the war has confronted American capitalism once again with its most acute dilemma, the dilemma it could not solve before the war, and could solve only temporarily through the war. Where can it find a profitable outlet for goods that can now be turned out at a rate 100 per cent greater than in 1939?
Somewhere, the American capitalists must find an expanding market which will absorb between $50 billion and $75 billion worth of production above the civilian production of 1941 – a boom year.
The capitalist economists and government “experts” answered – at least before the stock market slump – that the prospects for such an expanded civilian market were extremely bright, based on the following calculations:

There was a potential domestic consumers market for additional tens of billions of dollars worth of goods in the vast “backlog of savings” accumulated during the war.
Private capitalists planned to expend an annual sum estimated at around $22 billion for plant expansion, particularly in the production of capital goods for an anticipated tremendous boom in automobile production and housing construction, not to speak of other durable goods industries.
American exports to other countries as a result of “postwar demand” would increase three to four times above the previous all-time peak of 1920, to at least $30 billion. That was the figure cited last year by ex-Secretary of Commerce Henry Wallace and widely repeated by other government officials.

As our further analysis of current economic trends and factors will show, this 3-point program of continued capitalist expansion is based on the most imponderable “Ifs – “ and gross distortions of elementary economic facts. In short, it is largely wish-thinking.
How much is the so-called “back-log of savings,” who has it and what proportion of it will be spent for consumers goods to fill that vast void left in the market by the end of swollen government spending for war production?
The most authoritative source of information on this question is the Official Report on the National Distribution and Intended Use of Families’ Liquid Assets, issued in August 1946 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The full report is published in the August 30 United States News.
According to this official report, the total personal holdings of liquid assets by the end of 1945 was $130 billion, truly a stupendous sum of potential purchasing power. This was $90 billion more than at the end of 1939.
But, the report shows, the bulk of these savings, in the form of currency, bank deposits and government securities, is concentrated in the hands of a minority of the population. The top 10 per cent of income receivers, who secured 29 per cent of total national income, held 60 per cent of the national net savings and 60 per cent of liquid assets. The bottom 50 per cent of income receivers, who secured only 22 per cent of the money income, held only three per cent of liquid assets and actually went into the hole 11 per cent – that is, their expenditures in the war boom year 1945 were 11 per cent greater than their incomes.
The bottom 40 per cent of those with any liquid assets had an average of $40; the next 30 per cent had an average of $700; and the next 20 per cent, an average of $2,350. The top 10 per cent had average holdings of $10,500.
What did these holders of assets intend to do with them? The report says:
The survey questioned consumers on their spending intentions. The overwhelming majority reported they had no expectation of using their liquid assets for any purpose in 1946. More than half of those with bank deposits had no intention of using any of them this year (except in an emergency), while only one quarter definitely expected that they would utilize some part of their holdings.
In short, as the report states, “the bulk of the savings and of asset holdings is concentrated in a relatively small proportion of all the spending units,” and these don’t intend to use their “back-log” for consumer spending. They expend from current income. Their savings constitute capital for investment – one of the primary sources of funds used for speculative purposes that have aggravated inflation.
Among those with liquid assets – as of the end of 1945 – who intended to spend some, the report states they expected to buy between $4-$5 billion worth of automobiles; up to $4 billion in other consumer durable goods; and between $13-$15 billion in houses. “On the average,” the report adds, “prospective buyers expected to pay $1,100 for a car ... and $5,020 for a house.”
As we shall see further on, the supply of $1,100 cars and $5,020 houses is virtually nil – and many of those 70 per cent with average savings of under $700 have been forced to liquidate their savings to provide their families with bare necessities – food, clothing, medical care, rent.
Among the report’s major conclusions, are: 1. “current buying will be paid for primarily out of current income”; 2. the use of instalment credit and borrowing “will be substantial during the year”; 3. savings will decline for most consumers as prices go up. And finally:
The liquid assets held by the majority of people cannot be considered to constitute a reserve fund large enough for carrying on regular expenditures in the event of drastic changes in income. Total asset holdings of three-fourths of the people amounted to less than one-fifth of their annual income.
All it would take to wipe out the “backlog of savings” of 75 per cent of those having any savings in 1945 would be two-three months of unemployment or a 20-25 per cent cut in their regular money incomes or a similar degree of rising prices.
There are ample signs to show that the “backlog of savings” of the 75 per cent of savers in the lowest brackets is being rapidly dissipated. The First National Bank of Boston reported on September 25 that “borrowings are on the increase and savings on the decrease.”
Another straw in the wind is the fact that between January 1 and October 1946, the number of participants in war savings bond payroll withholding plans declined from 27 million to 7½ million and that redemptions have exceeded sales of the $18.50 E bonds by more than $800 million.
This situation, according to Secretary of the Treasury Snyder, worries the government because the primary objective of selling bonds to workers is “to maintain a widespread distribution of the public debt and to aid in our fight against inflation ... by making possible the retirement of additional amounts of bank-held debt.”
In reality, the reverse process to saving is taking place: Consumer debt is rising rapidly.
 
Credit Expansion
J. Gordon Dakins, manager of the credit management division of the National Retail Drygoods Association, on September 19 stated that outstanding consumer credit had increased between October 1945 and April 1946, at a rate of more than $2¾ billion a year – more than for any similar seven-month period in 16 years. He warned retailers to beware of “overloading the customer with credit.”
Federal Reserve Board figures show that consumer credit increased in the 11 months between August 1945 and July 1946, by more than $2 billion from the low point of $5.3 billion. At the present rate, it will pass the 1941 peak of $9.9 billion dollars by the end of 1947. Personal debt is piling up 13 times as fast as during 1945 and 1944. And these debts are being accumulated not for automobiles, houses or jewelry, but for living necessities. Automobile loans account for only 4 per cent of the total; jewelry store installment purchases only 1 per cent.
The point will be reached in the not too distant future when those with mounting debts will have to pay off. Their current purchasing will decline and this will mean a drop in consumption – and production.
The decline in savings and rapid rise in consumer debt is but one aspect of the shrinkage in mass purchasing power that is setting the stage for a new depression.
Far more serious is the decline in real current income from which comes the bulk of consumer spending and which is the main prop of the domestic market for goods. This decline is shown in the total money wages paid out and the drastic increase in the cost of living.
The total of individual incomes, according to the Steelman report in October, are the “highest they have ever been,” running at a rate of $167 billion a year. This seems enormous in terms of the 1941 total of $96.9 billion. But much of this difference is illusory; and it does not show the current trend.
First of all, the dollar is not worth the same as in 1941. The extremely conservative figures of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, on October 23, placed the decline of the purchasing power of the dollar between January 1, 1941, and September 15, 1946, at 31 cents. The wage earner can buy with each dollar what 69 cents bought in 1941. This does not take into account the tremendous spurt in prices of necessities since September 15.
The cost of living for the majority of the population has more than doubled since August 1939. The purchasing power of their dollar has been cut in half. This can be easily proved.
A survey of actual food prices – not OPA fictional ceilings – reported by the September 13 United States News, revealed that a standard market basket loaded with 15 basic foods that cost $3.96 in August 1939, cost on the average throughout the country the sum of $7.95 by mid-August 1946. That is double the pre-war cost.
Clothing, house furnishings and other main essentials of living have more than doubled in price. Average rents have increased since the pre-war year anywhere from 15 to 30 per cent. Add to that taxes that absorb between 10 and 20 per cent of the total income – such as payroll withholding taxes and sales taxes – and it can be seen that the estimation of a 50 per cent cut in the buying power of the average consumer’s dollar is no exaggeration. This is what has happened to prices. But what has happened to money wages? To get the main picture, we need study no more than the official report of the government, Steelman’s Second Year of the Peace.
“The money which the average family has to spend per week has decreased since V-E Day,” says the report. Although some workers won hourly gains of as much as 18½ cents an hour last spring, the popular belief that this set the general pattern, admits the report, has “served to obscure essential facts.”
The essential facts are that only 4,000,000 workers received wage increases by formal approval of the Wage Stabilization Board between February and June 30, 1946, and the average increase was 14.7 cents per hour. Many more millions received no increases at all. Hourly wage gains did not compensate for reduced total income due to shorter hours, loss of overtime, downgrading, shifts to lower paid industries, etc.
The net result, the report points out, was a decline between April 1945 and July 1946 of 8.5 per cent in the gross weekly earnings of manufacturing workers – the best organized section of labor. Real weekly earnings, the report adds, suffered a much more severe decline “with the rise of 11 per cent in the prices of consumers goods” in the period surveyed. It adds: “Greatly increased personal income taxes paid by workers constitute another significant factor.”
The CIO Economic Outlook, basing itself on figures up to July 1946, finds an “over-all reduction of over 19 per cent in the real earnings of American workers” from the previous year. By the end of this year, it is estimated that the real purchasing power of the American workers will have declined on the average 30 per cent. That represents a 30 per cent cut in the share of the workers in the goods they produce. That is the basic factor in the shrinkage of the domestic market.
Whose relative share is increasing? Primarily those whose income largely goes into capital accumulation – those who do not spend a great portion of their current income.
The Steelman report states that corporation profits after taxes this year reached the “highest point in history,” more than $11 billion annually, or about 20 per cent above the gigantic wartime average profits. The latest findings of the CIO Research Department, reported in the October 14 CIO News, show that “the best estimates available indicate that corporate profits, after taxes, will be at the fantastic level of almost $14 billion by the fourth quarter of 1946.”
Another section of the population that has enlarged its relative share of national income is the farmers. Farm income, says the Steelman report, has reached “an all-time high and farmers have never been in so liquid a position.” This favorable situation of the farmers, however, as we shall show later in this analysis, will not continue for any very long period in the future.
More and more of the income that is available for spending for durable goods – autos, homes, etc. – is being concentrated in the hands of a very small portion of the population in the top income brackets. This is shown in the record of dividend payments to stockholders. Dividend payments for the three months ending August 31, 1946, were up 6.6 per cent from the corresponding three months of 1945, according to the Department of Commerce.
 
Consumer Spending
The effects of the sharp decline in real wages combined with the extraordinary increase in the incomes of the capitalists may be seen in the trend of consumer spending.
The Steelman report noted that consumer spending, during August, had hit a peak of $126 billion annually, 20 per cent above the wartime high and 60 per cent above the pre-war record. However, the report warned that it was “the big question” whether this rate of spending would continue. It observed that since April the purchases of nondurable goods (food, clothing, etc.) “have been comparatively level” and, considering price rises, “may actually have declined slightly.”
Lewis L. Schellback, economist of Standard & Poor’s Corp., reported on October 12, that there was a “current excess of production over consumption” and that the index of retail sales “has been declining since February.”
The Federal Reserve Board reported on October 28 that “department store sales have shown no further rise from the high level reached at the end of August, although there is usually a considerable increase at this season.” And the Office of Business Economics, Department of Commerce, while reporting a gain for August in retail sales over the previous year, emphasized that the “major factor in the rise since the middle of this year has been higher prices rather than increased quantities of goods.”
Much of consumer spending, on the part of the war wealthy and inflation speculators, has been for conspicuous waste and luxuries. This has heightened the inflation that has reduced the amount of goods absorbed by the mass consumer.
Thus, the September 6 Wall Street Journal pointed out:
“Consumer spending is heavy but unbalanced ... Individual resources counted on to buy durable goods – such as scarce automobiles and refrigerators – are being dissipated in expensive foods, clothing, amusements and luxuries ... a full development of these trends could produce what the economists call a recession next year.”
On October 31, the Wall Street Journal calls attention to “consumer resistance to high prices” and “a tremendous increase in supplies.”
The so-called “buyers resistance” – more correctly the dwindling ability to buy – is beginning to have its effect in the sphere of durable goods – in particular automobiles and houses, two of the principal anticipated sources of the expanding market on which the capitalists have banked their hopes.
The October 17 issue of Wall Street Journal observes in bold-face type that, “First faint signs that auto demand is being nicked appear here and there.” It quotes spot reports from dealers all over the country that are summed up in the statement of a San Francisco salesman: “The easy money auto buyers are about gone.”
A United Press dispatch from Kansas City on October 25 reports the pessimistic views voiced by the general sales manager of the Pontiac division of General Motors to a meeting of 450 dealers from 13 states. He warned that the public’s buying “enthusiasm” is on the wane. He spoke of those who think the “buyers’ market is a long way off, but I say we are approaching it right now.”
The same fears are now being expressed regarding the demand for new housing. The need for over 12,000,000 new housing units, plus the “backlog of savings,” was supposed to provide a capacity limit to the housing market for years to come.
But average building costs, due mainly to the inflated prices of materials, are now 94 per cent higher than in 1939. Those savers in the Federal Reserve Board report who expected to spend $5,200 for a home, are faced with average prices now of between $6,500 and $10,200.
The situation in housing-demand is summed up by the October 21 Christian Science Monitor: New construction in August declined from the post-war high point in July. By September, only 708,100 units had been started of the government’s program to start 1,200,000 homes this year.
The Steelman report observes as a fact of “great promise” – judiciously tempered by other facts of “great danger” – that industrial production by August had hit an all-time peacetime peak of $172,000,000,000. In terms of volume of goods, and not inflated currency, the output on the whole was slightly higher than in 1941.
Standard & Poor’s weekly index of industrial production, as of October 12, shows that “the trend has been flat since the end of July.”
Moreover, a tremendous volume of this production has been withheld from the market. These hoards, reflected in gigantic inventories, amounted by August to the phenomenal all-time sum of $31 billion, according to the official figures of the Department of Commerce. Manufacturers’ inventories alone amounted to $18,430,000,000, and the Commerce Department noted the “real danger” that will arise “when a part of output is no longer channeled into stocks.”
What all this adds up to in the minds of Washington officials, according to a report of Standard & Poor’s is that “by next September some items will be piling up. Production will have to shrink to the size of the market.”
A similar shrinkage of the market is facing the agricultural industry, which has enjoyed extraordinary prosperity since the war began on the basis of world-wide scarcity. The precipitate break in cotton market prices in October, necessitating the closing of the cotton exchanges for the first time in 76 years, revealed the underlying instability of the high agricultural commodity prices.
On this score, the Wall Street Journal, warned editorially on October 31 that
“... commodity price declines have begun a wholesome correction ... We say it has begun a correction. We must confess our inability to predict whether or when the correcting process will be completed.”
The position of the small family farms, which comprise the overwhelming majority of agricultural production units, is far from secure. Between 1940 and 1945, according to the U. S. Bureau of Census, the number of farms declined by 219,799, to a low point of 5,877,000 total. Despite the fact that the number of tractors on farms increased 55 per cent in the same period, the number of farms with tractors increased only 42 per cent. Two-thirds of all farms still have no tractors, and one-third don’t even have horses or mules.
It is the “factory farm” of more than 1,000 acres, which now number more than 110,000, that is rapidly displacing the small farmer. The inevitable break in farm commodity prices, coupled with the competition of the more productive “factories in the field,” will spell ruin for tens of thousands of small farmers.
The prospect of the shrinking domestic market is coupled with prospects of reduced foreign markets, that other great outlet for goods that the American capitalist had been banking on and had, in fact, gone to war to ensure.
We know that American capitalism has dreams of a $30 billion annual export trade. But this year, including $1½ billion in lend-lease accounts, the total of exports is expected to reach only $9 billion, according to the October American Exporter. At the same time, imports from other countries are expected to total around $5¾ billion a year by mid-1947.
 
Foreign Markets
With exports nearly double imports, countries which buy from the US are buying “on the cuff.” They are merely piling up debt to American capitalism – debt which in the ruined state of European and Asiatic economy must in the end only aggravate the economic chaos prevailing in these bankrupt sections of the world.
On the export side, World Report, September 5, observes that “uncertainty is a large element in the future of world trade” and adds that “odds are against continuance of the present export boom beyond another two or three years.”
The effect of the decontrol of prices in the US has had immediate repercussions in the reports from a score of countries that they will not be able to buy from this country at the present level of inflated prices. Australia has officially announced that the rise in US prices has forced it to curtail purchases.
The decline in the domestic market and the gloomy outlook for further expansion of its foreign market has seriously affected the plans of American capitalism to maintain a boom on the basis of an extraordinary outlay of capital for expansion. This year’s original plans for such outlay called for about $12 billion – little more than half of the anticipated $22 billion.
The trend is to retrenchment from expansion plans. The NY World-Telegram, September 21, noting the effect of the stock market slump, reported that “business people have begun to restrict their operations” and that “expansion plans in many sections have been discontinued for the time being, and workers have been laid off in consequence.”
The automobile industry, says the NY Times, September 29, has been compelled “to cut back and slow down a large part of its program to spend something like $1 billion for reconversion and expansion.” The steel industry, says the NY Times, October 13, is a “bone of contention” with government officials because industry heads, contrary to claims of government officials, insist that present production capacity “will be more than ample to feed all demands that are presented.” And officials of the aircraft industry have announced that their plans for a $750,000,000 expansion program have been reduced to $400,000,000 “at most.”
What has brought the dilemma of American monopoly capitalism to an especially acute pitch is the enormous increase of productive capacity during the war and the tremendous accumulation of capital crying for profitable investment.
American industry, in five war years, expanded to the point where it could turn out 100 per cent more goods than in 1940. The total industrial facilities in 1939 was worth $40 billion. The wartime government added $26 billion worth of plants, of which an estimated $20 billion worth are usable for civilian production.
In its survey, Economic Concentration in World War II, the Senate Small Business Committee has shown that most of this 50 per cent addition to productive facilities has fallen into the hands of the small group of gigantic monopoly corporations that control American economy. Today, just 250 corporations own two-thirds of all manufacturing facilities having assets of $40 billion dollars – or as much as the entire total of manufacturing assets in 1939.
On top of this, the man-hour productivity of labor increased phenomenally during the war. The average worker today can turn out 25 to 30 per cent more in an hour than in 1939. An important example of the increase in per capita productivity was given by CIO President Philip Murray when he stated on October 15 that it took 460,000 steel workers during the war an average of 46.6 hours of work per week to produce 89,000,000 tons of steel; but now 462,000 workers produce 84,000,000 tons in a work week of 36.5 hours.
At peak operations, American industry can turn out goods far faster than the limited market can absorb them. But American corporations must expand inexorably. They have accumulated $54 billion of working capital – triple the amount in 1941. This must be invested because it cries out for profit.
But with shrinking domestic and world markets, with productive capacity at heights never remotely reached before, where can American capitalism invest its huge idle capital profitably? Indeed, every investment in further plant expansion, either at home or abroad, merely paves the way for an aggravation of the glut of goods that have begun to flood the available market.
At the present time, American Big Business is shouting for “more production.” But it doesn’t want more total production. It is scared to death that more goods will eliminate scarcities and undermine the price structure. Indeed, as Leo M. Cherne, executive secretary of the Research Institute of America, told a meeting of 600 business men in New York City on September 25,
“In far too many cases, management’s left hand has been accumulating inventories while its right hand has been advocating productivity.”
The program of Big Business to meet the coming crisis was stated very succinctly on October 17 by Mariner S. Eccles, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. He said that a depression can be staved off if 1. “productivity per worker can be raised – this is most important” and 2. “if large-scale industrial disputes and further general wage increases can be avoided.” He added as an afterthought “and if business groups are willing to refrain from further price increases.”
In essence, what Wall Street has in mind is to maintain its present volume of profits by forcing the workers to turn out more production in less time – the speed-up – and blocking wage raises or even slashing wages. It wants to stabilize the economy on a lower level. In other words, it will try to solve the crisis on the backs of the working masses.
 
Changed Conditions
But this is indeed not 1920, as some financial commentators concede. Casting a heavy shadow over these plans of Big Business is the organized labor movement, 15,000,000 strong, that wrested wage concessions from the American plutocracy last spring and is preparing to fight for new concessions in the immediate period ahead.
No doubt, American capitalism will try to maintain its unstable profits position at the expense of the living standards of American labor. But Wall Street is sure to meet savage resistance.
Where will it turn next for a solution, if the mass resistance proves too strong? It will turn once more to the public treasury and try again to prime the pump from that source. But these measures, as the “New Deal” era proved between 1933 and 1937, will not suffice to permanently quicken the blood stream of American capitalism. It will be found necessary to heap government spending upon government spending, pile up debt upon debt. And finally, to the present colossal sum of $263 billion of federal debt built up mainly in World War II, will be added at an ever faster pace vast debts for military expenditures in preparation for World War III.
Inflation would be intensified and add intolerable burdens to the working class. And this inflation in turn would only lay the basis for an even more terrible crash of the economy. For one thing is certain, even if the depression that lies immediately ahead is temporarily overcome, American capitalism is heading for an inevitable economic explosion, a crisis of such dimensions that the whole system will be torn apart. That crisis – as Wall Street well knows – will bear with it profound revolutionary implications.



Walter Reuther, president since 1946 of the powerful and strategically placed CIO United Automobile Workers, is generally regarded as the most “up-and-coming” of the new generation of labor leaders who began their rise with the CIO. Of all who rose to prominence and leadership in the UAW’s early days – including some of not inconsiderable talents – not one has survived save Reuther. Homer Martin, Wyndham Mortimer, R.J. Thomas, George Addes, Richard Frankensteen and many others were forced out or dropped by the wayside. Reuther alone stayed on top. Today, he holds almost undisputed control of this key union in the CIO.
“Smart” and “shrewd” are adjectives frequently applied to Reuther. But for all his adroitness and cunning, he is by no means the “master of his fate” He has been shaped by powerful social forces, pressures and conflicts, particularly as these have affected and been reflected in the development of the UAW.
To understand Reuther’s aims, methods, role in the labor movement and the direction in which he is traveling, it is essential to understand the kind of union in which he grew up and on whose mighty shoulders he now stands. For whatever is “unique” about Reuther is due, in the main, to the fact that he has come out of what has been, and in some respects remains, a unique union.
The UAW has been described most frequently as “dynamic.” Until the past few years, this adjective was fully justified and even today, as a “settled” union with a hardening bureaucratic crust, the UAW still retains the sources of its dynamic character.
In its rise the UAW exemplified the spontaneous rank-and-file character of that titanic upsurge of industrial labor in the Thirties which built the CIO. The auto union’s militancy became a by-word. If the auto workers did not invent the sit-down strike, they nevertheless perfected it and their use of it in the 1936-37 General Motors strike inspired its spread into a national phenomenon. They developed the famous “flying squadrons,” those mobile shock troops of the picket lines which have become permanent institutions in many UAW locals.
This “dynamism” of the UAW was due not to fighting qualities exceptional to auto workers, but rather to the exceptional factors in the origin and traditions of the UAW. Its unique development was a direct reflection of its internal democracy, which permitted the workers’ native militancy to find expression and allowed their initiative to flower.
 
Democratic Traditions of the UAW
The independence of the membership, their insistence on “running the show,” revealed itself from the start when they fought the AFL bureaucracy’s attempts to impose outside leadership upon them. Without exception, the auto workers’ leadership has been raised from their own ranks. For most of its history, UAW conventions saw stormy revolts against any moves to strengthen the bureaucratic powers of the top leaders against the ranks.
They jealously guarded the right to maintain caucuses and the open factional struggles of tendencies in the UAW was a constant source of astonishment – and dismay – to the old-line officialdom who ran their own unions with an iron hand and never let anyone “talk out of turn.” All political views found expression in the continuous struggle for program and leadership. New ideas found a favorable climate and the membership was educated in progressive social and political views. Far from weakening the auto workers’ union, this internal democracy became the wellspring of its power and tremendous growth.
The UAW did not come by its militant and democratic traditions accidentally. Their foundation was consciously laid in the decisive early stages of the union by politically radical workers who were responsible for the first successful organization in auto and who led the auto workers to their initial victories.
The Toledo Auto-Lite strike in May 1934, a virtual mass insurrection which won the first major contract in the auto industry, set the pattern. This crucial battle was led by members of the American Workers Party, which a few months later merged with the Communist League of America (Trotskyist) to form the Workers Party (now the Socialist Workers Party). A year later Trotskyist’s played the chief role in organizing and leading the Toledo Chevrolet strike that established the first union beach-head in General Motors. In this strike the Trotskyists gave leadership to the opposition against the old-line AFL leaders whose policies of class-collaboration and reliance on government intervention were the chief stumbling-block to unionization of the auto workers.
 
Spearhead of Revolt
It was these Toledo auto workers, as the largest delegation at the UAW’s founding convention in August 1935, who organized and spearheaded a revolt against the imposition of Frances Dillon, AFL President William Green’s personal representative, as appointed head of the newly founded international. They submitted finally under threat of losing their new charter. But a year later – again with the Toledo delegation in the lead – the militants, organized as a caucus, overwhelmingly rejected Dillon and elected their own officers from their own ranks.
These first two conventions not only freed the auto union from the deadly grip of an established bureaucracy, but incorporated into the very structure of the new international the principles of democratic unionism. Thus, in 1936, when reactionary elements red-baited Homer Martin, who was subsequently to become the first elected president, the convention delegates rose up and wrote into their constitution those justly famous provisions against discrimination for race, creed, national origin and political beliefs. In 1941, Reuther’s faction was to make the first major breach in this democratic constitution.
The May 1936 convention provided a remarkable demonstration of advanced political consciousness when the delegates voted overwhelmingly for the formation of an independent farmer-labor party. Direct intervention by John L. Lewis was required to force the delegates to attach a rider to this resolution endorsing Roosevelt for re-election.
The crucial test of the fledgling union came in the 1936-37 battle with General Motors. Here again it was radicals who gave decisive direction to the struggle. In Flint, Mich., where the battle centered, Kermit Johnson and Roy Reuther, both socialists, and Robert Travis, a leader of the earlier Toledo Chevrolet strike and by 1937 with the Stalinists, were the chief organizers and leaders of the great sitdown that brought victory. Contrary to a persistent legend, Walter Reuther entered the picture only toward the end of the strike and played no important role in its organization, strategy and leadership. But he did give it valuable assistance at its most critical juncture when thousands of workers from Toledo, Detroit and other auto centers poured into Flint. Reuther led a large contingent of his big, newly amalgamated Detroit West Side local, of which he was president, to support the sit-downers.
In those days Reuther was not exceptional for militancy and political radicalism. Everyone spoke – or pretended to speak – the language of mass action, rank-and-file control and advanced social and political ideas. The union in which young Walter Reuther got his start breathed mass action and democracy. It was led by zealous young men, in many instances radical-minded, most of whom had earned their spurs on the picket lines. This union, moreover, was pressing toward far-reaching social and political goals.
For these very reasons, the top CIO leaders regarded the UAW as a “problem child.” They feared the spread of its example. What would happen to them if their members got notions about rank-and-file control, union democracy, modest salaries for officers, annual conventions, the right to caucus and to oppose the leadership? Moreover, the CIO leaders were schooled in class collaboration, believers in the conference table and government favors rather than in strikes and class struggle methods. The UAW, in their opinion, had to be “tamed.”
The new UAW leaders themselves were beginning to get a taste for power. Homer Martin, who was elected president in 1936, by 1937 saw himself in the role of “boss” of a big union. The Stalinists, with a strong machine, were pushing for control with a program to tie the union to Roosevelt’s coattails.
The CIO leaders and the Roosevelt administration feared above all that the UAW might get “out-of-hand” politically. They had received one bad shock at the 1936 convention. They did not want to risk any more, especially since Roosevelt was already moving on the course that was to lead this country into war. For American imperialism and its labor supporters, it was imperative to curb the militancy of this “dangerous and explosive” union, harness it with a conservative bureaucracy and stifle its internal democracy.
 
His Credentials
There were not a few candidates for the job – Homer Martin, the Stalinists and careerists of all stripes. But, in the end, the forces of conservatism found their man in Walter Reuther. He had the proper qualifications, the right combination of talents and an appreciation of the nature and complexities of the task.
He had youth, energy, drive and ambition in a union that was young, vigorous and aggressive. He had a sharp mind and a fluent tongue that could express his ideas forcefully and clearly, although he lacked distinction in thought or style.
The son of an old-time Debs Socialist, Reuther got his real start in the labor movement as a Socialist agitator, when, at the age of 25, he campaigned for Norman Thomas and joined the SP. His early Socialist training and background had prepared him for the union movement, taught him how to appeal to militant workers, gave him a broader conception of the social system. A radical background was a good credential to the workers who built the UAW. And it did his reputation no harm that in 1933, after he was fired for union activity in the Detroit Ford plant, he and his brother Victor took their small savings and went to Europe, working 16 months in an auto plant in the Soviet Union.
Not the least of Reuther’s talents was his skill at factional maneuver. In the factional game, he had the agility of a star half-back, quick to find holes in his opponents’ line, slippery in the open and adroit at pivoting and reversing his field. To reach his long-sought goal of the UAW presidency, he had to twist and straight-arm and knee his way through powerful opposition in a bitter factional struggle of 10 years’ duration.
Most of all, Reuther was completely identified with the auto workers. Following his return from Europe in 1934, he had plunged into the task of organizing the unorganized Detroit auto workers. By 1936, he was elected to the UAW’s national executive board at that year’s convention. By 1937, he had succeeded in amalgamating a number of small Detroit West Side shops into one big local, which gave him the original solid base in the membership on which he was to build his power.
Thus Reuther had grown up in the auto workers’ ranks and participated in their struggles. And he knew how to exploit this fact. No matter how high he rose above the ranks or how far he moved away from their aspirations and needs, he was always careful that it was not so high and so far as to lose connection with them. Other UAW leaders, as shrewd and talented as Reuther, lost sight of this fundamental fact and sooner or later came a cropper.
This history of Reuther’s rise to power is the history of the factional wars that raged inside the UAW from 1937 to 1947. There were no fundamental, well-defined differences in program between the contending leaders and there were many shifts and realignments in the unprincipled contest for posts and power.
Homer Martin made his bid for supreme control following the 1937 GM strike. He tried to curb “wildcat” strikes in GM with a letter to the company offering it the right to “discipline” participants in “unauthorized” walkouts. When his high-handed methods ran into opposition, he raised the hue and cry about “communists” and “socialists” and tried to change the constitution to give him more powers. He fired a number of organizers, including Walter and Victor Reuther. Ironically, a decade later in a period of strong reaction and witch-hunting, Walter Reuther was to put Martin’s program into effect with a vengeance, from one-man rule and “company security” clauses to redbaiting and expulsions.
Martin climaxed his headstrong course by suspending a majority of the Executive Board members. By 1939, facing defeat, he tried to take the UAW back into the AFL. But the overwhelming majority of the auto workers refused to go along. Martin split and drifted into oblivion.
 
The Opportunist Emerges
The period of the fight with Martin marked a decisive turning point for Reuther in a vital respect. It was then that he underwent and completed his political metamorphosis. Reuther never did have more than a sentimental attachment to socialism. He had a disdain for Marxist theory. He was a devotee of “realistic” politics, by which is usually meant opportunistic politics in which principles take second place to posts and immediate advantages. Once immersed in union maneuvers and the struggle for posts and power, Reuther’s socialism quickly melted away.
Even the light ideological baggage of Norman Thomas’s Socialist Party hampered the young ambitious union leader. He figured to latch on to the political movement that offered the most promising and immediate rewards, the New Deal. In 1938 he decided to support Frank Murphy, a Democrat, for re-election as Michigan’s governor. At that time, the Socialist Party still maintained a policy of electoral independence and opposition to capitalist parties and candidates. But an amicable deal was cooked up. Reuther agreed not to embarrass the SP with a formal resignation at that time. Norman Thomas agreed to look the other way while Reuther jumped on the New Deal band wagon.
Another important aspect of Reuther’s political evolution was his collaboration with the Stalinists in the UAW, which did not end formally until 1939. His attitude toward the Stalinists then was in sharp contrast to his bitter hostility of today. It was the heyday of the Stalinist “People’s Front” and “collective security” program, when they .wooed Roosevelt and transformed him from a “fascist” into a “friend of labor.” Reuther could work with them then, although it was the time of the bloody Moscow Frame-up Trials and the betrayal of the Spanish revolution.
Significantly, his first clashes with the Stalinists were not over principles and program, but over union posts and advantages. He participated with them in the Unity Group caucus until late in 1938. But their conflict was foreshadowed at the April 1938 Michigan CIO convention. Victor Reuther was defeated for a post when the Stalinists failed to support him. This kind of blow is unforgivable to one who believes a good post is worth any number of principles. In due course, Reuther was to repay the Stalinists a hundredfold.
 
The 1939 Convention
The 1939 UAW convention, after Martin’s split, was no feast of harmony. On the one side was Reuther, who had the backing of the Socialist Party fraction, a number of powerful Detroit locals such as Hudson. Chrysler and his own West Side local, as well as partial support from the top CIO leaders. On the other side were the Stalinists, allied with a group of careerists, who had the stronger machine.
The Stalinist-Addes forces, despite their strength, were not anxious for any show-down fight that would put them at odds with Lewis, Murray and Hillman, while the latter wanted the semblance of “harmony.” They accepted the compromise offered by Hillman and Murray, Lewis’s representatives at the convention and agreed upon R.J. Thomas as president, whom Reuther himself supported. Hillman and Murray agreed that all vice presidential posts would be eliminated – Reuther’s included. Thus both the Stalinist-Addes and Reuther factions stepped back in favor of a man with no following at the time who had but recently jumped off Homer Martin’s band wagon.
In 1940 and 1941, when the Stalin-Hitler pact, the unleashing of the European war and the Finnish-Soviet war inspired anti-Soviet hostility in this country, Reuther became the leader of the most conservative elements in the UAW. He lined himself up in the CIO with Sidney Hillman against John L. Lewis and became the most open UAW supporter of the Roosevelt administration’s drive toward war. He became a vicious opponent of strikes and pushed Hillman’s policy of complete union submission to the war machine and government boards.
At the July 1941 convention of the UAW, Reuther’s faction commanded a majority. He took advantage of it to shove through the first anti-democratic change in the UAW’s constitution – a discriminatory amendment barring “communists” from elective and appointive offices in the International. Reuther tried to bar the delegates from the Stalinist-led Allis-Chalmers local of Milwaukee from being seated and smear their strike. He pushed through a resolution condemning the strike of the North American Aviation workers, which Roosevelt broke with the use of federal troops.
 
Stalinists Outdo Reuther
But fate proved momentarily unkind to Reuther. Hitler had marched against the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, and the Stalinists were not to be outdone in servile support of American imperialism and strikebreaking. The Roosevelt-Stalin war alliance was mirrored in the unity between the Murray-Hillman and Stalinist machines in the CIO to enforce the no-strike pledge and support of War Labor Board arbitration. Reuther was outflanked from the right.
Now he could only try to compete with the Stalinists in demonstrations of loyalty to the war government, support of the no-strike pledge, schemes for labor-management committees to improve the speed-up, and the notorious “equality of sacrifice” program for which the auto workers were induced to give up their overtime premium pay.
In order to preserve his faction and differentiate himself from the Addes-Stalinist group, Reuther found it more and more necessary to maneuver with the militants. At the 1943 convention, he found a means of hitting a blow at his opponents from the left. He led the fight against the Stalinist resolution for the “incentive pay” system and it was defeated. Almost everyone in the CIO, outside the Stalinists, opposed “incentive pay,” so Reuther took no risk. He joined with the Stalinists at the same convention, however, in reaffirming the no-strike pledge and complete submission to the war program.
On the slippery terrain of the war period, Reuther’s shifty foot-work brought him close to disaster. His prestige rank to its lowest point at the 1944 convention as the result of his shabby maneuvers over the no-strike pledge, during the stormiest debate in UAW history.
He first tried to prevent the resolution for unconditional repeal of the no-strike pledge from being presented with proposed rule to limit debate to a “majority” and a “minority” resolution, the Addes-Stalinist group’s and Reuther’s respectively, both reaffirming support of the no-strike pledge. The delegates howled this trick down and forced a Vote on all the resolutions.
Reuther’s resolution upholding the no-strike pledge contained a meaningless proviso, that between the end of the war in Germany (nine months off) and the end of the war in Japan the Executive Board be empowered to “authorize strike action” in plants “reconverted to the exclusive and sole manufacture of civilian production” (of which there were none).
Reuther was cut to pieces by both sides in the debate.
The opposition to the no-strike pledge, led by the Rank and File Caucus, in which the Trotskyists played a big role, piled up 36% of the votes. The “majority” resolution was defeated with slightly less than a majority. Reuther’s resolution was backed by less than 5% of the delegates. Reuther then joined with the rest of the leaders to squeeze through the unconditional no-strike pledge.
Reuther was an unabashed strikebreaker against “wildcat” walk-outs of the increasingly rebellious auto workers. He personally joined with Addes in attempting to break the 1944 Chrysler strike. His name was badly tarnished until the 1945-46 GM strike. Then, through this strike, at one stroke he was able to gain enough support from the militants, added to his caucus strength, to gather a narrow majority and win his longed-for UAW presidency.
 
Reuther and the GM Strike of 1945-46
The GM strike marked the big turn in Reuther’s fortunes. The initiative was first taken at a conference of 400 local union officials from two big UAW regions in Detroit on June 14, 1945. Against the opposition of the whole UAW International Executive Board, the conference went on record for a 30% wage increase and the holding of an NLRB strike vote. As director of the UAW’s GM Department, Reuther first tried to put the lid on the question of strike, although he covered himself with militant phrases. He stalled off strike action for months. Finally, on Nov. 21, he stepped to the head of the mounting movement and announced the strike was on.
Due to the “one-at-a-time” strategy Reuther had put through the Executive Board, the strike was to turn into a grueling 113-day battle. Reuther’s policy was to limit the strike to GM. The most advanced militants wanted to spread it to bring the full weight of the million auto workers to bear on the entire industry and force it quickly to terms.
Truman first unsuccessfully ordered the GM workers to go back without a settlement, then resorted to his “fact-finding” board procedure, designed to whittle down the union’s demands. Reuther complied with this procedure – the first time it was ever used. In the end, the GM workers’ endurance and fighting spirit, augmented by the strikes in steel an dother industries, won an 18½-cent raise.
Reuther had proved more quick to adapt himself to the resurgent militancy of the auto workers than had Thomas, Addes and the other UAW leaders, who gave the GM strike only indifferent support. The Stalinists, with whom the latter were tied at the time, were thoroughly discredited. Thus, riding the crest of the GM victory, Reuther ousted Thomas as president at the March 1946 convention.
But in the very moment of his triumph, Reuther dropped his “militant” mask. He conducted his campaign for the presidency on strictly clique lines. He was silent on all the basic issues, the Ford “company security” clause which he had approved in the Executive Board, the participation of union leaders on government boards. He concentrated on winning conservative elements, making unscrupulous deals for posts to gain the backing of Jim-Crow and even gangster types, like Richard Gosser of Toledo. He talked about “responsible” leadership – meaning one opposed to class struggle. His keynote was “unity,” an end to factions (all but his own. of course) and to what CIO President Philip Murray, in his’convention address, termed “internal bickering.” Reuther demonstratively promised he would be a “source of strength” to Murray, that timid apostle of “class harmony.”
 
Reuther Gains a Clean Sweep
The 1946 convention did not give Reuther all that he sought – complete rule. His faction was in a minority on the Executive Board – the delegates didn’t trust him with undivided power. By the next convention, however, he was able to make a clean sweep. This time it was not the militants who backed him. As in 1940 and 1941, he lined up the most conservative and reactionary elements, concluding an unsavory alliance even with the priest-ridden Association of Catholic Trade Unionists. The keynote of his program was anti-communism and red-baiting.
The reactionary trend was deepening in the country. Truman had proclaimed his “doctrine” of “containing Communism” everywhere in the world. Apathy and conservative moods dominated many workers and this was favorable to Reuther’s cause. He pushed through the resolution ordering the UAW officers to comply with the Taft-Hartley law and rode rough-shod over the opposition to take full control.
With the union reins firmly in his hands, Reuther has unfolded his real program for the union. Its essential features are centralizing of power and curbing of internal democracy; crippling of militancy; collaborating with the corporations in imposing long-term contracts; restricting real wage gains while boosting speed-up and man-hour output. The auto workers are being put on a “war footing.”
Reuther has ruthlessly pursued his drive to extirpate opposition. At the 1949 convention, his executive board secured powers to bring to trial and expel local union members. A campaign of local trials and expulsions has been instituted, since the start of the Korean war, against those accused of not supporting the war. Reuther has endorsed contracts permitting company managements to fire alleged “subversives.”
“Company security” clauses – the right of managements to “discipline” participants in so-called “unauthorized” strikes – have been incorporated, in one form or another, in all major contracts. The shop-steward method of settling grievances has been supplanted by the “impartial umpire,” who on all important issues rules in favor of the company.
In 1949, to head off a strike at Ford, Reuther picked up the recommendations of Truman’s Steel Fact-Finding Board and agreed to no wage increase in return for a pension limited to f 100 a month, including social security, payable to workers over 65 after 30 years of service. Reuther’s “pattern” undercut the demands of the CIO Steelworkers, who, after a prolonged strike, settled for a similar pension plan without wage gains.
A reputation has been fabricated for Reuther as a “slick” negotiator. Much light has been shed on this during the past three years. His “slickness” consists in wangling small concessions in exchange for yielding previous gains or surrendering the union’s major demands. Thus, in 1948, he agreed to a poorly worked out cost-of-living escalator clause, but gave away most of the GM workers’ demand for higher basic hourly pay. Also, for the first time he abandoned the one-year contract and signed a two-year pact.
The long-term contract has become the heart of Reuther’s policy of collaboration with the corporations and stripping the union of its fighting powers. This year Reuther introduced the 5-year contract, which binds the workers not to demand anything for five years and fixes a ceiling of four cents an hour annually for increases in basic wages. This policy, begun in GM, has been extended to Ford and other companies.
 
How Reuther Negotiates
How important a victory the corporations consider the long-term contract was indicated by the satisfaction expressed by GM President Charles E. Wilson, who pointed out that GM’s rate of man-hour output will increase for the next five years. He did not fail to hail Reuther for accepting “the principle of progress” and said, “The boys (Reuther & Co.) deserve a lot of credit.” Business Week summed up GM’s gain:
“GM has bought five years of labor peace. Its workers, with nothing to fight over for the next half decade save minor grievances, will almost forget they are union men. By 1955, UAW’s GM unit may no longer be a militant bargainer.”
At least, that is GM’s hope. And Ford’s.
How has Reuther been able to put over his reactionary union policy? He has depended heavily, of course, on such classic methods of the union bureaucrats as suppression of criticism and opposition, centralization of power in the top leaders, curbing rank-and-file militancy.
But Reuther does not rely solely on these crude methods. He understands the traditions of the auto workers and has respect for the volcanic forces latent in the ranks. Despite his earnest desire to establish himself as an effective moderator of the class struggle and to enforce the “rule, of the conference table” for the “rule of the picket line,” he has been compelled time and again in the years since 1947 to tolerate and go along with strikes. In 1948 the Chrysler strike had to be endorsed and in 1949 the Ford anti-speed-up strike broke over his head. This past summer a wave of strikes spurred Reuther to hasty negotiations for wage increases.
He has not dared to move as fast as he would have liked against opposition and has been forced to impose a certain restraint and caution on the most reactionary elements in the union who want to go “all-out” at once on the “commies” and the militants. When the company stooges and ACTU gang at the outbreak of the Korean war started hoodlum attacks on alleged “communists” in several auto plants, Reuther sensed that a big kick-back would ensue from the democratic-minded auto workers and issued a warning against such methods, advising the more “legal” means of formal trial procedures and expulsions.
Above all, in maintaining his hold on the ranks, Reuther knows how to cover himself with a mantle of “progressivism” and “social progress.” Of all the union leaders, he is the most adept at social demagogy. He does not even disdain to borrow slogans from the most anti-capitalist revolutionary source, the Trotskyists, when this serves his ends.
Thus, in the 1946 GM strike he picked up the “Open the Books of the Corporations” slogan from the Socialist Workers Party. It was an effective piece of propaganda in exposing the reluctance of GM to reveal its true profits. But Reuther turned the “Open the Books” slogan into a demand not for the unions right to investigate the corporation’s records, but for the government’s. After the strike, Reuther quickly dropped the slogan.
Reuther’s cost-of-living escalator clause was likewise borrowed from the Trotskyist program of the sliding scale of wages to adjust wage rates automatically to the rising cost of living. But in his hands it was used as a device to limit gains in basic real wages and to justify the imposition of long-term contracts.
Reuther’s reputation and the widespread publicity he gets, however, are based on more than his role and activities as a union leader. More and more he fancies himself in the part of a “social engineer” and “labor statesman,” as the prototype of the labor leader whose functions reach out to national and world affairs.
His reputation as an advanced “social thinker” and “bold planner” is based on the various schemes he has elaborated from time to time for dealing with important social and political problems. All his plans have one thing in common: their brief span of life. None has survived more than a few months.
Typical was his scheme to convert idle aircraft factories into the production of 20,000,000 pre-fabricated housing units in 10 years and thus solve both the acute housing problem and the growing unemployment that appeared in 1949. At that time Reuther sneered at the demand for the 30-hour week at 40 hours’ pay to meet unemployment and called it “idealistic and a dream at this time.” Today his own scheme is forgotten. He had no program of action to put it into effect and, besides, the aircraft plants are producing war planes for Truman’s tremendously increased armaments program.
Just after the Korean war began, Reuther came forth with his most grandiose scheme. It was nothing less than “A Total Peace Offensive” to “stop Communist aggression by taking the initiative in the world contest for men’s minds, hearts and loyalties.” This was to be accomplished through a program of “both” the “building of adequate military defense” and “launching total war against poverty and human insecurity” throughout the world. His main proposition called for the expenditure by the United States of $13 billion annually for 100 years (1950-2050) – a total cost of one trillion, 300 billion dollars – for economic and social benefits, part to be made available even to the Soviet Union. This vast sum was to be spent in addition to the then already staggering federal budget of $42 billion a year. This super-duper “Marshall Plan” was offered just when a CIO committee was bringing back from Western Europe a damning report on the original Marshall Plan which, they testified, had been a “miserable failure” so far as the workers were concerned and had only further enriched the wealthy.
Scarcely was Reuther’s new scheme in print, when Truman demanded and Congress enacted “supplemental appropriations” even larger than Reuther talked of. But the $18½ billion a year more that Washington is extracting from the American people is going exclusively for the “adequate military defense” (read imperialist war) part of Reuther’s program. What the American people and the rest of the world are going to get from the administration which Reuther supports is higher taxes, inflation, shortages, less housing, repression, military dictatorship, wage freezes, longer hours and finally the descent into annihilating atomic war.
 
An Apologist for Imperialism
Nevertheless this latest, stillborn “plan” of Reuther’s indicates how his mind operates and what his function as a labor leader is. He is aware that the American workers – including the auto workers – are very suspicious of the aims of American capitalism in the rest of the world and at home. They are wondering why Washington is supporting reactionary, anti-labor regimes in Europe and Asia, if its aims are so democratic. Is there to be another war to fatten the corporations and tear down labor’s living standards? Reuther is convinced that to get and keep the support of the workers for militarization, it is necessary to give the war program the cover of professed progressive social aims.
It is as an apologist and “left” cover for American imperialism and its war program that Reuther’s greatest significance lies. He is, in fact, the most aggressive and able representative in the labor movement of that most treacherous and deceptive tendency – social imperialism – represented in classical form by the European Social Democrats.
“Social imperialists” was the term Lenin applied to “socialists” who supported their own imperialist rulers in the First World War – “socialists in words, imperialists in deeds.” The present-day social imperialist does not even remain “socialist” in words, but, like Reuther, speaks of grandiose reforms for capitalism.
Reuther is the darling of the pro-war liberals and Social Democrats, who long ago recognized him as “our boy,” embraced, publicized and praised him. It is they – with Reuther’s conscious assistance – who have contributed most to the myth of Reuther as a new-type labor leader who combines aggressive militancy in union economic struggles with streamlined organizational efficiency and, most of all, far-seeing social vision. The real Reuther is a coldly calculating opportunist, able to play the “militant” one day and the “responsible” aide to the ruling class the next, who knows how to cater to the aspirations of the ranks with high-sounding “social plans” which he never follows through with a program of action.
As Reuther sits in his presidential chair at the UAW headquarters in Detroit, he can, see above him and before him the presidency of the CIO. Today he is widely spoken of as a likely successor to aging and ailing Philip Murray.
But he sees something more. Beyond the CIO presidency looms the prospect of political power in Washington.
Reuther’s ambitions are not so cramped as those of an old-type union leader like Murray. He represents a new and higher stage in the development of American labor. He does not want to limit his game to that of passive apologist for Wall Street’s brutal plans for world domination. He sees himself and the labor bureaucracy, resting on the tremendous organized power of the unions, as more than propagandists and “labor advisers” on government boards, as in the last war.
 
The Political Ambitions of a Reuther
He envisions himself and the labor bureaucracy cut out for leading parts in running the government and determining its policies. He does not think that a government of “dollar-a-year” corporation executives can command the loyalty of the workers and keep them in line. For this, he believes, the labor leaders will be needed in commanding government posts.
He has many times indicated his admiration of the British labor leaders who have been in control of the British government since 1945. And he has had before him the example of the Social Democrats in Western Europe who have held top posts in coalition capitalist governments.
He has toyed around with the idea of a “third party” and even spoke of it tentatively in 1948, but dropped it when Truman was nominated for president. He has been the chief labor figure in Americans for Democratic Action, a formation of pro-war liberal and Social Democratic elements, which is seeking to build itself as an organizationally independent wing of “progressive” capitalist politics.
Does Reuther dream of himself as the American Attlee who will some day save US capitalism from itself? If he has not permitted himself that hope, it is not because he feels unqualified.
But what Walter Reuther may become will be determined not by his individual desires and ambitions, but by the self-same forces in the class struggle that have carried him to his present prominence. The decisive factor in his further career will be the auto workers and the CIO movement as a whole. He must go where they go – or he will not go with them at all.
Reuther must always be mindful and watchful of those hundreds of thousands of workers in the plant of Detroit. Flint and a score of other industrial centers who hold his destiny in their mighty hands. They have made Reuther what he is; they can unmake him or cause him to modify his conduct tomorrow or the day after.
But it would be unrealistic to expect any basic change in the characteristics and role which he has displayed in his ascent to office and his activities in it. These have become second nature to him. When it comes to the showdown, Reuther for all his bold talk readily yields to pressures from the government and the corporations. That is why he cannot give the auto workers the leadership they must have to maintain their conditions and go forward. That is why the aim of the militants is not to “reform” Reuther but to replace him.



Is this it: was the fearful question that flashed through every worker’s mind last week as press headquarters screamed of tumbling commodity prices and stock market jitters. Is this the beginning of the bust that must inevitably follow the collapse of the inflationary boom?
It is a grim irony that under capitalism our anxiety outweighs our hope at the prospect that skyrocketing prices may now be on the way down. For the profit systems swings us continuously between, insecurity and want. Either, inflated prices to rob us of our purchasing power during “prosperity,” or a fall in prices that heralds mass unemployment, wage cuts and relief lines.
No one – least of all the capitalist soothsayers – can say with certainty whether the drop in commodity prices will continue, or whether the government will succeed in temporarily holding them up by huge subsidies, purchases and other means of artificial respiration. We do not yet know whether we are hearing another subterranean rumble – a warning – or whether the earth will rock and open under our feet by tonight.
What we can be sure of is the instability and anarchy of American economy and the need for the American workers to be prepared for the worst. We may be receiving only the most urgent warning to date. But this may well be IT – the beginning of the bust. American labor must PREPARE.
 
Previous Warning Signs
There have been previous warning signs – the stock market break in September 1946, and the cotton market crash shortly thereafter. Government measures succeeded then in shoring up the cracking walls of the economy.
This time the cracks appear broader and deeper. The price structure has been raised to shakier heights. The foundation has been riddled by the speculator-termites. A slight breeze might topple the works. That fear gave a tone of near-panic to press headlines when grain prices fell farther between Feb. 4 and 6 than during any three-day period in 100 years.
In the wake of this violent break in grain prices, followed all along the line by other farm commodities, there came a reaction in the stock exchange. That barometer of the hopes and fears of the ruling capitalist circles started to sink at once, warning of an economic storm in the offing. If the stock market prices did not break as sharply as commodity market prices, that is because securities prices had never regained much; of the ground lost in the summer of 1946.
When plummeting grain prices were temporarily braked over the weekend, livestock prices started to toboggan, falling in one day, Feb. 9, to a 16-month low. The next day all commodity market prices, including such products as cotton and rubber, resumed their plunge. Prices of securities in the New York Stock Exchange felt the worst slump in eight’ months.
Business journals and financial columns have cited the immediate factors that started the skid in commodity prices. Crops in Europe are better; Australia, Argentina and Russia are exporting more wheat. It is the bitterest jest of all that U.S. capitalism is getting jittery because there is a little more food available for the hungry of Europe and Asia. These factors are described and analyzed in John G. Wright’s article on Page 2.
 
Elements of Capitalist Crisis
But more deep-going and explosive elements underlie the instability of American capitalist economy – the classic elements of capitalist crisis: The widening gap between the wealth of the few and the poverty of the many; the inability of the workers to buy back what they produce; the growing glut of goods that cannot be sold profitably either at home or to the ruined peoples abroad. “Supply pipelines have been rapidly filling up,” wails the Feb. 5 Journal of Commerce.
Average real take-home pay per week for American factory workers fell from $35.33 in January 1945 to $29.58 in December 1947. Factory inventories have reached an all-time peak of nearly 28 million dollars. Savings have fallen to 5.6% of national income, a dangerously low level. Business failures have tripled over a year ago. Industrial production has been declining since November. On Feb. 6, the U.S. Census Bureau reported unemployment on the rise, up 400,000 in January alone. Retail sales are down in many cities. Credit and loans have swollen to top-heavy dimensions.
Despite the drop in commodity market prices, workers must think that retail prices will necessarily fall sharply at once. Here and there retail grocery chains have cut prices slightly on the most inflated items. But only a drastic overall slash in retail prices can restore the buying power of wages of even a year ago. Moreover, clothing, industrial products and rents are still going up.
Labor therefore faces a two-fold task: 1. To press more strenuously than ever for higher wages and for assured protection from possible further inflation – the sliding scale cost-of-living bonus; 2. To demand the 30-hour week at 40 hours pay, and unemployment insurance equal to trade union wages.
The handwriting on the wall is clear. The crisis? may be forestalled a while; on the other hand, it may be under way right now. To delay protective measures may be ruinous. We repeat: LABOR MUST PREPARE NOW.
 



FEB. 3 – While warming their senile hides and thin blood in Miami sunshine, the 15 “elder statesmen’’ of the AFL. Executive Council have been disporting themselves since Jan. 26 in a shameless political farce.
They have decked themselves in the fetching costumes of “independent” politics. But their gestures and postures are those of solicitors for the two-parity dive of Big Business.
On Feb. 2, the entire AFL Council lined up in chorus formation for the first act of their burlesque. This was their unanimous rejection of Henry Wallace and any third-party candidacy for the U.S. Presidency. Their theme song was “Do Not Split the Liberal Vote.”
The next act played the following day, was performed largely in the vein of low slapstick comedy. Here the cast of characters was seen trying to contrive their own political program and set-up.
 
Falling Apart
They were seated around a machine called Labor’s League for Political Education, blue-printed at the San Francisco convention last October to be the AFL’s political conveyance.
Then, right on the stage, one of the biggest parts of the machine dropped off – the carpenters’ union led by William L. Hutcheson. Daniel Tobin’s teamsters’ union started coming loose. John L. Lewis had wrenched off – in technical parlance, “disaffiliated” – the miners’ union a number of weeks ago. But the denouement, came in the attempts of the Council members to get a “reputable” driver for the machine. For months they had been hunting high and low for some old-line capitalist politician in need of a $20,000 a year job, to take the steering wheel of LLPE.
They had reached a point of frustration and desperation when they were actually considering appointing one of their own number to keep the job from going begging. At the last moment, however, they dug up a likely candidate ex-Senator Burton K. Wheeler, and even announced his acceptance.
Then the farce got out of hand altogether. Wheeler advised them that he could only take the job on a “part-time” basis, if at all. Besides he could not accept without the understanding that he did not go along hook-line-and-sinker with the Marshall Plan and did not subscribe to the AFL’s position of opposition to all Congressional candidates who voted for the Taft-Hartley Slave Labor Bill.
This led to a free-for-all among the Council members that did not appear to be in the original script of their show. A section of the Council, headed by David Dubinsky, “revolted.” They said they would not accept Wheeler.
 
A Thin Disguise
Seldom has the American labor movement been so disgraced as by the Miami spectacle put on by the AFL big-wigs. In the very breath that they opposed Wallace for his “false liberalism,” they revealed their own complete subservience to reaction. They complained that supporting Wallace “would play into the hands of Soviet Russia’s expansionist policy” – but that’s a thin disguise for their own slavish support of Wall Street’s imperialist program.
They also claimed a third party would “split the liberal vote.” We’ve heard that song before – at every election since 1932 and every time the workers demand their own political party. The last time we heard it was in 1946. The workers didn’t “split the liberal vote” and got the most reactionary Congress in decades anyway.
If the AFL leaders don’t go for Wallace’s third-party movement – and they are correct when they say it does not spring from the labor movement – how do they propose to free the American workers from subjection to the two old political machines of Wall Street?
It was on this issue particularly that the AFL leaders in Miami staged an exhibition that would be comic – if it were not so serious for the life of the American labor movement, and such an insult to the more than 7 million hard-working AFL members who pay the salaries of the “fat and stately asses” of the Executive Council.
 
Nobody Is Fooled
The game of the Council majority is to swing labor’s votes once more behind strikebreaker Truman and the Democratic Party. They haven’t dared to say this in so many words, but nobody is fooled by their pretenses of “non-partisanship.”
But some of these “labor statesmen” can’t agree on what capitalist party to sell out to in the 1948 elections. Hutcheson of the Carpenters has declined to go along with LLPE, because, as an old-time standby of the Republican National Committee he’s still playing for a deal with some “acceptable” Republican candidate. Tobin of the Teamsters has been gyrating around their political weather-vane – at the last sighting he was pointed toward Republican Governor Warren of California.
But in essence, they all represent the same kind of politics. They are company unionists in the political arena, opposed to all genuine independent political action by labor and supporting established political reaction through the two-party system.
How symbolic have been their frantic efforts to secure anybody but a genuine labor leader to head LLPE. They have been scouring the political swamps for months to drag up some Democratic politician who will graciously take $20,000 a year to cover up the word “Labor” in Labor’s League for Political Education.
They went after Robert LaFollette and Mathew Neely and James Mead and Maury Maverick. They were almost ready to settle for Andrew Biemiller of Wisconsin, until he decided he would rather run again for Congress. Besides some of the Council members thought Biemiller was “too radical” because of his former New Deal sympathies!
Then they finally latched onto that old Democratic wheel-horse and pre-Pearl Harbor darling of the American Firsters and isolationist ultra-reactionaries – Senator Wheeler. Wheeler brought this whole farce to a head when he telephoned the AFL leaders that before he’d take the $20,000 a year for the use of his name they’d have to know “I just couldn’t abandon my law business” – aiding the railroad corporations.
At this writing the LLPE is still without a national figurehead.
What voice have the AFL members had in the life-and-death question of the political course they must travel? None whatsoever. The 15 bureaucrats luxuriating in Miami have never given a thought to consulting those who pay the dues and assessments.
It’s high lime for the AFL members to put a stop to the disgusting conduct of those who presume to speak in the name of seven million workers. The voice of the ranks must be heard. They must decide.
The demand must be raised in all the great bodies of organized labor for a National United Labor Conference, with rank and file representation from the AFL, CIO, Railroad Brotherhoods and independents, to map out a program of independent political action for the labor movement.
Such a conference could end the shoddy maneuvers and deals on the top with capitalist politicians. It could launch the mighty legions of labor as a truly independent force by organizing labor’s own party and running its own candidates next November.
 



Leading imperialist spokesmen in Washington and London have bluntly proposed that the Marshall Plan be used to power an economic and military bloc of Western European capitalist countries against the Soviet Union. They are speedily discarding’ any pretense that the Marshall Plan is simply a humanitarian program of “relief and rehabilitation.”
At Senate hearings last week, Bernard Baruch and John Foster Dulles, chief Wall Street advisers to the Democratic and Republican parties respectively, demanded, in effect, that an economic and military alliance of anti-Soviet governments m Europe be made an integral part of Marshall Plan aid.
British imperialist spokesmen promptly responded. Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin blasted unrestrainedly at “communism” and called for a “western union” of England. France, Belgium, Holland and Luxembourg. This would be the “nucleus” for an eventual bloc of all capitalist regimes in Western Europe, including their “dominions and colonies.”
Tory Churchill, original author of the scheme, hailed Laborite Kevin’s words in a speech that bristled with incitement to war.
The day after Bevin spoke, the U.S. State Department issued a public statement approving his statement of British foreign policy.
This is but the latest of the belligerent actions marking the progressively hotter stages of the “cold war” launched by the Truman Doctrine last March. On every front – propagandistic, economic, diplomatic and military – American imperialism is stepping up its ominous drive toward an atomic war of global conquest.
Simultaneous with the call for a U.S.-dominated Western Bloc financed by the Marshall Plan, the Truman Administration intensified its propaganda attacks on the Soviet Union. It found potent ammunition, in Stalin’s crimes – particularly his alliance with Hitler. The U.S. State Department published captured Nazi, documents revealing damaging details of this alliance.
War talk is being accompanied by war-like actions – direct military measures in Greece and the whole Mediterranean area. In the Balkan peninsula, American arms and military direction are playing the major role in the Greek civil war. American troops, battle-equipped, are in the vicinity prepared to do the fighting too.
The pronouncements of Baruch and Dulles before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearings on the Marshall Plan carry a semi-official weight. Baruch, White House intimate and adviser during two wars, told the Senate hearings on Jan. 19 that the countries of Europe, “as many as are willing”, should “band themselves into a political, economic and defense union;” and that “the United States, and such others as will join us, mutually guarantee the nations entering this union against aggression.”
He added with significant emphasis: “By guarantee, I mean a firm promise to go to war in joint defense if any of them are attacked.”
Dulles, Republican foreign policy adviser and participant in seven post-war international conferences, addressed the Senate hearing a day after Baruch. He stated that a condition for effectuating the Marshall Plan program is establishment or “sufficient political unity so that these states (in Western Europe) will present a solid front to any aggressor.”
This “political unity,” he said, should have the form of a “regional defense pact” like that fashioned by U.S. imperialism at the inter-American conference in Rio de Janeiro. The “degree of aid”’ any country would get from the Marshall Plan “should be measured by the degree of cooperation” it gives to the U.S. and its western war bloc.
Just two days later, British Foreign Secretary Bevin proclaimed that the British and French governments had already set into motion plans for a bloc of England, France and the so-called Benelux countries (Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg). “I believe the time is ripe for a consolidation of Western Europe,” he said.
 
U.S. “Misrepresented”
He admitted that “the European Recovery Program (Marshall Plan) brought all this to a head.” He issued fulsome praise for U.S. imperialism, which is supplying the cash to bolster British capitalism. He complained that this wealthy “benefactor” is “misrepresented in propaganda as a sort of Shylock of Wall Street.”
Churchill, whom British labor kicked out of the government during the -war, rose from his seat In the House of Commons to boast that his Laborite opponent had adopted the program he himself had first proclaimed in Fulton, Missouri, two years ago. He reminded his hearers that two years ago he said “possession of the atom bomb would give three or four years’ breathing space.” But “more than two of those years have already gone.”
On the very day of Churchill’s speech, the U.S. State Department issued a virtually unprecedented endorsement of British foreign policy: “Mr. Bevin has proposed measures which will enable the free countries of Europe further to concert with one another for their common safety and good ... the United States heartily welcomes European initiative in this respect.”
Meanwhile, the United States is maintaining a fully-manned Naval task force in the Eastern Mediterranean. An additional 1,000 battle-equipped Marines have been dispatched to Greek waters. The latest belligerent announcement is that the U.S. is reopening its wartime airfield at Mellaha, Libya – within a 900-mile striking distance of the capitals of Italy, Yugoslavia, Albania, Bulgaria and Greece. Britain has reinforced its strategic base at Crete with 70,000 troops.
Step by step we are being dragged toward the precipice of war.
 



American capitalism is gearing its economy and military machine for another world war. That is the clear meaning of the report issued on Jan. 13 by Truman’s Air Policy Commission.
This report, released with Truman’s letter of commendation, projects a vast increase in U.S. military air strength. It sets Jan. 1, 1953 as “A-Day” – the dates when American imperialism must be in position to fight an all-out atomic world war.
The Air Policy Commission proposes for this purpose that expenditures for the air forces, totaling four billion dollars in 1948, be increased starting this year until they reach an annual total of 11 billion dollars in 1952.
Truman – in his 40 billion dollar budget message – asked for more than 11 billion dollars for the military establishment, 28% of the total budget. But his Air Policy Commission the very next day called for an additional sum for military aircraft if more than 1½ billion dollars annually for the next two years. This would bring the direct military budget total in 1949 to 13.2 billion dollars to be increased progressively to 18 billions by 1952.
 
Only the Beginning
This is only the beginning, however, as Hanson W. Baldwin, military expert of the N.Y. Times, points out in his Jan. 15 article, Huge Arms Costs Loom. Direct military costs between 1948 and 1952 will range from 15 billions to 25 billions annually – and not the 11 billions Truman told the public in his budget report.
Universal compulsory military training as proposed by Truman and the Big Brass will cost two billions a year (400 million dollars in 1949 just “in anticipation,” Truman’s budget message says.) The National Guard is to be brought to a peak strength of 723,000 with a yearly federal expenditure of 700 million dollars. The Army’s Organized Reserve Corps will get 400 million dollars as against 60 million now.
No estimates have been made by the Navy of what it is going to demand to bring its forces up to full wartime peak. The Atomic Energy Commission, now operating on a budget of 600 millions, is asking for another 2 billion dollars for production expansion in the next “four or five years.” A five-year program of “strategic stockpiling” of war materials has already been approved by Congress – cost 2.1 billions.
Billions more are being asked for various forms of military construction – new National Guard armories (600 million) new transonic and supersonic wind tunnels (500 millions); new laboratories, testing centers and proving grounds for guided missiles and new weapons (500 millions); modernized merchant marine adaptable to war purposes (600 millions).
“These lists are by no means complete,” says Hanson Baldwin.
What it all adds up to is this: American imperialism is deliberately and systematically preparing for war. The swollen war budget, growing more gigantic each year, prevents any possibility of halting or controlling the price inflation that is tearing down the living standards of the American people.
 
Will Increase
Tm Truman’s Air Policy Commission doesn’t only propose to expand the war establishment now but expresses belief that if conditions do change “substantially for the better” by 1950. “the 1950 review will increase the size of the establishment rather than decrease it.” In other words, the present proposals just a beginning!
But suppose conditions do change “substantially for the better?” According to the Air Policy Commission (and that’s Truman and the Big Brass speaking), that will make no difference!
Because “our will to carry the financial burden, which will increase from year to year for several years, may weaken, especially if we should have a period of depression combined with calculated changes for the better in the public attitude of a possible enemy. That is our gravest danger.”
As I.F. Stone commented in the Jan 15 P.M., “Heads or tails, higher appropriations win.”
Quick support for the major proposals of the Air Policy Commission is anticipated in Congress from Republicans and Democrats alike. Senator Edwin C. Johnston, Colorado Democrat who has frequently lined up with Taft and the Republicans, has introduced a bill to increase air force appropriations by 4 billions in the next two years. His bill contains no profit-limitations clause. “I just overlooked it,” he breezily told reporters.
 
Quick Support
The Republicans, who talk “economy,” are likewise expected to back the demanded gigantic expenditures. In a recent speech in providence, R.I., Senator Taft demonstratively called for an expanded air force.
Truman’s war budget, his Air Policy Commission’s report, plus the tremendous increases in military expenditures envisaged in his universal training’ program, reveal the ominous trend. It is the trend to higher and higher prices, to a war-bolstered economy, to scarcity and want, to militarist regimentation, to atomic annihilation.
 



A hyena, a vulture and a jackal cornered a poor little pig. The hyena said, “Come home with me. I’ll put out some nice pineapple slices.” The vulture said, “Come home with me. I’ll open a tub of delicious sauerkraut.” The jackal said, “Come home with me. I’ll put a big red apple in your mouth.”
This is a fable.
* * *
The election fight this year will have its special name in history. It will be called the Battle of the Demagogues.
We are already being pounded from land, sea and air by all the capitalist candidates for President.
For the next ten months, we will be flattered and cajoled. Our passions and prejudices will be stimulated. We will be lured with glittering promises and persuaded with specious arguments. No lie or deception will be left unsaid that can possibly swing a vote.
This era and this year are especially favorable for demagogues. It is a time of vast social discontent. It is a time of unrest and seeking. The people are edger to listen, ripe for answers.
There is Truman, pride of the Pendergast machine, colleague of Rankin and Howard Smith. He’s anxious for votes and scared of Wallace. So he promises $40 a year more in every pocketbook and peace on earth. It sounds good – except he wants a $40 billion war budget and compulsory military training.
Taft is swinging at Truman in the name of “free enterprise” and against “regimentation,” “bureaucracy” and “totalitarianism.” Mouth-filling words – but not broad enough to cover up the Taft-Hartley Slave Labor Act.
They are joined in the demagogue free-for-all by a past master, Wallace. He plays on the fear of war and hatred of imperialism. This wartime vice-president of American imperialism says he will lead us to the promised land of peace – via a few detours, such as continued occupation of Germany and Japan, the United Nations and “enlightened capitalism.”
Never say what you mean or mean what you say. That’s the slogan of the capitalist demagogues, and we are in for it. Start ducking. That pie in the sky is falling right on our heads. This is no fable.
 



We can breath more freely now. We don’t have to worry one bit about the status of our democratic rights and civil liberties. At least that was the gospel according to Attorney General Tom Clark in his speech last week at the Cathedral Club banquet in Brooklyn.
The author of the recent political blacklist of “subversive” organizations pooh-poohed the notion that Truman’s “loyalty program’’ endangers free speech and political freedom, “Why,” said Mr. Clark, “until danger appears clearly and presently on the horizon, men here may speak and think as they will, protected in that liberty by the Constitution’s Bill of Rights.”
Now, that sounds reassuring, Mr. Clark. But there’s still a mite of doubt in my mind. Let’s take Truman’s “loyalty program,” for instance. I’ve had the notion that it’s a “disloyalty” purge. It provides for a secret investigation of the private lives and opinions of some two million government workers. They can be fired out of hand by department heads for even being of “doubtful” or “suspected loyalty.”
They can appeal, all right – but they’re guilty until they prove themselves innocent. They’re fired first. They can get a hearing – but they can’t examine FBI evidence and reports and they can’t confront their accusers.
Now what does that spell to you, Mr. Clark? It spells – and smells – G-E-S-T-A-P-O to me.
And how about that little political blacklist of yours, Mr. Clark, in which you on the basis of your sole judgment and authority, presume to publicly brand a number of working-class organizations, including the Socialist Workers Party, as “disloyal” and “subversive.”
I suppose that was intended to make the members and sympathizers of these organizations feel free to speak as they please – free, that is, of threats, intimidation and coercion from the government.
Civil rights, Mr. Clark? How free do you think the Negro people feel down in Louisiana, or in your own fair state of Texas, after those lynchings of Negro war veterans when your FBI couldn’t track down and jail the killers with an eye-witness list? But you’ll do better, won’t you Mr. Clark, with your own little list – that bulwark of civil liberties.
It’s surprising your blacklist isn’t Exhibit No. 1 on the Freedom Train. But then the Freedom Train contains only historic documents. But some day yours will be too, Mr. Clark. In fact, it will probably be the only thing you’ll be remembered by.
 



Seventy-nine cents of every dollar the American people will shell out for Truman’s proposed 1949 budget of $39,669,000,000 (that’s billions) will go tor war – past, present and future. This does not include items, like the atom bomb development, which are hidden under special misleading headings.
Six times more will be spent for war preparations than for human needs.
Direct military expenditures alone will cost $11,025,000,000 – 28% of the total – a $279,000,000 increase over the present budget. The Social Welfare, Health and Security program will take $2,028,000,000 – $68 million more than before, but one-third less than the $3,147,000,000 in 1940.
Almost 17 times as much will be spent for developing the atom bomb ($674,000,000 under the heading – Natural resources not primarily agriculture”) as for long-range public housing ($40 million).
Truman proposes a “first year” expenditure of $400,000,000 for “universal training” – that is, universal compulsory military training which “in full operation will cost about 2 billion dollars annually.”
At the same time, he allocates the magnificent sum of – $20 million – to extend unemployment compensation to millions of workers not now covered. He also asks for a new national health insurance fund of $150 million – to be paid for out of new payroll taxes – and to cost the government in 1949 just $15,000,000 for administration.
In addition to direct military outlays, Truman proposes to spend $7,009,000,000 to bolster capitalist dictatorships and military machines in Europe, Asia and Latin America – under the heading of “international affairs” and “foreign relief.’” This is nearly 1½ billion more than in the present 1948 budget.
Another major war cost will be payment of $5,250,000,000 of interest on public debt – mostly to bankers and corporations for war loans and on interest-bearing government bonds.
Another $5 billion – a claimed anticipated surplus of revenue over expenditures – will go to these same bankers and corporations to pay off a part of the $251 billion war debt.
Still another sum of nearly $2 billion is earmarked for payment to the capitalists. It is buried right at the bottom of the budget under “Refund of receipts.” This is $1,990,000,000 for war tax rebates mainly to corporations.
The budget proposes $300 million as grants to states for elementary and secondary schooling in the face of the near-collapse of the country’s public school systems. Less than half as much for our children’s education as for the atom bomb!
 
Non-Military
Only $1,157,000,000 of the budget is designated for general operations other than those concerned with the military. This is less than the 1948 budget total of $1,473,000,000. It gives an idea of what the federal government’s operations would cost minus the war machine. Even this item includes a hidden war cost – $85 million for cemeteries and return of war dead.
While interest payments, military preparations and other war costs are higher, there is one war cost that Truman proposes to reduce – expenditures for the victims of past wars, the veterans. Veteran services and benefits will be cut from $6,632,000,000 in 1948 to $6,102,000,000 in 1949.
Compared to his eventual $2 billion annual spending for compulsory military training, his $4,507,000,000 for “foreign aid” and his $1,250,000,000 for “occupation purposes” in 1949, Truman has asked for just $571,000,000 in new appropriations for his much-vaunted new social welfare program, which some of the press has dubbed his “New Deal.”
 
More Inflation
Included in this “New Deal” is $80,000,000 of additional expenses for a so-called “new anti-inflation program.” This useless expenditure just raises the cost of government – and the inflation.
The “economy-minded” Republicans who dominate Congress have quickly indicated that if there is going to be any cutting of Truman’s budget, it will come from the minor items related to human welfare. Thus, Republican Senator Styles Bridges found the military and foreign affairs items “realistic,” but thought the meager sums for social security, health, education, housing, etc., “beyond the means of the nation to meet this year.”
Truman’s expanding war budget is the greatest single item aggravating the inflation, although he says in his budget message that “we are all aware of the imperative necessity for preventing further inflation.” One of his major proposals on this score is:
“I am not recommending at this time cost-of-living increases in pay for military and civilian government personnel, nor cost-of-living increases in benefits for our veterans, social insurance beneficiaries, retired Federal employees and other similar groups,” although “the rapid increase in living costs ... has placed a serious burden on these groups.”
 
Surplus to Bankers
Truman’s claimed anticipated surplus of $5 billion in 1949 is all going to pay the war debt to the bankers.
The budget figures give the lie direct to Truman’s “State of the Union” speech where he demagogically said he wants to cut income taxes $40 a year for every individual and put additional taxes on corporation profits.
His own estimate of direct taxes on individuals in 1949 totals $23,322,000,000, compared to $22,793,000,000 in 1948. Total direct taxes on corporations will be only $610,000,000 more in 1949 than 1948. But Truman doesn’t expect Congress to follow his tax proposals anyway.
The cold figures of Truman’s budget add up to – inflation, war, human agony.
 



Congress and Truman have left the unions no alternative but to launch a new wage fight, if workers’ real wages are not to suffer a further 10 to 20% slash in the next six months.
The misnamed “anti-inflation” bill passed by a majority of both Democrats and Republicans in Congress, and signed by Truman on Dec. 30, was obviously a cheap last-minute gesture. Even the capitalist press admits the bill is worthless.
Industrial executives, whose views are reported in the Dec. 21 N.Y. Times, unanimously expressed “fears that the Government effort may have just the opposite effect and spur higher prices and large-scale buying. No one could cite a single product in which lower prices are expected as a result of the latest anti-inflation program.”
Philip Murray and the other CIO leaders, who held forth the hope of a government “rollback of prices,” have been forced to the reluctant conclusion that a “third round” of wage increases is now the top point on labor’s agenda.
But what their wage program is and how they intend to achieve it remains a deep-dyed mystery to the union rank and file. They have raised no concrete wage demands. They have initiated no preparations for a serious struggle. They have failed to take the elementary steps of developing a unified strategy.
The CIO’s national organ, the CIO News, presents no wage program of action. But in the original wage statement of the CIO officers and in subsequent brief articles there are positive hints that Murray and his lieutenants intend to follow the timid and disorganized tactics they pursued last spring.
Each CIO international union will take its own course, make its own demands and settle for whatever it can get whenever it can, regardless of the consequences for other CIO affiliates. Last spring, Murray quickly grabbed the inadequate wage offer of the steel corporations. This set a wage pattern for the other unions, which accepted settlements that did not begin to meet the previous loss in real wages due to fast-rising prices.
Nor was this all. Murray bound the CIO Steelworkers with a two-year no-strike pledge in its contract, although the union can reopen wage negotiations next April. The CIO Auto Workers and other leading affiliates have contracts running until next spring and summer. By the time the top CIO leaders get around to negotiating more wages, the gains will be wiped out in advance by the continuing price increases.
Indeed, Big Business and its government agents have already more than discounted future wage increases. They have ensured such a swift rise in prices prior to anticipated wage demands that they even hint in the press about their willingness to hand out a few crumbs to labor. That is what most of the union leaders are getting ready to settle for – a few crumbs.
There are significant signs however, that the union ranks are far from satisfied with the prospects held out by the timid officialdom. Organized pressure is developing from below to compel the leadership to adopt an effective wage program that will protect real wages in this inflationary period.
Thus, the current CIO News has had to take cognizance of the extremely important developments in the CIO auto and packinghouse workers unions. For the first time, the News has broken its silence on the demand raised by far-sighted militants over the past years for a sliding scale cost-of-living bonus as the most effective answer to price inflation.
The CIO News reports the initiative taken by the five General Motors locals in Flint which have launched a campaign inside the UAW for adoption of a 25-cent hourly wage raise demand and for a sliding wale cost-of-living bonus that will provide automatic wage increases for all price increases. The Flint program is gaining wide support, having been endorsed by Briggs Local 212, Ford Local GOO, Cadillac Local 22, Fleetwood Local 15, Budd Local 300 and others.
The CIO Packinghouse Workers have served a 30-day notice on the leading meat packers for reopening of the wage clause and will demand a cost-of-living bonus.
These are good beginnings. But a lot more heat will have to be generated under Murray and his lieutenants to force through a militant unified strategy of struggle to establish an adequate wage program for American labor in this period of inflation.
 

reis: “Defend Our Shores” (29 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
“Defend Our Shores”
(29 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. XII No. 13, 29 March 1948, p. 4.

We’ve been reading in the past few weeks the testimony of
the military experts on how “weak” the U.S., armed forces
are. True enough, the atomic bomb is in mass production. But this
country is being “threatened” and where is the “trained
manpower” to “defend our shores?”
Probably you are one of the many millions of Americans who think
“our shores” or “our borders” can be located
on any standard map. Defined on the north and south by treaties with
Canada and Mexico; fenced in on the east and west by Acts of God, the
Atlantic and Pacific.
But there you are in error, according to the military-experts.
“Our borders” are very elastic. They stretch like a big
rubber band and include about every habitable and uninhabitable
portion of the globe. You can take Secretary of State Marshall’s
word, for that.
“Our responsibilities” and “our leadership”
and “our interests,” he told a Berkeley, California,
audience on March 19, “are not confined to Europe.” Not
even to Europe! “They exist in the Middle East, in Indonesia,
in China – and we cannot ignore Latin America, or our direct
responsibilities in Japan and Korea.”
When you take this broad view of “our borders” which
we must “defend from aggression,” it becomes clear why
Russia is such a grave menace. We are entirely surrounded by Russia,
like the drunk who felt his way all around a tree and exclaimed,
“Trapped!”
We are “contained” on the Danube, the Persian Gulf,
the Japanese Sea and beyond the Yangzte River. We stand guard at
Tierra Del Fuego and glare eye to eye with the “red hordes”
across the Antarctic reaches. And let us not forget “our
border” in – Indonesia – now patrolled by U.
.-equipped-and-trained Netherlands troops fighting the good fight for
“American democracy” against the Javanese republican
“bandits.”
Of course, if you don’t look at “our borders”
with the sternly patriotic eye of a Wall Street imperialist or
militarist, you are apt to see the political map in a different
perspective. You might be tempted to say, “It looks like we’ve
got those Russians squeezed in a vise.”
You might even be led to the further conclusion, “It looks
like Russia is surrounded and threatened on all sides by American
imperialism. It looks like the U.S. has its hooks in most of the
world – and Russia is next.”
You’d be right, too.
The next time you hear that radio propagandist or read the
testimony of that brass hat before a Senate committee telling you we
need UMT and the draft and more billions for arms to “defend
our country” – remember he’s not talking about
“from the rocky shores of Maine to the sunny strands of
California.” He means the whole planet.


reis: Truman, Big Brass Plot to Impose Militarist Censorship on Press (15 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
Truman, Big Brass Plot to ImposeMilitarist Censorship on
Press
(15 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. XII No. 11, 15 March 1948, pp. 1 & 4.

The iron boot of militarist censorship and suppression is poised
over freedom of the press in America.
So drastic and far-reaching are plans of the military authorities
for control of the press that even some publishers are alarmed:
In a four-article series entitled The Problem of Secrecy
(N.Y. Times, March 3, 5, 6 and 7), Hanson W. Baldwin,
commentator on military affairs for the N.Y. Times, reveals
that suppression of news, intimidation and harassment of reporters
and publishers, and censorship for alleged “military security”
is already far advanced. 
Complete Blackout
He discloses that the Big Brass and the Truman administration are
building up a system of news censorship that would in a short time
impose a complete blackout on any information or criticism they did
not want published.
There have been “months of behind-the-scenes discussions and
considerable pressure by some Government officials, particularly some
in the National Military Establishment, to control the military,
semimilitary and even politico-military information published in this
country,” Baldwin reports. These officials “are plainly
impatient with public criticism and would like to devise some system
by which the press could be better ‘controlled’.”
This pressure, he adds, “has also come from the White
House.”
The first “considerable anxiety” felt about the
military threat to press freedom, says Baldwin, was last Fall “when
it became known that the Security Advisory Board of the State
Department-Army-Navy-Air Force Coordinating Committee had proposed to
‘classify’ and to ban from public disclosure even
information that might cause ‘serious administrative
embarrassment’.”
Such censorship, Baldwin points out, could “provide a cloak
to hide” any inefficient and even criminal conduct of
government and military officials, such as the case of Maj. Gen.
Bennett E. Meyers.
Protest against this proposal was “so vocal” that the
Security Advisory Board revised its definition of. “classified”
and “secret” information by rewording some of the cruder
formulas. But it still defines as “secret” any
information that would cause “unwarranted injury to an
individual.” This, says Baldwin, could obviously be used “to
protect Government officials from criticism.”
In addition to the extensive system of “classified”
information, reports Baldwin, there are many other methods of
censorship and suppression now being practiced. He cites, for
instance, the repeated complaints of censorship of correspondents in
Japan by Gen. Douglas MacArthur.
Recently, MacArthur refused to reaccredit to his command area the
Newsweek correspondent, Compton Pakenham, because he showed
“marked antipathy toward American policy and American personnel
in the occupation zone.” Some correspondents “have been
subjected to threats and grilling; the home of one man was searched
by the Army’s Criminal Investigation Department.” The
“MacArthur precedent,” says Baldwin, “has now been
extended to Europe.”
A United Press correspondent, Robert Miller, who recently
visited Saudi Arabia, “learned that King Ibn Saud, with the
full cooperation, and perhaps at the instigation of the United States
Army, State Department and oil company officials, had banned all
American newspaper correspondents from his country.”
In another case, an interview with Charles F. Wennerstrum, who
presided over the recent trial of Nazis in Frankfurt, was subject to
harsh attack before it was even published in the Chicago Tribune.
“Obviously, some Army source read the dispatch before or during
its transmission ... despite the fact that wire communications are
supposed to be inviolable,” says Baldwin. He adds: “This
sort of ‘censorship by surveillance’ or by threat was
practiced extensively before the war in Nazi Germany.” 
Grilled by FBI
Robert H. Wood, editor of Aviation Week, a McGraw-Hill
publication, has been grilled repeatedly by FBI agents for publishing
a story, well-known outside of Air Force circles, about the
supersonic speed of the Bell XS-1, modeled on a captured Nazi design.
The Russians had also captured the design, so anything Aviation
Week published was not news to them.
What is serious about this case, Baldwin points out, is that
the Air Force secured the aid of the Department of Justice and FBI
for a “punitive and threatening measure” to force a
publication to disclose the source of its information “and
presumably to impress and overawe it.” This case, further, is
being used as an argument for legislation to “give the
Government the legal club needed to restrict the flow of news to what
it considered desirable.”
A bill has been prepared with terms “so broad – it
defines as a criminal offense, for instance, the transmission of any
‘information’ concerning the national defense ‘to
any person not entitled to receive it’ – that it could be
used, and undoubtedly would be used, in the light of past experience,
to limit the legitimate information media of the country.”
But, as Baldwin shows, the military aren’t even waiting to
get their censorship system legalized.
On March 3, representatives of the big newspapers, magazines
and publishing houses conferred with Secretary of Defense Forrestal
and proposed a system of “voluntary censorship” as a
means of avoiding direct censorship.
This “voluntary censorship,” says Baldwin, “might
well turn out more theoretical than real.” Any publication that
printed information the government wanted withheld would be
“subjected to all sorts of government pressure; its sources of
information might be closed up: it would probably be called
‘unpatriotic,’ etc.” Even “voluntary
censorship,” he says, can be used “as a powerful
restraining influence on the flow of information.”


reis: Henry Wallace – His Record as Capitalist Politician (8 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
Henry Wallace – His Recordas Capitalist Politician
(8 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. 12 No. 10, 8 March 1948, p. 2.

Henry, Agard Wallace is a middle-class, capitalist politician who
feeds on liberal-sounding words. These he chews over like a cow does
its cud. He never tires of the flavor of such phrases as the “Common
Man,” the “General Welfare” and “Progressivism.”
And who dares oppose these?
Liberal phonies always use such glittering generalities. Only
Wallace repeats them more often, more vaguely and more shamelessly.
This windy demagogy is the foundation of his reputation as a
“Champion of the People.”
Fortunately, we are not forced to judge him by words alone.
Wallace has had ample opportunity to demonstrate in deeds his
self-proclaimed love for the “common man.” He was a top
figure in the government for 13½ years and once bore the proud
title of Roosevelt’s “Crown Prince.”
In all those years he did not do a single thing of benefit for the
“common man” – not for the workers, the Negro
people, the poor farmers and sharecroppers or the small business man.
His deeds in office were an unbroken chain of reaction.
That is a matter, of public record, if not of public knowledge. Most
of the facts have now been conveniently compiled in a book, Henry
Wallace – The Man and the Myth by Dwight Macdonald.
(Vanguard Press, Inc., New York City).
Wallace was the Roosevelt administration’s loudest
warmonger, jingo and apologist for U.S. imperialist participation in
World War II.
He was a member of Roosevelt’s secret policy group that
initiated the development of the atomic bomb. He hailed this most
fiendish instrument of war as a major triumph of Roosevelt and the
“New Deal.”
He upheld Roosevelt’s wartime demand for Saudi Arabian oil,
boasting this “was not ruthless imperialism but good
old-fashioned American imperialism” and “the United
States: is proud of it.”
He defends to this day the dismemberment of Germany, starvation
rations for the German people and continued ruthless military
occupation of the conquered countries. 
“World Peace” Formula
His “anti-imperialist” program, stated most fully and
crudely in his Madison Square Garden speech in September 1946 calls
for an agreement between Washington and the Kremlin to divide the
world between them. That is his formula for “world peace.”
Here are some highlights of his record on the “common man”
at home:
He put through, as Secretary of Agriculture, a program of “planned
scarcity,” whereby the big landowners were paid to destroy
crops and livestock to boost prices in a world of unemployment and
hunger.
He fired his own “New Deal” colleagues out of the
Department of Agriculture at the behest of cotton speculators,
textile interests and the : reactionary Farm Bureau of big
landowners.
He falsely interpreted a clause in the Agricultural Adjustment
Act. to permit wealthy landowners to reduce acreage by evicting
thousands of tenant-farmers and sharecroppers.
He repudiated, at the climax of the 1946 General Motors strike, a
confidential report of Commerce Department economist’s which he
himself had released before the strike and which showed that the auto
corporations could raise wages 10% without raising prices.
He demanded, just after the 1946 coal strike, that the
government take over strike-threatened industries and that the
workers, “like other federal employeee, give up the right to
... strike.”
He rudely refused to see a Negro delegation and sneaked out on
them when they came to appeal for aid in saving the life of the
Virginia sharecropper Odell Waller, who was later executed for his
self-defense slaying of a white man.
He surrounded himself, as Secretary of Commerce, with a retinue of
conservative big businessmen and proclaimed himself “the
representative of business in government.” 
Defends Profit System
He has championed consistently but one program, “the
preservation of our democratic free enterprise system” –
that is, the capitalist exploitation of labor for private profit.
These fully documented damning facts go unchallenged and
unmentioned in an attempted reply to Macdonald’s book in a
review by Russell Lord in the March 1 New Republic, Wallace’s
mouthpiece.
Lord treats us to the worshipful disciple’s fanciful
portrait of Wallace, “profoundly simple, profoundly practical
... it is certain he will keep growing.” Lord concerns himself
chiefly with heated denials of the least important aspects of
Macdonald’s book, his psychological and moral appraisals of
Wallace.
The record cited by Macdonald shows that Wallace is a “trimmer,
hedger and chronic reneger” who “lacks the guts to stand
up under pressure.” But Macdonald overemphasizes personal
quirks and traits and leaves out the key to a real understanding of
Wallace.
That key is the class character of Wallace, his politics and
his movement. In every major test of his career Wallace has proved
himself a loyal defender of capitalism and American imperialism.
From 1933 to 1940, when Wallace headed the Department of
Agriculture, he faithfully served the rich landowners against the
poor farmers, tenant-farmers, sharecroppers and low-wage consumers.
He worked most closely with the Farm Bureau Federation, the lobby of
the “400-acre farmers.” The Farm Bureau’s 1,800
county agents became the local agents of the Agricultural Adjustment
Administration (AAA).
The AAA paid landowning farmers to withdraw a portion of their
land from cultivation in order to reduce crops and raise prices. But
the majority of farmers are tenants and sharecroppers and only
landowners received benefits. The landowners. first withdrew
from production land occupied by tenants and share-croppers. These
not only were deprived of a livelihood, but were kicked out of their
homes. 
Wallace’s Sell-Out
A clause in the AAA contract said that the landlord “shall
permit all tenants to continue in occupancy of their houses on this
farm, rent free, for the years 1934 and 1935.” The Southern
Tenant Farmers Union protested there were hundreds of evictions in
spite of this clause. Wallace fired several of his aides who
supported the tenants. He said , the clause did not mean the same
tenants must remain, only the same number of tenants. The
Arkansas courts promptly accepted his interpretation and upheld
hundreds of evictions.
Ten years later, when he was Secretary of Commence, Wallace
followed similar policies. He appointed as his undersecretary Alfred
Schinder, a conservative big businessman who had previously served
under banker Jesse Jones. Another ton job went to Albert J. Browning,
who called for incentive wages. Wallace brushed aside the small
business interests who sought his aid against the monopolies. The May
20, 1945 N.Y. Times published a special article describing the
surprise and pleasure of Big Business at Wallace’s policies.
While Vice President, from 1940 to 1944, Wallace destroyed any
claim he might have to being “anti-war” and
“anti-imperialist.” He served the special role of
whitewashing the imperialist character of the war and dressing up its
sordid aims. In his highly-publicized address on the “People’s
Century,” he lied about the war as a “people’s
war,” even a “people’s revolution,” whose aim
was to bring a quart of milk a day to every child in the world.
Today, as we all know, not the least result of the war has been to
bring starvation and death to millions of children in Europe and
Asia. 
Deal with Stalin
Wallace’s campaign for a deal with Russia and his expulsion
from the Truman, administration over this issue has led to the charge
that he is “pro-Russian” and a “Communist
fellow-traveller.” Macdonald’s crude Stalinophobia and
lack of a class approach to politics leads him to make similar
charges.
Wallace is just as much an American imperialist today as he was
during the war. He is no more “pro-Russian” than were the
capitalist politicians – from the White House down – who
whitewashed the crimes of Stalin during wartime, just as the
Stalinists whitewashed Wall Street and its chief political agent,
Roosevelt.
Wallace, today asks no more than Roosevelt and Churchill agreed
to, in essence, at Teheran and Yalta, and Truman underwrote , at
Potsdam. He wants to give American capitalism a breathing spell
through another deal with Stalin to divide the world into “spheres
of influence.” Wallace’s differences with Truman are
tactical, not fundamental.
What Wallace wants he stated in his Madison Square Garden speech,
on Sept. 12, 1946. He declared that “by mutual agreement, this
competition should be put on a friendly basis” and mutual fears
should be “allayed by practical regional political
reservations.” These “regional reservations”, he
stated, would include the one-third of the world which “Russian
ideas ... are going to govern” and “much of the rest”
of the world where “American Ideals” will rule,
This is dirty horse-trading disguised as a “peace”
program. It is Wallace’s chief plank today – the most he
has to offer the “Common Man.”


reis: Washington Whips Up War Hysteria (22 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
Washington Whips Up War Hysteria
Truman and Militarists Drive to Impose UMT and
Peacetime Draft
(22 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. XII No. 12, 22 March 1948, pp. 1 & 2.

Washington is deliberately whipping up a war hysteria.
The events in Czechoslovakia have provided Truman, the State
Department and the Big Brass with the pretext for a warmongering
drive unparalleled in the peacetime history of the country.
Every major capitalist newspaper and all the radio stations have
been screaming war incitements. Each new headline in the past three
weeks has blazoned further provocative statements by the top
government officials and militarists.
This campaign was climaxed on March 17 by Truman’s speech to
a special joint session of Congress – a speech that left no
doubt that the Administration is definitely committed to war.
How soon the nation will be plunged into another imperialist
blood-bath no one, of course, can say. But there can be no doubt
whatsoever that American imperialism intends to go to war, that war
is the end-object of its international strategy.
Wall Street’s course, as Truman made plain in his address to
Congress, is toward the speediest preparation of public opinion and
the military machine for a world conflict of atomic annihilation. 
Truman’s Demands
Truman attacked Russia in the most savage terms, accusing it of
sole responsibility for endangering the peace. He called for
universal compulsory military training, establishment of peacetime
conscription and huge expansion of the armed forces. He demanded
immediate passage of the so-called European Recovery Program as the
direct implementation of the West European military alliance against
Russia.
“Measures for economic rehabilitation alone are not enough,”
he said, hailing the Five-Power Military Paect signed that very day
and pledging “full support” by the United States.
He bemoaned the “tragic death” of Czechoslovakia,
which Roosevelt and Churchill themselves, at Yalta, had tossed into
Stalin’s “sphere of influence.” The U.S. Army, on
orders from the State Department halted 50 miles from Prague in 1945
to permit occupation by the Russian army.
Truman’s demonstrative action in calling the joint
session followed a series of statements and actions by State
Department and military officials designed to arouse public war fever
and stampede Congress into speedy passage of the demanded war
measures.
Secretary of State Marshall issued an alarmist press statement
terming the international situation! “very, very serious.”
Secretary of National Defense Forrestal hastily called a secret
conference of the General Staffs of all the armed services in Key
West, Florida. “It’s no secret,” said the
Scripps-Howar newspaper chain on March 13, “that Mr. Forrestal
and joint chiefs of staff are worried sick at imminent threat of war”
and are “thinking in terms of immediate mobilization.” 
Use Armed Forces
Former Secretary of State Byrnes, author of the
“get-tough-with-Russia” policy, demanded that the United
States “act” if the Communist Party wins the April 18
election in Italy and use U.S. armed forces to preserve the “status
quo.”
The whole sequence of events establishes pretty definitely that
Truman and the militarists now in control of U.S. foreign policy are
deliberately pushing toward war.
Prior to his Czechoslovakia coup, it has now leaked out, Stalin
made a direct bid to Washington for another deal. Stalin’s
offer to meet with Truman was made “late in January” and
was “turned down,” the Mar. 5 U.S. News disclosed.
Business Week of Mar. 6 revealed that “official
Washington – and that means the State department and the
military – has brushed aside Russia’s January peace
feelers.”
This news was suppressed. The American people were kept in the
dark while Wall Street’s agents in Washington developed their
campaign to force matters to a showdown. Stalin’s subsequent
move to consolidate his grip on Czechoslovakia provided the pretext
for the long-planned campaign of war hysteria.
This is now being stirred to a more frenzied pitch over the coming
elections in Italy. 
Brazen Attempt
Rarely has there been so brazen an attempt by a foreign power to
interfere with an election in another country, as Washington is
engaged in. The State Department has threatened to cut off any
economic aid to Italy if the Communist Party (Stalinists) gain a
majority in an election run by the Italian capitalist government.
Speaker of the House Martin has called on Italians in this country to
write their relatives to vote against the Communist Party.
As the war scare grew, the Senate overwhelmingly approved the ERP
bill and the House is being whipped into line for quick action.
Then Marshall, on Mar. 15, told the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee that the situation in Greece has become “worse”
despite the 250 million dollars in U.S. military supplies given the
Greek monarchists. He complained that Turkey was so strained by
military preparations that its economy is in dire straits. He urged
that more money and arms be poured into these countries.
U.S. imperialism finds it cannot prop up capitalist reaction
anywhere by purely economic means. The regime of Chiang Kai-shek is
in dire straits and China is in a state of hopeless chaos. Now the
clamor is going up for more military aid to Kuomintang China.
Thus, the Marshall Plan is becoming more and more a scheme to arm
the military entente which U.S. imperialism is building. The nucleus
of that entente is the 50-year military alliance between England,
France, Holland, Belgium and Luxemburg. Other countries – 14 in
number so far – are being lined up through the ERP conference
now in progress in Paris.
Even the Western Zone of Germany, under British, U.S. and French
occupation, has been invited into the ERP. Wall Street is now seeking
to build up and integrate a capitalist Western Germany into its
military bloc. 
“New Concept”
The chief of the Decartelization Branch staff of the U.S.
occupation government in Germany, Richard Bronson, informed his staff
in Berlin on Mar. 15 that General Clay has a “new concept of
industrial decentralization.” War industry cartels will not be
decentralized because “we have got to think about the war.”
All these developments unmistakably mark the drive of Truman and
the militarists toward war. The war hysteria campaign is designed to
prepare public opinion for a military adventure any time America’s
rulers see fit to begin armed hostilities. The program of war
preparations is being pushed aggressively, with plans for new huge
increases in the military budget. Now the draft and UMT have been put
at the top of the Administration’s agenda to regiment the
nation under military rule.


reis: Search for a White House Tenant (8 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
Search for a White House Tenant
(8 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. XII No. 10, 8 March 1948, p. 4.

Housing shortage got you down? A couple of real estate brokers
named Philip Murray and William Green are seeking a new tenant for
one of the choicest residences in Washington, D.C. It’s in an
exclusive neighborhood, but close to the shopping district. It’s
equipped with a new $15,000 balcony for sun-bathing. And it’s
rent free – with a $75,000 a year honorarium. Just to help you
keep up this elegant joint.
But before you start writing any letters like “Dear Sirs:
I’m a veteran with a wife and two kids living in a one-room
cold-water flat,” you should know there are a few strings
attached to the deal. The lease contains a list of restrictive
covenants a yard long – and the usual one barring occupancy by
“non-Caucasians” is just a starter.
Labor leaders, non-believers in capitalist “free
enterprise,” working-class radicals of any stripe are strictly
verboten. The new tenant must be some solid citizen, with
respect for property, law and order and the established two-party
system. He must have some good Wall Street references, comport
himself in a decorous and conservative fashion, but at the same time
be able, when the occasion requires, to talk a polite brand of
“liberalism.”
Murray & Green, Inc., would prefer, if possible, a tenant of
long-standing devotion to the Democratic Party. But a Republican
might prove acceptable if he can meet all the other qualifications.
There’s one other very important restriction. Opponents of
the Truman Doctrine are barred from the start. Anyone who doesn’t
stand four-square for American imperialism, support of anti-labor
regimes in Europe and preparations for World War III against the
Soviet Union had better not send in an application for White House
tenancy to Murray & Green, Inc.
But, you will probably ask, why arc these real estate brokers –
-whose sideline, incidentally, is holding union offices –
looking for a new tenant? Don’t they have a desirable tenant in
the White House now? Well, yes – and no.
If it were altogether up to Murray and Green, they’d renew
Harry S. Truman’s lease in a minute, But there’s one
further little hitch.
The lease to the White House has to be renewed every four years
and signed by a majority vote of the American electorate –
meaning principally the workers. And Truman, it looks like now, is
suffering from an aggravated case of political halitosis. Even his
best friends arc beginning to tell him so.
So, Murray & Green, Inc., have to scram around at this late
date to line up a possible new tenant, acceptable to the landlord,
Wall Street, and yet who can turn on the “liberal” charm
like a neon sign and attract the labor vote. That kind of tenant is
scarce as hen’s teeth today.


reis: How the Cost-of-Living Bonus Works (29 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
How the Cost-of-Living Bonus Works
(29 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. XII No. 13, 29 March 1948, p. 4.

In 1938 The Militant proposed, a wage program for the
American labor movement in anticipation of the coming war and the
inevitable war-borne inflation, called “The Sliding Scale of
Wages.”
The predicted inflation has followed a nine-year course. Despite
the recent slump in the wholesale commodity market prices, the
cost-of-living is substantially what it was in January, at the peak
of the price spiral and prices are resuming their upward trend.
Today, many far-seeing union militants have come to the conclusion
that the principle of the sliding scale of wages, or, as it is often
called, the cost-of-living bonus, contains the only immediately
effective protection for real wages against rising prices. 
Set Wage, Sliding Bonus
This is a bonus to be paid in addition to the negotiated
wage scale. The latter remains fixed during the life of the contract
regardless of the ups or downs of prices. But the bonus is paid over
and above regular wages if the cost of living rises, and in
amounts directly proportional to the increase of prices, Thus, the
bonus is adjustable; the basic wage is fixed. If prices go up, the
bonus goes up proportionately. If prices go down, the bonus goes
down. But the basic hourly wages remain the same during the life of
the contract.
The demand for the sliding scale cost-of-living bonus was first
put forward by the CIO Packinghouse Workers during negotiations in
the Spring of 1947. The UPW leaders did hot press for the demand,
however, and settled for a small fixed wage increase. The CIO Rubber
Workers have now called for a sliding scale cost-of-living bonus in
addition to a 30-cent hourly basic wage increase in their present
negotiations.
For the most part, however, the top CIO leaders have opposed this
program. Their method of opposition has usually been evasion of the
issue, rather than direct attack. But now, for the first time since
1938 we have the opportunity to defend this program in debate with
attempted reasoned arguments against it. The Reutherites in the CIO
Automobile Workers, who have opposed the sliding scale bonus demand
as proposed by five UAW local presidents in Flint, have set forth the
reasons for their opposition publicly and in detail. 
Opposition’s Arguments
Their arguments are contained in a lengthy article entitled
Escalator Clause, signed by Coburn S. Walker, financial
secretary of Chevrolet Local 659, Flint, and published in the Feb. 12
issue of The Searchlight, Local 659’s paper.
Walker’s article is based largely on the example of the
operations of a sliding scale wage clause in the contract of the
Sinclair Oil Co. with the CIO Oil Workers International Union. Walker
rests his arguments on his interpretation of a letter sent to the UAW
by E.E. Phelps, OWIU Director of Research and Education.
This letter also published in The Searchlight, says the
Sinclair workers secured a cost-of-living sliding scale contract
which was in effect from Januarv to Sept. 15, 1947. After eight
months, the escalator clause was dropped and a fixed wage increase
alone was written in the contract.
What were the effects of the escalator clause and would the
Sinclair workers have done better if they had retained the clause?
Phelps’ letter, though it attempts to justify the
discontinuation of the clause, shows that if it had been retained,
the Sinclair workers would have received higher wages than they now
have.
He says that only Sinclair and a few of the smaller oil companies
agreed to the sliding scale of wages principle. The big companies
insisted on fixed wage scales “sometimes nearly meeting”
the wages paid the Sinclair workers. At the time the Sinclair
workers’ contract was changed, they were getting “3 cents
above what competitive companies’ agreements called for.”
At that time – midsummer of 1947 – the leaders of
the OWIU thought that the economic situation “didn’t
forecast any further sharp increases” in prices. They decided
to consolidate their sliding scale increases on the basis of a
25-cent an hour raise in basic wages. The actual contracts signed
provided, in most cases, a 15-cent basic raise, plus a 10-cent bonus
to continue until the summer of 1948.
Had the old contract continued, however, Phelps now admits, “the
economic conditions would have benefited the membership to the extent
of about 10 cents an hour.”
Phelps further reveals that “a few settlements have been
made containing these minimum base rate adjustments (25-30 cents an
hour), ACCOMPANIED WITH A FURTHER COST OF LIVING BONUS THAT PAYS AS
MUCH AS 7 TO 12 CENTS (an hour)).” 
Two Things Clear
Two things stand out pretty clearly in Phelps’ letter.
First, the oil workers raised their wages 28 cents an hour during the
period that all other CIO unions, including the auto workers, got
raises of only 10 to 15 cents an hour. Second, for some of the oil
workers, their full cost-of-living increase has been converted into a
permanent basic increase – plus cost-of-living bonuses of 7 to
12 cents.
Walker takes the fact that the Sinclair workers discontinued their
particular escalator clause as a demonstration that all such clauses
are no good. He says, for instance,
“If the UAW accepts the Sinclair Oil type of
escalator clause, AS RECOMMENDED BY PALMER (former Local 659
president), a fall in prices would leave the workers with no gain in
their living standards.”
But then, in the very next sentence, Walker contradicts
himself: “Palmer and his friends are really asking for
something different from what the Oil Workers got.”
The original Sinclair Oil contract tied all wages to prices. That
is one type of escalator clause. It has a possible weakness if prices
should fall below those at the time the contract was signed. 
Basic and Bonus
But the program advanced by the Flint local presidents and the
rubber and packinghouse workers doesn’t tie basic wages to
prices. It calls for basic wage increases PLUS a cost-of-living
bonus adjustable for price rises. Walker’s only answer to the
real demand formulated by the Flint local presidents is that it is
“illogical.” Why, he asks, should the basic wage be
fixed, while only the bonus is adjusted to price movements?
Far from being “illogical,” it is exactly what the
situation calls for. Even Phelps’ letter indicates that in some
of the oil companies, WHERE THE WORKERS WERE READY AND ABLE TO
ENFORCE THEIR DEMANDS, they got not only a basic wage increase of 25
to 30 cents an hour, but also “a further cost of living bonus
that pays as much as 7 to 12 cents.” During the same period the
auto workers have received only an 11½-cent basic raise.
Another argument of Walker is that “escalator clauses
freeze workers living standards and prevent them from improving the
conditions of their families.” This would not have happened if
the UAW contracts even had an admittedly inadequate escalator clause
like the Sinclair Oil workers. It is estimated that, even in that
case, the average auto worker would have received $500 more in wages
than he actually received and today would be enjoying $50 more a
month.
But the Sinclair contract, as Walker admits, is not what
the UAW progressives ask. They ask for a wage program that will
improve the workers’ living standard and keep it improved.
That’s why they want their basic wages fortified by a
cost-of-living bonus. 
Present UAW Demands
As a matter of fact, the present basic wage demands of the UAW are
not designed to improve living standards, at all, but just to restore
them to the level of June 1946. Walker himself says that 15 cents of
the demand is to restore the living standards of two years ago and
the other 10 cents is for further price rises which “the Board
expected.” This is just a program of chasing after high prices.
Walker’s – or rather the Reutherites’ –
arguments break down at every stage. They say escalator clauses might
result in pay cuts. Then they say that the sliding scale
cost-of-living bonus, which does not have this weakness, is an
“illogical” demand. Why this is any more illogical than
the simultaneous demand for basic wage increases and pensions, they
don’t explain.
The two wage demands proposed by the UAW progressives deal with
two different aspects of the wage question:

The improvement of living standards through basic wage
	increases; 
The protection of basic wage increases from future price
	rises through a cost-of-living bonus clause.

It is because they confuse these two different aspects of the wage
question that the Reutherites raise such contradictory and foolish
arguments against the cost-of-living bonus wage programs.


reis: Green, Reuther Hand Out Same Political Bunkum (1 March 1948)





Art Preis Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Art Preis
Green, Reuther Hand Out Same Political Bunkum
Offer No Positive Labor Program in Speeches at
Convention of Truman Doctrine Liberals
(1 March 1948)

From The Militant, Vol. 12 No. 9, 1 March 1948, p. 1.

AFL President William Green and CIO United Auto Workers President
Walter Reuther were the chief union spokesmen at the Americans for
Democratic Action convention on Feb. 22 in Philadelphia. The ADA is
the organization of Truman Doctrine liberals.
Green, an ancient mossback, represents the horse-and-buggy era of
craft unionism. Reuther is a star graduate of the newer school of
streamlined labor bureaucrats who pose as up-to-date and
“progressive” in their thinking.
But they spoke the same language before the ADA convention. They
expressed identical views on political action and the Marshall Plan –
and all their views were reactionary. 
Ignored Labor’s Problems
The problems of American labor before advancing Big Business
reaction found place in their speeches only in a few brief
complaints. They had another program to peddle – the Truman
Doctrine, currently disguised as the European Recovery Program.
When it came to a political program for labor and progressives
in 1948 they came forth with a hollow negative – “Get
Henry Wallace!”
Green ranted about Wallace’s third-party venture as
“ill-conceived and ill-timed”, not to speak of
“red-starred.” Reuther proclaimed, “We’ve got
the job of taking on Wallace and his Joe Stalin associates.”
From their concentration on Wallace, you’d think that all
evils stemmed from him rather than the Democratic and Republican
freebooters who have mutually held a political monopoly for eight
decades.
But you will search in vain in their speeches for any direct
intimation of who these big “labor statesmen” are for.
And that’s what shows them to be such sad bankrupts. They’ve
literally nothing to offer. 
Blind Alley
Wallace is a phony who doesn’t represent labor. Good. Taft
is the co-author of the Taft-Hartley Slave Labor Law. Nuff said.
Truman? Well, he’s the author of the Truman Doctrine and
they’re all for that. But still they didn’t dare let his
name pass their lips. Not yet anyway.
That is the blind alley that the whole past policy of the top
trade union leaders has led to. At this late hour and at this
critical stage in American and world developments. the Greens and the
Reuthers have no political answer for the American workers.
Shall they continue to play the politics of the “lesser
evil” and go down to defeat with strikebreaker Truman or some,
other Democratic stumblebum? Shall they stall around until after the
Democratic and Republican conventions in the hopes that from one or
the other they’ll get a name to which they can attach a
“liberal” label? Or shall they just forget all about
national politics in this year of decision and put the stress on
“local politics,” as some are counselling?
This Gordian knot of political ineptness and indecision can be cut
through at one stroke. Let the 15 million organized American workers.
through their elected representatives, hold a national united labor
conference, form their own Labor Party and run their own presidential
and local candidates in November.




The Standard Oil officials “hampered the development of synthetic rubber in the United States and ... engaged in activities helpful to the Axis nations” through their cartel agreement with the Nazi IG Farbenindustrie, but they are, nevertheless, “personally patriotic men,” declared the Truman Senate Investigating Committee May 26 report.
Similarly, Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold, condemning the Standard Oil-Nazi cartel, added that “these arrangements were not entered into with any desire to aid or assist Germany.”
Neither of these claims can be denied. The American monopolies are anxious, desperately so, to win the war. They are the real masters of this country; and they would never have entered this war had they not considered it essential to their interests.
At the same time, however, the system of monopoly capitalism compels the monopolies individually to engage in activities that interfere with the war objectives of American capitalism as a whole.
The consolidation of capital, which at an earlier stage of capitalism served to expand the means of production, now tends inexorably toward opposite ends. As a means of self-preservation, the monopolies must now drive in one general direction: Curtailment and limitation of production, in the international as well as domestic sphere.
The safeguarding and increasing of profits is the sole objective of the monopolies, of course. Monopoly profit-making requires: arbitrary limits to production, restricting the output of goods which might glut the market, the elimination of competition.
Capitalism, in its early progressive stage, created the modern national state within which the productive forces might develop unhampered by feudal restrictions. Today, however, national boundaries have become a noose strangling the productive forces. The capitalists are compelled to reach out beyond the national borders for new markets, sources of raw materials and cheap labor, and especially for new fields for the investment of their surplus capital. Hence the war.
But the law of monopoly rules even on the international plane. The individual monopolies of every country, while instigating wars to win more of the world’s markets and productive resources, at the same time seek to free themselves from competition and to restrict production through internation cartel agreements with the foreign monopolies which their class as a whole aims to subdue by force of arms.
There is not a single monopoly, in any capitalist country, which does not have international cartel agreements, and which is not attempting to continue these agreements despite the war.
Thurman Arnold reported on June 3 that the Department of Justice had “discovered last week” a list of 162 agreements between IG Farbenindustrie, the German chemical trust, and American corporations. In his March 26 report to the Truman Committee on the Standard Oil-Nazi patents-pool conspiracy, Arnold had to admit
“There is no essential difference between what Standard Oil has done in this case and what other companies did in restricting the production of magnesium, aluminum, tungsten carbide, drugs, dyestuffs and a variety of other critical materials vital for the war.”
The same is true of the British, German, Japanese and French monopolies.
An outstanding example is the world aluminum cartel, an agreement by the American, British, German, French and Swiss interests to parcel among themselves the world markets. They pooled their resources, bought up all surpluses and withheld them from the world market, drastically limited world production and fixed the world prices.
The chemical and dyestuffs cartel agreement between du Pont and IG Farben also included the British Imperial Chemical Industries, the Etablissements Kuhlmann of France, and the Mitsui interests of Japan.
Although Standard Oil and the other monopolies now claim that their agreements with the Nazis have been “suspended” for the “duration,” the evidence indicates that the agreements are being maintained, so far as possible, during the war.
The American monopolists are keeping a weather eye fixed on the post-war period. They expect and desire a postwar epoch retaining all the fundamental characteristics of the pre-war capitalist era. They have no perspective other than a return to “normal” capitalist relations, to a post-war world in which German capitalism will continue to rule in Germany, and with which they will have to continue their monopoly agreements, though they hope it will be a defeated Germany – a weaker partner in the cartels.
Moreover, the American capitalists are not too sure about the outcome of the war. They are keeping the way open, in the event of a protracted stalemate or a failure to score a decisive victory, for resuming relations as equals with their German cartel partners.
As Thurman Arnold on June 3 was constrained to admit:
“There is another danger from the existence of these cartels which we have yet to face. It is a danger which will be felt in their influence over the peace that is to come. That danger arises from the fact that these cartels have not been terminated, they have only been suspended during the war. The small group of American business men who are parties to these International rings are not unpatriotic, but they still think of the war as a temporary recess from business-as-usual with a strong Germany. They expect to begin the game all over again after the war.”
So far as the monopoly rulers of America are concerned, even if Hitler must go, his masters, the German capitalists, must remain.
This perspective of the monopolies is shown by provisions they placed in the cartel agreements as soon as the war broke out in 1939. The American trusts hastened to implement and extend their cartel agreements with the Axis corporations.
The files of the Standard Oil Company have provided a typical example of such a “full marriage,” as Arnold called it, of the US-Nazi monopoly interests.
On October 12, 1939, the Standard official in charge of the negotiations with IG Farben wrote a letter stating:
“They [IG Farben] delivered to me assignments of some 2,000 foreign patents, and we did our best to work out complete plans for a modus vivendi arrangement for working together which would operate through the terms of the war, whether or not the US came in.” (Our emphasis.)
Another example is the cable which a Standard official sent on Sept. 11, 1939 from New York to the company’s agent in Japan. This cable states:
“Also, as we fear United States Government in near future may have grounds for action, unfavorable to American-Japanese trade, we consider timely for us to organize with Japanese partners whose influence would be valuable later towards re-establishment after Interruption in our trade.”
For Standard Oil, the war with the Axis is not an ideological battle to the death. It is merely an unfortunate but necessary “interruption in our trade.”
According to one confidential memorandum in its files, Standard had received an offer from IG Farben, after September 1939, to purchase Standard’s German subsidiary in order to “safeguard Standard Oil of New Jersey’s interest for the duration” – i.e., to prevent its seizure as enemy property. Very likely Standard accepted the offer, since it has attempted to do as much for IG’s interests in American firms.
Likewise the General Electric agreement with Krupp, the German steel and munitions trust, was extended after the start of the war. A special clause was inserted into the agreement fixing the formal date for its termination as 1950.
That cartel agreements were to be operative, as far as possible, during the war itself, is proved by the royalty provisions under which American corporations agreed to put aside a share of the profits from American war production to be paid their German cartel partners afterward.
An example of this practice was revealed at the Senate Patent Committee hearings. An official of Rohm and Haas, a du Pont subsidiary maintaining a monopoly on synthetic glass by cartel agreement with IG Farben, was forced to admit that his company had continued “after Pearl Harbor” to set aside royalties on US military orders for post-war payment to the German interests. These, he belatedly assured the committee – after the facts were out! – are now being held “with the hope and expectation that they will be seized by the Alien Property Custodian.”
  
How the Cartels Curtailed US Production
The American monopolies have used every conceivable device in carrying out their cartel agreements to restrict production.
A. Restricting the Number of Producers. The primary method is to exclude any independent companies from entering the field or to rigidly limit the number of producers and the quantities they may produce.
This was the device used by the Aluminum Company of America to restrict American production of the vital war metal, magnesium, to one-twentieth of German production. ALCOA’s agreement with IG Farben provided that only one American company, Dow Chemical, could produce magnesium and that it could sell the metal only to companies designated by ALCOA.
General Electric, which controlled the patents on tungsten carbide, the finest and cheapest metal alloy for the use of cutting tools, informed the German Krupp steel trust, at the time of the signing of its cartel agreement, that GE desired to limit American licensees “to a small number, preferably not more than two.” It was actually limited to just one, GE’s own subsidiary, Carboloy, Inc. GE’s agreement even gives Krupp the right to determine what companies GE may license.
Perhaps the most glaring example is tetracene, the best and most easily produced chemical agent for ammunition priming. The tetracene patents are jointly owned by Remington Arms, a du Pont subsidiary, and IG Farben. According to the agreement between the two, Remington could not license the United States and British governments to produce tetracene, nor could Remington or any of its private licensees produce tetracene to be used for war purposes by the American government or “in ammunition sold to the British government.”
B. Dismantling Plants. To curtail production American partners in the monopolies went to the extreme of dismantling costly plants.
Standard’s agreements with IG Farben covered acetylene and acetic acid, best and cheapest raw material base for rayons, plastics, paints, dyes and other important chemical products. Jasco, Inc., a holding company owned jointly by Standard and its Nazi cartel partner, had built an acetylene plant in Baton Rouge. At the behest of IG Farben, the plant had been closed down prior to the outbreak of war between Germany and Britain. Subsequently, Standard agreed to the complete demolition of the plant, through an agreement signed after the outbreak of war on Dec. 1, 1939. The Standard officials sought to cover up their tracks by pre-dating the agreement back to August 31, 1939, the day before war was declared.
In another instance, work on Standard’s government-financed Baton Rouge plant for the production of butadiene, basic element of synthetic butyl rubber, was impeded for several months. According to the testimony of W.S. Parish, president of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, “in September 1941, the rubber corporation (division of the government Reconstruction Finance Corporation) instructed Standard to suspend all work on the government butadiene project for one year.” It was only after Pearl Harbor, Parish claims, that the government rescinded this order.
C. Limiting Production Through Price-Fixing. When independent companies seek licenses to produce commodities protected by American-Nazi patent agreements, they can secure such licenses only by agreeing to sell their products at the high price established by the monopolies.
Although it was manufacturing tungsten carbide at a cost of $6.50 a pound, General Electric, from 1928 until confronted with an anti-trust suit early this year, maintained a price as high at times as $453 a pound, and never lower than $200. According to the testimony before the Truman Committee of L. Gerald Firth, president of the Firth-Sterling Steel Company, a GE tungsten carbide licensee, “a large number of firms never used it because of the price.”
In accordance with its agreement with IG Farben, du Pont has fixed prices so high as to prevent any independent production of vital dyestuffs. Speaking of this conspiracy, Thurman Arnold stated that “it not only resulted in high prices to the American consumer, but has also restriced the full development of the chemical industry which is essential to our war effort.”
D. Prohibitive Royalties. Sometimes the monopoly simply refuses, on one pretext or another, to license any other manufacturer. More often, however, independent producers are discouraged by the exorbitant royalties demanded by the monopoly.
When Goodrich Rubber Company sought the use of Standard’s butyl rubber patents, Standard brushed the request off by demanding prohibitive royalties. A letter written on Jan. 10, 1940 to Goodrich by Frank Howard, vice president of Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, states “quite frankly, it was our intention that the license would not be a suitable one under which to operate if the licensee expected to go beyond producing a relatively high-cost specialty product.”
E. Discouraging Plant Expansion. During the past two years of government war preparation the monopolies sought to avoid expansion of productive facilities and the erection of new plants. Only when the government agreed to pay for new plants did the corporations finally agree to expansion.
A principal method for discouraging expansion has been the circulation of false reports that existing facilities and stock-piles of materials are large enough to meet any contemplated needs.
The present acute shortage of aluminum resulted from the deliberate efforts of ALCOA. For two years prior to American entry into the war ALCOA repeatedly assured the government that no new plants were needed. The Office of Production Management accepted these assurances and passed them on to the public:
“For months the Defense Advisory Commission and the OPM had said that talk about a shortage in aluminum was misleading and that it was unpatriotic to talk about the possibility of such a shortage ... The OPM had apparently completely relied on ALCOA as a source of information as to the availability of aluminum and had discouraged anyone else from going into the business of producing aluminum. ALCOA had long followed a policy of maintaining high prices and building new capacity only when certain that it could sell at its fixed prices all that would be produced.” (Truman Committee Report, June 1941.)
When ALCOA did finally permit the erection of new plants – at government expense – it received the lion’s share of the contracts. These new plants will not reach full production until 1943 or thereafter, and will still fail to produce sufficient aluminum for the country’s civilian and military needs. This is a calculated scarcity, enabling ALCOA to maintain its monopoly prices and conform to its cartel obligations.
The catastrophic rubber shortage is also due in great measure to discouragement of synthetic rubber plant expansion by the Rockefeller-du Pout-Mellon interests controlling the synthetic rubber processes. A year and a half before Pearl Harbor, Jesse Jones, head of the RFC and the government’s Defense Plants Corporation, was informed of an impending rubber shortage and was urged to facilitate expansion of synthetic rubber production. Acting undoubtedly at the instigation of Standard and the other monopolies, Jones took the position that sufficient crude rubber stocks were available, even if all imports were cut off, to meet the country’s needs for more than a year of war. A year later, Jones finally agreed to start an “experimental” program for producing 40,000 tons of synthetic rubber. When Singapore was about to fall, Jones informed the Truman Committee that he was making plans for the production of 400,000 tons of synthetic rubber – in 1944. He also told the Truman Committee that “the president had concurred in this (previous) course.”
Likewise to prevent expansion Standard Oil falsely denied that its butyl rubber process, which it had made available to IG Farben, was the best and cheapest synthetic rubber available. It turned aside government investigators with the excuse that butyl rubber was “still in the experimental stage,” and anyway was “too costly.” Jesse Jones testified before the Truman Committee that “Standard had not encouraged any of us in the belief that butyl rubber was a success.” In 1939, an official of the Navy’s Bureau of Construction and Repair tried to get “first hand information on the compounding” of butyl, but was prevented, a letter sent by a Standard employe to the corporation officials boasted:
“You will recall,” says the letter in part, “that I took up this question with you before his arrival. As agreed upon I took Mr. Werkethin [the Navy official] over to see the K plant when it appeared that I could not very well steer his interest away from the process. However, I am quite certain that he left with no picture of the operation ...” (Our emphasis.)
Four months after Pearl Harbor, and after Standard had already agreed, because of a government suit, to release its butyl patents, Parish and Howard, heads of Standard Oil of New Jersey, still sought to mislead the government as to the true value of butyl rubber. They argued that it was still in the “experimental” stage, even though the committee had before it Standard’s own documentary evidence to show that butyl is superior in many respects to natural rubber. The Standard officials also claimed that butyl was “too costly” to produce, although documents taken from Standard’s files showed that it cost only 6.6 cents a pound as compared to the 21 cents a pound being charged by the British and Dutch interests for crude rubber.
In addition to curtailing production, the German capitalists exacted other payments which their American partners were willing to meet.
A. Giving the Nazis Industrial Processes. The first important price was granting the Nazi interests the patents on exclusive and invaluable industrial processes.
To IG Farben, Standard Oil gave the secret of butyl rubber manufacture, its superior acetylene process and its method for producing high-octane aviation and synthetic gasoline. For the gasoline processes, the Nazis have special reason to be grateful. They have kept the Luftwaffe in the air for two and a half years and enabled Hitler to keep his gigantic motorized army in motion.
The tungsten carbide formula perfected by General Electric has helped German industry to speed up certain tooling and metal cutting processes by as much as five hundred per cent.
B. Direct Material Aid. The American monopolies supplied German industry with the necessary capital for expansion. American capital investment in Germany was $5,000,000,000 in 1933. By 1939, it had increased another $3,000,000,000.
Among the leading American corporations owning or holding large interests in German corporations are Standard Oil, General Motors, Ford Motor Co., Anaconda Copper, General Electric, International Telephone and Telegraph, US Rubber, International Business Machines, International Harvester, E.I. duPont de Nemours.
Standard Oil designed and directly supervised the construction of Germany’s synthetic gasoline and high-octane aviation gas plants.
When Nazi and Italian fascist airlines, prior to American entry in the war, could not secure fuel in South America, Standard’s Brazilian subsidiary supplied the necessary petrol, in defiance of objections from the American State Department. The Standard officials claimed they had contracts which, as a matter of “business honor,” they had to fulfill. A.A. Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State testified on April 3 that: “Their (Standard officials) position was they would keep the contract they had already made, irrespective of the interests of the United States.” On the same day, William La Varre, chief of the American republics office of the Department of Commerce, denied that any contracts existed, calling the claim a “subterfuge.”
C. Military Information. Information of military value relating American and British production was regularly provided to the Nazis.
Through supplying Krupp with a complete list of the sources and amounts of royalties paid by its tungsten carbide licensees, General Electric’s Carboloy Company kept the Nazis informed on the number and location of plants producing tungsten carbide and the exact quantities of this vital war metal being produced in this country.
DuPont “gave a German company access to military information through Remington Arms royalty payments (on all tetracene produced in America) to the German company.” (AP dispatch, April 17)
Under the agreement between ALCOA and IG Farben, the Nazis were able to learn through royalty payments what companies in America were producing or using magnesium and how much.
After the outbreak of war between Germany and Britain, Standard Oil made an agreement with the British oil interests, pooling patents for the important hydrogenation and polymerization processes in the production of synthetic gasoline. In order to get this agreement, Standard had executed a fake dissolution of its arrangement with IG Farben. But as late as March 18,1940, as documents from Standard’s files revealed, Standard was secretly passing on to IG Farben all the confidential data and technical information it was securing from the British and other American oil firms in the Anglo-American pool.
Most of the information about how American corporations gave military information to the Nazis is buried in the Department of Justice files. It is too explosive to make public. But here are two examples, which the New York newspaper PM unearthed:
“In one American company Arnold’s investigators have found a patent license for making steam turbine engines, used by the Navy, with an agreement by the American company to furnish the German licensor with ‘duplicates of all correspondence with the United States Navy as well as drawings worked out by the former.’
“In another case, the German trust was permitted to veto the appointment of the man in charge of military production for the American company.” (PM, April 5.)
D. Withholding Military Information from US. An important form of indirect aid has been given the Nazis by the refusal of American corporations to give information of military value to the American government. Not a single great American corporation has willingly released its patents for war production.
Standard Oil and ALCOA, months after Pearl Harbor, forced the government to initiate anti-trust suits to secure release of the butyl rubber and magnesium patents. General Electric has been able to secure an indefinite postponement of a threatened government prosecution aimed at releasing its tungsten carbide patents.
Even where the patents have finally been released, as in the Standard and ALCOA cases, the companies have been able to retain the vital “know-how,” the developed industrial techniques. Without this “know-how” which the companies have refused to release, the patents are of little value, since most of them are purposely incomplete and obscure.
American companies “failed” to give the government information about the patents they gave the German interests, or to keep the government informed of patents secured from Germany.
The following letter, sent by Standard Oil’s Howard to his superior Parish, demonstrates the reluctance of the monopolies to cooperate with the government when this is against their cartel interests. In part, the letter states:
“Any program by which the Army Air Corps can obtain their objective of a one or two year start over the rest of the world In this vital matter [high grade aviation gasoline] bristles with difficulties and sacrifices from, our standpoint ...
“To meet the very proper desires of the air corps as expressed to us, we shall have to violate our agreements and perhaps forfeit the confidence of our associates, both American and foreign ...” (Our emphasis.)
That letter was written in 1935. To date, Standard has not forfeited the confidence of its principal foreign associate – IG Farben.
 
The Impotence of the Government
The findings of the Department of Justice and of two Senate investigating committees have disclosed the above outlined consequences of the American-Nazi cartel agreements.
Yet the government has proved impotent to cancel these agreements or force Standard Oil, ALCOA, du Pont, General Electric and the other monopolies to discontinue honoring the terms of these agreements.
For more than a year the facts about the American-Nazi patent-pools were in the files of the anti-trust division of the Department of Justice, but the government was reluctant to make them public through anti-trust prosecutions.
Only after the fall of Singapore and the Dutch East Indies and three months after Pearl Harbor, did the Department of Justice initiate suits against Standard Oil, ALCOA, General Electric, du Pont, and a few other monopolies to secure release of the American-Nazi patents.
But these suits collapsed under the pressure of the corporations. Standard Oil threatened to stall the suit through years of lengthy litigation. To save face, the government was compelled to give Standard a so-called consent decree on Standard’s own terms. Standard agreed not to contest the case and to pay total fines of $50,000, if the government agreed to drop all charges. Standard further agreed to formally release its butyl rubber patents, with the understanding that the government was to have no power of supervision over the company’s future cartel agreements or its laboratories. The government in return obtained only the privilege of investing its funds in butyl rubber plants to be controlled by Standard. Other companies can use Standard’s patents provided they agree to pay a “reasonable royalty” on all production after the war. Standard is permitted, however, to charge its butyl rubber licensees royalties during the war for providing them with the “know-how,” the technical explanation which is needed to give the purposely obscure patents any value.
The only other case which has thus far come to trial is that of ALCOA. This case also was settled by a consent decree, which Thurman Arnold admitted was “even worse” than Standard’s.
Before the pending government suits against General Electric, du Pont and the other monopolies could come to trial, the Roosevelt administration took steps to halt further prosecutions “for the duration.” On March 20, Attorney General Biddle, Secretary of War Stimson, Secretary of the Navy Knox and Assistant Attorney General Arnold sent a joint letter to Roosevelt, informing him that “some of the pending court investigations, suits and prosecutions under the Anti-Trust statutes by the Department of Justice, if continued, will interfere with the production of war materials ... In those cases we believe that continuing such prosecutions will be contrary to the national interest and security.” Roosevelt pointedly made this letter and his reply public on March 28, the day after Arnold exposed the facts about the Standard-IG Farben conspiracy to the Truman Committee. Roosevelt’s reply said, “I approve the procedure outlined in your memorandum to me ...”
The subsequent developments in the government’s projected suit against General Electric’s Carboloy, Inc., illustrate how this policy is now being carried out.
This suit was originally scheduled to begin last October. It was postponed to February 1942, again postponed to March, then postponed again to April. In the third week of April, Federal Judge Philip Forman of Trenton, N.J., was about to open the trial, when he received a telegram from Undersecretary of War Patterson and Under-Secretary of the Navy Forrestal. The telegram asked Judge Forman to postpone the case once more, because “we desire time to study the question of whether trial at this time of US vs. General Electric Co. and others would interfere with war production.” Judge Forman agreed, indefinitely postponing the case.
Whether it will finally go to trial is up to the War and Navy Departments, which have an “inter-departmental” agreement with the Attorney General permitting them to halt any antitrust prosecution which they deem an “interference with war production,” unless the President orders such prosecution on the direct appeal of the Attorney General.
To cap this process, Attorney General Biddle on May 27 urged prompt passage of legislation exempting concerns from prosecution under the anti-trust laws when they are complying with specific requests from the War Production Board in furtherance of the war effort.
“Already,” said the Associated Press, “business men are receiving formal assurance that they will not be prosecuted for anti-trust violations directly ordered as part of the war drive. The Attorney General issues certificates under a plan worked out by President Roosevelt.”
This is nothing less than unconditional surrender to the monopolies.
 
Why the Government Will Not Act
To interfere in any effective fashion with the monopolies’ cartel arrangements, with their control of patents and production, would mean to squeeze the very heart of monopoly capitalism. This government, whose sole function is to safeguard the interests of the capitalist class, cannot and will not take measures which would inevitably tend to undermine private property “rights” in the means of production.
In war-time particularly, the government is often constrained to establish certain rules and regulations which, if carried out, may step on the toes of this or that group of capitalists. This is done in the interests of the capitalist class as a whole.
But, as the present situation reveals, this government will not curb the cartel system and its practices because this means to impose on the basic interests of all the monopolies. Since the cartel agreements, even those with the Nazi capitalists, are an inevitable and necessary part of the capitalist process in its present stage – monopoly – the government cannot and will not prevent them, just as it will not attack the monopoly system.
The government dares not even seriously expose the cartel practices. For this might serve to discredit the capitalist ruling class in the eyes of the masses. The government seeks to preserve the prestige of the monopolists for that prestige is essential to their continued domination of the economic and political life of the nation.
If the capitalist government cannot resolve this contradiction, still less can the assorted liberals, reformist labor leaders and the Stalinists, who are anxious above all else to maintain “national unity” with the owning class.
The liberal, trade union and Social-Democratic papers have been wailing woefully at the US-Nazi cartel conspiracies. The “solutions” they offer are beneath contempt.
A typical liberal newspaper, PM, which has published more on these conspiracies than any other daily, seriously called on the small stockholders of Standard Oil to take steps to oust the trust officials responsible for the agreements with IG Farben. The editors of PM must be aware of the absurdity of this proposal. The majority of small stockholders with a few shares of common stock, have no more say about the operations of a giant corporation than any ordinary depositor has in the operations of a bank. They cannot hope to carry through a long, costly legal fight against the tremendous wealth of the leading corporation share-holders.
The trade union leaders and Social-Democrats would “solve” the problem by appealing to the administration to give the labor leaders a few more government posts. Naturally, they do not question the “right” of the private owners to control industry, nor do they dare to challenge the monopolies’ domination of the government and its war production and procurement agencies.
As for the Stalinist leaders, their press has systematically suppressed the facts about the US-Nazi cartel conspiracies. From March through May, during the height of the exposures, the Daily Worker and Sunday Worker carried exactly five tiny items, in obscure positions, on the conspiracies. This policy was “explained” in an editorial in the Daily Worker, April 24, assuring its readers that the “large American corporations and their leading personnel” are patriotic, and that they are “part of the camp of national unity.” The same editorial attacks those publications which are exposing the monopolies as “naive ‘trustbusters’” whose attitude “can be dangerous” and who are imitating the “demagogy of Hitler.”
Neither the monopolies nor their cartel agreements can be eliminated within the framework of the capitalist system. They are bred by the system. They will disappear only with the end of that system. The first effective step to mobilize the workers for that purpose is the transition slogan of the Socialist Workers Party:
For the expropriation of the war industries and their operation under workers’ control!
 



America’s liberals are beginning to beat their breasts
in lamentation. “Democratic” imperialism is repaying their faithful
services with a weighty boot on their tender backsides. Liberals and
sub-rosa and one-time Stalinists are being hounded out of government
jobs by the hundreds. A government witch-hunt is in progress against
liberals in the shipyards, radio communications and other maritime
services by orders of Secretary of the Navy Knox. The liberal literary
lights, who have sought to shine in the government propaganda agencies,
are being snuffed out.
These personal indignities are but half the burden of the liberals’
laments. The other half is that, no matter how loudly the liberals
shout, “This is really and truly a war for democracy,” the deeds of the
bourgeois rulers cry out even more loudly, “This is an imperialist war.”
In the heat of the “war for democracy,” the New Deal is melting
away. Its much-vaunted social reforms, the CCC, NYA, WPA, etc., its
social and labor legislation are being liquidated. The government war
agencies have been tucked away in the pockets of Big Business.
Reactionaries of the vilest stripe are being coddled by the
administration, not only at home but internationally. The State
Department is maintaining toward Petain, Franco and Mannerheim an
attitude singularly fraternal for a government that is urging the
masses to fight and die “against fascism.”
The liberals are embarrassed. Like the dreamer who sees himself
exposed in some public place minus his pants and is incapable of
running to cover, the liberals are suffering from involuntary indecent
exposure. Only they aren’t dreaming.
 
“How Can Such Things Be?”
The first personal blows came when ex-Stalinoid Malcolm
Cowley, an editor of the liberal weekly, New Republic,
and the writer C. Hartley Grattan were unceremoniously booted out of
the Office of Facts and Information. This first sprinkling has since
turned into a flood, with hundreds of other liberals swept out of
government jobs.
The Stalino-liberal newspaper PM has been wailing
at length about this government witch-hunt. The June 10 PM
reports:
“Employees of the Government of the United States in
this year of 1942, a New Deal Government headed by FDR, have lost their
right of free speech and free thought.
“This is the direct and most important result of a
current ‘Red’ witch-hunt – the color is Dies-tinted – that has already
cost several hundred persons their jobs, finds at least a thousand more
on the grid, and ultimately threatens thousands more whose only crimp
is that they are liberals and have fought for years in the forefront of
New Deal reform at home and anti-Fascism abroad.”
PM cannot reconcile this witch-hunt
with its picture of Rooseveltian liberalism:
“In the midst of this extraordinary phenomenon, the
Vice President of this country, with the approval of the President,
wrote and delivered a ringing speech which identifies our war as the
climax of 150 years of revolution – revolution for the people, by the
people and for a quart of milk a day for the people’s children ...
“In the midst of this phenomenon, a liberal Attorney
General of the country spoke at a dinner of New Deal leaders and put
heart in them by saying that it was vital to the success of our war
effort that they press on with their good works. That this same
Attorney General, some weeks later, made a legalistic mistake and a
political blunder (deportation order against Harry Bridges) has nothing
to do with the fact that he was chosen by the President because of his
record for liberalism.”
PM simply can’t explain the
contradiction it sees:
“In the face of all these things, how can this witch
hunt be explained? ... How can this be? How can men be persecuted for
anti-Fascist ideas in a war against Fascism? We do not know the precise
answer to this paradox.”
PM finally attempts an answer. It is
really the insidious work of the enemies of the New Deal and Roosevelt
“who have yet to make up their minds who is more important to their
purpose to destroy: Adolf Hitler or Franklin D. Roosevelt.”
PM is not alone in its lament. The Nation,
traditional oracle of American liberalism, also complains:
“The persistent red-baiting patterns of the
investigations and the consistency with which only liberals are fired
give strong color to the suspicion that officials high up in both
agencies [FBI and Civil Service] are neither ignorant nor naive. It is
time we discovered who is responsible for the idiotic and dangerous
procedure by which men and women appointed to government jobs because
they are known anti-fascists are forthwith dismissed – for the same
reason.” (The Nation, June 20, 1942.)
Likewise the Social-Democratic New Leader
puts on a scowl and even dares to shake a disapproving forefinger under
the nose of the Commander-in-Chief himself:
“With the Department of Justice working overtime
(ousting liberals), there are weighty scores against the Roosevelt
administration. The White House has done little to force the removal of
the isolationist Senator Reynolds from the chairmanship of the Senate
Military Affairs Committee, and even less to remove Senator Walsh as
head of the Naval Affairs Committee.
“The President has permitted Father Coughlin to go
free. This was done on the basis of some agreement that the radio
priest would keep silent and that clerical fascism would be halted in
the United States. Roosevelt has kept his part of the bargain – the
other side has not.” (New Leader, June 27.)
The New Leader apparently wants
Roosevelt to strike bargains only with fascists who will live up to
their part of the deal.
And the Stalinists join the wailing, to report that:
“... the one man in Congress who cast his vote for
democracy on Jan. 6, 1939 in opposing the infamous embargo against
Loyalist Spain is being blacklisted today by government agencies.
“John T. Bernard (ex-Representative from Minnesota)
has been refused his right toiparticipate in this world war against
fascism – because he is one of the nation’s most stalwart foes of
fascism. It doesn’t make sense but it is true.” (Adam Lapin, in the Daily
Worker, June 18.)

 
The Bridges “Mystery”
The dilemma of the liberals is most clearly exemplified
in the case of Harry Bridges, CIO Longshoremen’s president, who is a
model of Stalinist servility to the administration, acting as a
“fingerman” for the employers and FBI against labor militants. When
Attorney General Biddle, “chosen by the President because of his record
of liberalism,” ordered the deportation of Bridges, the liberals found
themselves in quite a stew.
PM’s editor Ralph Ingersoll struck on the matchless
explanation that Biddle ordered Bridges’ deportation because Biddle is
a Biddle.
“Our Attorney General is an honest, intelligent,
educated, highly principled and liberal Biddle – then is it fair to ask
what is a Biddle? Regretfully, we leave the answer to wiser
heads than ours.” (PM, May 29.)
We search for an answer among “wiser heads” in the
columns of The Nation. There I.F. Stone, writing on Biddle
and the Facts in the June 20 issue, sadly reports that
“... the whole case suggests absolutism in decay,
rather than democracy in action: the long persecution of a workers’
leader, the use of secret police for political purposes, the
mobilization of witnesses from the dregs of society, the readiness of
an upper-class liberal to serve as the tool of these forces.”
Is there a distinction between “upper class” and “lower
class” liberals ? And isn’t Biddle as much the “tool” of Roosevelt, who
named him to office, as of “absolutism in decay”? But naturally such
questions are not answered by the wailing Nation

editors.
Common Sense, the liberal monthly, decides in its
July issue that Biddle is really but a seeker for knowledge:
“How could Mr. Biddle, probably the most liberal
member of FDR’s cabinet, be accused of deliberately giving comfort to
the enemy at home and abroad? Probably the answer is that Mr. Biddle
wanted a test case before the Supreme Court on the question of whether
Communists aim to overthrow the government by force.”
The Stalinists solve the Bridges deportation mystery in
their usual neat fashion – there’s Munichmen “appeaser” work afoot:
“Instead of prosecuting and jailing the Fifth Column
Coughlinites, Nazi agents and Ku Kluxers, Biddle is trying to deport an
outstanding anti-fascist labor leader whose work is a pillar of
strength to the war effort ... Biddle’s ‘force and violence’

defamations against the Communist Party are a notorious tactic of
Hitler and Goebbels to divide and conquer.” (Daily Worker,
May 31.)
But since Biddle is also Roosevelt’s flunkey, is
Roosevelt also a Munichman? The mystery deepens and Adam Lapin,
Washington correspondent, can only shake his head in the June 25 Daily
Worker:
“There sure are some queer goings on in the
Department of Justice under the Biddle regime.”
 
Terrible Doings in Washington
Pointing to the blows being struck at the social
agencies of the New Deal – the CCC, NYA, WPA, etcetera – PM,
on June 15, complains:
“There seems to be a very real danger that the New
Deal is losing the domestic front while its attention is absorbed with
the job of licking the Fascist foe without. Bit by bit the reactionary
clique in Congress is nibbling away the New Deal bases that gave the
common man a real stake in democracy and saved him from succumbing to
Fascist demagogues. It makes one angry to see good New Dealers in
Congress on the defensive, uttering apologies, for things that ought to
make our Nation proud.”
Then there is the sad case of the Roosevelt-majority
Supreme Court. Of one of its recent reactionary decisions, Samuel
Grafton, the liberal columnist, says complainingly:
“I hope everyone has noticed the remarkable
similarity between our ancient poll taxes and the recent Supreme Court
ruling that it is all right for a municipality to charge a book peddler
$10, or more, or less, for a license to sell books.
“Under the poll tax, as it exists in eight states, one
must pay from $1 to umpty-ump dollars to exercise the right to vote.
Under the new Supreme Court decision one must pay $10, in Fort Smith,
Arkansas, to exercise the right of free press.
“If anything were needed to show that the Supreme
Court decision, a bare 5-to-4, put over by the perfectly shocking
acquiescence of Mr. Justice Frankfurter, was a retrograde
decision, that by it the Court speeded backward into a dark tunnel like
a man with his foot caught in a roller-coaster, it is this comparison
... Are we going to let local government get up a kind of juridical
Sears, Roebuck catalogue with prices on the various items in the Bill
of Rights?”
By Gad, it’s enough to make one want to get up from
one’s easy chair and do something about it, if only Grafton would tell
us how to upset a Supreme Court decision short of revolution, and how
to make a typical liberal, Felix Frankfurter, not act like a typical
liberal in a capitalist government post. The June 27 Nation

can only shake its head mournfully at the speedy demise of Roosevelt’s
“liberal majority” on the Supreme Court:
“It is sad to see Stone, Frankfurter and Jackson
taken in by the sweet company-union overtones of Byrnes in the
wage-hour case.”
The liberal complaints pile up, against every cabinet
officer, every government department, and the government war production
agencies. The latter especially, dominated by the corporation
dollar-a-year men, come in for some loud wails.
The Nation catalogues the “business-as-usual”
set-up of the
War Production Board and ends with the pitiable plaint:
“... Something is still ‘seriously wrong’ ... and it
will not be corrected until Nelson, who is as fainthearted as the
President about firing people, gets out the ax and keeps the promise he
made when he became head of the WPB. When, Mr. Nelson, will the heads
roll?” (The Nation, April 11.)
Yes, when? Evidently, Mr. Nelson was too busy that week
to read the Nation. At any rate, the streets of
Washington have been singularly free of rolling heads except those of
liberals. I.F. Stone sadly concludes in The Nation of
June 27:
“Carefully read and considered, the Truman report on
the Guthrie case is the key to the continued setbacks suffered by
ourselves and our allies. The arsenal of democracy, as the Guthrie case
and the reactions to the report show, is still being operated with one
eye on the war and the other on the convenience of big business ...
“The Guthrie report shows that, months after Pearl
Harbor ... the big-business crowd is as powerfully entrenched under
Nelson as it was under Knudsen.”
Stone ends with the happy suggestion that: “The solution
of our problems lies in a more democratic direction of our industrial
effort,” although he confesses dolefully, “the trend is the other way.”
And even Dorothy Thompson, who can say “war for democracy” in every
language including the Sanskrit, complains that the government is
giving $600,000,000 worth of new plants for synthetic rubber production
to “finance enormously rich corporations to manufacture a product for
which the people themselves are a certain market ... Why didn’t they
put up their own money?” Why indeed? She finishes off with the profound
suggestion:
“If we are going to survive this epoch we have got to
do imaginative thinking. And stop letting people whose brains have
grown dull on monopoly do it for us.”
The problem that is beginning to trouble the liberals
more than anything else is the strange international company the
“democratic” rulers are keeping these days.
Freda Kirchwey, editor of The Nation, had some
strong words to say on this subject on January 3, after the State
Department had “advised” the Free French to withdraw from St. Pierre
and Miquelon islands in favor of Petain. “Mr. Hull Should Resign”
was the title of her indignation piece:
“If the State Department, without consultation with
the President or the Cabinet, has plunged the nation into its present
humiliating position, its officials should be called into account as
promptly as were the military leaders at Pearl Harbor. Without the
least delay, the President should demand the resignation of the
officials who on their own say-so betrayed the cause to which this
country has been pledged not only by the terms of the Atlantic Charter
but in many pronouncements by the President ... Why should men who have
demonstrated their failure with such undeviating success be permitted
to direct the policy of a great power committed to a life-and-death
struggle?”
 
Hull’s Bedfellows Embarrass the Liberals
Why, indeed ? Miss Kirchwey can’t answer her own riddles
but, evidently, President Roosevelt knows why, because Miss Kirchwey
was compelled to report six months later in the June 20 Nation:
“But it must be admitted the future is still obscure.
. . . The agreements made in Washington and London (with the Kremlin)
are only a blue-print
... on the very day when the new coalition was proclaimed, Secretary
Hull announced the resumption of shipments of food and other supplies
from America to the Vichy government in North Africa.
“No promises, no pacts, no fine speeches by Welles or
even (!) Wallace or Winant, can wipe out the demoralizing effect of the
old diplomacy pursuing its old discredited maneuvers while the struggle
against fascism reaches a climax of danger and effort.”
Samuel Grafton, who poses many questions well and knows
none of the answers, stated:
“The best I can make of our current policy is that we
insist the French people shall rise in revolution, but not against
their government ... Hitler thinks the French resolution is more
important than the French fleet, for he has kept his hands off the
latter to avoid the former. We have reached the remarkable situation in
which Hitler lets the French fleet alone, to sustain Vichy’s prestige,
and we sustain Vichy’s prestige in order to save the fleet.
“One of us must be taking a hell of an ideological
beating. Who are the French people to revolt against? Hitler doesn’t
want them to know, either.” (New York Post, June 16.)
 And
echo  calls in the Stalinist press:
“How long is Marshal Petain going to be allowed to
make a sucker out of the United States?” (Daily Worker,
June 13.)
The liberals are also taking “a hell of an ideological
beating” about Finland as well. Here the Stalinist press gives the lead
that the liberals follow. Adam Lapin goes in for some illuminating
society reporting in the Daily Worker, June 9:
“Mannerheim’s envoy to Washington, Hjalmar Procope,
spent his Sunday evening chatting and dining with high administration
officials and with leading
United States Senators ... As plans for a new Finnish-Nazi drive
against the Soviet Union, personally mapped by Hitler, were under way,
some of the officials who dined with Finnish Minister Procope included:
“Milo Perkins, Director of the War Economic Board;
Paul V. McNutt, Chairman of the National Manpower Commission; Assistant
Attorney General Thurman Arnold; Associate Justice Stanley Reed of the
Supreme Court; Senate Majority Leader Alben Barkley and Senator Joseph
B. Guffey of Pennsylvania.
“... it seems about time they realized that Finland is
Hitler’s ally, and that attending social evenings with Procope can
hardly he construed as a friendly gesture toward the Soviet Union ...”
The concern of the liberals about the particular
attitudes of the “democratic” rulers toward Vichy and Finland has begun
to broaden out into a more generalized worry about where this whole

“struggle against fascism” is heading. This is best expressed by J.
Alvarez Del Vayo, Foreign Minister in the Spanish Loyalist Government,
in one of a series of articles on World War III? in the June
20 Nation:
“The Petains and Francos were not merely tolerated.
They were, and they yet are, considered by the ruling diplomacy a
useful element of counterpoise in a Europe which tomorrow might swing
too far to the left. That is why the diplomacy which today still
directs foreign policy on the side of the Allies, when it has a choice,
prefers an Otto of Hapsburg to an Austrian Socialist, an Eckhardt to a
Hungarian democrat ... One cannot but maintain a certain reserve when
considering the question what kind of peace would emerge if the present
governments of the United Nations could vote secretly on the
transcendental question of the organization of the world of tomorrow.”
How long? How is it possible? How can this be? How can
we convince the masses that this is a “war for democracy against
fascism” when liberals and anti-fascists are persecuted, when
reactionaries and pro-fascists are handled with kid gloves, when Big
Business is in the saddle and the old ruling diplomacy rides higher
than ever? The liberals chant their woes and drench the wailing wall
with their tears. But they have no answers and would not like the
correct answers.
 
They Don’t Want to Tell the Truth
If it occurs to them that Mr. Hull does not resign
because Roosevelt approves his policies, or that the monopolies are
running this war because it is a capitalist war, or that high
administration officials maintain a certain fraternal attitude toward
Petain, Franco and Mannerheim because this is not and never was an
ideological war between democracy and fascism, they do not voice their
suspicions. God forbid! They don’t want to tell the truth about this
war. They just want to save their own tender hides in the mounting
reaction and continue with a straight face to be able to tell the
masses that this is “our” war.
But it is becoming more difficult for the liberals to be convincing.
As the intellectual spokesmen for the petty-bourgeoisie who are being
crushed by the war-expedited monopoly control, the liberals are feeling
the weight of reaction on their own backs. They look to the past with
misgivings and to the future with rising fear. They keep shouting
hoop-la for the “war against fascism” but they can scarcely conceal the
feeling that somehow this “war for democracy” is writing the epitaph
for bourgeois democracy in general and for its liberal exponents in
particular.
Fortunately for the masses of the world, their fate does not depend
on these hired mourners at the death-bed of bourgeois democracy. While
the liberals wring their hands hopelessly at the spectacle of the death
agony of capitalism, the revolutionary proletarian forces are building
their cadres and mobilizing their strength throughout the world.
The oppressed of the earth will silence the whines of the liberals
along with burying the rotting corpse of capitalism. For the masses,
unlike the liberals, are seeking an answer to the question of their
destiny, an answer that will sweep the globe – the socialist revolution.




Experts Baffled for Explanation
But New Millions Face Unemployment

New Deal Takes Care of Bankers First;
Juggles Relief as Riot Insurance

Roosevelt Smiles on the Unemployed
When Elections Roll Around I

Roosevelt Smiles on the Unemployed
When Elections Roll Around II

Only Destruction of Capitalism
Can Rid Society of Mass Unemployment
 




Historians of some future age, unearthing the writings of our current sooth-sayers on the “New Deal” depression, will undoubtedly publish their findings in some journal devoted to the study of mental diseases. The average “expert”, when not blaming depressions on the misbehavior of sun-spots, usually attributes economic crises to the mental state of the business class.
If the bottom drops out of the stock market, or increasing millions of unemployed haunt the gates of silent factories, the pundits of the press bark, “Pessimism!”, and let the matter ride. Undoubtedly, pessimism has characterized the state of mind of the average business man for the past twelve months. The economic guess-alls have failed to show, however, whether this frame of mind is a cause or result of the present decline.
 
Third of Nation Distressed
In a similarly enlightening fashion, these economic gospel-pounders view the facts of chronic mass unemployment. America’s 15 million unemployed, who, with their dependents, represent one-third of our population, when not dismissed as “lazy bums who won’t work even if they had a job,” are considered at best merely temporarily unfortunate beings to whom some attention should be paid – after the real tragedy of declining profits has been properly remedied.
Between June 1935 and August 1937, dates which roughly mark the life span of the “New Deal Boomlet,” unemployment was regarded largely as an irritating, but not dangerous, skin blemish, which could be concealed under the powder and rouge of mounting production and profit figures. It could be soothed, whenever it itched, by a light application of W.P.A. jobs and starvation pensions for the helplessly aged.
 
Unemployed Census Revealing
It was with undoubted optimism that F.D.R. undertook the nation-wide census of unemployment in June 1937. Production was heading steadily for the pre-depression peak of 1929. Business men were staggering gaily from heady draughts of fresh-drawn profits. Everything was hunky-dory, if only the Budget were balanced, taxes reduced, and the “goddam relief racket cut out.”
When the figures of the census were revealed finally in November 1937, America was already hurtling down an economic land-slide at the most precipitous pace in its history. What use to bemoan the fact of 8½-11 million unemployed during the peak of a boom, when six months later at least five millions more had been piled on those figures – and profits were melting away, to boot?
 
Figures Give Vital Lesson
But the American workers dare not forget these figures. They reveal a fact that is truly ominous. The figures of mass unemployment registered at the peak of Roosevelt “prosperity” prove conclusively, that, despite temporary periods of comparative recovery, larger and larger sections of workers are condemned to permanent joblessness – disemployment. Increasing millions under capitalism are cut off forever from productive labor in normal economic pursuits.
This economically disenfranchised “nation within a nation” (larger, including dependents, than the entire populations of such countries as Spain, Canada or Mexico) is supplemented from time to time by new millions of jobless workers, who are periodically cast by each succeeding wave of depression upon the desolate shores of our economic system. While some workers are lucky enough as individuals to be drawn back into the economic currents by the receding waves, other millions are left permanently stranded, part of the rapidly accumulating wreckage of labor and talents, of human lives and aspirations which is mass disemployment in America.
 
Two Factors Reveal Depths
Two factors distinguish the 1929–? economic decline from all previous depressions. One is the increasing mass disemployment. The other is the increasing regularity of periodic lay-offs suffered by almost every worker regardless of his trade or industry. The unemployed of previous depressions were largely re-absorbed into industry during the following upturns. Each recovery period which succeeded former depressions surpassed previous booms in the volume of production and brought forth new industries. Indeed, certain industries formerly weathered the depression fairly well, and the workers in these industries considered themselves permanently secure. Until 1929, a railroad job was considered a guaranteed life-time security. But the present depression has made an exception of no industry. A million railroad workers, for example, have lost their regular occupations during the past nine years.
These burning facts must be seared into the consciousness of every American worker. Every worker, in all industries without exception, is from now on threatened by the ravages of periodic lay-offs; and increasing millions of unemployed face the dismal future of permanent disemployment.
 
Workers Pay Price of Crisis
The American working class is paying an incalculable price for these conditions in terms of physical suffering, disordered family life, mental break-down, disease and death. Compare the $2,500 yearly income estimated by the U.S. Children’s Bureau as necessary to provide the minimum comfort and decency level of living for a family of five with the $400–$700 per year which the average W.P.A. worker earns. Then remember that the W.P.A. workers, who represent less than 20 percent of the unemployed, are considered a relatively “privileged” group. We can well understand why certain authorities have claimed that the unemployed as a group suffer five times as much from sickness and disease as the rest of the population.
Millions of workers find that the few comforts and conveniences they manage to accumulate over years of hard work are snatched away during even a few months of unemployment. A couple of instalment payments missed, and automobiles, radios and washing machines are promptly taken away. Every day hundreds of homes, representing life-times of sacrifice and scrimping, are foreclosed. Thousands of families are evicted to join the homeless hordes that today aimlessly travel our highroads.
 
Class Strength Sapped
If we permit these conditions to continue for any length of time, the resistance of the American working class will be sapped. The unparalleled militancy displayed by the American workers during the past four years of bitter struggles will be dulled. Hunger and disease demoralize the workers and drain their fighting spirits.
It is this possible demoralization, rather than any immediate suffering, which is most to be feared by the workers. In both Germany and Italy, desperate and demoralized unemployed, susceptible to any demagogic appeal, and lacking powerful organizations knit firmly to the trade unions, helped form the storm-troop gangs of the fascists which utterly destroyed the labor movements in these countries. The American labor movement dares not permit our homegrown Hitlers so fruitful a field for exploitation. The dangers are too hideous to contemplate.
(This is the first of a series of articles on the nature of unemployment, its causes and how it can be remedied. The next article in the series will be The New Deal and the Unemployed, an analysis of how the Roosevelt administration has dealt with the unemployed and unemployment since 1935. – Ed.)
 




The failure of the capitalist system to supply even the most elementary needs of the workers is no more glaringly illustrated than in the persistent phenomenon of mass unemployment in the richest country on earth.
It becomes increasingly clear, particularly in the mass production industries, that the organized labor movement and the employed workers in general, face in chronic mass unemployment the most devastating menace to their interests.
Despite all the tremendous gains of the past few years, particularly in the field of industrial unionism, constantly recurring economic declines heaping up new and more extensive strata of unemployed have cut wide swathes in the union ranks and hold the terror of insecurity over every employed worker. The knowledge that there are thousands of jobless men, desperate for any opportunity to earn a livelihood waiting just outside the plant gates, cannot help but breed an extreme caution in the average worker. It is a desire to hold on to his miserable portion without complaint rather than risk the loss of all in a fight for more decent wages and working conditions.
 
Mass Unemployment Permanent
In the past year and a half of Roosevelt depression, one decisive fact stands out – mass unemployment is permanent. If in the past nine years the workers have constantly renewed their hopes on the illusion that “bad times” were merely temporary and that “relief” was desirable merely as a “hand-out” to tide the jobless worker over until his next job, this illusion is fast disappearing. Where formerly the WPA worker said, “When I get back into private industry ...” today, the workers in mass production industries are saying in increasing numbers, “When we get back on WPA.” A pick-up in production no longer means a proportionate rise in employment. Rationalization of industry has proceeded at a pace sufficient in the past three years to permit a 25 to 35 percent expansion of production from the low norms of last March, without any material increase in employment. Those who worked two days a week work four now, and production is more than doubled. The totally unemployed must look to relief or government relief jobs as a permanent source of mere subsistence.
 
Production Up – More WPA!
A striking illustration of this fact was given several weeks ago, by the District WPA Director, William B. Schmuhl, in Toledo, Ohio, in a conference with the representatives of the C.I.O.-WPA Joint Action Committee. He stated that if production in Toledo industry were to rise to the peak of the 1937 boom, a minimum of 8,000 more WPA jobs would still be required now over the 7,000 actually provided previously during the production peak.
Included in the hundreds of thousands, rising production will fail to call back to private employment is a high percentage of young, militant union members, particularly in the C.I.O., who possess insufficient seniority. They had a taste of wages in unionized plants back in ’36 and ’37. They do not relish, as a permanent livelihood, WPA with its $10–$14 per week wages.
But despite the almost 100 percent political support given by organized labor in the past to the New Deal, that agency is proceeding with its now time-hallowed practice of withdrawing unemployed benefits, rather than expanding them and raising the standards.
Up to the present, the organized labor movement has failed to recognize the true character of present unemployment. The jobless worker who looked to his union for help, received little more than the encouragement of occasional resolutions and the sporadic aid of hastily formed, and most often, poorly informed, grievance committees.
In addition, the C.I.O. in many instances, especially where the Stalinists had any foothold or influence, simply told its members to join the Workers Alliance. Sad to relate, this organization was not merely numerically weak, but was so interlinked with the New Deal politicians and so anxious to gain the favors of the WPA officials as a “respectable” organization, that it has long since degenerated into its own unique form of company-unionism. Throughout the entire period of the Roosevelt depression, it spent its time fawning before the government officials. Its leaders, like David Lasser and Herbert Benjamin, cooled their heels in the anterooms of the WPA headquarters in Washington, the legislators offices, or the back-gates of the White House, rushing eagerly into print to expand each perfunctory official hand-shake or smile into another major victory for the unemployed. Such concessions are cheap, and the politicians bestowed them lavishly.
The specter of 10 to 14 millions of permanently disemployed hangs over organized labor. Hundreds of thousands of union men are jobless. The trade union leaders cannot and dare not permit these workers to continue either disorganized or divorced from the organized employed worker. Such a policy means only a gigantic breeding ground for the doctrines of the Father Coughlins, the Gerald K. Smiths, and all their fascist ilk, who spread the gospel that the unions only want the money of the workers, that the unions by their “excessive demands” are creating unemployment, etc.
The only answer organized labor can give to such demagogy, is a national program of organization of the unemployed and WPA workers.
More is needed than wordy resolutions or the intercessions of individual labor leaders. Just as the auto workers themselves, in open battle with the industrialists, won concessions, so the WPA workers and jobless are themselves the key to the solution of their problems.
The pressure from the ranks of the WPA workers in particular have forced the C.I.O. in cities like Cleveland, Toledo and Detroit to set up unions for the WPA workers. In this, they have begun to follow the spendid example of the Minneapolis Central Labor Union and the General Drivers Union which has followed this practice for four years and won outstanding benefits for the jobless of their community.
This move, still in its beginnings, is being bitterly fought by the reactionary elements within the labor movement, particularly the Stalinists, who fear the growth of fighting organizations directed against the New Deal politicians and the government which they so ardently woo.
Such elements must and will be brushed aside. The important thing right now is a nation-wide demand by every honest, militant unionist: “Charter the WPA workers!” and “Build the WPA Industrial Unions!”
 




A pistol shot has torn open the abscess of Fascism. Herschel Grynszpan, homeless 17-year-old Polish Jew, in a gesture of defiance and despair, shot a secretary of the Nazi embassy in Paris. This act has served as the pretext for abominable reprisals against 600,000 defenseless individuals, the whole of German Jewry. Thus, the inner poison of Fascism bursts forth to disgust the world.
 
What Is Grynszpan’s Fate?
Today Herschel Grynszpan lies a pathetic and broken figure in a French prison waiting for the law to move its course to the guillotine. Starting as the central figure of a tragedy still in its opening act, Grynszpan has already become submerged under developing events of such tremendous and shocking character as to divert the world attention from his own fate.
But Herschel Grynszpan must not be forgotten. He is both a portent and a lesson. As a portent, he reflects the growing feeling amongst the masses that fascism can never be curbed by simply bowing to its deadly advance, by servility and meekness, by reliance on sentiment and indignation alone. Fascism can be destroyed only by the most unyielding and courageous resistance on the part of victims and potential victims.
 
No Individual Terror!
As an object lesson, however, this pitiable boy demonstrates, as never before in history, the falseness and futility of acts of individual terror as a means of fighting the oppression of a whole social system. Individual terrorist acts, striking at single representatives of an entire class, are a reflection only of weakness, disorganization, and lack of understanding of the real forces that keep political systems like Fascism in power. Indeed, individual terrorism only re-enforces those ideas which fascism itself employs to gain and hold power. Whoever thinks that by wiping out certain individuals he can cripple an entire regime thereby lends weight to the Fascist ideology, the “Leader” principle, which builds up the need for a Dictator.
 
Fascism Is Capitalism
But fascism is not the product of the Hitlers and Mussolinis. They themselves are rather the products of fascism, the off-spring of a decaying capitalist order. It is decaying capitalism that breeds Fascism.
The “democratic” capitalists, and their agents – who are themselves prepared, when they feel the need, to push forward their own particular brands of “Fuehrers” in America, Great Britain and France – do not want the true nature of fascism exposed, because in the exposure its very roots will be traced directly into the soil of the capitalist system itself. This is the fundamental fact which Grynszpan did not understand. That is why he made a futile gesture against one individual instead of fighting politically against the system which breeds such individuals.
 
Grynszpan Is Victim
The real responsibility for Grynszpan’s act does not lie with this half-crazed immature boy himself. In reality, it lies with the “democratic” capitalists and their agents, who raise their hands in horror at this hapless victim and are preparing to offer him as a sop to Nazi blood-lust. For Grynszpan’s individualistic action was merely the reflection of the ideas pumped into him by these very gentlemen, the very basis of whose system is in the crowning of the individual over the masses.
These scoundrels “denounce” in the same breath, and to the same degree, both Hitler and [word missing]. Fascism is the crime of an entire ruling class which degrades millions upon millions of Grynszpans into servile existence.
 
Must Not Be Victimized
We must not permit the spokesmen of capitalist “democracy” to portray the act of a Grynszpan in the same light as they do the acts of a Hitler. We dare not permit these gentlemen, whose own hands drip with the blood of millions of exploited workers and colonial slaves, to sanctimoniously offer the body of Grynszpan as tribute to Hitler.
Herschel Grynszpan has already paid for his folly a thousand times over – with the terrible realization of the consequences of his false method of fighting fascism. Far from aiding his people and weakening Hitlerism, which was his honest desire, his act served as the pretext for more bloody repressions. For fascism can be destroyed only by the mass revolutionary action of the workers stamping out the entire system of capitalism which breeds anti-Semitism and fascism.
His own words after his arrest attest to this realization, as well as to his just despair of any hope from the representatives of democratic capitalism. He said, “Being a Jew is no crime – I hoped President Roosevelt would take pity on us refugees – I am not a dog – I did not mean to kill – I lost my head.” But Roosevelt did not take pity on the refugees. Nor did any other “democratic” leaders. So Grynszpan was driven to resist by the only means which his limited understanding could grasp.
Above all, we must realize that Hitler’s actions against the Jews did not arise from Grynszpan’s act. Hitler’s terror campaign was already planned. It flowed from his desire to use this campaign as an outlet for the resentment of the German masses against their terrible living conditions. Grynszpan’s revolver shot was merely a pretext. Inevitably, even if he had never existed, some other pretext would have served.
The tragic fate of this boy must serve as a living lesson to the Jewish people. They must no longer beg for the grace and condescending “good-wishes” of the “democratic” nations, who have not and will not willingly lift a finger for their practical aid. They must stiffen their spines! Stop crawling and cringing! Join hands with all the oppressed workers and masses of the earth to offer open resistance to fascist terrorism!
If Grynszpan dies, it will be only as another victim of the yielding to the fascist demands. The liberals and the “democrats” plan to offer his life as another appeasal to insatiable fascism. But the workers must cry “Halt!” to this submission to Nazi blackmail. This is the same sort of blackmail that Hitler has been using on the Jew of the world! But the more you yield to a blackmailer, the more he demands!
Workers of all races, religions and colors! Unite against the taking of Grynszpan’s life as payment for the Nazi blackmailing threats!
 




Someone has said that man is the only animal who can convince himself that things are not what they are, but he would like them to be.
The history of the federal relief program from 1935 to the present demonstrates this fact. Much of the cheering for Roosevelt is based on the completely false idea that there has been a substantial improvement in the conditions of the unemployed during the past three years. Actual facts and figures prove there has been a gradual and subtle decline in the living standards of the unemployed as a whole during the period of the W.P.A.
A story is related of the scientist who experimented with frogs. He placed them alive in a pan of water over a very low flame. The pan was sufficiently shallow to permit the frogs to hop out. But so low was the flame that it took days for the water to heat. The rise in temperature was so gradual that the frogs failed to notice it. Eventually, they boiled alive. If the pan had been near a radio with the assuring tones of F.D.R. gushing forth, the frogs might have boiled to death with a smile.
This story demonstrates the distinction between the Hoover and Roosevelt methods of treating the unemployed. Hoover threw the unemployed into a red-hot pan of outright starvation. Roosevelt supplies just enough relief jobs to keep the unemployed from “jumping out of the pan”, that is, pacified by a gradual process of becoming accustomed to lower standards and by a form of stabilized poverty.
 
Starvation in F.D.R. Program
Not that Roosevelt has scrupled to discontinue relief and jobs altogether when it suited his purposes. Five and a half million relief families, 22 million men, women and children, faced outright starvation “between June and November 1935, when the Roosevelt administration discontinued direct relief. Of these five and a half million unemployed breadwinners, over 1,750,000 never received employment on the W.P.A. They subsisted at best on meager allotments of state and local governments.
These millions, together with the additional five million more unemployed families estimated to have required relief in the past year of depression, today face a relief crisis unparalleled in the past six years. The breakdown of relief in Cleveland, Chicago and other centers has revealed conditions as rotten almost as anything known under Hoover. These crises flow from Roosevelt’s direct relief policies.
 
Slashing Relief Appropriations
The federal government is gradually liquidating its obligations to the unemployed. First, it slipped from under the responsibility for direct relief. Since then, it has slowly decreased the appropriations for work relief in relation to the total number of unemployed. The original appropriation for W.P.A. was four billion. dollars. Unemployment in the fall of 1935 was about 11 million. At its peak in February 1936, W.P.A. employed 3,853,000 workers. From that date until July 937, although unemployment had declined less than 25 per cent according to the government’s own census, the W.P.A. was reduced, through systematic and ruthless wholesale dismissals, by more than 50 per cent, to 1,800,000 workers.
Contrast the present one and a quarter billion dollars W.P.A. appropriation with the original four billion, and the maximum of 2,800,000 jobs provided under the present fund with the almost four million jobs at the 1936 peak. There are, variously estimated, two to five million more unemployed now than in February 1936, but a million less W.P.A. jobs, and an appropriation that will last no further than January, 1939.
For anyone not blinded by personal or political considerations, the above figures, cited from government sources, reveal a startling fact. The total benefits for the unemployed as a group have been reduced in the past three years, particularly when contrasted with the actual number of unemployed at any given period.
 
Wages Gradually Reduced
A further startling fact is that real work relief wages, on the average throughout the country, have suffered a gradual reduction from the C.W.A. program to the present W.P.A. set-up. C.W.A. paid an average weekly wage of $15 for unskilled laborers, about $65 monthly. The F.E.R.A. originally paid an average weekly wage to laborers of $12, or $50 monthly. The administration then reduced wages on F.E.R.A. to the equivalent of each worker’s direct relief budget, the worst form of forced-labor for emergency relief orders. The discontinuance of this forced-labor policy was not effected by the administration without considerable mass persuasion from the unemployed. Hundreds of strikes ripped the F.E.R.A. work program wide open.
When the W.P.A. began, Roosevelt did not make the mistake attempted under the F.E.R.A. He quickly covered that one revealing glimpse of his actual ruthless purpose with a great ballyhoo of “security” wages and “prevailing” hourly rates of pay under the W.P.A. The actual amount earned by most W.P.A. workers was more than could be secured on direct relief. But, as always, what the administration gave with one hand, it withdrew with the other.
By discontinuing direct relief, the federal government was able, with little additional cost, to give slightly higher benefits to a smaller group of workers.
Further, the W.P.A. established wide wage differentials for areas of varying populations within these regions. Thus, the $55–$60 per month paid unskilled workers in large industrial centers in the north-eastern states, where unionism, and unemployed organizations and mass actions were most extensive, were offset by the incredible coolie wages paid in the South and the rural areas.
At its peak, W.P.A. wages, including the wages of the skilled and professional workers, averaged only $45.91 per month. This is less than the highest averages for unskilled laborers alone during the C.W.A. and F.E.R.A. For three years, the W.P.A. paid workers in certain southern areas as little as $19 per month. The “security” wage is a ghastly joke, unless it implies merely security from immediate starvation. It certainly cannot mean “freedom from anxiety, want or poverty” in the dictionary sense.
Recently, minimum wages on W.P.A. were raised to $40 per month. This act has been pointed out as a great humanitarian deed by Roosevelt. Few have asked why this noble deed was not done three years ago, at a time when Roosevelt had the national legislature eating out of his hand, and why this concession was so comparatively easy for him to secure now from an increasingly hostile legislature.
 
Roosevelt’s ‘Noble’ Sentiments
Just how much Roosevelt has been moved by political considerations as contrasted with nobler sentiments in his unemployed policies we can observe accurately. Both in the fall of 1934 and that of 1936, just prior to the general elections, a sharp increase was noted in federal work relief employment. This was particularly apparent in September and October 1936, when Roosevelt reversed his policy of mass W.P.A. lay-offs while unemployment was declining, and packed the W.P.A. projects. Few new projects were started, but old ones were double and triple shifted.
Immediately following Roosevelt’s re-election, 400,000 W.P.A. workers, most of them still displaying Roosevelt campaign buttons, were fired en masse. Within six months of the elections, almost three-quarters of a million W.P.A. workers had received the reward of blind political faith in the form of pink dismissal slips.
We are approaching another election. Again W.P.A. jobs are on the increase. A couple of hundred thousand workers will be advantageously placed on W.P.A. rolls for a few weeks prior to the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November. Then we can confidently predict that the W.P.A. will follow its time-hallowed custom of firing hundreds of thousands – after the votes have been safely recorded.
(The next article of this series will be a discussion of the New Deal unemployment policies in relation to the entire Roosevelt program of saving the capitalist system and preparing for imperialist war.)
 




Some day the “New Deal” era will be known as the “Years of the Great Deception.” Few political demagogues have demonstrated so great a divergence between the word and the deed, the promise and the fulfillment as has Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Borne into office on a tremendous tide of popular protest against the brutal indifference of the Hoover regime, Roosevelt has steered a course with such political adroitness that he has maintained his popular hold upon the masses of American people despite the fact that his policies have failed to effect a single fundamental change in our economic and social order.
The “money changers” whom Roosevelt stormed against in 1932 and vowed “to drive from our Temple” are very much with us. Indeed, his first political act, the Bank Moratorium, served merely to clean out the small independent banks and a host of small depositors. The major financial groups were given a new lease upon the country. Backed by government power and credit, finance capital consolidated its power.
For those who point the finger at Wall Street as the root of all evil, and pin a halo to the scalp of F.D.R., it is well to recall that the genial Great White Father, when he had the greatest opportunity ever presented to uproot the choking weeds of Wall Street by nationalizing the banking system, chose rather to nurture their growth.
Roosevelt, in his speeches, championed the “little man,” the small independent producer. He scored with fiery tongue the industrial monopolists. His new “Magna Charta,” the National Recovery Act, as its one outstanding achievement wiped out thousands of the “little men” by virtue of its price-fixing “codes of fair business practice” and further entrenched industrial monopoly. And, startling as it may sound, while we have read of innumerable investigations under the Anti-Trust laws, there has been not one successful prosecution since Roosevelt took office.
 
‘Subsidizing’ Home Owners and Destroying Crops
Much has been made of Roosevelt’s “social” legislation. Chief among his “reform” acts have been the Agricultural Adjustment Act, the establishment of the Home Owners Loan Corporation, and the Wagner Labor Act.
The first was an attempt to subsidize wholesale crop and livestock destruction, while a third of the nation was in dire want, and resulted in the ruin of tens of thousands of small dirt-farmers, tenant-farmers and sharecroppers. The rich landlord farmers continued to collect their rents and shares, and pocketed the bounty of the government.
The H.O.L.C., instead of protecting the small home-owners, has merely guaranteed interest payments to the banks, mortgage companies and insurance corporations. Thousands of small home-owners, unable to meet interest and amortization on government loans, have been foreclosed, while the mortgage sharks get good hard government cash in place of shaky mortgages and increasing property taxes.
 
Bargaining Rights Won on Picket Line
Another diamond in the Roosevelt crown has been the act defining the rights of collective bargaining for labor. Under this act, and its defunct predecessor, Section 7A of the N.R.A., organized labor was presumably guaranteed the rights of collective bargaining free from coercion and restraint by the employers. Yet, in every single great test of these acts, and there have been scores of them in the past four years, labor has won recognition for its bargaining rights only by blood and struggle.
The Maritime strikes, the Textile Strike (when Roosevelt threatened to call out the Federal troops against the strikers), the Minneapolis Teamsters strike, the Toledo Auto-Lite, the Milwaukee power, the Koehler, the Little Steel, the General Motors, the Rubber strikes, and thousands of other bitter physical struggles, testify to the fact that Roosevelt had given the workers merely the rights they always possessed, the rights they have always had to wrest from the ruling class in life and death conflicts.
 
How F.D.R. ‘Solved’ Unemployment
However, the greatest problem which faced Roosevelt when he took office was that of unemployment. There were 15 million unemployed in the U.S. when he became President. So far as the elimination of mass unemployment in this country is concerned, Roosevelt’s program has accomplished exactly nothing. There are 15 million unemployed in the U.S. today.
The “reasonable” leader, the liberal who seeks “good motives” instead of so u n d accomplishments, the “radical” who yearns for the green pastures of “popular” causes, all chant in chorus, “But Roosevelt has done more for the unemployed than Hoover!”
Granted! But these apologists fail to add how much more, and why Roosevelt’s concessions to the unemployed were made.
Roosevelt’s aid to the unemployed comes under two headings, the Social Security Bill and the work relief appropriations. Like almost every New Deal concession, the Social Security Bill is a bone with a string attached. Its benefits apply to less than ten per cent of the present unemployed. Further, the conditions under which a worker can receive any benefits are extremely restricted, and then the benefits last but a few weeks. The real pay-off is that workers obtaining unemployment insurance receive less, in most instances, than they might on relief.
This “benevolent venture,” adopted in most European countries years ago, is in reality a clever scheme of government taxation of the workers, whereby a tremendous fund is being built up, largely from deductions in workers’ wages. Thus, this grandiose scheme resolves itself into a gigantic swindle, a deferred payment of wages.
 
Riot Insurance and Political Expediency
The history of relief and work relief programs under Roosevelt is one of constant mass struggle by the workers for every slightest concession and the skillful use by Roosevelt of federal funds for political maneuvers. Relief comes under two headings on the Roosevelt Budget – riot insurance and political expediency.
It is significant to note that the order in which Roosevelt applied himself to the national problems when he took office were first to safeguard the bankers, next to entrench monopoly, and finally to throw a few crumbs to the unemployed, who in the spring, summer and fall of 1933 were in mass ferment.
The Emergency Relief fund which Roosevelt instituted in the summer of 1933 – after six months in office during the lowest point of depression in American history – was literally wrested from the “New Deal” regime by riots and bloodshed, by storming of food stores and warehouses, in which literally hundreds of thousands of desperate unemployed, led mainly by such organizations as the Unemployed Councils and Unemployed Leagues, took part.
These funds provided only a bare emergency relief in the form of food orders, and because of the necessity for state and local governments declaring themselves in practical bankruptcy in order to obtain these federal grants, many state and local communities refused to avail themselves of such funds. As a result scarcely a third of the needy unemployed received any of these starvation benefits.
 
C.W.A. Stifles Mass Jobless Revolt
As winter approached, and as the first year of Roosevelt’s tenure came to a close, with the promise of re-employment under the N.R.A. program completely fulfilled, Roosevelt instituted the first federal work relief program, the Civil Works Administration. This was more than a humanitarian gesture. On the one hand it was an attempt to stifle mass revolt during the most bitter months of winter; on the other, it was the beginning of that program of “pump priming” and credit inflation into which Roosevelt has been repeatedly forced when all his other measures have proved inadequate to solve the economic crisis. Within three months of its inception, the C.W.A. folded up. The unemployed went back to dandelion greens.
It is interesting to note that the wages paid under the C.W.A. for common labor were $15 per week. The “mistake” of maintaining such “high” wages has never again been repeated by Roosevelt. For as we shall note, every future work program was to mark a decline in the actual and real wages paid federal work relief employees.
The pump-priming of the C.W.A., a mere 400 million dollars failed to increase buying power to an extent whereby industry and business might revive. Roosevelt “prosperity” failed to materialize, and the unemployed were again on a rampage. Demonstrations and hunger marches swept the streets of every city. City halls, state legislatures and the federal capital were invaded by militant masses demanding relief. The answer of Roosevelt was the F.E.R.A. This program provided funds for direct and work relief.
 
FERA Wage Down to Relief Level
Work relief under the F.E.R.A. was initiated in September 1934. The full program was cleverly built up to provide the maximum of employment just prior to the 1934 and congressional elections. Even so, at its peak, the F.E.R.A. employed a million less workers than the C.W.A., although the need was just as great. Further, the wages paid amounted to a maximum of $12 per week, which in February 1935 were cut to the equivalent of each worker’s emergency relief budget. This was a fancy scheme to exact work for what amounted to direct relief, and was followed shortly by the rapid demobilization of the work program.
In June 1935, the federal government ended the F.E.R.A. At one stroke, 5½ million families were left to starve, or to go back to the tender charities of bankrupt local communities.
A recurrent pattern marks the entire course of Roosevelt’s treatment of the unemployed. Unemployment is considered temporary. Periods of starvation relief and jobs at coolie wages are followed by periods of outright starvation. This plan is calculated. The administration is testing how little it will take to satisfy the unemployed. Further, it is blindly hoping for a business pick-up which will relieve the problem. The pick-up fails. Demonstrations, hunger marches, riots. Shortly after the ending of the F.E.R.A., Roosevelt notes a decline in his popularity. Too many millions of workers have had to jam Section 7A down employers’ throats with their bare fists. Production has registered scarcely any rise. The unemployed are fuming.
Again the astute Magician of the White House pulls a trick rabbit from his hat. This time it is pump-priming on a larger scale, a super-super works program. The W.P.A. gets slowly under way in the fall of 1935.
(This is the second of a series of articles on unemployment. The next article will continue the story of The New Deal and the Unemployed, covering the Roosevelt unemployed program from the winter of 1935 up to the present.)
 




Franklin D. Roosevelt has been pictured in so many diverse aspects by anti- and pro-New Dealers that disinterested observers of the man might well feel they are viewing grotesque reflections in a hall of freak mirrors. These reflections continually resemble caricatures in which those features which are most attractive or most detestable are drawn to exaggerated proportions, all in accordance with the particular prejudices of the artists.
To his foes on the right, largely the relics of the hard-bitten independent industrial feudalists of an earlier capitalism, Roosevelt sometimes appears as a blood-red revolutionist trampling on the most sacred rights of private property and the unrestricted exploitation of labor. To these gentlemen, whose minds see no further than the end of a blackjack, the slightest gesture of pacification offered by Roosevelt to the unemployed or any other section of the workers and poor farmers, even though the gesture be made with an empty hand, appears as calculated betrayal of their interests.
By his friends of the left – the ineffectual reformers and liberals, the labor fakers marketing unionism to the capitalists as an instrument for stabilizing profits, the peace-time pacifists, the Stalinists who wish to preserve democracy even if they have to silence by frame-up, knife or gun every labor militant – by these he is still hailed the new St. George of the common man, thrusting a solid spear into the dragon of vested interests.
Portraits Are Modified
From time to time, each camp is forced to modify their particular portraits. When juicy appropriations for military purposes are pushed through by Roosevelt, when fat bounties in the form of R.F.C. loans are tossed into” the laps of bankers and railroad tycoons, when the undistributed profits tax is dropped into the legislative waste-basket, the “Tories” nod their heads benevolently in his direction and affirm, “The kid’s got talent all right. If he’d only take himself in hand, cut out these week-end sprees with those red bums around the corner, and stick to business, he’ll be tops someday.”
When Roosevelt, the great democrat, counterposes only an imposing silence to the labor smashing brutalities of Hagueism, and the insolent flaunting of organized gunmen in the face of legislative edict by the Weirs, Girdlers and Fords; when the Roosevelt State Department, in immediate response to the demands of the blood-sucking American oil, mine and land interests in impoverished Mexico, imposes ruinous retaliatory economic measures upon our southern neighbor; when he sanctions the “neutral” embargo of arms to Republican Spain and permits the unhampered shipment of oil, scrap iron and munitions to Japan; when, in fact, he demonstrates a more than detached concern for the interests of the real ruling class regardless of his most idealistic utterances, the loyal “leftists” shake their head sadly and paint the picture of a generous, noble soul, abused and misled by crafty and insidious powers betraying him within his own camp.
All of these estimates are false to the core. Roosevelt is neither a lurking anarchist awaiting the opportune moment to sprout whiskers and heave a well-timed bomb into the sacred precincts of the New York Stock Exchange, nor a talented but irresponsible playboy, nor a great white knight come on horse-back to storm the citadels of oppression, nor a yokel being taken in by county fair sharpers, nor a benevolent country squire innocently inveigled into capitalizing some shady enterprise by treasonable advisers.
 
Roosevelt Ablest Capitalist Politician
In actuality, Roosevelt is the ablest, most intelligent, calculating and single-minded politician yet produced by the American capitalist class. His sole objective, linking into a single chain all his seemingly contradictory acts, is to save and stabilize the system of American capitalism.
The means by which Roosevelt intends to carry out this objective are dazzlingly clear. All the main lines of his strategy, his legislation, his statements, his executive policies point to that means: imperialist war.
American capitalism, torn by the same internal contradictions that beset the rival systems of every capitalist nation on earth, is fighting in every portion of the globe for outlets for surplus capital and products unmarketable at home. Facing the menacing shadow of mass unemployed millions which industry can never
absorb, supporting a government credit structure mounting to unprecedented and top-heavy heights, unable, except by huge government spending programs which mean increasing tax-loads, to balance profits, prices and production with mass purchasing power, the American capitalist class is preparing its inevitable and desperate bid for survival through the military subjection of its commercial and imperialist rivals.
It is the role of Roosevelt to best prepare the American nation for that task. His entire program of economic and social legislation can be understood only in the light of such preparations.
 
War Demands Support By All
Roosevelt is perfectly aware that the successful pursuit of his imperialistic aims through military means necessitates the complete loyalty to him of every section of the population. Such blind adherence to his designs, particularly in the part of the impoverished masses, can only be secured by his convincing the American workers and farmers that he is the genuine champion of their interests.
Further, Roosevelt understands how vital to his aims is the preservation of peace between capital and labor.
His program is to keep a constant balance between the classes. On the one hand he maintains his hold over the masses by attacking the most conspicuously evil manifestations of the capitalist system. On the other, while disguising with reforms the ugliest aspects, he tries to maintain the system as such strengthened and intact.
The attempt to maintain class peace in America becomes increasingly difficult for Roosevelt. He is unable for any length of time to pacify labor by paving the way for wage concessions, for he must immediately cancel out these concessions by measures which induce price rises and the maintenance of profit levels. He cannot indefinitely pacify the unemployed, because new waves of unemployment force him to spread appropriations for jobs in thinner and thinner layers, while the ruling class thunders at him because of the inevitable increase in his requirements.
 
Now to the Left, Now to the Right
So Roosevelt, offering his favors now to the left and now to the right, subduing with increasing difficulty the constantly smouldering class conflicts, hastens his course toward imperialist war before inevitable, recurring and constantly deepening economic crises explode into naked and tremendous class conflicts which neither he nor anyone will be able to control.
It is true that Roosevelt has incurred the displeasure of many of his own class whose immediate and personal interests have been hampered by the measures he has taken to preserve the class as a whole. But such displeasure is temporary,” like the immediate reaction to a bad-tasting medicine whose future results will be beneficial.
It is significant to note, that in every poll of public opinion, as well as in the expressions of the capitalist press, Roosevelt’s foreign policy and war appropriations (the greatest in the peacetime history of this and every other nation) have received almost universal endorsement. The recent Life magazine poll, among those of the wealthy and upper middle class, showed a more than 90 percent approval of Roosevelt’s imperialist preparations as expressed in his foreign policy and armaments program.
So it is that Roosevelt hopes ultimately to conquer unemployment. The administration is preparing to receive dividends on every dollar spent for the relief of the unemployed. Those dividends will be exacted in the form of support for the Roosevelt war program. Every concession to the working class, every slightest social reform has a price tag on it, marked in blood, “$upport of Imperialist War.”
(The final article in this series will be a discussion of the only genuine program to aid the unemployed and end unemployment. – Ed.)
 




Franklin D. Roosevelt has been pictured in so many diverse aspects by anti- and pro-New Dealers that disinterested observers of the man might well feel they are viewing grotesque reflections in a hall of freak mirrors. These reflections continually resemble caricatures in which those features which are most attractive or most detestable are drawn to exaggerated proportions, all in accordance with the particular prejudices of the artists.
To his foes on the right, largely the relics of the hard-bitten independent industrial feudalists of an earlier capitalism, Roosevelt sometimes appears as a blood-red revolutionist trampling on the most sacred rights of private property and the unrestricted exploitation of labor. To these gentlemen, whose minds see no further than the end of a blackjack, the slightest gesture of pacification offered by Roosevelt to the unemployed or any other section of the workers and poor farmers, even though the gesture be made with an empty hand, appears as calculated betrayal of their interests.
By his friends of the left – the ineffectual reformers and liberals, the labor fakers marketing unionism to the capitalists as an instrument for stabilizing profits, the peace-time pacifists, the Stalinists who wish to preserve democracy even if they have to silence by frame-up, knife or gun every labor militant – by these he is still hailed the new St. George of the common man, thrusting a solid spear into the dragon of vested interests.
Portraits Are Modified
From time to time, each camp is forced to modify their particular portraits. When juicy appropriations for military purposes are pushed through by Roosevelt, when fat bounties in the form of R.F.C. loans are tossed into” the laps of bankers and railroad tycoons, when the undistributed profits tax is dropped into the legislative waste-basket, the “Tories” nod their heads benevolently in his direction and affirm, “The kid’s got talent all right. If he’d only take himself in hand, cut out these week-end sprees with those red bums around the corner, and stick to business, he’ll be tops someday.”
When Roosevelt, the great democrat, counterposes only an imposing silence to the labor smashing brutalities of Hagueism, and the insolent flaunting of organized gunmen in the face of legislative edict by the Weirs, Girdlers and Fords; when the Roosevelt State Department, in immediate response to the demands of the blood-sucking American oil, mine and land interests in impoverished Mexico, imposes ruinous retaliatory economic measures upon our southern neighbor; when he sanctions the “neutral” embargo of arms to Republican Spain and permits the unhampered shipment of oil, scrap iron and munitions to Japan; when, in fact, he demonstrates a more than detached concern for the interests of the real ruling class regardless of his most idealistic utterances, the loyal “leftists” shake their head sadly and paint the picture of a generous, noble soul, abused and misled by crafty and insidious powers betraying him within his own camp.
All of these estimates are false to the core. Roosevelt is neither a lurking anarchist awaiting the opportune moment to sprout whiskers and heave a well-timed bomb into the sacred precincts of the New York Stock Exchange, nor a talented but irresponsible playboy, nor a great white knight come on horse-back to storm the citadels of oppression, nor a yokel being taken in by county fair sharpers, nor a benevolent country squire innocently inveigled into capitalizing some shady enterprise by treasonable advisers.
 
Roosevelt Ablest Capitalist Politician
In actuality, Roosevelt is the ablest, most intelligent, calculating and single-minded politician yet produced by the American capitalist class. His sole objective, linking into a single chain all his seemingly contradictory acts, is to save and stabilize the system of American capitalism.
The means by which Roosevelt intends to carry out this objective are dazzlingly clear. All the main lines of his strategy, his legislation, his statements, his executive policies point to that means: imperialist war.
American capitalism, torn by the same internal contradictions that beset the rival systems of every capitalist nation on earth, is fighting in every portion of the globe for outlets for surplus capital and products unmarketable at home. Facing the menacing shadow of mass unemployed millions which industry can never
absorb, supporting a government credit structure mounting to unprecedented and top-heavy heights, unable, except by huge government spending programs which mean increasing tax-loads, to balance profits, prices and production with mass purchasing power, the American capitalist class is preparing its inevitable and desperate bid for survival through the military subjection of its commercial and imperialist rivals.
It is the role of Roosevelt to best prepare the American nation for that task. His entire program of economic and social legislation can be understood only in the light of such preparations.
 
War Demands Support By All
Roosevelt is perfectly aware that the successful pursuit of his imperialistic aims through military means necessitates the complete loyalty to him of every section of the population. Such blind adherence to his designs, particularly in the part of the impoverished masses, can only be secured by his convincing the American workers and farmers that he is the genuine champion of their interests.
Further, Roosevelt understands how vital to his aims is the preservation of peace between capital and labor.
His program is to keep a constant balance between the classes. On the one hand he maintains his hold over the masses by attacking the most conspicuously evil manifestations of the capitalist system. On the other, while disguising with reforms the ugliest aspects, he tries to maintain the system as such strengthened and intact.
The attempt to maintain class peace in America becomes increasingly difficult for Roosevelt. He is unable for any length of time to pacify labor by paving the way for wage concessions, for he must immediately cancel out these concessions by measures which induce price rises and the maintenance of profit levels. He cannot indefinitely pacify the unemployed, because new waves of unemployment force him to spread appropriations for jobs in thinner and thinner layers, while the ruling class thunders at him because of the inevitable increase in his requirements.
 
Now to the Left, Now to the Right
So Roosevelt, offering his favors now to the left and now to the right, subduing with increasing difficulty the constantly smouldering class conflicts, hastens his course toward imperialist war before inevitable, recurring and constantly deepening economic crises explode into naked and tremendous class conflicts which neither he nor anyone will be able to control.
It is true that Roosevelt has incurred the displeasure of many of his own class whose immediate and personal interests have been hampered by the measures he has taken to preserve the class as a whole. But such displeasure is temporary,” like the immediate reaction to a bad-tasting medicine whose future results will be beneficial.
It is significant to note, that in every poll of public opinion, as well as in the expressions of the capitalist press, Roosevelt’s foreign policy and war appropriations (the greatest in the peacetime history of this and every other nation) have received almost universal endorsement. The recent Life magazine poll, among those of the wealthy and upper middle class, showed a more than 90 percent approval of Roosevelt’s imperialist preparations as expressed in his foreign policy and armaments program.
So it is that Roosevelt hopes ultimately to conquer unemployment. The administration is preparing to receive dividends on every dollar spent for the relief of the unemployed. Those dividends will be exacted in the form of support for the Roosevelt war program. Every concession to the working class, every slightest social reform has a price tag on it, marked in blood, “$upport of Imperialist War.”
(The final article in this series will be a discussion of the only genuine program to aid the unemployed and end unemployment. – Ed.)
 




Anthracite Bosses Fold Up in 9 Days
After stalling for nine days, just long enough to give the 76,000 striking anthracite coal-miners in Pennsylvania a well-deserved vacation, the hard-coal operators conceded the major social and wage demands of the AFL United Mine Workers. An agreement was reached on June 7.
This agreement includes not only an 18½ cent hourly wage increase, with time and a half after 35 hours a week and seven hours a day, but welfare and safety concessions similar to those previously won in the bitter strike of the 400,000 soft coal miners.
The contract includes an operator-financed health and welfare fund of five cents on each ton of coal produced, expected to amount to about $2,500,000 annually. The control of the fund is vested In a three-man committee, two from the union, and one from the operators. This is an even better agreement than secured by the soft coal miners, whose fund committee consists of one each from the union and operators, and a third jointly acceptable to both.
By their successful struggle for far-reaching social, as well as wage, demands, the miners have set an example for the rest of labor to follow in the battles ahead.
* * *

Whitney’s Plea to Truman and Congress
If a man bumps his head against a stone wall once, it’s probably an accident; twice, it may still be an accident; a hundred times, and he’s just a damn fool.
That’s the thought that comes to mind in reading the big advertisements by A.F. Whitney, head of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, published in metropolitan newspapers last week. Headed, Strikes Can Be Prevented, the ads contain a plea by Whitney for Truman and Congress to “stay on the job” and “prevent strikes” by “action to remedy the conditions which cause American workers to strike.”
“A President and Congress wanting workers to ‘stay on the job’ must themselves get on the job. The Congress must not be allowed to adjourn without taking positive steps to eliminate the causes of strikes,” says Whitney.
No decent-minded person can possibly oppose social legislation to better the conditions of the American workers. But to direct a plea to THIS Congress to “stay on the job” in the interests of labor is like banging your head a hundred times against a stone wall.
Instead of pleading with the Big-Business Congress, Whitney would have done far better to have spent the Trainmen’s money for advertisements calling on the workers to organize a labor party, run labor candidates and boot the whole gang of Wall
Street politicians out of Washington. Labor’s slogan should be not “Congress Must Stay on the Job,” but – KICK OUT WALL STREET’S CONGRESS! ELECT A WORKERS’ AND FARMERS’ CONGRESS!
* * *

Tobin’s Warning on AFL Southern Drive
Daniel Tobin, head of the AFL Teamsters, is finding employer opposition very tough down below the Mason and Dixon Line, where the AFL, like the CIO, is engaged in a big organizing drive.
Hence, his magazine, The International Teamster, in its June issue presents a view point quite unique for his publication, in an article entitled, AFL Starts to Organize the South, Tobin’g magazine states:
“Under the pretext of ‘saving the South from Communism,’ the Ku Klux Klan is preparing to inject itself into the struggle to maintain the open shop. Every union organizer will probably be branded a ‘Communist’ as the Klan attempts to ride the crest of a wave of patriotic prejudice to organize the South itself and promote the sale of cotton fabrics woven into the hoods and shrouds of its official costume. Thus the southern industrialists will profit both ways. They will keep wages low and sell cotton to the nightshirt cavalry.”
We can but welcome Tobin’s timely warning against the Southern reactionary red-baiters and the anti-”communist” agitation of the open shoppers. But it is well to keep in mind that Tobin’s opposition to red-baiting is still confined to a limited field – and only when it hits him and his organizers over the head.
We are still waiting to hear from Tobin any criticism of AFL President William Green and other AFL big-wigs, who launched tne AFL Southern drive with a bid to the employers to sign up with the AFL before the “communistic” CIO organizes the workers. The AFL leaders themselves have been lending red-baiting ammunition to the Southern bosses – and the latter are shooting it at the AFL as well as the CIO.
In addition, we would be doing less than our duty if we overlooked Tobin’s own record of red-baiting – and specifically his attack on the progressive and militant leadership of Minneapolis Drivers Local 544. Tobin not only conducted an unprecedented red-baiting drive against the Trotskyists and militants, but he collaborated in a conspiracy with Roosevelt to frame-up and imprison 18 Local 544 and Socialist Workers Party leaders during the war.
Red-baiting is indeed a sinister and treacherous weapon. Those who use it within the labor movement only help the bosses. And sometimes, as Tobin has found in the South, are apt to find it may explode in their own faces.
 



A proposal for a national united labor conference of all unions, AFL, CIO and Railroad Brotherhoods, to initiate joint action against enactment of anti-labor legislation by Congress and President Truman, was announced on May 27 in Detroit by CIO United Automobile Workers President Walter P. Reuther. This proposal, Reuther stated, is backed by the top officers of the UAW-CIO.
This is the most positive answer that has yet come from any American union leaders in response to the urgent demand from labor’s ranks for effective united action to beat back the increasingly violent anti-labor offensive of Big Business and its government. This offensive has been climaxed by Truman’s call for a draft-strikers law and Congressional passage of the infamous Case Union-Busting Bill.
Foreseeing the tremendous struggle impending at the very start of the Big Business-government drive against labor after V-J Day, The Militant last September 15, 1945, first urged:
“Right now one of the most reactionary Congresses in American history is debating problems affecting the destinies of scores of millions. These millions have no genuine voice in the legislative halls and no means of bringing direct immediate and concentrated pressure to bear. The obvious and crying need is for the mobilization of organized labor’s power in Washington through a National Labor Congress representing every union local and labor body in the United States.”
On September 15, 1945, the UAW General Motors delegates conference in Detroit adopted a resolution urging the International Union to initiate a Congress of Labor. This proposal was not seriously pressed at the time. Events of the past few weeks in connection with the breaking of the railroad strike and action on the Truman and Case bills have brought the question forward with greater force than ever.
In his statement last week, Reuther said:
“The top officers of the UAW-CIO today decided to ask President Philip Murray of the CIO to take immediate steps to bring about joint action by all organized labor to prevent passage in the Senate of restrictive labor legislation proposed Saturday to Congress by President Harry S. Truman.
“Vice President Richard T. Leonard and R.J. Thomas agreed with me to ask President Murray to confer immediately with officers of the American Federation of Labor and the railroad brotherhoods to plan the calling at the earliest possible date of a national united labor conference for the specific purpose of combating President Truman’s proposals and all other restrictive legislation aimed at labor now pending in the Congress.”
Prior to Reuther’s announcement, a resolution had been adopted on May 23 by Detroit Briggs Local 212, which embodied proposals made by Emil Mazey, former Local 212 president and newly-elected member of the UAW International Executive Board. Mazey, a leading UAW militant who spoke against the no-strike pledge and for a labor party at the 1943 UAW convention, was attending his first general membership meeting since his return from Army duty in the Philippines and Okinawa.
The Militant hails the UAW’s proposal for united labor action and urges all unionists to call upon their leaders to take immediate steps for the convening of a National United Conference of Labor. United labor action is the most imperative need today in the face of the concerted attacks of Big Business and its government upon the fundamental rights of the working people.
 




Murray’s Complaints About Congress
In his concluding speech at the recent CIO Steelworkers convention, Philip Murray, the union’s president, complained that Congress “has hot adopted a single piece of constructive legislation since the year 1937.” For the last nine years, he said, “labor has been fighting with its back to the wall.”
Without realizing it perhaps, Murray in these words voiced a terrible indictment against the traditional policies on political action pursued by himself and the rest of the present trade union leadership.
Since 1933, the Congress majority has been Democratic. In general, this majority was sustained through the influence of the late President Roosevelt. Every national election, the union leaders told the workers to go out and vote for “friends of labor” from the Democratic Party.
Now we have the admission from Murray that the results of this policy of supporting capitalist “friends of labor” through five national elections has been to maintain a Congress that has done not one thing for labor In nine years – and done everything possible for Big Business.
Murray again proposes campaigning for “substantial, progressive, liberal-minded officers in the elections coming up this year” – so long as they are Democrats or Republicans. Against this bankrupt policy, the trade union militants must counterpose effective labor political action – the formation of a genuine independent labor party which will fight to put real labor candidates in Congress.
* * *

Big Ford Local 600 Backs Miners’ Fight
CIO United Auto Workers Local 600, representing 65,000 workers in the Ford Motor Company’s River Rouge plant, on May 19 issued a resolution through its executive board calling for support of the coal miners and their wage and welfare demands.
The resolution states that “the real issues of the coal strike are being obscured by the press of the country – namely, that coal miners need a wage increase, health security and that all labor must support them.” It calls on the government “to make the coal operators grant a health and welfare fund to the miners.”
This pledge of solidarity, which undoubtedly reflects the sentiments of all the auto workers, should be emulated by every Section of the CIO. The unprecedentedly savage drive of Big Business and the government against the miners and rail workers is aimed in reality against the entire labor movement.
* * *

CIO Organizing Atom-Bomb Plant
The great atom bomb plant at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, “is now the first major concentration point in the CIO’s southern organizing campaign,” reports the May CIO News.
“A corps of CIO organisers, veterans of both World War II and other CIO organizing drives are already in the city,” the CIO News reveals. There are 40,000 workers in the massive plants. These workers, who produced the most destructive weapon of all time, work under abominable conditions. They are fired without cause and without regard to seniority. Wage rates vary, from worker to worker, from 12 cents to $1.02 an hour for those in the same building doing the same work.
When World War II ended, says CIO News, “it also became apparent to the workers that their rights within the giant plants were being reduced almost as swiftly as the atomic bomb had reduced the two Japanese cities.”
 




Packinghouse Union Seeks New Wage Boost
The most important action of the recent convention of the CIO United Packinghouse Workers of America, held in Montreal, Canada, was adoption of a report of the contract committee calling for a new “master agreement” with the Big Four meatpacking trust and the large independents.
Negotiations are to begin August 7, about six months after the UPWA won a 16-cent an hour increase by strike action. Truman tried to break the strike by plant seizures. The UPWA’s principal demands, as voted by the convention, will be for a 12-cent an hour increase, a $1 an hour minimum wage, a guaranteed annual wage and 30-hour week.
Another great labor struggle is shaping up as unions like the UPWA, which are being robbed of hard-won wage gains by price extortions, are renewing wage demands. If they want to put a real road-block in the path of the profiteering price-gougers, they should demand an escalator clause in the next contract providing a sliding scale of wages, under a fixed minimum, automatically rising in direct proportion to the rising cost of living.
* * *

All Not Yet Quiet on the Strike Front
In the 30 days following June 18, there are more than 700 strikes scheduled by smaller unions, according to Department of Labor records. These involve demands for wage increases and shorter hours.
Labor Department officials predict that there will be at least 150 strikes going on at any time during the rest of the year, with an average of 30,000 to 50,000 out at all times.
This appears to be a very small figure in terms of the peak of the strike wave last January, when 1,750,000 were out at one time. Actually, it represents a several times higher average of strikes and strikers than during the pre-war period.
What has the corporations and their political agents most worried is the real possibility of big industrial strikes by this fall and winter, as those who won wage gains last spring find them shrunk to zero by price inflation.
* * *

Guild President Lashes at Truman
The 250 delegates to the CIO American Newspaper Guild convention in Scranton, Pa„ last week, heard Guild President Milton Murray keynote the deliberations with a scathing attack on Truman’s labor policy.
“We find the most unhappy picture of petty advisors who have constituted a new Missouri gang surrounding the President of the United States and counseling him to invoke a draft law against labor, to put bayonets at the backs of workers, if necessary, to break strikes ...” said Murray.
Murray’s answer to Truman’s assault on labor is “to see that decent, proper legislators attend the halls of Congress so that sane and sensible legislation can be adopted.”
First, it must be noted that Truman’s draft-strikers bill wasn’t just cooked up by a “new Missouri Gang.” It was originated by Truman’s predecessor, Roosevelt, in his Congressional message of June 1943. Truman’s strikebreaking plant seizures are an exact duplicate of Roosevelt’s, in the rail and coal industries specifically. As for using troops against American workers, memory recalls Roosevelt’s breaking of the North American Aviation strike in June 1941 – and he didn’t get the advice to do that from Missouri, either. Truman is following, whether expertly or not, Roosevelt’s labor policy in its fundamentals.
Secondly, labor has been voting for “decent, proper legislators” for lo! these many years. Unfortunately, these “decent, proper legislators,” as they were represented by the union leaders in past elections, were also representatives of capitalist parties.
The only “decent, proper legislators” for labor are genuine labor representatives, put in office by a labor party.
* * *

Sidney Hillman Looks Beyond the Case Veto
As this column noted last week, various union leaders are trying to cuddle up to Truman once more, using his veto of the Case Union-Busting Bill as a pretext for dusting off his “friend of labor” label.
The June issue of The Advance, organ of Sidney Hillman’s Amalgamated Clothing Workers, CIO, publishes a front-page editorial, Beyond the Case Veto. It starts off saying, “It is not the province of The Advance to speculate on the why or wherefore of the President’s veto of the reactionary Case Bill.”
Any such speculation, of course, would embarrass Hillman’s editors, since it would lead to the conclusion it wasn’t done from pure pro-labor motives, but simple political expediency. Besides, in the same breath as his veto, Truman called again for a draft-strikers law.
By some pretty tricky calculations, The Advance then tries to show that the voting on the Case Bill in Congress proves that the sole anti-labor forces that must be feared are the Republicans and “Democratic tories” from the South. It concludes that the “record of the two parties still points to the importance of the workers in this country not being cajoled into supporting the reactionary Republican party because of the reactionary minority in the Democratic party.”
There’s no gainsaying that the Republicans are reactionary. But what “minority” in the Democratic Party passed Truman’s “work-under-bayonets” bill in the House by a vote of 306 to 13?
 



During the war, the U.S. government took $203,000,000 of the American people’s money and built a tremendous steel plant at Geneva, Utah. The operation of this plant was turned over to the U.S. Steel Corporation which made high guaranteed profits from government contracts.
Last week, Attorney General Tom C. Clark approved the War Assets Administration’s sale of this $203,000,000 government-built and owned plant to U.S. Steel for $47,500,000 – that is, a fourth of its cost.
Of course, there was “competitive” bidding. If any of our readers, or all of them together, had made a fair offer of $47,500,001, they could have been the proud owners of a brand-new super-de-luxe steel plant.
It might be argued that our readers and the rest of the workers did own this plant. Well, it’s true they paid for it – but they never owned it. The U.S. government owned it; and it’s a capitalist government.
Since this government is a great defender of “free enterprise,” and since U.S. Steel had $47,500,000 to pay for a $203,000,000 plant, Benjamin Fairless is now the president of a steel empire owning 32,7 per cent of national steel capacity, instead of 31.4 per cent as in 1945.
There is, of course, a trifling matter of anti-trust laws and further expansion of private monopoly. Even the Anti-Trust Division of the Department of Justice had to concede that. The Anti-Trust Division advised Attorney General Clark against the gift to U.S. Steel.
Clark opined that “I do not view the sale, as such ... as a violation of the anti-trust laws.” He piously added that this did not constitute approval of “the conduct of practices of the U.S. Steel Corp, in its use of property.”
That doesn’t worry U.S. Steel. It has the plant. The modest cost – for U.S. Steel – can be defrayed through tax rebates and tax deductions. It can even afford to junk the plant entirely. After all, it just wanted to keep the plant from competitors.
The plant could have been operated by the government under workers’ control. “Free enterprise” has dictated, however, that U.S. Steel must increase its monopoly over national steel capacity by 1.3 per cent even if it means robbing the working people who paid for the plant.
 



After a two-day demonstration of their paralyzing power in the greatest transportation strike in history, the 293,000 members of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen were ordered back to work by their leaders late Saturday afternoon. This order came shortly before a deadline set by President Truman in his strikebreaking ultimatum the night before.
For 48 hours, the engineers and trainmen, traditionally among the most conservative unionists in America, had defied Truman’s “seizure” of the country’s railroads under the Smith-Connally Anti-Strike Act.
There was no sign of a break in their ranks up to the very moment when A.F. Whitney and Alvanley Johnston, presidents respectively of the trainmen’s and engineers’ unions, under the concerted onslaught of the capitalist government and Big Business, ordered a return to work on the terms fixed by Truman in conspiracy with the railway profiteers.
 
Workers Bitter
A tremendous wave of bitterness and wrath swept the striking railroad workers when word came of their leaders’ submission to Truman’s dictate. They were full of fight and were prepared for a showdown struggle.
From lodge meetings all over the country came immediate reports of boos and sharp resentment at announcement of the return-to-work order. As even the Big Business press admitted, “the members voiced mixed opinions, but the one that predominated was: ‘Whitney says we’re licked, but our turn will come.’” (N.Y. Times, May 26).
Never, in the whole history of American labor struggle, have workers fighting for their just demands been subjected to such savage attack by the agencies of capitalist rule.
The ferocious assault against the railroad workers, spearheaded by the government and whipped up by the unrestrained howlings of the kept press, even surpassed the attack on the striking soft-coal miners prior to their two-week truce announced May 10.
The climax of the government’s strikebreaking assault, and the threat which forced the leaders of the two striking unions to bow, was Truman’s declaration in a radio address Friday night that if the strikers did riot return to work by 5 p.m. Saturday he would order Federal troops to run the railroads. Thus Truman was prepared to emulate his Democratic and Republican predecessors in the White House who three times since 1877 have turned rifles and bayonets against railroad workers.
At the very moment when Whitney and Johnston were making their declaration of surrender, Truman was before a special joipt session of Congress calling for “emergency” legislation which would permit him to draft strikers into the armed forces and force them to work under penalty of courts-martial. It also provided for firing, loss of seniority, and fines and imprisonment for strikers and union leaders in government-“seized” plants.
Within two hours, the House of Representatives had seized upon this most viciously anti-labor legislative proposal ever put forward by an American president and approved it by a majority of 306 to 13. The measure was delayed in the Senate only because the ultra-reactionary majority desired to make it “foolproof” by amendment and to tack it on to the notorious Case Anti-Strike Bill, which the Senate had previously given precedence on the floor.
 
Government Serves Wall Street
Throughout the entire current rail labor struggle, the government acted openly as the instrument of the railway corporations and the Wall Street financiers, headed by the J.P. Morgan interests, which control the country’s rail transport. The anti-labor railway magnates simply sat back while the government, led by the Truman administration conducted a savage strikebreaking war on the rail workers. The latter had been driven to strike revolt for the first time in 21 years as a result of decades of cumulative blows that brought their conditions to an intolerable state.
Why did these traditionally conservative workers, bound by the most bureaucratic union structure and dominated by the most craft-ridden, ultra-conservative top leadership in the American labor movement, sweep aside all barriers and go out on strike?
Truman, in his Congressional speech, charged that the strike was the result of the “obstinate arrogance of two men,” Whitney and Johnston. That these timid bureaucrats, whose entire record over decades is one of retreat and capitulation to the railway interests and government, were in any way responsible for the strike, is laughable.
On the contrary, these leaders were finally driven to strike action by the terrific pressure of the union ranks, whom the union tops could no longer hold in check. Whitney and Johnston were stating the literal truth in their last-minute plea before the strike on Thursday when they appealed to Truman to offer some terms which the ranks might find acceptable, declaring “we have told you many times that the present agitation among the men ... is extremely serious and that their demands could not be abandoned.”
Neither in his radio address nor in his speech to Congress did Truman voice the slightest sympathy for the just demands for changes in working rules which were the key issue of the strike. His entire attack was directed venomously at the workers. He did not even mention the railway corporations – nor did he give the slightest hint as to any responsibility for the strike on the part of the rail monopolists.
 
Railway Profits
He did not tell, for instance, how the leading railroads had piled up three billion dollars in net profits during the four war years of 1941–46 – an increase of 1,164 percent over their profits rake-off in 1936–39! He did not tell how the rail moguls had deliberately stalled negotiations in order to throw the issue into the lap of the government, because they knew the government would intervene on their behalf and exert its prestige and power to force the railroad workers to yield.
He did not tell how government officials during the strike had agreed to recommend not only an 18½ cent an hour wage, increase, but certain rule changes which the unions had said would be an acceptable basis for settlement, and that these proposals were either not presented to the operators, or if they had been, the government officials had kept silent about the operators’ refusal to accept them.
Instead, Truman maliciously insisted on the strikers accepting terms WORSE than those they had opposed by their strike action. The corporation-dominated “fact-finding” boards prior to the strike had recommended only a 16-cent increase, compared to the 18 and 18½ cents awarded in other industries after strikes, and only seven of the demanded 43 rule changes. Truman proposed an additional 2½ cents increase but NO CHANGES in the rules.
Whitney and Johnston had no choice but to denounce Truman’s terms as even “less favorable” than those offered by the “fact-finding” boards. The union leaders finally offered to order a return to work on the basis of the original “fact-finding” offer – but Truman insisted that they accept his own worse terms.
These were the terms which the panicky and fearful Whitney and Johnston finally hastened to accept in a tearful statement to the strikers, proclaiming: “We confess that we lost our cause.” They called off the strike “due to the pressure brought upon us by the President of the United States in his address last evening.”
 
Strikebreaking Trick
The chief instrument for breaking the rail strike was the method developed by the late President Roosevelt and further perfected by Truman – government “seizures” under the vicious Smith-Connally anti-strike law. First, the corporations refuse to concede the just demands of the workers. Then, the federal administration “seizes” the plants involved. Finally, the workers are driven back to work on the grounds they cannot “strike against the government.”
Truman followed this procedure in the rail strike, which was called after the “seizure” on May 19. “This is no longer a dispute between labor and management,” he declared in his Congressional speech. “It has now become a strike against the government itself.”
But all that changed in the “seizure” was that the rail owners and their agents were given a government label. As Ralph Ingersoll of PM put it:
“The Government has NOT taken over the railways and made them the property of the people – and given the railwaymen at least civil service rights. The Government has put out a piece of paper, sent a man into the offices of the Railway Owners’ Assn. – and left the railway owners still operating, still the bosses, still saying what they’d pay and how long their men had to work to get it. The deeds to the properties are still in the owners’ vaults.”
In short, these “seizures” are nothing but a strikebreaking device to wrap the monopolists in an American flag and protect their profits and privileges. Thus, immediately following the end of the strike, the ultra-conservative Republican N.Y. Herald-Tribune, May 26, wrote with smug satisfaction: “Now all that remains to be done is the issuance of an executive order turning the seized railroads back to their owners. The formality probably will be put off until Monday.” The roads were actually returned on Sunday.
Combined with the overwhelming assault of the government, the Big Business press and the whole owning class, there was an additional factor which gravely weakened the power of the rail strikers to hold out. That factor was the criminal division existing among the 21 different unions representing the 1,500,000 organized railroad workers.
The leaderships of 19 of these unions, split along craft and jurisdictional lines and ready to stab each other in the back for narrow jurisdictional advantages, did not go along with the strike of the two operating unions. In the very middle of the strike, they publicly announced their acceptance of the terms against which the engineers and trainmen were fighting. This gave Truman the opportunity to praise their “example” and use it as another weapon against the strikers.
 
Robertson’s Treachery
On top of this came the direct treachery of such rail union leaders as David B. Robertson, head of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, representing 120,000 members, including a claimed 40,000 engineers. Robertson ordered his membership, including the engineers, to aid the government in breaking the strike, wiring his locals to “get transportation moving.” At the same time, he echoed the attacks of Truman on Whitney and Johnston, telling reporters “these are men grasping for power.”
The whole course of the rail workers’ struggle has underscored a profound lesson for all American labor – a lesson which the workers can ignore only at their greatest peril.
 
Played Ball
For long years, the leaders of the rail unions have played ball with the capitalist government, lined themselves up with the capitalist politicians, diverted the struggles of the workers into the treacherous channels of government arbitration. They have served faithfully as the labor lieutenants of the capitalists and the hand-maidens of the Big-Business government.
They were neither willing nor capable of resisting the government to which they are tied by a thousand threads. They had no program – no political program – with which to fortify the rail workers in the type of struggle to which they were inevitably being impelled. They were totally helpless and unprepared to cope with the savage offensive which the capitalists, through their government apparatus, unleashed against the rail workers.
That offensive, for which the mine and rail strikes have served as a pretext, is now being directed against the entire labor movement. Congress is proceeding at the signal of Truman to speed legislation whose purpose and results would mean destruction of the right to strike, repression and ultimate crushing of the unions, and a system of forced labor under the shadow of bayonets.
 
Decisive Lesson
Never has the fusion of the capitalist government and the capitalist class been so nakedly revealed. Never has it been so clearly shown that the government is nothing but an executive committee for safeguarding the interests of the billionaire, monopolist ruling class.
That is the decisive lesson the workers must grasp if they are to successfully defend their own interests and halt the march of reaction in the great social crisis that impends. This government is the enemy of labor. It must be fought by labor’s own independent political means, a genuine labor party freed of all ties with the capitalist political machines and agents. American labor must prepare not only for economic struggle, but also for a remorseless political struggle to raise labor and all the oppressed sections of American society to governmental power.
 



Unflinching in their defiance of the government’s all-Truman administration to terms and gained an historic out drive to break their strike, the 400,000 soft coal miners of the AFL United Mine Workers on May 29 forced the triumph.
The contract they wrested from the government, present controller of the mines, provides major concessions in line with the union’s key demands for an operator-financed health and welfare fund, improved safety regulations and the right to organize supervisory employees.
In addition, the miners won wage increases totalling $1.85 a day – the largest amount so far won by any union during the current strike wave.
Forced to concede the fact of a clear-cut victory by the miners, the Big Business press could only vent its rage by denunciation of the Truman administration for retreating before the miners after failing to crack their solid front through a terrifically savage strikebreaking campaign.
The bituminous miners struck on April 1, after the mine owners had arrogantly refused even to consider the mine workers’ main demands. These included an operator-financed, union-controlled health and welfare fund, contractual agreement to meet federal and state mine boards’ safety regulations and recommendations, and observance of the National Labor Relations Board decision recognizing the right of supervisory employees to collective bargaining through unions of their own choosing.
The agreement made by the government does not provide for the type of health and welfare fund the miners sought. But it is a far-reaching concession. Through a five-cent a ton levy on coal production, a health and welfare fund of between $25,000,000 and $30,000,000 annually is to be established for the miners. It will be administered jointly by the government and union.
In addition, the union is to get complete control over the millions of dollars which the companies have been deducting annually from miners’ pay for company-controlled “welfare” funds from which the miners received scarcely any benefits. These funds must now be turned over to the union for a genuine welfare fund.
 
Safety Committees
The federal safety code, which has been non-compulsory, is to be enforced, with periodic federal mine inspection and obligatory institution of all safety recommendations. Every mine union local is to have a mine safety committee with power to inspect at all times any operations and to pull out any workers immediately endangered by unsafe conditions.
The straight time wages are raised 18½ cents an hour. Since the miners will return from a 40-hour to a 35-hour week with two-hours-a-day guaranteed overtime at time-and-a-half rates, the total daily increase will amount to $1.85.
Truman seized the mines on May 22, after the UMW leaders had declared a two-week strike-truce on May 10. This truce followed the false declaration by Truman that the operators had “agreed in principle” to the union’s demands.
Large numbers of the miners refused to accept the truce. On May 25, when the truce ended, virtually all the mines were shut down despite Truman’s threats to use troops, which was actually begun in Kentucky. It was also after Truman had told the striking railroad workers he would not deal with a union on “strike against the government.”
But the miners could not be terrorized. Truman had to swallow his threats and come to terms.
 



A wave of demands for united labor action to resist the Big Business-government union-busting drive is sweeping all sections of the American labor movement, according to reports from coast to coast.
The proposal of the CIO United Auto Workers for a national united labor conference in Washington of the CIO, AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods is beginning to gain backing from local and even state union bodies.
A further immediate step for the preparation of such a national conference was urged in a resolution adopted last week by the UAW International Executive Board. This called for local united labor conferences throughout the country. Local conferences and joint mass meetings have already been held in a number of leading cities, including Los Angeles, Chicago Akron and Buffalo.
 
Many Endorsements
Last week, immediately following the UAW’s call for a national united conference of labor, other unions quickly took action to advance the campaign for such a conference. New Jersey State CIO leaders, the Buffalo CIO and a number of local unions have endorsed the UAW proposal.
The New York branches of the AFL Seafarers International Union and Sailors Union of the Pacific, which last week engaged in the AFL seamen’s one-day work stoppage, passed resolutions unanimously in their membership meetings in support of the national conference of labor plan.
At the same time, the all-out offensive of the Truman administration and Congress against organized labor has given a strong impulsion to the movement for the formation of a national independent labor party.
This is reflected tn resolutions being adopted increasingly by local unions calling for the building of a labor party. Enthusiastic response has greeted all references to a labor party at mass meetings held in many cities last week to mobilize united labor action.
 
Labor Party
The growing sentiment for a labor party was reflected in a speech last week at the United Hatters, Cap and Millinery Workers Convention by David Dubinsky, president of the 330,000-member AFL International Ladies Garment Workers Union. Dubinsky endorsed the creation of a national independent labor party and declared that the union leaders “cannot satisfy themselves with a party that includes the Southern reactionaries or the industrialists in the Republican party.”
Truman’s most recent threat to labor, his preparations to use armed forces to break the scheduled CIO maritime strike on June 15, has underlined the completely anti-labor program of the capitalist government and its domination by Big Business.
The need for united labor action on a national scale is of the utmost urgency. The UAW’s proposal for a national united conference of all labor unions should rouse immediate support from all labor bodies.
Every local and state union, CIO, AFL and Railroad Brotherhoods, should immediately go on record and demand the calling of such a conference in the shortest time possible.
The initiative and inspiration for united labor action on a national scale must be provided through local conferences and mass meetings everywhere. The local union ranks must not wait. They must put the prods to the top union leaders to act – and act NOW.
 




How Not to Defeat Anti-Labor Drive
Despite “tough” talk from some top union leaders in opposition to the anti-labor drive of Truman and Congress, they are beginning to demonstrate once more that they have no stomach for a fight. They are wilting under the Big Business-government onslaught and seeking formulas behind cover of which they can retreat with “honor.”
Such capitulatory moods were expressed by ranking AFL leaders before the fifth biennial convention of the AFL United Hatters, Cap and Millinery Workers, held last week in New York City. Max Zaritsky, UHCMW president, David Dubinsky, head of the AFL International Ladies’ Garment Workers’ Union, and Matthew Woll, AFL vice president, delivered speeches which might be summed up under one heading: How Not To Defeat The Anti-Labor Drive.
* * *

Surrender Labor’s Economic Weapons
Zaritsky proposed nothing less than “this union carry its wartime ‘no-strike’ policy over into the reconversion period.” He boasted that “wage rates and total earnings of members increased substantially despite the fact that the union did not resort to strikes in order to make its gains.”
Zaritsky spoke from the smug and narrow outlook of the head of a union of 40,000 members which deals with a swarm of competing petty manufacturers in a secondary consumers goods industry. Because of various special factors, this particular industry suffers a relative labor shortage, a favorable circumstance for collective bargaining.
In addition, this small union has been able to ride with the gains won by the great industrial unions through their strike struggles against the giant monopoly corporations – a different calibre of opposition than the “cockroach” employers confronting Zaritsky.
Zaritsky’s theory is that the way to avoid repressive legislation is to surrender labor’s strike weapon and depend on “labor statesmen’’ like himself to win gains by ingratiating themselves with the employers and capitalist government. But even “labor statesmen” par excellence, like Philip Murray and some of the railroad union leaders, were forced into leading tremendous strike actions despite all their efforts to put ideas like Zaritsky’s into practice.
* * *

Surrender Labor’s Political Weapons
While Zaritsky proposes that labor yield up its economic weapons of struggle, Matthew Woll represents the other side of the theory of “defending” labor by capitulation. He advocated at the Hatters’ convention that labor “give the other fellow (the ruling capitalists) all titles to property, give him the political power.” With “the invincible power of labor on the economic field,” contended Woll. “I will match his power and I will reign supreme.”
To support his argument that labor should surrender any struggle for political power and rely solely on its “economic power,” Woll pointed to the example of the miners strike. He did not point out, however, how the intervention of the government served to prolong the strike and whittle down the possible gains of the mine workers. He did not show how labor’s weakness in the political field helped the government to break the railroad strike.
Woll’s horse-and-buggy theory of no-politics for labor (in reality he means support only capitalist politics) would keep labor in the position of fighting against the employers with one arm tied behind it.
* * *

New Back-Door Deals with ‘Friends of Labor’
Dubinsky, on the other hand, said he wants labor in politics. He even advocated the idea of an independent national labor party at the convention.
But, while paying lip service to the labor party idea, Dubinsky indicated he was ready to make still another political deal with Truman. The ILGWU president said he did not agree with calling Truman “strikebreaker No. 1.” “I say that the test of judging the position of the President,” claimed Dubinsky, “will be his signing or vetoing of the Case bill.”
Dubinsky is ready to accept Truman as a “friend of labor” even if he broke the railroad strike, tried to smash the mine strike, and is pushing the “work-under-bayonets” bill to draft strikers into the Army. All Dubinsky asks is one little veto.
Zaritsky, Woll and Dubinsky have come up with three tried- and-true methods for leading labor to defeat: give up labor’s economic weapons; give up labor’s political weapons; seek some more back-door deals with “friends of labor” like Truman.
 



FEBRUARY 18 – The titanic strike of 800,000 CIO Steelworkers, the largest walkout in American labor history, has ended in victory.
Unable after 26 days to crack the solidarity of the steel workers, the steel corporations, through U.S. Steel, capitulated on Friday to the final 18 cents an hour wage increase demand of the union.
Never before has the ruthless U.S. Steel Corporation yielded to a strike. Never have the steel barons been forced to grant large a wage concession.
The victory of steel labor has broken the back of the Big Business resistance to the other outstanding wage demands in auto and electrical equipment.
 
GM Workers Firm
General Motors Corporation is still trying to chisel an extra cent off the 19½ cents demanded by the heroic GM workers, whose 90-day strike has spearheaded the whole fight of the CIO. But the GM workers, heartened by the steel victory, are standing firm as Gibraltar.
From the first days of the steel strike it was clear that the steel corporations faced the most united and formidable union resistance in their .history. The first hour of the strike that began January 21 saw the entire industry paralyzed. The question then was, not would the steel barons be forced to make wage concessions, but how much?
For weeks, the corporations prolonged the strike with the sole objective of preserving their Immense profits and augmenting them, despite wage increases, by wangling extortionate price boosts.
The Truman administration only too readily bowed to the Inflationary demands of the profits-swollen corporations. It granted a price increase of $5 a ton on steel – 10½ per cent.
 
Gravy for Bosses
Every penny of this price increase is pure gravy to the corporations. Wartime excess-profits tax rebates, the elimination of the profits tax, the reduction of overtime premium pay, and the increased labor productivity more than compensate for the increase in labor costs due to the new wage gains.
The pattern established by the administration’s generous approval of these staggering price increases is one of mounting inflation, whereby Big Business, unable to deny substantial wage increases, plans to nullify these increases as quickly as possible through a skyrocketing cost of living.
 
Big Steal Formula
Simultaneously with the announcement of the steel settlement, the Truman administration announced its intentions to enforce a new “wage-price stabilization” formula. This “formula” is a refurbished Little Steel wage-freezing policy, which is already being called the “Big Steal” formula.
This formula would limit wage increases to between the 16 and 18 cents which the strikes have forced the government to concede, while guaranteeing “immediate” price increases for any wage increases approved by the government wage-price agencies. One new twist ensures that no wage increases will be granted without the prior approval of the government wage-freezing agencies. This is the denial of price increases to any firm which grants unapproved wage rises.
It has become glaringly apparent that the wage gains won by the steel and other unions face imminent shrinkage. An inflationary offensive has been unleashed by the corporations and their government hirelings intended to rob the workers of the full benefits of the higher wages they have won in their magnificent strike struggles.
In this sense the victory, of the steel and other workers must be viewed as only partial and temporary. Before long, the whole struggle will have to be renewed on an even broader and more decisive scale.
More and more the workers are realizing that wage increases of and by themselves are no assurance of a sustained higher standard of living and a greater share in the nation’s wealth. Inflation expressed in higher prices for necessities is the device to which the capitalists invariably resort to reduce the purchasing power of the masses when money wages are increased.
 
Next Step
The only means for effectively fighting the robbery of capitalist-created inflation is through a rising scale of wages which is automatically adjusted to every rise in living costs. That must be the key economic slogan in the renewed wage struggle which is bound to come on the heels of the mounting inflation.
Of the lessons learned in the great strike wave, one of the most important for the workers will be their clearer comprehension of their friends and enemies.
 
Stalinist Double-Dealing
A particularly perfidious role has been played in these strikes by the Stalinists. Despite their newly-proclaimed “militancy,” the unions under their domination were the last to go on strike, and are making the poorest settlements. The Stalinists climaxed their double-dealing with the secret 18½ cent wage agreement affecting the GM electrical workers organized in . the CIO electrical union which undercut the 19 cent wage demands of the OM auto workers.
Within the ranks of labor the strikes have revealed weaknesses that must be quickly eradicated in preparation for the next inevitable stages of struggle.
The chief weakness is political. The workers, lacking any political party of their own. have no real means for combatting the blows of the capitalist government, its administration and Congress. The capitalist government has proved the most formidable obstacle to the realization of labor’s full demands
The union leaders have continued their utterly bankrupt policy of attempting to place dependence upon the capitalist government and maintaining in one form or another their ties with the capitalist political parties, Democratic and Republican.
But the next and more crucial phase of the struggle may well prove costly to labor if it does not take immediate steps to create its own political instrument, a labor party, and begin to run its own labor candidates.
 



A gigantic price steal is being engineered behind the scenes in Washington to rob the workers of the benefit of any wage gains won during the present great strike struggles.
An unprecedented inflationary increase in prices will be unleashed in the interests of the profiteers and monopolists, according to all indications from the capital.
The Truman administration last week revealed that it is preparing to settle the steel and other current major strikes on the basis of granting the corporations most of the scandalous price increases they have been demanding.
 
Another Formula
This policy, it appears, will be wrapped up in some new “wage- price stabilization” formula which will leave the door wide open for unrestricted prices while attempting to fix wages at some new frozen level.
That the administration is seriously contemplating such a policy was indicated last week when William Green. AFL president, following a conference with Truman revealed that he had heard reports of a new “Little Steel” formula in the making. Green stated that labor “could not acquiesce in another wage formula like the Little Steel formula” which would become “both a maximum and a minimum.”
What the administration is preparing to do to aid the price steal long planned by Big Business is indicated by the recommendations of the government’s “fact-finding” panel in the meat-packing case.
The panel on February 7 proposed a 16-cent instead of the demanded 25-cent wage increase for the packinghouse workers whose national strike was halted by government plant “seizures” several weeks ago.
These wage increases are not to come from the staggering profits of the meat trust. Only five cents is to be “absorbed” by the meat barons who enjoyed the greatest profits of their history during the war and who plan to continue and better them. The other 11 cents is to be paid out of price Increases and government subsidies, which the people pay indirectly through taxes.
 
Steel Holds Out
The steel corporations are continuing to refuse to settle the steel strike and pay the 18½- cent increase the government recommended, unless they also get the outrageous prices they have been demanding.
Although the OPA originally rejected any price increase over $2.50 a ton, the administration subsequently offered $4 and is now reported to be agreeing to between $5 and $8 a ton price increases for the steel industry. Such price increases would not only absorb any proposed wage increases but would actually provide profits on a scale never before reached by the steel moguls.
The administration’s readiness to yield to the hijacking demands of the steel and packing bosses has been an open invitation for every big corporation in the country to blast away at the already wide breach in the price-control dike. Among the corporation big-shots in behind- closed-door sessions with Truman last week was General Electric’s C.E. Wilson, who declared his corporation would make no wage increase offer to settle the CIO United Electrical Workers strike because “the price consideration is the one hurdle we can’t get over.”
The forces behind this concerted assault on price ceilings and workers’ living standards are revealed by nationwide full- page ads appearing this week, in which the National Association of Manufacturers threatens that “full production isn’t possible” because of “frozen prices” and “price ceilings limit production.”
Unable to break labor’s strike struggles for higher wages to meet the wartime inflation already imposed on the wage-earning consumers, Big Business aided by the capitalist government is heading for all-out inflation under what one correspondent called Truman’s contemplated “Big Steal Formula.”
 



PITTSBURGH, Jan. 23 – South along the snaky Monongahela, northwest along the broad Ohio, northeast along the Allegheny, immense tentacles of steel plants reach out from this city of smoke and steel and stretch for scores of miles beside the river banks.
For the past three days, these plants have sprawled lifeless. No smoke or flame belches forth from the squatting steel monsters, with their huge spines of stacks rising from the open hearths and furnaces.
Those whose labor fed these monsters and pumped lifeblood through their iron veins have risen up in titanic revolt. Now the steelworkers of all races, creeds, colors and nationalities are on strike. 227,000 of them in this vast steel valley alone, 800,000 throughout the land, are engaged in the mightiest battle of their lives.
 
New Fires Are Burning Now
When I saw the mills in their immense silence last night, only great ghosts of structures in blankets of snow-covered roofs stood dimly outlined behind iron-spiked or barbed-wire-topped surrounding walls. There was only blackness in the skies instead of fierce red glare and spurting flames.
Other and smaller fires are burning now, visible only as glowing red dots from a short distance. They are far different from the ore-eating, man-eating conflagrations that a few days ago roared and blazed inside the mills. These are friendly fires, meant to warm and comfort pickets in the long, freezing, vigil of the near-zero night.
These glowing coals in coke-fueled steel barrels, called salamanders, form a mighty chain up and down the valley and the river banks. They have become symbols of union strength and hope opposed to the tyrannical power of the steel bosses.
Hundreds and hundreds of these metal-barrel heaters burn night and day at the innumerable gates, entrances and possible entrances to the steel kingdoms. And always near and around them are the slow-circling clusters of men and women of steel, keeping their day and night-long guards in American labor’s greatest strike siege.
Here at the moment there is no outward drama of clashing bodies, the sickening crack of state troopers’ clubs, the metallic ring of the horses’ hooves as they surge forward to ride down and crush the picketing workers, such as I saw in Bethlehem, Pa., in 1941.
But here there is an even more profound and stirring drama. Here there is the inspiring example of hundreds of thousands of workers, rising up out of a half-century of immense labors, hardships and tragedies, out of fierce and bloody struggles and terrible defeats, to forge a new and stronger unity in action.
Whatever the final outcome of the immediate wage issues in dispute, the steel workers have already gained a colossal triumph in the unity they have displayed in this unprecedented struggle for their right to live in decency, comfort and security.
 
The Heart of Steel
I spent all of today in Homestead and Braddock, two great citadels of Big Steel sprawling their miles of plants along the Monongahela. This is in the very heart of the nation’s greatest steel area, where the steel industry grew from infancy and the earliest struggles of the steel workers took place.
Every foot of ground in these towns is rich in the traditions of the steel workers. Here a worker’s child learns early in life to know the mills as well as its own mother’s face. Here, the grandfathers and fathers of today’s steel fighters fought and shed their blood and died in the cause of labor at a time when they had to stand alone and isolated against the armed brutality of the steel potentates and their government agencies.
Through the morning and afternoon I talked with men and women steel workers in their crowded, busy union halls, in taverns, on street corners and on the picket lines, where I did my turn with the men as I questioned them about their problems and their views.
“Just think,” said Andy Steiner to me this morning at Sam and Jerry’s, the only union bar in Homestead, “just think, it was 27 years from the ‘Battle of the Pinkertons’ in 1892, when we had the first strike, to the next strike in 1919. Now it is going on 27 years – and we got another strike. Make something of that.”
Andy is one of the thousands of active CIO Steelworkers Local 1397 members who are doing their bit to keep a ring of steel-hearted men and women around the big Carnegie-Illinois plant in Homestead. He is doing a special chore helping to build shelters at the entrances to protect pickets from the biting cold.
 
Building on the Old Traditions
Andy and the others are making something out of the traditions of the old struggles. After each bitter defeat, a whole new generation has risen and carried forward the battle to greater heights. Each generation has built anew on the fighting traditions of the old, transforming the heroic memories of the past into the inspiration for the present battle, the battle which every steel worker I have talked to is convinced must be and will be fought through this time, to victory.
There is scarcely a child in Homestead who cannot recount to you the story of the first great bloody struggle in July 1892. There are still surviving a half-dozen or so men, now in their 70’s, 80’s and 90’s, who stood with their fellow workers on the banks of the river and turned the Civil War memorial cannons against the boat-loads of Pinkerton agents coming in to break that first strike.
Then there are their sons, men in their fifties and sixties, who went down to cruel defeat in the 1919 steel strike but are today marching again in the class fight that can know no final end until the workers eliminate capitalist exploitation forever.
In the Local 1397 union hall, where Andy Steiner took me to see the old framed picture of scenes of the great 1892 struggle, I talked with several old-timers from the 1919 strike.
 
This Is Different, This Is Better
All said the same thing, in almost the same words:
“This is different – this is better – we’re all together now, here and all over the country. Yes – this is different.”
Among these old-timers, I spoke with several Negro workers who had been brought in from the South by the corporation during the last war to be used as strikebreakers. Then race hatred had been used to the hilt by the company to divide and disorganize the workers.
“Yes,” said one of these veteran Negro workers who has toiled 30 years in the plant, “I worked during that strike. A lot of us did, and a lot of the white workers did. We didn’t know any better then, we didn’t understand what they were using us for. There never was more than 60 per cent of the men out then.
“But now it’s different,” he said, looking with shining eyes of pride around the hall at the workers, men and women, black and white, working and fighting together for their common betterment. “Today, we’re all in this like we should be, standing together.”
And from every white worker I heard only glowing tribute to the union loyalty and lighting spirit of the Negro workers, who today are playing a truly significant role in this gigantic battle.
In the room used for the strike canteen, two motherly middle-aged women were serving coffee and doughnuts. They told me they worked as janitresses in the plant.
Widows, with large families and dependents, one of them takes home $43 every two weeks and the other $47. That’s just one small but telling fact about the “big” wages the steel corporation propagandists have been lying about in the press and over the radio.
Other workers, including one who had been 33 years in the mill, told me they have been working only two or three days a week since V-J Day. Some, among the skilled workers, who were getting $1.24 an hour, have been downgraded to 96 cents, and in their last pay check took home the “magnificent” two-week total of $31. One said, “I asked them to give me what they took off in taxes and insurance and I’d give them my pay check back. I’d be better off that way.”
Are the men and women ready to hold out? A Negro worker told me with a chuckle:
“We made it through the depression, didn’t we? And this isn’t going to be any worse than that. We’ll make it through this no matter how long it lasts.”
 
Now Everybody’s Together
That’s the spirit of the steel strikers and that’s the spirit I observed on the picket lines after we left the union hall. Out on the picket line at the Open Hearth No. 4 gate, I spoke to the young assistant picket captain, who said enthusiastically:
“It’s really surprising how everybody is doing his bit. Hardly anyone is reneging on the picket assignments. Everything is pretty smooth and well-planned.”
There on the line I marched around for a spell and talked with one foreign-born worker who had been in the midst of the bitterest clashes in the 1919 strike.
“You don’t know what a difference. In the last strike, they called it a ‘hunkies’ strike,’ a ‘foreigners’ strike.’ Right here where we are picketing, the company police and the state troopers beat us on the head with clubs. They went right into the workers’ homes – smashed everything up.
“But now – we got everybody together – everybody,” he said with intense feeling. “Even the company police – they’re organized in a union, they don’t even carry guns any more.”
At that very moment, one of the two young company police sitting in the booth at the gate, came out and strode over to where Eloise Gordon, our Militant representative in this area, was talking to the pickets around the salamander while distributing last week’s issue of the paper.
In the most friendly fashion, the company guard asked for a Militant and bore it off in triumph. A few moments later he came back and pleaded with Eloise for another copy “to take home for myself to read.”
“You’re working,” said Eloise, to the delight of the pickets, “why don’t you get yourself a six-month subscription for 50 cents.” “Oh, I will,” he assured her, “only I can’t right now and I want to take it home and read it first to see what it’s like.” Eloise gave him one more copy.
Later we walked into town to see the simple eight-foot white stone marker put up in 1941 by the steel locals at the entrance to the West Street High Level bridge to commemorate the courageous men who fought and died in the 1892 historic forerunner of the present battle. Right across the road is the Homestead “Roll of Honor” listing the names of the local boys who were taken into the armed forces in World War II. Most of them were the boys of steel workers. Thus stand the two markers symbolizing the steel workers who died in the class struggle and those who died in the imperialist war to enrich the barons who murdered their grandfathers and fathers in 1892 and 1919.
On our way back from visiting the memorial stone, we experienced the most exciting moment of the day in Homestead. Looking down the hill toward the main gate of the plant, we saw a mass picket line circling before the entrance. Strung before the gate was another small straight line of individuals, from which every few seconds one would detach himself and hurry into the plant gates.
We hurried over and learned it was time for the administrative and supervisory people, as well as the CIO maintenance crews to go into the plant under the rigid inspection of the union pickets.
The “white badge” men, better dressed, softer-looking than the picketing workers, were being used by the company to put on a show of marching into the plant in a body. The pickets threw their circle close, so that only one man could pass through at a time. Meanwhile the picket captain and assistant picket captains closely inspected the passes and jerked back the coat collars to inspect each white badge to insure that only legitimate “pushers” and supervisors went in, according to the agreement with the union.
“But if one of them so much as picks up a screwdriver – out he goes and stays out,” the picket captain said. “They can only come in through this one gate, and some of them have to go two miles inside the plant to their departments. There’s nothing to do in there. All they do is play cards. But the management thinks it’s playing ‘psychology.’”
 
A Veteran Turns the Tables
We watched the most aggressive of the picket captains, a little, wiry young fellow who had recently returned from 33 months’ army service in Europe.
As each “white badge” came up to the line, the veteran’s elbow would jut out and catch the supervisor in the crook of the arm. “Pass?” he would snap. “Badge?” he would bark, pulling open a coat collar to get a better view. “OK.” We watched that elbow jab out methodically and halt the meek “white badge” men.
In one pause, the little tough veteran turned to us and grinned slyly: “That’s psychology, too!” .
That jabbing elbow of the little veteran was a bit of living testimony to the might of the organized steel workers. Never before in all the history of steel have there been such scenes. Who ever heard of the one-time domineering and arrogant supervisory flunkies of the corporation halting humbly before the plant gate at the imperative prod of a steel worker’s elbow?
 
Braddock Spirit Is the Same
Over in Braddook later on, we witnessed the same determined spirit among the members of Local 1219 at the big Carnegie-Illinois plant there. We talked to the steel militants in the local union hall, crowded to the door. Later we climbed up and down the icy slopes to visit various groups of pickets around the ever-present and ever-welcome glowing salamanders.
As in Homestead and everywhere else in the steel valley, the workers of Braddock are indignant about the propaganda the steel barons are putting out to the effect that the average steel worker’s wage is $1.23 an hour.
In the union hall, the workers eagerly told me some of the true facts of their conditions.
“Since the end of the war,” said one worker, “we have had very little overtime. For unskilled labor alone the 40- hour week has meant a loss of roughly $40 a month in take-home pay. Remember that 70 per cent of the men here are classified as unskilled labor, getting 78½ cents an hour.”
Another, a boilermaker among the top layer of wage earners, exclaimed:
“A buck twenty-three an hour! Why the pushers here only get $1.18. The average boilermaker gets only around $1.05½. The average wage – if you don’t figure in what management gets – runs to about 89 cents an hour. The men in here, a lot of them, been taking home about $48 in cash after two weeks’ work.”
One big, hearty worker stated heatedly:
“If we were supposed to be getting $1.23 an hour like the papers say, then we boys got a helluva lot of back pay coming. Every time I see my foreman, I yell at him, ‘Hey, when am I going to get all my back pay?’”
 
A New Headline for Labor
On our return from Braddock, we passed once more through Homestead and got a last glimpse of the memorial to the martyrs of 1892. And I suddenly recalled the headline I saw in yesterday’s Pittsburgh Post-Gazette: “Steel Output Hits 50-Year Low” – the lowest, in fact, since the 1892 strike.
And I thought too of another headline being written today by this gigantic national steel strike of 800,000 workers, a headline those old pioneer steel labor fighters would have been proud to see. This headline proclaims that all the struggle, suffering and sacrifice of more than half a century have not been in vain:
“STEEL LABOR MORALE, UNITY AND FIGHTING POWER REACHES A 50-YEAR HIGH.”
 



It was nearly 14 years, from 1918 to 1932, before the veterans of World War I resorted to various forms of mass action, such as marches on state capitals and Washington, in order to fight for their interests.
Now, less than six months after V-J Day, veterans of World War II are beginning to take up where their fathers left off when MacArthur scourged the 1932 Bonus Marchers out to Washington with fire and bayonet.
On January 24, the country witnessed the first veterans’ march on a seat of government when 600 former GIs, members of the striking United CIO Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America, converged on the state capitol in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
The capitalist press, even the dailies in Pennsylvania, gave very little publicity to this significant event. They fear such actions may spread. Moreover this demonstration, unlike Its forerunners of the early ’30s, was organized by union members in a strike struggle.
* * *
These striking veterans, from Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Erie, Farrell and Sharon, marched in a shouting body to the capitol building in Harrisburg. They demanded to see Governor Martin and threatened to camp in the Senate chamber until they had their case heard.
The banners they carried showed where a large part of the returned veterans stand, despite the Brass Hat and Big Business scheme to turn them against organized labor.
“We Refuse to Scab – Pay Us Our Bonus,” “We Demand Equal Rights as American Citizens” and “We sweated it out for our country, we will sweat it out for $2 a day.”
These slogans refer to the fact that the veterans are not only denied their compensation under the GI “Bill Of Gripes” because they are on strike. They are also denied state unemployment compensation because they haven’t, in many instances, worked long enough to accumulate benefits under the state law.
Their willingness to “sweat it out for $2 a day” expresses their determination to back the strike of General Electric and Westinghouse UE workers for a $2 a day wage increase.
* * *
Specifically, the marchers demanded a special session of the State Legislature to vote a veterans’ bonus, provide striking veterans with state unemployment compensation and take prompt action on housing for returned veterans and their families who are suffering from the severe housing shortage. Veterans in other states are also raising these demands.
George I. Bloom, Governor Martin’s secretary, and Secretary of Labor and Industry William H. Chestnut, who met the veterans, completely evaded the issues. Bloom blew up the conference with the veterans’ committee when he asked to know about “communistic” influence on the marchers: The Governor, he said, would be “very much interested” in knowing if the veterans were “being used by Communists.”
The veterans are regarded as “heroes” by the capitalist rulers only so long as they serve as cannon-fodder. When they fight for their rights as workers and ex-servicemen, they are treated as nuisances and insultingly slapped across the face with a red-herring.
 



The most savage and concerted strikebreaking assault ever hurled by Big Business and its government against American workers reached its frenzied climax last Friday, May 10, the day the AFL United Mine Workers Union wrested an “agreement in principle” from the coal operators on its key health and safety demands and offered a two-week truce in the 40-day strike of 400,000 soft coal miners.
With a desperation born of fear before the demonstrated power and solidarity of the militant coal miners, the agencies of government, the big corporations, and every capitalist instrument of propaganda were mobilized for a ferocious attempt to intimidate the miners and frustrate their just demands. With the mine strike as a pretext, Congress renewed its drive for laws to shackle the unions and help beat labor’s standards down.
The invective, slanders, lies and threats hurled at the miners increased in volume and unrestraint as it became clearer that the profiteering mine operators and the government were being forced to yield major concessions by the unshakable stand of the mine workers. From all reports, the union’s offer of truce, with retroactivity for all gains finally granted, came only after the operators had wilted and indicated their readiness to talk terms. The day after the truce, the UMW announced its further demands for wage increases totalling 27 cents an hour.
 
Truman Gives Signal
The signal for last week’s coordinated anti-labor offensive had been given by President Truman himself with his scare-head statement of the previous Friday that the mine strike confronted the country with an imminent “national disaster.”
He followed this up by calling “illegal” the miners’ chief demand for a “royalty” to provide a union health and welfare fund. Truman threatened “militant action” to break the strike which he said was “gradually” assuming the proportions of a “strike against the government.”
At its peak, the anti-labor offensive unleashed at Truman’s cue surpassed in ferocity even the strikebreaking drive of the late President Roosevelt against the wartime mine strikes of 1943. Last week’s assault renewed and extended the virulent labor-hating drive that followed V-J Day and reached its previous climax during the General Motors strike.
 
Poisonous Barrage
Advancing behind a poison-gas barrage from the boss press, Congress, spewing labor-hate and denunciations against the miners and their leaders, poured anti-union bills into the legislative hopper.
The Senate even shoved aside its consideration of Wall Street’s militarism program and voted 66 to 9 for immediate discussion of the notorious Case Labor Disputes Bill. This is designed virtually to destroy the right to strike and to disembowel the American union movement.
Both houses began consideration of hastily-drafted measures to make it “illegal” for the mine operators to grant a union health and welfare fund financed by “Royalties” based on production or for employers to grant similar demands to other unions.
The atmosphere for this Congressional labor-hating orgy was created by the Big Business press and radio which turned on a nationwide geyser intended to flood the country with panic and sweep the people into a veritable lynch spirit against the valiant miners.
Newspaper headlines screamed in “disaster” type – special huge ominous black type kept in reserve for announcement of overwhelming catastrophes, like declarations of war. A horrifying picture was painted of imminent famine, water supplies and utilities cut off, millions unemployed and the country lying in ruin.
These horror stories were bolstered by rapid-fire announcements of threatened plant shutdowns, railroad curtailments and “state of emergency” warnings fa big cities like New York and Chicago. To the actual reduction of coal stocks, the capitalist press added fantastic exaggerations.
One after another, big industrial corporations threatened huge lay-offs. General Motors, which only the week before had calmly reported that due to the GM strike it had accumulated coal reserves sufficient for a long period, suddenly discovered it would be down to its last lump in 10 days.
Shameful to relate, the miners also received some stabs-in-the- back from within the labor movement itself. At the very height of the anti-labor attacks on the mine strike, which were being focused especially on the person of UMW President John L. Lewis, CIO President Philip Murray speaking at the Amalgamated Clothing Workers convention on May 9 launched a blistering attack at Lewis, boasting that “no one in the CIO has turned against the Government.”
This attack on a strike leader who was then under fire from the most reactionary elements in the country could only give comfort to labor’s enemies. Moreover, it was unaccompanied by any statement of support for the miners’ strike or their demands.
From another quarter, the Communist (Stalinist) Party and its Daily Worker were conducting a continuous sniping attack on Lewis, stressing particularly his leadership of the wartime mine strikes which the Stalinist leaders had helped try to break. At the same time, like the capitalist press, the Daily Worker called on the capitalist government “to act” in the mine strike – of course, “in the interests of the miners.”
 
Operators to Blame
Under a tremendous flood of scare-head propaganda, Big Business and its government sought to bury the plain and simple fact that the responsibility for the mine strike rested squarely on the rich operators who had arrogantly refused even to consider the elementary demands of the miners for adequate health and safety conditions.
The Truman administration could have forestalled what it called a “national disaster” by the simple device of forcing the operators to meet the miners’ just demands. But Truman did not say so much as a word on behalf of the miners – not even their demand that the new contract Include an agreement by the operators to carry out all safety regulations recommended by the U.S. Bureau of Mines!
What the capitalists and their agents like Truman yelled about was the union’s “illegal” demand for a 10-cent payment on every ton of coal mined to maintain an imperatively needed union health and welfare fund. Yet all the miners have asked for in essence is an increase in their meager share of the wealth their labor alone produces – an increase that will go into a union fund for their mutual welfare.
Truman doesn’t find anything “illegal” about the corporations collecting royalties on anything produced under monopoly patents. The government itself hands billions in “royalties” to the corporations in the form of tax rebates. It gives other billions from the public treasury in “royalties” – subsidies – to the meat and other trusts. Nor does Truman find anything “illegal” about the coal operators deducting tens of millions of dollars annually from miners’ pay checks for COMPANY-controlled “welfare” funds from which the miners never receive a penny.
 
Brazen Tie-Up
Never was it more clearly revealed than in last week’s savage attacks on the miners that American Big Business and the present government are inextricably tied together. All the politicians of the Wall Street- owned Democratic and Republican parties act as cogs in the political machines of big capital.
The fact that a tiny cut-throat gang of Big Business rulers can carry out with impunity such a brazen and unrestrained anti-labor attack as was witnessed last week is directly attributable to the political “company-unionism” of the American labor leaders.
So long as the union leaders in every national election urge the workers to cast their votes for this or that current “friend of labor” within the Big Business political machines, the workers will find themselves politically helpless before the offensive of capitalist reaction, which is spearheaded by the government itself.
The ferocity of the drive against the miners, revealing ever more openly the fusion of government and Big Business, is a further storm-signal to the American labor movement. Labor must have its own independent political weapon, a labor party committed to a real program of struggle against American Big Business, if it is to beat back the assaults of Wall Street and its government and wield real political power in the interests of the American people.
 



As the power of the 400,000 soft coal miners in the fifth week of their national strike made itself increasingly felt throughout American industry, the Big-Business government last week launched an open drive to intimidate the miners. It aims to force them back to work without securing their demands for safety conditions and a union health and welfare fund.
President Truman on May 4 took the lead in an intensified strikebreaking pressure campaign when he issued a statement which claimed that the mine strike constitutes a “national disaster.” The statement embodied a report of the Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion.
This scare-head report was clearly designed to throw responsibility for the strike and its economic consequences on the miners. Truman has remained silent, however, about the criminal disregard of safety rules and measures by the coal operators. He has tacitly upheld their arrogant refusal to consider the just demands of the miners.
Among other vital demands, the miners are asking the operators to include in the new contract a specific agreement to put into effect promptly all safety recommendations of the U.S. Bureau of Mines and the various state mine inspection agencies.
 
Fear “Insurrection”
On the same day as Truman’s statement, a group of Senators representing the wealthy mining interests launched a savage attack on the mine union and its leaders. Headed by Senator Lucas, the senatorial reactionaries frothed at the mouth about the strike being a movement that could “easily become an insurrection against the government.”
Every hypocritical argument is being used to smear the militant miners. The leading spokesmen for the Southern soft-coal operators, former Senator Edward R. Burke, even said over the, radio that “the Lewis strike means continued misery for millions of unhappy men, women and little children in foreign lands whom he has deprived of the coal we promised ...”
Of course, that misery was created by the imperialist war in whose blood-profits the mine owners shared. Moreover, promised shipments of relief coal have been curtailed for months by the Wall Street government.
Neither Truman, the Senators nor any coal operators have yet shed a public tear, for instance, about the 12 new widows and 55 orphans left in misery and destitution by the hard coal mine explosion in McCoy, Va., two weeks ago.
 



ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., May 18 – Striking a powerful blow for trade union democracy, the rank and file delegates at the Third International Convention of the CIO Steelworkers of America climaxed their five-day sessions here this week by successfully defying USA-CIO President Philip Murray for the first time in the union’s 10-year history.
This unprecedented defiance of Murray, who hitherto had been able to whip the steel workers into line for anything he proposed, came late in yesterday afternoon’s session, when the convention rose in tumultuous revolt against Murray’s proposal to drastically reduce rank and file representation at future conventions.
 
Dramatic Protest
This dramatic and uproarious protest against Murray’s attempt to cut the number of convention delegates reflected a far more profound issue than the immediate question in dispute. By their action in voting down this proposal, the steelworkers for the first time crashed their mighty fist through the bureaucratic crust of the Murray machine. They demonstrated the growing resistance of the steel militants to the iron rule which Murray has always exercised over the union in order to stifle any opposition to his conservative and timid policies.
At this convention, Murray was not confronted by the largely inexperienced workers he had been able to dominate and intimidate at prior conventions. The 2,626 delegates, although they included hundreds of staff members on Murray’s pay-roll, were nevertheless overwhelmingly composed of rank and filers who recently had gone through the test of a great national strike. They were more experienced and self-confident. They were imbued with the consciousness that they had fought and sacrificed for the union and that control over its policies was rightfully theirs.
 
Murray Fearful
Thus, the climactic outbreak on the fourth day of the convention was no accidental event. It had been brewing throughout the three and a half days preceding the major conflict. The question of convention representation merely crystallized the resentment against the top leadership’s bureaucratic methods.
Murray had himself indicated his fear of such a development when he unexpectedly eliminated at the start of the convention certain issues which he obviously feared might precipitate heated discussion and possibly strong opposition.
As the convention progressed, there was expressed bolder and sharper criticism of the conduct of Murray’s district directors and international staff members. A strong sentiment was openly voiced against the undemocratic manner in which Murray had jammed through contracts without ratification by the membership. Further protest was provoked by Murray’s obvious attempt to limit discussion and railroad through his proposals without proper consideration by the delegates.
Prior to the convention, the Murray machine had been preparing for a red-baiting witchhunt against “communists” and “reds” at the convention. On Murray’s instructions, his lieutenants had been touring the steel locals in a big campaign to line up resolutions for repressive actions against anyone in opposition to Murray. Nearly 300 resolutions were jammed through local unions calling for constitutional amendments providing for various forms of special restrictions on “communists and socialists.” Most of these resolutions called for prohibiting the right to hold any office by “communists and socialists” and some sought to bar radicals from union membership.
On the very eve of the convention, Murray had hastily called together his executive board, which at his order had been working diligently to build up a red-baiting drive, and instructed them to call the whole thing off. The highly-publicized campaign of red-baiting was for the time being shuffled off the stage on the first day of the convention, when Murray introduced a “Statement of Policy” on the question.
This “Statement of Policy,” which was adopted without discussion by the convention, proposed no constitutional restrictions on radicals. It merely asserted that “this union will not tolerate efforts by outsiders – individuals, organizations, or groups – whether they be Communist, Socialist, or any other group, to infiltrate, dictate or meddle in our affairs.”
At the same time, the statement insisted that “however, we will not permit any limitation on the free and democratic right of full discussion of trade union problems in our own ranks. We must not and do not seek interference with the free and democratic right of each member to ... harbor such views as he chooses, in his private life as a citizen. Our union has not been and will not be an instrument of repression ... As a democratic institution, we engage in no purges, no witch-hunts. We do not dictate a man’s thoughts or beliefs.”
Murray’s statement was not motivated by any genuine devotion to union democracy. He has carried through numerous bureaucratic expulsions of those who opposed him. His chief lieutenants Van Bittner and McDonald had personally helped put over a constitutional provision barring “communists” at the recent founding convention of the CIO Utilities Workers Union.
It was obvious that this statement was introduced to allay the fears of the steel workers that a purge of militants was being contemplated at this time. Although the original campaign of red-baiting resolutions had been designed as a weapon primarily against the Stalinists, there was all indications that the repression would be directed against the genuine militants as well. Murray’s retreat was dictated in large part by his desire to maintain the appearance of “peace and harmony” at the convention.
 
Seeks to Appease
This was revealed in connection with other issues. There had been protest, for instance, against the failure of the union’s policy to provide for district conferences of the steel locals for mutual discussion of policies and the refusal in some instances of district directors to permit such conferences. Murray sought to appease the locals on this question with a special resolution introduced by his resolution committee providing for regular annual district conferences.
Also, there had been a move on foot before the convention to extend the terms of officers and district directors from two to four years. The opposition to this proposal to entrench the bureaucracy more firmly was obviously so great among the ranks that Murray wisely chose not to press it at the convention. To the surprise of everyone, when the Committee on Constitution came to the section of its report dealing with terms of office, it recommended no change in the present two- year terms.
But these concessions to alleviate the discontent with the top leadership’s methods did not alter in any real essentials the undemocratic policies pursued by the Murray machine.
These were revealed in his conduct of the convention itself. Murray kept pressing the convention for “speed” and urging that discussion be cut short. His pay-roll stooges on the convention floor, tried to block discussion by howling “Question!” almost as soon as any resolution or motion was presented. This brought sharp protest at several points from rank and file delegates.
At the same time, Murray consumed an enormous portion of the convention’s available time with long-winded speeches on every possible occasion by himself, his chosen lieutenants and guest speakers. Not a single issue hit the floor without Murray quickly intervening with lengthy orations from the chair to “clarify” the question. In this manner, Murray personally consumed not less than 50 per cent of the convention’s time – while he repeatedly urged the delegates to “expedite the proceedings.”
 
Underlying Discontent
The first open expression of the underlying discontent existing among the steel workers and the fact they are no longer meek “hand-raisers” for everything Murray says, came on Wednesday afternoon, the second day of the convention. A heated debate developed over the issue of arbitration of grievances.
Resolutions had been introduced by several locals, asking that the International Union share the heavy expenses connected with the arbitration procedure under the contract. These expenses are borne entirely by the local treasuries. Piled-up grievances, most of them accumulated during the war under the no-strike policy, confronted many locals with the danger of bankruptcy.
When a voice vote was taken after Murray had spoken lengthily on the question, there was a very close division. Murray was forced to call for a show of hands, and the resolutions committee’s report to reject the local resolutions on the question was finally carried, but with hundreds of hands raised in opposition. Up to that moment, it was the largest opposition ever displayed toward anything Murray had ever supported.
The next serious expression of opposition occurred at the beginning of the Friday morning session, when the resolutions committee introduced a resolution referring to the International Executive Board proposals by local unions for securing more rank and file representation on the Wage and Policy Committee and for ratification of contracts by the membership. A large section of the union, particularly from the smaller fabricating plants, was very dissatisfied with the provisions of the contracts foisted on them after their prolonged strike, which lasted many weeks after the settlement in basic steel.
Delegate Harvey, Local Union 1206, got a big hand when he opened the discussion by opposing the committee’s resolution and called for wider representation of the local unions on the Wage and Policy Committee, advocating that this committee be composed of local union presidents. Murray immediately delivered a long speech “to correct the delegate.”
 
“Correct Murray”
Several other delegates then took the floor “to correct Brother Murray.” Delegate Kelly, Local Union 1833, introduced a new note which got a big hand from the convention when he demanded that the rank and file have a voice in approving all contracts. “You take the United Auto Workers, for instance,” he stated. “They have the rank and file OK the contract. We should have that too. I appeal to the delegates that what the auto workers have, we should have.”
This sentiment was a serious challenge to Murray’s undemocratic policy on contracts. Assistant to the President Clinton Golden, then Murray, gave long speeches designed to beat down the opposition. In the course of Murray’s talk, he took occasion to indirectly denigrate the leading role of the General Motors workers in spearheading the wage fight and claimed for his own policies the chief responsibility for “setting the wage pattern” won by the CIO in its strikes. What Murray did was to give away 40 per cent of the union’s original wage demands even before the steel strike, while the GM workers were battling for a 30 per cent increase. He finally settled for an 18½ cent an hour increase while the GM workers were still battling to secure a government recommendation of 19 cents.
Murray sought to halt further debate by reminding the delegates that “you have occupied exactly one hour in the discussion on this resolution” – although he himself had used most of the time. So strong was the voice vote opposition to the resolution committee’s recommendation against changes in the Wage and Policy Committee setup that a hand vote was called for. The vote was about three to two in favor of the recommendation. The opposition was even larger than on the previously disputed arbitration issue.
The report of the Constitution Committee was not presented until late Friday, with the convention scheduled for but one more day. This served as a pretext for a “speed-up” drive by Murray, in the chair, and Committee Secretary Doherty. The delegates had received no copies of proposed amendments in advance, despite Murray’s assurances to the contrary on the previous day.
 
Heated Outburst
So rapidly were proposed amendments read, that it was impossible for delegates to grasp what was proposed. Time and again, delegates shouted out, “Slow down, slow down.” At one point, a delegate in uniform secured the floor and heatedly denounced the fact that hundreds of paid staff members were sitting on the convention floor who were trying to prevent rank and file delegates from speaking by continuously shouting “Question!”
It was immediately following this outburst that the convention representation question was introduced. The Constitution Committee first reported its non-concurrence in a number of resolutions to reduce the votes of officers and staff members at conventions. It proposed instead that the existing basis of representation, one vote for every 100 members, be changed to one vote for every 500 members.
As soon as this proposal to drastically reduce the number of rank and file delegates was read, there were groans and shouts of “No!” from all over the hall. Scores of delegates were on their feet, frantically waving their hands for recognition and crowding around the “mike” in the middle of the center aisle. Such a scene was without precedent in the history of CIO Steelworker conventions.
 
Fiery Denunciation
The first delegate to get the floor was Higgins of Local 3159. Indignantly he asserted, “It seems to me that the committee must have been out last night, when it brought up this propostion.” A big shout of “Yeah!” came from the delegates.
The next speaker, a Negro delegate from Youngstown, Dillard of Local Union 1462, brought the convention to its feet with a fiery denunciation of this obvious move to curb the voice of the rank and file by curtailing the number of rank and file delegates. “Talk about democracy!” he said sarcastically, “I’m speaking against this resolution and call on the convention to vote it down.” His concluding words were met with a tremendous ovation and thunderous cheers.
Murray, red faced and visibly shaken by this revolt, hastened to try to put it down. He first tried to assure the delegates that “it makes no difference to me how you vote on this question.” But he then proceeded to talk at length on why smaller conventions would be a good thing, that big conventions cost a lot of money, that they wouldn’t be able to find big enough convention halls, that anyway conventions should be “compact bodies.” He received only a flurry of applause.
Immediately the floor was flooded with arm-waving delegates. Delegates Hahn, Local Union 227, and Czelen, Local Union 1229, secured the “mike.” Just after Murray had spoken, there had been a lull. Every delegate was wondering if the others had again wilted under Murray’s oratory and prestige. But the succeeding remarks of delegates brought such cheers that the ranks became fully confident. Hahn charged the proposal was designed “to concentrate the control of the conventions by a small minority.” Czelen declared that the proposal would mean “we would have the same amount of staff members as delegates, but the rank and file will not be here.”
After this speech, there was such a clamor for the question – this time by the rank and file majority – that Murray put the vote. A feeble “aye” sounded for the proposed change. Then the loudest “No!” ever heard in the convention hall – where the CIO auto workers had met recently too – shook the rafters. The steel workers had come of age. They had decisively asserted themselves for the first time against Murray and his machine.
The struggle over organizational policies and democratic practices was the dominant theme of the convention. It was primarily in this form that the dissatisfaction with Murray’s general policies was expressed. On the broader questions of economic and political program, the convention went along generally with the major resolutions put forward by Murray.
At the same time, there were talks by various individual delegates on a number of resolutions that clearly demonstrated the spread of progressive and militant ideas among the steel workers. Many of the policy resolutions put forward by Murray revealed the pressure of these advanced ideas.
 
“Political Action”
Obviously couched in terms intended to appease the growing sentiment for genuine independent labor political action, the important resolution on “Political Action” called for support of the CIO Political Action Committee by stressing its “independent political activity” and its character as “an independent force, without commitment to any major party.”
The resolution wound up, however by repeating the bankrupt formula about giving “our support to the progressives of either major political party.” In short. Murray proposed to repeat the previous fiascos of backing capitalist “friends of labor,” rather than fighting to build an independent labor party which could provide an effective political instrument that could really combat Big Business reaction.
An important resolution was passed unanimously expressing opposition to peace-time military conscription. This brought forth several excellent statements from the floor. Tom Hood of Local 1330, a Youngstown delegate, who had spent 12 years in the Marines and been an aerial gunner in World War II, received big applause when he condemned peacetime conscription and asserted that building a big army was “like giving a man a machine, he will want to try it out and see how fast it will go, no matter who he knocks down. There are always generals who want to try out their machine.”
He stated that conscription was intended to give the children of steel workers “training in a system that only breeds wars.” He told how while he was in the air corps “we were forced to take part in the suppression of the people of Italy who were fighting for a little more bread.”
Another delegate, Hirsh of Local Union 1206, still a member of the armed forces and in uniform, declared his opposition to peacetime conscription and charged that the army was based on a bureaucratic caste system that degraded the enlisted men and gave the officers outrageous privileges.
 
Foreign Policy
One of the most spontaneous ovations was accorded Delegate Trbovich, of Local 1010 in East Chicago, Indiana, when he spoke on one section of the foreign policy resolution. Emphasizing that he was speaking only on the last section of the resolution calling for “encouragement and assistance to the people of the liberated countries and colonial peoples to exercise the right for self determination and to build their own democracy,” Trbovich stated:
“It is the duty of the trade unions to see that our own country is brought into line on this question. In Indonesia, for instance, British troops with American weapons are shooting down the people fighting for their own government.”
A sharp volley of applause greeted his statement:
“We did not work to produce weapons of war to be used for shooting down other peoples fighting for their rights. If we are really sincere about fighting for oppressed people, we must see that our boys are not used for imperialistic purposes to put down people fighting for liberty in the colonies.”
On the key issue of the mounting inflation which is robbing the steel and other workers of their recent wage gains, Murray offered no program other than begging the government to “save OPA” and dependence on the capitalist political agencies to “control prices.” There was no proposal to combat inflation by fighting for higher wages.
On the contrary, the day before the convention opened, Murray issued a public statement that the union would “observe its wage commitments” in the present contracts even if the OPA was smashed and regardless of inflation.
But, there can be no doubt that the steel workers along with the more advanced industrial workers generally, will come to realize that the most effective method to fight the consequences of price rises is by demanding in their contracts a sliding scale of wages, under a fixed minimum, that provides for the automatic increase of wages to keep pace with every rise in the cost of living.
In this spirit, a Youngstown delegate, Ted Dostal of Local 1330, voiced the sentiment of many militants during his well-received talk on the resolution calling for unemployment compensation to strikers. After pointing out that the unemployment insurance funds come out of the “unpaid wages of the workers,” he asserted that the “OPA is full of loopholes and prices are bound to rise. We will have to fight for higher wages. We must prepare for real struggles in the coming days ahead. That is why we must see to it that the laws are amended to provide for compensation when workers are again forced out on strike.”
Among the most gratifying features of the convention, was the large number of Negro delegates. They were among the most articulate and militant participants in all debates. They played a truly significant role in the deliberations and repeatedly evoked enthusiastic response from the overwhelmingly white audience. However, the Negro steel workers, a large section of the union, still have no representation on the union’s leading bodies.
 
Stalinist Role
The Stalinists played a miserable role at the convention. On every possible occasion they cottoned up to Murray – who shortly before the convention had been prepared to open a red-baiting drive against them.
This morning, shortly before the closing of the convention, the Stalinists precipitated a scandalous brawl on the convention floor that nearly broke up the convention in a riot. In an effort to capture undisputed control of a section of the union, they brought forth a proposal to divide the largest district of the union, the Chicago-Calumet District 31, into two districts, one of which they hoped to seize.
In the midst of the controversy that followed, the Stalinists and Districts 31 representatives got into a physical scrap that threw the convention into an uproar for 15 minutes, and was only quelled with difficulty.
This convention will be recorded as an historic one. It has marked a great advance for the steel workers. While they have a long way to go yet in fully asserting democratic control over their union and in elaborating a militant, progressive program, the steel workers showed in this convention that they are on the road to big contributions to the future progress of American labor.
Having once demonstrated their determination to fight for democratic unionism, they will continue to hammer away for membership control over the steel union’s policies. Their first victory over the Murray machine will encourage them to continue the struggle against the bureaucrats. With the increased militancy and self-confidence born of their recent great strike struggles and confronted with the continued attacks from the bosses and government, they will press forward for a fighting policy.
 

 
It is unfortunate that the central issue before the CIO United Automobile Workers convention, held March 23–30 in Atlantic City, found expression only indirectly through the struggle among the top leaders for posts.
Most of the basic questions were not discussed openly on the convention floor. This obscured the vital differences on program and policy which underlay and gave so bitter a character to the fight for the UAW presidency between General Motors strike leader Walter P. Reuther and the incumbent president, R.J. Thomas.
That more was involved than a mere conflict of personalities was indicated in part by the capitalist press, which paid extraordinary attention to the convention’s daily proceedings. Leading newspapers reported edition by edition the progress of the hours-long roll call vote for the UAW presidency and half-hour radio bulletins were flashed all over the country.
In the minds of the majority of delegates, the basic issue, though never clearly expressed, was the program and policies of the GM strike. By their majority vote for Reuther as UAW president, the delegates vindicated the GM strike and intimated their desire for the continuation and development of the program and policies implicit in that strike. In this sense, the underlying conflict at the 1946 UAW convention was a continuation and extension of the struggle that dominated the previous convention in September 1944. The 1944 convention, held at the height of the war, was wracked by the fight over the no-strike pledge.
For nearly three years the auto workers, like the rest of labor, had been caught in the vise of the wage freeze and wartime inflation. Their accumulated grievances had been buried under mountains of War Labor Board red tape. The corporations were violating contracts and committing provocations with impunity. The whole struggle of the auto militants was centered on breaking the shackles of the no-strike policy forged by their leaders.
Although the UAW top leadership had always been torn by factional differences, it nevertheless united against the ranks in defense of the no-strike policy. Reuther, it is true, attempted to cater to the militant sentiments by presenting a “compromise” proposal. But unable to straddle the fence on the issue, in the end he went down the line with the rest of the leadership.
Although the opponents of the no-strike pledge mustered some 35 percent of the convention votes, they could not swing a majority. Their chief obstacle, and one they were not ready to confront, was the fact that the auto workers in the main supported the war and Roosevelt’s war program. The convention delegates knew, and the leadership pounded home the fact, that to scrap the no-strike policy meant an open, bitter fight against Roosevelt and the government.
The majority were not prepared to make that fight. But neither were they prepared to accept the consequences of the no-strike pledge, which meant unconditional surrender to the arrogant corporations. They therefore left the decision inconclusive and finally voted to refer the issue to a membership referendum.
This referendum, however, in turn proved inconclusive. When the results were announced in March 1945, it was revealed that less than 20 percent of the membership had cast ballots. A significant third of the votes were for rejecting the no-strike pledge, but the majority of the relatively small number voting endorsed it.
Armed with this mandate, the UAW leaders proceeded to crack down on the union militants. The latter, having no officially recognized and effective means to resist the mounting corporation provocations, were goaded into one desperate and isolated “wild cat” strike after another. The leadership merely redoubled its strikebreaking efforts and retaliated with new threats and increasingly harsh “disciplinary” measures against leading local militants. The emboldened corporations, with the sanction of the International union leaders, fired not a few good union men and began a systematic campaign of provocations.
By the summer of 1945, prior to V-J Day, the UAW was blazing from one end to the other with “wild-cat” strikes. Like volunteer firemen in a dry summer, the UAW leaders were racing from one strike to the next trying to smother the flames. At one point, as Reuther admitted during one of his caucus rallies in Atlantic City, the UAW Executive Board confronted no less than 67 simultaneous unauthorized strikes.
The union was rent by an increasingly fierce conflict between the ranks and the leadership. The latter met the demands of the members for militant resistance to the corporations only by new bureaucratic expulsions, removal of local leaderships and similar suppressive measures.
This policy was climaxed during the bitter Kelsey-Hayes strike which lasted six weeks. This strike occurred in September and October 1945, following V-J Day, after the UAW Executive Board had formally renounced the no-strike pledge, already scrapped in practice by the membership.
Nevertheless, headed by R J. Thomas, the UAW leaders sought by every means of deception and intimidation to break the Kelsey-Hayes strike. In the end, the workers were forced back to work with several local leaders remaining fired. The local union was placed in the hands of an appointed dictator-receivership. This outstanding act of strikebreaking and bureaucratic practice cost the leadership a further tremendous loss of prestige.
Thus, during the period following the no-strike referendum, the UAW presented a disorganized and chaotic appearance. It had no leadership nor effective program. “Wild-cat” strikes, while reflecting the just indignation of the workers and their will to struggle, were an isolated and sporadic form of resistance and therefore ineffective. This was appreciated by the most advanced militants in the UAW.
In Detroit, 40 local union presidents came together in the middle of May, 1945 and formulated a program for the union. Already, the UAW was beset by cutbacks and increasing unemployment. The auto workers were feeling the pinch of the loss of overtime pay through the return to the 40-hour week. The demand was raised for a fight against reduction of take-home pay, concretized in the slogan “52 hours pay for 40 hours work.”
  
The June Regional Conferences
Then at a conference of 400 local union officers of the two largest UAW regions, 1 and 1A of Detroit, held June 14, 1945, against the opposition of the UAW top leaders, headed by R.J. Thomas, the delegates approved with only 20 dissenting votes a resolution calling on the UAW Executive Board to initiate an industry-wide strike vote “to guarantee success of their negotiations” for a “30 percent hourly pay increase.”
This resolution was in opposition to an official resolution, introduced by a hand-picked Resolutions Committee majority. The latter was virtually identical with the minority resolution – with the omission of the call for strike action. Thomas spoke heatedly against the minority resolution and against the union being “rabble-roused into a strike.” Richard T. Leonard, Director of the UAW’s Ford Department and later author of the notorious “company security” clause, was chairman of the meeting. He tried to call the minority resolution “out of order,” but was overruled by the conference. The well-known Stalinist John Anderson, of Detroit Amalgamated Local 155, was the only local union officer who opposed the strike recommendation from the floor.
Reuther alone among the top UAW officers appreciated the powerful sentiment for militant action. And he began to ride with the tide. In an evasive, but militant-sounding speech, he spoke of the need for “reevaluating the basic policy of the union.”
Two months after the Detroit Regional Conference, with the surrender of Japan, Thomas was forced to announce the formal end of the UAW’s no-strike pledge. But he accompanied it with a fearful admonition against any “rash of strikes” and threats against strikes “without authorization of the International President and Executive Board.”
Thus, even after the war had ended and on the eve of the greatest strike wave in American history, the Thomas-Addes leadership represented a conservative, weak and timid policy. They wanted to continue the policy of class collaboration, of reliance upon the capitalist government, which had reached its most disastrous point during the war years.
Reuther, on the other hand, seized hold of the situation. He began to give more and more positive leadership to the militant trend. At the General Motors Delegates Conference on September 15 he supported the decision for a corporation-wide strike “to take place within two months.” That titanic strike began on schedule, November 21, 1945.
The Thomas-Addes-Leonard faction never really supported the GM strike. They merely “went along” with it insofar as they could not prevent or derail it. What they subscribed to most readily was the weakest part of Reuther’s program, his “one-at-a-time” strategy. The major concern of the Thomas-Addes group throughout the GM strike was to prevent its spread to Ford, Chrysler and other companies.
It was the merit of Reuther that, by and large, he gave the GM strike aggressive leadership. He certainly weakened along the road, as when he yielded to Truman’s pressure and appeared before the administration’s “fact-finding” board after having condemned it. But he was a model of resoluteness compared to the conservative and timid conduct of Thomas.
The GM strike became the spearhead of the whole American labor struggle for higher wages. It inspired and set the pattern for the gigantic strike wave in January–February 1946 when nearly two million workers of entire basic industries, such as steel, electrical equipment, meat packing, fought simultaneously on the picket lines.
Above all, the GM strike set the example for a policy of militant class struggle as against class collaboration with the employers and their government. It showed the industrial workers the road to victory through fighting action.
  
Unique Program of GM Strike
Moreover, the GM strike was unique in other respects. Its program went beyond the question of immediate wage increases. The GM workers advanced new and important demands affecting the broadest economic and political issues. They posed the question of prices, profits and the control of production – matters which the capitalist owners of industry have always insisted are the exclusive “prerogatives of management.”
By contrast with the militant policies and advanced program of the GM strike, the Thomas-Addes-Leonard group pursued a conservative course, best exemplified in the negotiations with the Ford Motor Company.
They wanted to demonstrate the superior effectiveness of “labor statesmenship,” that is, a policy of collaboration with the corporations, as against strike action.
The “labor statesmen” finally came out with an agreement for an 18-cent an hour raise. This raise was actually won for the Ford workers by the GM strikers. But in hastening to accept Ford’s 18-cent offer, the UAW Ford negotiators headed by Leonard, seriously undercut the 30 cents-an-hour wage demand of the GM workers, not to speak of the 19% cents they might have won on the basis of the government’s own recommendation.
Moreover, the UAW Ford representatives acceded to the Ford Company’s demand for “company security,” that is, the right of the company to fine and fire workers for so-called unauthorized strike action. Only widespread membership opposition forced modification of the “company security” clause in the final contract. But it was retained in principle.
This unprecedented concession to the corporation was designed, both from the standpoint of the company and the union officials, to lay the basis for eliminating the best union militants from the plants. Remembering the “wildcat” strikes for which they themselves were responsible, the Thomas-Leonard-Addes group determined, in collaboration with the employers to establish a method of curbing the militants through empowering the companies to victimize strikers.
At the same time, they sought to hasten the end of the GM strike through proposals for impermissible concessions. Such was Thomas’s proposal to reopen the GM parts plants during the strike. Later, he wanted to end the strike without settlement of the extremely important local plant grievances.
Furthermore, the Thomas-Addes-Leonard group sought the intervention of CIO president Philip Murray in order to take the negotiations out of the hands of Reuther and the elected nine-man GM negotiations committee. They directed a persistent underhanded attack at Reuther and his aggressive methods in an effort to destroy his prestige with the GM workers. This attempt to undermine the GM strike and discredit Reuther largely failed, as the recent UAW convention proved.
Thus, what was on the order of the day for the convention was the question of endorsement or repudiation of the General Motors strike, its general policies and program. And with the examination of the GM strike, should have come a thorough consideration of those key issues which arose out of the whole auto negotiations and struggle. Two of these key issues were “company security” and the “fact-finding” procedure of semi-compulsory arbitration.
But the delegates were denied the opportunity to discuss” the GM strike and the related issues. Certainly the Thomas-Addes-Leonard-Stalinist caucus was anxious to avoid any open discussion. This was made abundantly clear when they wiggled out of a proposed debate between Reuther and Thomas through slick parliamentary maneuvering in spite of the majority demand of the convention.
As for Reuther, aside from his demonstrative challenge for a debate, he made no real effort to bring the issues on the floor.
In this sense, the leadership of the Reuther caucus were as much responsible for the muddled and inconclusive character of the UAW convention as their factional opponents. They fixed their eyes mainly on posts and played narrow, so-called “straight” politics. In order to win votes they catered to the more backward and conservative elements, made “deals” with unsavory individuals and skirted the questions of principle.
  
Responsibility of Both Caucuses
The issue was boiled down to the question of “For Reuther” or “For Thomas” – for the endorsement of the GM strike or against it. The delegates could not go beyond this point into the elaboration of a program based on their decision. There was no movement in the ranks prepared to push a third alternative to the two presented by the main divisions of the convention.
Reuther played conservative at the convention. He concentrated on the “backwoods” vote by stressing matters of organizational procedure and policy, as well as emphasizing his desire for “responsible” leadership in contrast to his alleged “radicalism.” While the main base of the Reuther caucus consisted of the most progressive militants, Reuther’s intimate machine included many questionable and reactionary elements. Reuther, hell-bent on election, decided he could not alienate any votes. That accounts for the conservative, “statesmanlike” nature of his convention campaign.
A typical example of Reuther’s unprincipled deals with unsavory elements was his support of Melvin Bishop, discredited director of Region 1, Detroit, for first vice-president running against R.J. Thomas. Bishop was thoroughly despised by the workers in his region. He had played ball with the corporations during the war to the extent of going to the managements and having them fire militant workers. He had done this against popular militants at both Hudson and Briggs, two of the principle locals in his region.
When it came to a choice between Bishop, whose name symbolized conspiracy with the corporations, and Thomas, the entire Briggs delegation with one of the largest blocks of votes reluctantly determined to vote for Thomas. Their vote swung many others, and Thomas was elected by a sizable majority.
An especially bad aspect of Reuther’s policy was his catering to Jim-Crow elements. Most notorious was his alliance with Richard Gosser, regional director from the Toledo, O., area, who had been repeatedly condemned for his policy of discrimination against Negroes. Richard Gosser, regional director from the Toledo area, still maintained backward prejudices against Negroes inclined toward support of Reuther. But the very important, influential and militant section of Negro delegates, who should have been with the main stream of militants in Reuther’s caucus, largely supported the conservative wing.
The Stalinists, who were allied with the anti-GM strike, “company security” faction of Thomas-Addes-Leonard, were principally responsible for keeping the support of the Negro delegates for the conservative caucus.
The Stalinists were able demagogically to exploit Reuther’s weakness on the Negro question. They took the lead in proposing the establishment of a post on the Executive Board for a Negro representative.
Both the Reuther and Thomas-Addes-Leonard caucus leaders opposed this proposal. Indeed, the most vicious speech against it was made by Ben Garrison, of Ford Highland Park Local 400, the man who made the presidential nominating speech for Thomas. But the fact that the Stalinists, who conspicuously and vigorously supported Thomas, initiated the fight for a Negro Board member played an important part in cementing the support of many Negro delegates for the Thomas-Addes-Leonard clique.
A small section of the most progressive elements in the Reuther caucus also backed the proposal for a Negro board member. These militants, however, pointed out the failure of both caucuses to nominate any of the well-qualified Negro delegates for a top UAW post.
  
The Outstanding Event
The positive aspect of the outstanding event of the UAW convention, the election of Reuther over R.J. Thomas, was its implicit endorsement of the GM strike. This fact stands out above all others and remains as the unique achievement of the convention.
The majority of delegates voted in favor of precisely those policies which the capitalist press, and the conservative UAW and CIO leaders, so vigorously condemned. These are the policies which Thomas called in one caucus meeting “socialistic experimentation.”
They are, in truth, far from “socialistic.” But they do represent a policy of militancy and a program aimed at resolving the broader and deeper-going issues of the American scene. As one delegate expressed it to this writer, “Reuther wants to do something about inflation and profits and housing. He wants to fight.” That, at least, is what the majority voted for in voting for Reuther.
At the same time, they were voting against something. They were voting against timidity and conservatism and bureaucratism.
To the superficial observer, it might appear that the net outcome of the UAW convention has been, with the exception of the change of presidents, to maintain a continuation of conservative leadership. That is what seems to be the case since the top officers and executive board are composed of a conservative majority.
But it would be incorrect to conceive of this leadership as fixed and unchanging in its policies and line-ups. More than once in the history of the dynamic, democratic and militant UAW, the pressure and movement of the ranks have forced significant shifts and changes on the top.
It need only be recalled that Reuther himself, the most progressive of the UAW leaders in 1946, was the chief spokesman in 1941 for the right wing tendency which sought to bar “communists” and which advanced a pro-war policy.
In evaluating the role of the various top leaders and tendencies in the coming period, the militants will have to keep in mind the possibilities of shifts and changes. The tactics of the most advanced and progressive elements must be based not on preconceived evaluations, but rather on an exact analysis and appreciation of the new factors that are almost certain to arise.
All the issues left unresolved by the past convention, will recur in sharpened form. New issues will break to the surface.
The auto workers in particular, and the labor movement in general, will not face a quiet, placid existence in the next period. In their drive to organize the unorganized, particularly in the South, the CIO and UAW will confront a tremendous reactionary opposition. The question of “company security,” of collaboration with the government “fact-finding” procedure, of militant struggle versus dependence on government agencies, will arise repeatedly.
The political aspect of the labor struggle will come to the fore. Political issues, which have played so important a factor in the great strike struggles, will take on an ever more compelling character.
Big Business is conducting a tremendous inflationary drive to wipe out wage gains and augment huge profits. A new period of intensified reaction is being prepared as part of American imperialism’s program for another World War to destroy the Soviet Union and to achieve undisputed rule of the world.
A crucial period of political crisis is imminent. It will pose sharply before American labor the key question of a break with the policy of political collaboration with the capitalist class and its government.
Already one notes a significant and growing sentiment for the formation of a party of labor independent of the Democratic and Republican parties of Wall Street. There were reflections of this growing sentiment in the vague expressions of both Reuther and Thomas during the course of the UAW convention for a possible “progressive third party.”
The abysmal and shameful weakness of American labor on the political arena was borne out repeatedly during the strike wave. Time and time again the mighty organized power of labor on the economic arena has been nullified on the political field. Experience has been hammering that fact home to the American workers.
It is safe to assume the likelihood that the September 1947 convention of the UAW will see many of the unresolved issues of the past convention express themselves in dominant form. And these issues will extend in no small degree on to the decisive political plane. 



How Press Buried McCoy Disaster News
Any spokesman of the coal mine operators just needs to open his mouth against the AFL United Mine Workers demands for safety and welfare improvements to rate front-page billing in the capitalist press. But when coal miners go to their deaths in mines that are operated in violation of every safety regulation, the news is usually stuck back in the “Want Ads” section.
People who failed to scan their papers very closely last Thursday and Friday, surely missed the buried accounts of the latest mine disaster down in McCoy, Virginia, where 12 hard-coal miners died on April 18. The N.Y. Times – “All the news that’s fit to print” – contained a one paragraph mention of the disaster on April 19, down in the middle of a story headed: Coal Operators Quit Washington. The next day, in a story with a one-column, two-line head, the Times condescended to devote six inches of type to a UMW statement on the disaster – back between the sports page and business news.
The “impartial” press, usually indifferent to the continuous murder of coal miners, was even more reluctant to give this terrible tragedy a “play.” It was a thunderous punctuation of the miners’ demand for an operator-financed, union-controlled health and welfare fund, improved safety measures, etc. More than 400,000 soft coal miners have been striking for these demands since April 1, and 75,000 hard- coal miners like those at McCoy will be raising the same demands shortly.
* * *

Rail Unions Seek Bigger Pay Award
Fifteen non-operating employees railroad unions are seeking an additional 14 cents an hour wage increase to make up the difference between their 30 cents demand and the 16 cents awarded by a government arbitration board.
The railway workers were kicked in the teeth when their leaders went to arbitration instead of conducting a militant fight like the CIO unions did. In seeking additional awards, however, the rail union leaders are proposing to go through the same rigmarole that resulted in the arbitration ruling of only 16 cents, which all the rail workers are roundly condemning. The union officials are again following the procedure of the Railway Labor Act and will finally wind up, if a deadlock persists, with – more arbitration.
Meanwhile, in Cleveland starting April 24, some 175 general chairmen of two operating unions, the brotherhoods of railroad trainmen and locomotive engineers, will consider the question of strike action to win their 30-cents demand, which another arbitration board cut down to 16 cents.
* * *

Westinghouse Strike Passes 100-Day Mark
On April 24, the 75,000 Westinghouse Electric strikers marked their 100th day on the picket lines in their battle to force the hold-out international trust to grant an 18½ cents an hour wage increase similar to those won in General Electric and the GM Electrical Division.
On the same day, the directors of the huge corporation, which has plants in Japan and Germany and collected from both sides of the battle-lines during the war, declared a stock dividend, cutting up a $3,150,000 melon.
The Westinghouse strike is the most critical labor struggle now in progress. All sections of organized labor must rally to give full moral and material support to the courageous members of the CIO United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers who have held out more than 13 weeks against hunger, injunction, police terror and a flood of company propaganda.
* * *

Women Strikers Ask Maternity Leave Clause
150 women workers went on strike at the Dearborn Glass Co., Chicago, on April 22, demanding a special clause in their CIO United Auto Workers local contract providing for maternity leaves.
The bosses are always talking about the virtues of “home and babies,” but when it comes to permitting women workers to have babies without losing their jobs the employers don’t sing any sentimental tune.
The striking union points out that the present contract provides for leaves for “satisfactory cause.” It insists quite correctly that time out for bringing forth the next generation is more than a satisfactory cause.
 



Some 2,000 delegates, representing approximately 800,000 organized steel workers, will begin deliberations on May 14 in Atlantic City at the Third International Convention of the CIO United Steelworkers of America.
This convention of the union in America’s most basic industry meets against a background unique in the experience of the steelworkers.
After 50 years of struggles and many bitter defeats, the steel workers will be able to record at this convention the most successful struggle and the greatest achievements of their history.
The rank and file delegates who will participate in the convention have gone through the fire of a titanic battle, the largest industrial strike this country has ever known. They have become tested union combat veterans.
In the course of their unprecedented strike, the steel workers of all races, creeds and national origins, attained a unity in action, a singleness of purpose and endeavor never before known in the industry.
The greatest single sector of the union, Big Steel, had previously gone through the whole past decade of mighty labor battles without a direct test of strength. They had not been pitted in militant combat against the powerful U.S. Steel trust since the terrible defeat of the Great Steel Strike of 1919.
In the recent strike, however, they matched blow for blow and came out not only with their forces intact and further consolidated, but for the first time brought the mighty corporation to terms by picket-line action. This must be recorded as a tremendous gain for the whole union and labor movement.
Nor should there be any minimizing of the significant gains in terms of wage increases and other concessions which the steel workers won by their determined fighting action.
The whole experience of their recent historic struggle has left deepest reflections in the thinking and understanding of the steel militants. It has taught them initiative, raised their self-confidence, and, above all, inspired them to view their problems in broader terms.
And in the event of the strike they could observe not only their strength and their power to win gains, but the existing weaknesses which must be corrected and the grave issues which that combat left unresolved.
This convention, if it is to fulfill its real duty to the steel workers and the labor movement generally, has the obligation to examine carefully the lessons of the recent struggle, analyze the decisive issues that confront the union and prepare for the inevitable and greater struggles that lie ahead.
It is little more than three months since the conclusion of the strike that won the largest single wage increase ever achieved in steel. Yet it is apparent to all, that these wage gains are already seriously threatened by price inflation.
American Big Business is determined to thrust upon the workers the colossal debt of the Second Imperialist World War out of which the Wall Street rulers emerged with the highest pile of blood-profits in their history. The corporations are seeking to protect their profits by a form of hidden wage cut – price increases. In this way they intend to rob labor of its recent wage gains.
It is clear that the only effective way the workers can protect their limited wage gains and halt the steady decline in living standards is by fighting to keep their wages abreast of steadily rising prices. The capitalist government, which is concerned first and always with safeguarding profit interests, can not be depended upon in the slightest to “control prices.” The record of the OPA is one of consistent concessions to the extortionate price demands of the corporations.
More and more, the most far-seeing militants in the labor movement have come to appreciate the need to fight for a program which will really defend labor against the consequences of inflation and that this program is best expressed in the slogan: For a sliding scale of wages to meet price rises.
The steel union convention can make a great contribution to the labor movement by adopting as a major plank of its program the demand that there be incorporated into its contracts a clause for a sliding scale of wages that will rise automatically with every rise in the cost of living.
 
Political Tasks
What was most clearly revealed during the course of the strike wave is the weakness of the labor movement in the political arena. The mighty strength of the industrial unions on the economic field is repeatedly negated on the political field.
We have witnessed the spectacle of a Congress representing the tiny class of ruling rich able to contemptuously defy the overwhelming working section of the population. While the CIO leaders, headed by USA-CIO President Philip Murray, complained about the tax rebates and other methods whereby the government has helped to finance corporation strike-breaking, their voices found little echo in the halls of Congress. Not a single labor voice is being raised in Congress on behalf of 15,000,000 organized workers and their families.
In direct contravention of the strong opposition of the entire union movement, President Truman during the strike wave, not only called for the establishment of semi-compulsory arbitration “fact-finding” boards, but succeeded in imposing such boards on the workers and used them to whittle down the just wage demands of the steel and other unions.
So long as labor follows the policy of “company unionism” in the political field, so long as it looks to the capitalist government, the capitalist “friends of labor” and the Big-Business controlled Democratic and Republican parties to protect the workers’ political interests, labor will suffer unending victimization.
It is time for organized labor to discard its antique, bankrupt political policy and to build its own party, a labor party. If a mighty organization like the CIO Steelworkers were to take the lead along with other big unions in forming a labor party, millions of workers and lower middle class people would quickly rally behind such a labor party in the fight against the reactionary monopolists who today rule America.
 
Organize South!
One of the truly great and progressive tasks which the CIO, including the steel union, has set itself is the organization of the Southern workers. The fact that the CIO is now in a position to undertake this crusade with justified hopes of success is one of the true measures of the strength it has gained in the recent strike wave.
But it must be recognized that this organizing drive is no ordinary one. It is not, as leading CIO officers have stated, a “simple trade-union campaign.” Effectively conducted, this campaign is bound to conflict with the whole rotten social, economic and political system maintained by the white Southern ruling class.
The chief bulwark of that system is organized and legalized Jim Crow, the complete subjugation of the Negro people who form a main source of “cheap labor” in the South, and the rigid division of the workers along racial lines.
Only by the most uncompromising struggle against the Jim- Crow system can the CIO achieve its splendid aims in the South.
 
Against Witch-Hunts
In the Southern campaign, the basic task of uniting the Negro and white workers can be accomplished only if the CIO refuses to adapt itself in any way to the prejudices fostered by the Southern ruling class social system and if the great mass of Negro people are firmly convinced that the CIO is truly their fighting champion for first-class citizenship all up and down the line.
In connection with the Southern drive, the steel workers must be on guard against the sinister and divisive methods of red-baiting. Already the Southern industrialists and their fascist-minded agents of all stamps are raising the hue and cry against the “red communistic” CIO.
It would be self-defeating for the steel workers to give any aid and encouragement to this anti-labor campaign by supporting red-baiting policies within their union. Any witch-hunt within the union against “reds” could only jeopardize the Southern organizing campaign and give comfort to the bosses, both North and South.
All progressive elements in the labor movement should be uncompromising enemies of Stalinism. But Stalinist influence can be destroyed in the unions only by exposure of their reactionary influence and by counter-posing a genuinely militant program. Any attempt to fight Stalinism by means of red-baiting and bureaucratic expulsions is directed in reality not only against the Stalinists but against the genuine union militants.
Past conventions of the CIO Steelworkers have always raised in one form or another the basic issue of trade union democracy. No union can remain, in the long run, an effective fighting instrument of the workers if the control over policy and the carrying out of policy does not rest firmly in the hands of the membership.
A democratic union provides the means for the membership to freely elect its officers and to exercise control over them. It provides the means for expression by the members, for their initiative, constructive suggestions and criticisms.
The CIO Steelworkers, it must be recognized, has not achieved to any genuine extent the degree of trade union democracy of some CIO unions, and notably the most dynamic and progressive union in the country, the United Automobile Workers.
It was only in 1942, that the steel workers were permitted to establish their own international. For many years, they were under the control of a hand-picked organizing committee.
Today, district officers and organizers are still imposed from the top, not selected by the ranks themselves. They are therefore not infrequently more responsive to the top leaders who handed them the posts than to the will of the members in their districts. At the same time, they serve as convenient whipping-boys on whom the top leadership can throw responsibility for its own faulty policies or improper conduct.
The lack of genuine trade union democracy is also reflected in the fact that the top leadership can make agreements and sign contracts without the final approval of the membership. This was true in the last great strike.
There are indications of a considerable and growing sentiment among the steel union militants for greater union democracy. They would like to be able to elect their own district representatives. They would like to be able to hold district conventions and maintain district organizations where they might have the opportunity to discuss their common problems and work out proposals for improvement of the union in between the International conventions.
Another concern of the steel workers is the report that an effort may be made at this convention to lengthen the terms of office of top officers as well as district appointees. Such a move, a prelude to extending the time between conventions, is correctly feared as an encouragement to the firmer entrenchment of a top bureaucracy over which the membership would have less and less control.
No officer of a union need fear frequent elections if he is carrying out the policies the members desire and is doing a good job. Nor can it hurt the interests of the union if the duly elected rank and file representatives meet frequently in convention to examine past policies, make new constructive decisions and keep a close check on the officers.
If the delegates at the steel convention have the opportunity to discuss the basic issues freely and fully, their deliberations will bring forth decisions which will help guide the whole labor movement for its great progressive tasks ahead.
 




Mine Strike Endorsed by William Green
AFL President William Green finally gave a public endorsement to the strike of 400,000 soft coal miners of the AFL United Mine Workers when he urged the convention of the Pennsylvania Federation of Labor on May 8 to give unqualified support to the miners’ struggle.
Green told the cheering delegates that “the UMW is in a life and death struggle and the organization is making a fine fight of it. Our duty is to rally around the mine workers until they win this battle.”
This is the first time in many, many years that the ultra-conservative Green has spoken out decisively on behalf of striking workers. Throughout the war Green was a prop of the notorious no-strike pledge and assailed the miners’ wartime strikes.
Whatever Green’s present motive for backing the miners, his stand can only be welcomed. Once more Big Business and its government are making the mine union the chief target of their anti-labor drive.
* * *

No Agreement on Rail Wage Issues
Negotiations with the railroad operators for additional wage raises above the 16 cents an hour granted by a government “fact-finding” board were broken off on May 2 by representatives of the brotherhoods of locomotive engineers and trainmen.
The union representatives were last week departing from the scene of negotiations in Chicago to go to Cleveland where preparations are reported on foot “to organize the strike” of 300,000 engineers and trainmen scheduled for May 18.
Both unions had previously gone through all the delays and rigmarole of the Railway Labor Act, and when its provisions were exhausted, had submitted their demands to a special Truman- appointed “fact-finding’’ board.
Additional strike threats have since been voiced by three other operating brotherhoods, representing the conductors, switchmen and firemen. Their demand for a 30-cent increase was whittled down to a grant of 16 cents an hour by an arbitration board. On May 3, officials of these unions issued a statement that unless their demands for additional increases and other concessions are met, they will take a strike vote and a strike would “actually occur.”
At last reports, the Truman administration was planning to intervene again through the establishment of another panel – an “extra-legal” panel of three, necessitated by the fact that all legal provisions for stalling strike action under the Railway Labor Act are exhausted. New red-tape machinery is now proposed.
* * *

Textile Workers Heading South
One of the major battle-fronts of the CIO’s great organizing campaign in the South will be the textile industry, a chief stronghold of low-wage sweatshop conditions.
As reported at the recent convention of the CIO Textile Workers Union, of the approximately 800,000 textile workers in this country about 400,000 are organized. However, these are mainly in the northern plants, 85 per cent of whose employes are unionized. Only 20 per cent of Southern textile workers are in the union. Over 300,000 are non-union, and suffer corresponding conditions.
Heading the TWU-CIO Southern drive will be Vice-President George Baldanzi, who is a vice- chairjnan of the CIO’s Southern organizing committee. He warned the TWU convention that the Southern employers have already started a wide-scale counter-offensive, with a “crew of evangelists” stumping the Southern states to organize the reactionary forces against the “communistic” CIO.
* * *

Stalinist Chickens Come Home to Roost
Readers of The Militant will recall articles we published last fall about the despicable scabbery of the Stalinist-dominated leadership of the CIO International Woodworkers of America in the Pacific Northwest during the prolonged and bitter strike of the AFL Lumber and Sawmill Workers Union.
Not only did the IWA leadership reject joint action in the strike, they openly attacked the strike, helped break picket lines, and signed injunctions along with company representatives against AFL picketing. The New World, Stalinist west coast sheet, slandered the strike. Finally, the IWA leaders made a deal for a 12½ cent an hour increase, undercutting the AFL demands, although the AFL union in the end won 15 cents.
Now comes the pay-off!
Today, the Stalinist leaders of the IWA are screaming their heads off because the employers with whom they collaborated have concertedly ABROGATED 100 IWA contracts. In addition, the Fir Industry Negotiating Committee of the Northwest lumber operators, has issued 33 demands on the union which, if granted, would destroy the IWA.
 



The Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) this week is scheduled to launch its greatest organizing campaign since the historic drive in 1936–37 to entrench unionism in America’s basic industries. This new drive is called “Operation Dixie.”
Some 400 of the CIO’s crack organizers, financed by a million dollar fund, will open what CIO President Philip Murray has called a “crusade” to mobilize into the CIO ranks not less than one million Southern workers within the next year.
United organization of the’ cruelly exploited Southern Negro and white workers would constitute the first great advance in what inevitably must develop into a social, economic and political struggle aimed at a profound transformation of the entire South.
Although Murray at the CIO Textile Workers Convention last week described “Operation Dixie” as nothing but “simple, pure, unadulterated campaign of trade union organization,” anyone acquainted with the Southern scene recognizes that a real drive to bring the white and Negro workers together will be resisted with all the ferocity and violence that the Southern ruling class can muster.
Through the Civil War, the Northern industrialists established their political and economic power over the nation and the system of chattel slavery was destroyed. But the Southern landowners and growing business class have maintained their wealth and privileges by inhuman labor exploitation, fortified by the Jim-Crow system.
This system has kept the poor whites and virtually enslaved Negroes apart, divided them by social barriers penetrating into every phase of life. Upholding and enforcing this division is a network of Jim-Crow laws and government agencies, backed by a tremendous and continuous physical terrorism. That terrorism, which operates most savagely against the Negro masses, but has also struck at union organizers and political opponents of the Southern ruling class, is summed up in the phrase: Lynch Law.
”Operation Dixie” means nothing less than a ruthless struggle against a sector of the American ruling class which is completely steeped in the traditions and practices of reactionary violence and is utterly cruel and remorseless in its opposition to any force which offers the slightest threat to its vile system.
 
Basis Is Laid
What the CIO drive must envisage, if it is to be successful, is not a “simple” trade union campaign, but a real crusade of social, economic and political emancipation. It must be prepared to wage war against the whole system of exploitation and Jim Crow that forms the bed-rock of the power of the rich Southern whites.
The basis for such a crusade has been developing since the first World War, and has grown to great proportions in the 16 years of depression and World War II. Northern capital, ever eager to exploit “cheap labor” and escape the encroachments of unionism, has been industrializing the South at an ever more rapid pace.
The industrial working class has grown simultaneously. Organized in militant struggle, these industrial workers can and must lead the whole of the backward and oppressed masses of the South to emancipation. In fact, they will need the fighting alliance of the Negro people and the millions of white agricultural workers and share-croppers to achieve victory.
 
Far-Reaching
The CIO is in reality launching a movement in the South that, to be successful, must go far beyond the traditional bounds of “simple” trade unionism. That is dictated not by the wishes of the CIO leaders, but by the very nature of Southern social and economic conditions.
Any policy that ignores this, that seeks to confine the drive to the most narrow trade union aims or tries to adapt itself is one way or another to the prejudices of the Southern system can only hamper and weaken “Operation Dixie.” Such a policy would be a great disservice both to the Southern workers and to the Northern workers against whom the present South stands as a bulwark of anti-labor reaction.
 



APRIL 13 – The 400,000 soft coal miners on strike since April 1 mean business about securing their precedent-making social demands before they will even consider the question of wages. This was brought home sharply to the stunned mine operators when AFL United Mine Workers President John L. Lewis and the UMW negotiating committee dramatically broke off negotiations on April 10 and stalked out of the conference room.
“We trust that time, as it shrinks your purse, may modify your niggardly and anti-social propensities,” declared Lewis at the conclusion of a scathing statement he read to the operators just preceding his walkout.
From the very start of the mine union negotiations, the UMW representatives have insisted on the consideration of a series of life-and-death social demands going far beyond the wage question.
 
What Demands Mean
These are directed at eliminating the terrible toll of accidents in American mines; providing adequate health, medical and sanitation facilities in the filthy, decrepit company towns; ensuring the welfare of miners’ widows and orphans; compensating the injured and their families; restricting the price-gouging in the monopoly company stores and rent-gouging on company-owned dwellings.
To all these vital demands of the miners the smug, grasping operators replied that the mine union committee was merely bringing up “time-killing trivia with the obvious intent of stalling negotiations and creating a national crisis.”
 
Terrible Toll
These “trivia,” as Lewis demonstrated at the very opening of negotiations, include the slaughter of 28,000 miners and injury of more than a million in the past 14 years. This casualty list comes from the refusal of the operators to provide proper safety equipment, their resistance to mine inspection and safety laws, their control of state inspection boards.
These “trivia” include scores of thousands of widows and orphans left to starve because the operators have blocked compensation laws. They include disease-ridden, insanitary communities and “homes” because many operators will not use their huge profits to provide even a semblance of modern sanitation and health facilities for their company towns.
The miners are determined to secure decent conditions first of all through a welfare fund, provided from the, operators’ profits, which the union itself will control. They are demanding safety equipment at operators’ expense. They insist that the operators provide them such “trivia” as running water, bath facilities, garbage collection and sewage disposal.
 
Company Stores
They are seeking an end to the extortionate prices of the company stores through a 10 per cent discount on all purchases at present price levels and 20 per cent on mine clothes and equipment. As Lewis charged, the 3,600 mining company owned stores “were inferior in service and in goods because competition is eliminated and thus prices are high.”
Lewis minced no words in characterising the smug attitude of the wealthy operators towards these “trivia.”
“When we sought surcease from blood-letting you professed indifference. When we cried aloud for the safety of our members you answer ‘Be content – ’twas always thus’ ... When we emphasized the importance of life you pleaded the priority of profits; when we spoke of little children in unkempt surroundings you said, ‘Look to the State.’”
 
Bread and Roses
Now the operators are complaining that they are willing to give the miners the highest pattern of wage increases but have been “refused with abuse.” The miners answer, in the words of the old labor song, “We want bread, but we want roses too.” If they win their social demands, they will set an example for the rest of American labor that may have far-reaching progressive consequences.
 



President Truman’s Army Day speech in Chicago on April 6 served notice that American imperialism is pushing the mightiest and most ruthless program of militarism ever conceived. Behind the thin screen of Truman’s diplomatic phrases could be heard the rattle of the saber.
His speech and program were a bellicose proclamation that Wall Street imperialism intends to impose its rule on the whole globe by force and threat of force.
The swaggering arrogance of American capitalism flaunted itself in Truman’s pointed assertion: “The United States today is a strong nation; there is none stronger. This is not a boast. It is a fact ...”
 
Grandiose Program
To assure this position of supreme might, Truman made plain that the whole American people are to be regimented and Prussianized through a grandiose militarization program.
The heart of Truman’s speech was his three-point program for the maintenance of a military machine capable of sweeping any opponent or combination of opponents from American imperialism’s path.
Truman demanded: “First, unification of all our armed services in a single department; second, temporary extension of the Selective Service Act; third, universal training.”
Truman proposes the complete streamlining of the armed forces in keeping with technical, advances, particularly atomic warfare, which have outmoded the previous military structure. Wall Street wants a military organization designed to inflict atomic destruction to the maximum.
Simultaneously, it wants the extension of the draft – originally passed as a “temporary” wartime measure. This is but a stepping stone to permanent conscription of America’s youth into the bloody services of American imperialism.
This demand is brazenly proclaimed after millions of GIs abroad, now forced to serve as tools for tyrannizing over conquered and colonial peoples, have asserted demonstratively their desire to come home at once.
 
Hypocritical Assertion
On top of this, Truman wants to impose universal military training – “not conscription,” he blandly assures, “unless Congress declares an emergency and calls upon them to serve in the armed forces ...” That is, whenever Wall Street’s political agents decide to make war.
Just a few months ago the tide of popular protest and indignation against such proposals for universal militarization and regimentation was so strong that only the most outspoken militarists and reactionaries were openly calling for such measures.
Since then a monumental propaganda drive has been unleashed to ready public opinion for a new bloodbath, a third World War. The Army Day proclamation of American imperialism’s leading political representative was timed to take advantage of the terrific warmongering campaign and diplomatic offensive’ against the Soviet Union.
What is the purpose of this gigantic militarization that Truman demands? Truman asserted first that “victorious nations cannot, on the surrender of a vicious and dangerous enemy, turn their backs and go home.” But no one will believe that American imperialism fears shattered and prostrate Germany and Japan. Clearly, it is against revolting peoples of conquered and colonial countries that mighty occupation armies are to be used.
 
Worldwide Preserve
But Truman’s main threats are reserved for his “allies”, above all the Soviet Union. Hypocritical American imperialism, which is maintaining vast military forces throughout the world, is shaking its mailed fist at the Soviet Union. “We expect recognition,” Truman sharply warned, “that we also have an interest in maintaining peace and security” in the Far East and “insist that the sovereignty and integrity of the Near East and Middle East must not be threatened ...” American imperialism, he thus proclaims, has staked out worldwide preserves.
Though the greatest slaughter in human history ended only a few short months ago, Truman is already warning that “on short notice, each man must be ready to take his place and go forward – not at the end of a few months, or a few days, but immediately.”
Truman has thus spoken for a new war, for American imperialist domination of the globe and for military regimentation and repression at home.
That program of Wall Street can be halted only if the American people rise in their wrath and mobilize their full powers of organized resistance against it.
 



Brushing aside all labor and consumer protests, OPA Administrator Paul Porter last week signed an order, approved by Economic Stabilizer Chester Bowles, to remove price ceilings from several thousand consumer goods items representing about 15 per cent of all consumer goods in terms of dollars.
This action of the agency which is supposed to “control prices” gives legal cover and a great additional impetus to the inflationary drive of Big Business, which is seeking to rob labor of its recent wage gains and to augment huge profits through charging “all the traffic will bear” for scarce goods.
Through appeals to both Porter and Bowles, a Joint committee of the CIO, API, and railway brotherhoods unsuccessfully attempted to block the Office of Price Administration’s Inflationary order.. The union committee warned that this action “Is a major gamble with the economic future of America.”
 
Labor Protests
The order lifting price ceilings on hundreds of essential household Items, as well as many products customary to the average standard of living in this country, was issued on the pretext that it would have no great bearing on the cost of living since it did not effect “necessities.” Anything the masses don’t need for mere survival is considered “not a necessity” by the capitalist government.
But the government is preparing to legalize extortionate price increases even for indisputable necessities. This was shown by the action last week of the House Agricultural Committee, which unanimously voted approval of a proposal to discontinue the present huge government subsidies to the meat trust and to permit the meat barons to rob the people directly through a six cent a pound hike in meat prices. Meanwhile, the meat packers are channelling a large portion of supplies into illegal, black market outlets.
The House Agricultural Committee’s proposal is one of several inflationary amendments which Congress is planning to attach to the bill for extending the Price Control Act for a year beyond its present expiration date of June 30, 1946. The extension bill is scheduled to reach the House floor next week.
 
Capital Goods
Porter’s order lifting price ceilings on consumers items also Included the suspension entirely of price regulations on six broad classes of machinery and industrial equipment, including printing presses, textile machinery, railway cars, telephone equipment, machine tools, etc. This affects about one-third of the country’s capital goods industry.
The Joint labor committee, which sharply protested this phase of the OPA’s order, disputed the OPA’s flimsy claim that its “suspension action” on capital goods “will not affect the cost of living.”
Boris Shiskin, AFL economist and OPA Labor Policy Committee member, charged: “The price pattern in the machinery industry generally and in heavy machinery particularly has been traditionally monopolistic. Decontrol now, in the face of the present avid demand and cross-bidding for machinery, will mean immediate and drastic price increases.” These increases, he pointed out, inevitably will be “promptly passed on” to the American consumers.
 
OPA Sanction
Big Business and its Congress intend to extend OPA only if its powers are shorn to a minimum. The OPA itself is again demonstrating, however, that it is more than ready to give legal sanction to price gouging.
 




The Bigger The Lie ...
Someone observing Daily Worker reporter George Morris slowly and laboriously punching away at his typewriter in the press room during the CIO United Auto Workers convention last week, wisecracked: “Well, creative writing is always harder than straight reporting ”
Morris gave an example of Stalinist “creative” writing in the March 26 Daily Worker where he described the UAW convention debate on the proposal for the establishment of a special Executive Board post for a Negro representative. Both the Thomas-Addes group, which the Stalinists supported, and the Reuther group opposed the proposal. Both groups in this respect catered to the prejudices of the more backward among the white delegates.
In Morris’ story, however, we learn that “the debate for the Reuther forces was led off by Trotskyite Ben Garrison” in opposition to the proposal.
It is true that Garrison, a member of the convention Resolutions Committee, made a vicious and red-baiting speech against the proposal for a Negro board member. But, contrary to Morris’ account, Garrison “led off” the debate for the Thomas-Addes group – he subsequently made the nominating speech for former UAW President R.J. Thomas. And delegates who were sympathetic to Trotskyist views supported the proposal for a Negro board member.
* * *

Doing the Dirty Work for the Bureaucrats
Aside from supplying the Thomas-Addes clique with most of its slanderous ammunition against the militants in the Reuther caucus, the chief function of the Stalinists at the UAW convention was to take the lead in arguing for all organizational measures calculated to strengthen the top bureaucracy.
When none of the top officers were willing to “stick their necks out” in open support of such proposals as increasing the length of officers’ terms, doubling the dues and raising officers’ salaries, the Stalinists obligingly did the dirty work for them. It was the Stalinists who made the loudest and longest speeches in favor of these proposals.
One of the big laughs of the convention was to hear Stalinist delegates solemnly affirm that the’ officers should be given two-year instead of one-year terms in order to “eliminate factional politics.” They even brought in a minority report of the Constitution Committee to increase the top officers’ annual salaries by $1,500, instead of the $1,000 proposed by the committee majority.
Despite the Stalinist pleadings, the UAW delegates overwhelmingly voted down all proposals to strengthen the hand of the top bureaucrats.
* * *

Rail Arbitration Gives Bitter Fruit
Two railway labor arbitration boards on April 3 handed down a decision for a 16-cent hourly wage increase for 1,220,000 railway workers. This is in contrast with the average 18½-cent awards approved by the government for most of the big CIO unions which went on strike.
Fifteen non-operating rail unions had been demanding a 30-cent increase. Three operating brotherhoods had demanded a flat $2.50 daily raise, instead of the $1.28 the government proposes to allow them.
Leaders of most of the rail unions, except for the engineers and trainmen, had agreed to binding arbitration of the issues. Now they are making an outcry against an award which is typical of the rotten deals the workers usually get from arbitration.
B.M. Jewell, chairman of the National Conference Committee of the 15 non-operating employees unions, declared “the award is wholly unsatisfactory ... There is no justification in the world for expecting railway employees to accept lesser rates of pay than workers in other industries ...” He further complained that the railway workers “have absorbed the shock of three defeats – one in 1941 one in 1943 and this one today.”
This admission of three defeats is a sufficient commentary on the policies of the rail union leaders who have opposed militant struggle. It wasn’t arbitration but strike action that won bigger gains for the CIO unions.
* * *

Goodrich Local 5 Sets Record Straight
Air Bag, the excellent paper of Akron Goodrich Local 5, CIO Rubber Workers, in its April issue nails the misleading accounts in such papers as the Cleveland Plain Dealer and N.Y. Times which tried to give credit to government conciliators for the fine settlement won by the rubber union in its new contract.
“The fact is that no governmental agency had any formal part in these negotiations. On the contrary this was an outstanding case in which the union representatives and company representatives fought it out without any outside interference or government meddling,” states the Air Bag.
“We do not believe it is necessary to go through complicated governmental machinery and red tape. The results of the negotiations show that it is better to battle it out union to company directly.”
 




900 Strikes Planned Within Next 30 Days
More than 900 strikes are scheduled to be called in the 30 days after April 10 unless the workers’ demands are satisfied, according to a report last week of the Department of Labor.
This flood of strike notices, totalling 830 in the month ending April 10, surpassed the previous monthly high of slightly more than 600 set last fall before Congress voted to withhold NLRB funds to prevent the taking of strike polls. Only 16 strike notices are being withdrawn on the average per week. Labor Department officials glumly admitted, while 210 were filed in the last week covered by the report.
Most of the notices have been filed against individual plants. This indicates a new wave of strikes, largely against the independent concerns. These latter, some of them extremely wealthy, are notoriously anti-union. They can be expected to put up bitter resistance to the unions demands.
The wage gains won by the big strikes in auto, steel and other basic industries have inspired a sweeping spirit of militancy throughout all sections of the organized workers.
* * *

CIO Utility Workers Hold First Convention
The first convention of the newly organized CIO Utility Workers Union of America was held in Atlantic City last week. This union was chartered by the CIO last August. Its most important contract to date, secured in January, covers 20,000 members in the Consolidated Edison Company, New York City.
An industrial union for the hundreds of thousands of utility workers is needed to unify the poorly-organized utility workers and fight for improvement of their conditions.
One bad step which the convention took was the incorporation of an “anti-red” clause into its new constitution. This would bar any person who formerly belonged to the Communist Party from ever holding office and provides for the expulsion of present members.
Clauses of this type not only violate the right of union members to freely maintain their political opinions, but often become the means for victimization of good union militants or bureaucratic hounding of anyone else the leadership may not like.
This anti-democratic clause had been approved by Allen S. Haywood, CIO National Organization Director. It was endorsed in violently red-baiting speeches at the convention by two other chief lieutenants of CIO President Philip Murray, CIO Secretary-Treasurer James B. Carey and CIO Steel Workers Secretary-Treasurer David J. McDonald.
* * *

Time Marches Back for Luce Publications
In a prominent advertisement in the N.Y. Times, April 10, the Time Magazine Unit of the CIO Newspaper Guild of New York published an open letter, headed “TIME marches back!”. It was addressed to Henry R. Luce, tycoon-publisher of such powerful organs as Time, Life and Fortune, and producer of the March of Time, with its slogan “Time marches on.”
The Guild charges representatives of the Luce interests with refusing to grant Time editorial employes the maintenance of membership clause contained in the previous contract which had been in effect 18 months. This clause had been approved by the War Labor Board. Negotiations for a new contract have been in progress since last November.
In its advertisement, the Guild reports that the Luce spokesmen “have refused to bargain with us on one of the most vital points in our 1945 contract – the continued security and existence of our union at Time Inc.”  
The attitude of the capitalist press to its own employees is indicative of its policies in writing about organized labor generally.
* * *

Disabled Veterans Get UAW Support
One more illustration of the fact that only the workers have any real interest in aiding the veterans was given at the recent CIO United Automobile Workers convention in Atlantic City.
A committee of four white and Negro disabled veterans from the Atlantic City hospital made a moving appeal to the convention to support their plea for specially-equipped automobiles to be provided by the government so that they might be able to travel about and lead lives as close to normal as possible.
The convention passed a strong resolution demanding that the government provide such automobiles for all veterans who are unable to move about freely because of loss or paralysis of lower limbs. It instructed the officers of the union to present this demand personally to President Truman and the officials of the War and Navy Departments.
In addition, the convention authorized the purchase of three specially equipped automobiles as a gift for the veterans at the Atlantic City hospital to be used in training them to drive automobile’s despite their physical handicaps.
 



Wielding inflationary amendments like sledge-hammers, the House of Representatives in a frenzied twelve-hour session on April 17 smashed almost every bone in the skeleton of the Price Control Act before voting 355 to 42 on April 18 to extend the measure for just nine months after June 30.
Previous periodic extensions of the Act, passed originally in early 1942, had already stripped it down to bare bone. When the howling Congressmen concluded their orgy of amendments last week, about all that was left to the Act was its name.
 
OPA Aids Profiteers
During the hearings preceding the House actions, Office of Price Administration and Economic Stabilization officials had pleaded for a one-year extension of the Price Control Act without any further crippling amendments. They had pointed but that even under the past four-year operations of the OPA, corporation profits had swelled to the greatest volume in all history.
Moreover, the OPA itself has been more than compliant toward the price-gouging demands of Big Business. It was largely ineffective in halting wartime inflation, the extent of which was concealed by lying government “statistics.”
Since V-J Day, the OPA and Economic Stabilization Board have permitted big price increases all along the line and have completely removed price ceilings from thousands of commodities. Just last week, OPA hiked price ceilings to manufacturers of work clothing from 12 to 15 per cent.
“Reasonable Profits”
Nevertheless, the Big Business- dominated House, its inflationary appetite merely whetted by these OPA price concessions, proceeded to wreak havoc on the few remaining legal price restrictions, except for rent controls.
Its major amendment Is designed to safeguard and boost profits on an unprecedented scale. This would provide for price ceilings high enough to guarantee costs and a “reasonable profit” on every single item handled, from the manufacturer all the way to the retailer. The profiteers want not only huge over-all profits – they want assurances of profit on every single nut, bolt and tooth-pick produced.
Further, the House amendments include provisions to give “industry advisory committees” composed of corporation representatives the authority to determine when price controls shall be removed altogether from any commodities. Thus, the price- gougers themselves would have direct power to “regulate” prices and scuttle even the pretence of price control.
Other amendments would eliminate all government subsidies to food producers by the end of this year. The huge subsidies which have been fattening the meat barons would be halted by June 30. Instead, this indirect cost on the consuming public will be collected directly through price increases.
What the House amendments mean to the Wall Street plutocrats is indicated by the response of the stock market, reported in such headlines as “House Vote on OPA Sends Stocks Up” (N.Y. Times, April 18). The House Committee for the Protection of the Consumer was constrained to charge that those who voted for these amendments, including “the monstrous guaranteed profits amendments,” would “add billions to the cost of living” and “are pawning the people’s future for the favor of profiteers.”
Even Economic Stabilizer Chester Bowles, who has been handing the corporations virtually everything they have been asking by way of legal price boosts, was compelled to publicly brand the unrestrained inflationary actions of the House as “a long step toward starting us on a joyride to disaster.”
Bowles declared over the radio on April 17 that the American people face “a total additional burden to our collective family budgets of billions upon billions of dollars. The share of the average family would amount to many hundreds of dollars during the coming year.”
As an agency of the capitalist government committed to protecting profits above all, the so-called “price control” agencies like OPA have been able to do no more than toss a bucket of water on the raging inflationary conflagration. Now even this bucket is being kicked out of their hands.
Only the decisive independent mass action of the workers and consumers, through the struggle for a rising scale of wages to meet price increases and through committees to directly control and regulate the distribution of essential goods, ferret out black marketeers and expose the profiteers, can be relied upon to place any real obstacles before the advancing juggernaut of inflation.
 



General Motors Corporation, arrogant as ever, on December 28 walked out of Truman’s Fact-Finding Board hearings on the GM strike. The corporation categorically refused to permit its books and records to be made subject to examination even by friendly government officials.
Insisting that its monumental profits and ability to pay the 30 per cent wage increase demanded by 225,000 GM strikers was nobody’s business but its own, the corporation withdrew its spokesmen from the hearings.
The Fact-Finding Board, a hand-picked creation of Truman’s, had not called for GM’s books. It had merely claimed its right to investigate them “if necessary,” but that all information would be kept “confidential” from both the union and the general public.
 
GM’s “Attorneys”
When the Board members at the December 28 session, in opposition to GM’s ultimatum, reiterated its intention to consider profits and prices in connection with the wage issue, Walter Gordon Merritt, GM attorney, announced: “Our chairs will be vacant.”
But the next and final session of the Board, on Saturday, December 29, revealed that GM’s chairs were “vacant” only in the direct and formal sense.
In the absence of the paid GM spokesmen, the members of the Fact-Finding Board themselves proceeded to act as attorneys for the multi-billion dollar corporation which only the day before had thumbed its nose at the Board.
This “impartial” body grilled and cross-examined Walter Reuther, the UAW spokesman, and other union representatives, in a savage and heated fashion. The Board members put forward all the arguments the corporation itself has flung at the union.
The tenor of the Board’s attack on the union’s case was clearly revealed by its persistent prodding of the union spokesmen on GM’s insulting counter-proposal to institute a straight-time 45 hour week.
 
Laying a Trap
It is becoming increasingly apparent that the government is laying a trap for the auto workers through the Fact-Finding Board stratagem.
The participation of the UAW leaders in the farcical proceedings of this body, which has no power to enforce its decisions on the corporation, is further and further committing the union to the government’s eventual decision.
That decision, all the developments indicate, is largely formulated and is in no way related to the facts presented by the union before the Fact-Finding Body. Persistent reports emanate from Washington that the government is planning to propose a wage increase somewhere in the neighborhood of what the corporation itself proposed, between ten and fifteen per cent.
The function of the Fact-Finding Board, which has been given labor sanction by the very presence and participation of the UAW leaders, will be to present this wage proposal in the form of an “impartial” recommendation allegedly based on the “facts.”
 
Violate Mandate
Reuther and the other UAW leaders are being sucked into a position where they will be impelled, under terrific government pressure and manufactured “public opinion,” to accept some miserable “compromise” proposed by the Fact-Finding Board – a Board which the UAW leaders have, In effect, endorsed.
From the outset, the GM workers realized that Truman’s Fact- Finding Board order was a trap and the GM Delegates Conference on December 8 rejected this slick method for settling the strike by government intervention.
Thus, the UAW leaders have participated in the Fact-Finding procedure in outright violation of the clear-cut mandate of the GM strikers.
 
Serious Danger
When General Motors blandly walked out of the Fact-Finding hearings it was but a further warning to the auto workers that the whole set-up was phony, and that the union was being maneuvered into accepting sole responsibility for any “impartial” decision of the government.
This constitutes one of the most serious dangers to the GM strikers and their just demand for 30 per cent.
The intervention of the government, Truman’s arbitrary establishment of the Fact-Finding panel together with his demand that the GM workers end their strike, conclusively demonstrated that the administration is fronting for General Motors.
Let the GM workers stand by their position on the treacherous Fact-Finding Boards! Let the GM workers call on their leaders to immediately withdraw from these semi-compulsory arbitration boards! Stick by the 30 per cent demand and fight it out! There is nothing to gain from Washington – except a miserable sell-out.
 



Last week the Southern Bourbon Democrats fee the Senate were caught on the horns of a dilemma.
They were torn between two frenzied desires. While anxious to speed enactment of anti-labor legislation, they were confronted by the unexpected “emergency” called forth by the sudden presentation of a bill for establishment of a permanent Fair Employment Practices Commission.
The Bilbo Bourbons decided that the most immediately pressing problem before the nation is to defend “white supremacy” against the ominous consequences of any federal law against racial discrimination in industry,
When a Senate majority on January 17 passed Senator Chavez’s motion to take up the FEPC bill, a bloc of 15 Southern Senators rose to arms and launched their mightiest weapon – the filibuster.
* * *
Again a handful of wilful, vicious Southern leaders of the Democratic Party, dredged from the malodorous swamps of Southern white ruling class anti-Negro hatred, prepared to rant indefinitely in order to block action on the FEPC.
Senator George of Georgia declaimed in outrage, against introducing the FEPC bill “in a time of industrial crisis, when the very life of this nation as at stake.”
But that did not prevent him and his colleagues from proceeding to gum up the machinery of the Senate indefinitely in order to ensure that 13,000,000 Negro citizens of the United States are kept in a permanent position of servitude and second-class citizenship.
Senators Eastland and Bilbo, veteran banner- bearers for the “white supermacy” scum, proclaimed their determination to talk the Senate to death, if need be. Eastland said he personally was prepared to talk two years against the measure. More modestly, Bilbo said, “I propose to exercise my right to speak twice on the measure – for 30 days each time.”
Cautious Senator Ellender of Louisiana merely promised to spout “as long as God gives me breath.”
* * *
First in the hopper of the “1,000 amendments” which the Bourbon bloc threatens to attach to the FEPC bill is an anti-closed shop rider prohibiting discrimination in employment because of “race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, OR MEMBERSHIP OR NON-MEMBERSHIP IN OR AFFILIATION OR NON-AFFILIATION WITH ANY LABOR UNIONS.”
On January 18 the FEPC opponents revealed their first filibuster tactic. They began introducing “corrective” proposals for the permanent journal of proceedings which required the reading of interminable records out loud.
Senator Overton of Louisiana opened a discussion devoted to the Journal, the Congressional Record, the Bible and anecdotes of his childhood days (apparently not yet over.)
This included the usual insulting tirade against Negroes such as:
“Any nigger girl can walk into my office and the Federal Government would attempt to make me place her side by side by side with the other girls. I don’t know what I’d do if anyone told me to do that.”
Meanwhile the threat of “secession” spread its pall over the Senate. Senator Eastland telegraphed the Mississippi state legislature to “protect the sovereignty of Mississippi and the liberty and freedom of our people (meaning the rich Southern whites) by the passage of a nullification proclamation” if the FEPC bill should pass.
* * *
As for the Senate majority, they stand apparently helpless to halt the filibuster. They excuse their inaction on the ground of respecting the “democratic right” of this ultra-reactionary handful of “white supremacists” elected by a tiny minority in the poll-tax states.
For what are the democratic rights of 13,000,000 Negro Americans compared to the right of Senatorial “free speech” for their most vicious oppressors?
 



JANUARY 21. – Today at one minute past midnight the battle was joined in the most titanic and crucial labor struggle in American history.
Eight hundred thousand CIO steel workers – the flesh and bones and blood of America’s basic industry – threw down the gauntlet before the steel corporations, the most voracious and ruthless monopoly in the world.
Throughout the nation, at one blow from the mighty fist of steel labor, the gigantic mills, the vast blast furnaces and hearths, stood cold, silent and deserted.
Pittsburgh, Homestead, Braddock, Youngstown, Lackawanna, Bethlehem, Gary, Indiana Harbor, South Chicago – all the names synonymous with steel – today became the battlegrounds of a struggle that strikes at the very foundations of American monopoly capitalism.
For from the steel plants come the indispensable materials and products on which the whole gigantic organism of American industry, transport and commerce is nourished and sustained. Steel, the heart of American industrialism, is deprived of its very life blood, the labor of the steel workers. With its heart paralyzed, all American industry in a few short weeks will face virtual prostration.
 
Coast to Coast
The power in action of the organized steel workers is joined with that of more than 900,000 other striking workers already massed on embattled picket lines from coast-to-coast. They are fighting for decent wages and security against the country’s greatest monopoly giants, whose savage slogan is “Unconditional Surrender to Wall Street!”
First on the honor roll of the heroes of American labor are the 225,000 General Motors strikers. With unparalleled fortitude and courage, they have held out for more than nine weeks against the world’s largest industrial corporation and have spearheaded the drive of all American labor for a living wage.
Last week, they received mighty reinforcements. On Tuesday, some 200,000 CIO electrical and radio workers poured from the plants of the international electrical trusts, General Electric, Westinghouse and the Electrical Division of General Motors. The next day, the united forces of 325,000 CIO and AFL packinghouse workers clamped fighting picket lines around the plants and stockyards of the meat barons.
Today no less than l,700,000 workers are on strike at one time. They are all fighting for the same thing, a greater share of the wealth their labor produces, the wealth that is being drained off in unprecedented profits for a handful of Big Business parasites who produce nothing yet demand all.
 
Wall St. Insatiable
So voracious and insatiable, so drunk with privilege and power are these Wall Street pirates who dominate American economy, that even the capitalist government dares not give them open, support. The Truman administration is constrained by political expediency to give verbal support, however feeble, to the greatly reduced minimum wage demands which the union leaders have agreed to accept under pressure from the government.
But the steel, auto, electrical and meat-packing plutocrats, lusting for higher prices and greater profits and greedily clinging to their war-profits loot, have arrogantly rejected even the pleas of the Truman administration to make the minimal wage concessions required to terminate the strikes.
When Benjamin Fairless, U.S. Steel president, speaking for proffer of an additional price-steal of $4 a ton, it was clear that Big Business as a class had determined on nothing less than a showdown struggle against American unionism.
That is precisely what The Militant had warned, from the outset of the General Motors strike, was the main issue in the unfolding struggle. That is precisely what was confirmed when General Motors walked out of Truman’s “fact-finding” hearings and bluntly rejected the government’s recommendation of a wage settlement nearly 45 per cent less than the CIO auto workers’ original demand.
 
Forecast Confirmed
This forecast has received additional confirmation by the actions of the electrical and meatpacking trusts. Although the leaders of the CIO electrical union agreed, even in advance of the battle, to call off their strike if the companies would meet the 15-cent offer made by Fairless to the steel workers and negotiate the difference between the 25 cents originally demanded, GE, Westinghouse and General Motors refused to consider it. In months of negotiations, Westinghouse has made no counteroffer, however small.
The “Big Four” packing trust, Armour, Swift, Wilson and Cudahy, already enriched by hundreds of millions in government subsidies, preferred to inflict a meat famine upon the American people rather than give the low-wage packinghouse workers decent wages. These profiteers refused to settle even when the government twice offered huge additional subsidies by way of big price rises.
 
Corporations’ Conspiracy
These giant corporations, enormously enriched by the war, are conspiring to undermine and, if possible, destroy the Industrial unions, drive down living standards and inflate prices. They are determined to maintain the unprecedented profits they are wringing from the working class and deny the workers, the real producers, the higher wages they need.
Moreover, they are scheming, with the aid of the compliant government, to rob the workers and nullify any wage gains by means of deliberate price gouging. To this end, they are proceeding to throw the country into industrial paralysis, to blackmail and intimidate the consumers, and to starve out and crush the striking workers and returned veterans.
For the entire American labor movement, for the overwhelming majority of the American people, there can be no timid yielding on the fundamental issues posed by the rapacious corporations. And 1,700,000 workers on the nation’s picket lines are determined to battle out these issues to a decisive and favorable conclusion.
 



In the fight against General Motors the CIO United Automobile Workers have put forward a most significant and far-reaching demand: “Open the Books of the Corporation!”
This is the first time in American history that a union has wielded this powerful weapon in a major struggle against the employers.
The mere suggestion that the union has the right to investigate the corporation’s records has sent General Motors and its Big Business confederates into convulsions of fear and rage.
For the billionaire Wall Street financial cliques like the du Ponts and Morgans correctly see in this demand more than a simple issue of wages or hours.
To the capitalist overlords who have a stranglehold on the natural resources and means of production, a “look at the books” contains a threat to their continued rule and their profits, privileges and power.
In answer to the UAW’s demand, General Motors Corporation published from coast-to-coast a newspaper advertisement entitled:. “A ‘Look at the Books’ or a ‘Finger in the Pie’?”
GM follows up with this $64 question: “Which is the UAW- CIO really after? Is it seeking facts – or new economic power? Does it want to know things – or run things?”
First of all, the GM workers do want to know things – plenty of things. When they raised their demand to investigate GM’s books, their immediate purpose was to throw full light upon the corporation’s enormous profits and profit-potential to prove conclusively that the company can easily afford to pay the full wage demands of its workers.
“We have firmly declined to recognize this as a basis for bargaining,” says GM’s advertisement. Thus with one contemptuous gesture. General Motors rejects any inspection of its books for the purpose of ascertaining the facts of its ability to pay higher wages.
Even if we can pay the wages asked, says General Motors in effect, we refuse to consider this fact as relevant to the merits of the union’s wage case.
At the same time, the GM propagandists go on to assert that “the full facts are published” already “in annual reports ... audited by outside auditors. Similar figures are filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.”
“Does the UAW-CIO honestly believe,” asks the corporation in self-righteous indignation, “that General Motors would or could deceive these experts?”
This mammoth corporation has no need to “deceive” its own “experts.” Corporation auditors are not likely to differ with their high-paying clientele on what constitutes “legitimate” cost and profits. Nor does the SEC, a hand-picked agency of the Big Business government, often question the carefully-drawn reports of the most powerful corporations.
 
What the Workers Want to Know
What the workers want to know are all those facts the corporations misrepresent or fail to report: The hidden profits concealed as “costs”; the hundreds of millions piled up in fake “depreciation” and “contingency” funds; the watered stock and phony “capitalization” on which the corporations pay out millions in profits from the wealth produced by the workers.
If the corporations have nothing to hide, if their hands are clean even within the definition of capitalist law, why should they fear to let the representatives of their own workers see the books?
The answer is clear. They don’t dare permit investigation of their records. Such a thorough going scrutiny as a workers’ committee might make would inevitably uncover scandalous acts of fraud, double-bookkeeping, fictitious losses, padded costs, diversion of assets, price-rigging, falsified production figures, etc. The corporation owners would be fully exposed as grand-scale swindlers and outright violators of the law.
That is one real reason why the corporations threaten to resist to the end rather than willingly permit the workers any glimpse into the company books.
But there is a further and equally weighty reason why General Motors refuses to divulge its “secrets” to those who create all its wealth.
The unions, howls the GM ad, “hope to pry their way into the whole field of management.” And this “surely leads to the day” when the organized workers “will demand the right to tell what we can make, when we can make it, where we can make it, and how much we must charge you – all with an eye on what labor can take out of the business ...”
Thus, says GM, “the idea itself (a ‘look at the books’) hides a threat to GM, to all business ...” Because questions of “earnings, prices, sales volume, taxes and the like ... are recognized as the problems of management,” and the owners alone have the right to deal with such matters.
 
The Nub of the Corporation’s Fears
Here we come to the nub of the corporation fears. Once the workers turn an x-ray on the corporation books, once they get a clear picture of the stupendous robbery and exploitation registered in those books, they would Inevitably be aroused to demand greater control over the predatory operations of the private owners.
The workers would eventually come to the conclusion that the best thing for them to do would be to KICK OUT THE PARASITIC OWNERS ENTIRELY and operate industry under the” control and for the benefit of the working people.
Just what is this “management” and its function that the GM owners speak so awesomely about and whose “rights” the workers must never invade? These are functionaries hired to squeeze the maximum profits for the owners out of the labor force and means of production. For the capitalists aren’t interested in producing for the needs of the people. They are solely concerned with grabbing ever-greater profits.
The tax laws have been rigged so that the monopolists can operate industry even at low capacity and still realize enormous profits from tax refunds. Giant monopolies like General Motors conspire to restrict production in order to create artificial scarcity and impose high prices. In the last months of 1945, many corporations deliberately curtailed production in order to avoid paying excess profits taxes which are to be eliminated in 1946.
 
Labor Has the Right to Say
The workers who suffer from the greed, swindling and sabotage of the monopolists have not only the right but the duty precisely to tell the owners “what we can make, when we can make it, where we can make it, and how much we must charge ...”
Thus labor not only has the right and obligation to “know things,” but to “run things.”
The handful of billionaire monopolists who arrogate to themselves the “right” to control the means of subsistence of the people serve no useful function in production. Their “management” has been only mismanagement.
They manipulate the means of production to serve their selfish profit interests. They have converted the means for potential plenty into a monstrous exploitative mechanism creating scarcity, terrible depressions, starvation wages, poverty, wars.
For economic planning and the rational administration of industry a new “management” has long been needed. The only ones truly capable of organizing and operating industry for full and efficient production and for the needs of the people are the organized workers themselves.
Standing in the way of the needs of the masses, blocking the read to plenty, are the plutocratic parasites who hypocritically prate, as does General Motors, about “more and better things for the people,” but who actually provide less and less for the working people and more and more for the idle rich.
To screen their predatory and criminal operations, the capitalists have Invariably invoked the “sanctity of business secrets.” But this is a sham intended only to deceive the people and ward off exposure of the capitalists’ real secrets – the monstrous degree of their exploitation of labor and their criminal acts.
Between the big monopolies themselves there are no “business secrets.” They cooperate closely, not only on a national but an international scale, to exploit the toiling masses.
Thus, America’s leading corporations were caught red-handed in secret cartel agreements with the Nazi and Japanese corporations whereby all these Big Business conspirators freely exchanged the most vital patents and industrial processes essential to war. These deals were concealed not only from the people but from the American capitalist government itself.
 
GM Workers’ Battle Cry
These are facts which the Trotskyists have long since exposed. That is why the Socialist Workers Party in 1938 advanced for the first time in this country the slogan of “Open the Books of the Corporations!” For the past seven years, the Trotskyists have been advocating the need for this step.
Today the GM workers have taken up this slogan and made it the battle cry of the most progressive sections of the labor movement. Tomorrow. American labor is going to go even further.
To Wall Street’s and GM’s question, “a ‘look at the books’ or ‘a finger in the pie’?”, American labor is going to answer:
“We are not only going to inspect your books. We are going to eliminate your despotic and ruinous rule over our economic life. We want nothing less than the whole pie our sweat and toil produces.”
 



Attempting to project a program to allay the deepening and spreading class struggle between American labor and Big Business, President Truman on January 3 addressed the country by radio on “The State of the Union.”
The “state of the union,” Truman confessed, is not a happy one. “First among the obstacles” to the universal security and prosperity which the war government promised for peace, said Truman, “have been labor-management disputes?’
Thus, Truman dealt primarily with the decisive problem vexing American political life since V-J Day – the tremendous conflict between American labor and capital.
 
Truman’s “Solution”
Truman proposed to alleviate this conflict by passage of a single piece of legislation, the “fact-finding” bill initiated by him on December 3 when he made his strike-breaking “request” for the GM workers to end their strike. In his speech, he again called for a federal law to establish semi-compulsory aribitration government “fact-finding boards” and to prohibit the right to strike for a “30-day ‘cooling-off’ period.”
This proposition was met with bitter hostility and denunciation by virtually all sections of organized labor when it was first propounded. But once more it is advanced by Truman as his “solution” to the irrepressible class warfare provoked by the union-busting, wage-slashing offensive of America’s war-profits bloated corporations.
Truman, of course, claimed his program to restrict the right to strike “contains nothing harmful to labor.” For, he argued, “there is no reason why a strike cannot be postponed for thirty days” so that the government can “step in to obtain all the facts and report its findings to the country.”
 
Danger to Labor
In general, any law to restrict the right to strike would be an opening wedge for more drastic anti-labor legislation and in its very essence can be only dangerous to labor.
Under the particular circumstances now prevailing, Truman’s measure would have a specifically pernicious effect upon labor’s struggle. The present strikes are being called after months of delay and stalling, as a last desperate resort of the workers to win their just demands. The proposal to enforce a further 30-day delay would serve only to interpose another obstacle to strike action at the most timely and strategic moment.
If, in addition to this, the workers cannot strike before they submit their demands to a hand-picked government “fact- finding” board, we have nothing less than the establishment, even though in limited form, of compulsory arbitration. Moreover, the American workers have had a sufficient and bitter experience with these red-tape government boards.
But along with his attempt to show what a “good thing” his “fact-finding” plan is for labor, Truman also claims, with far more truth, that “on the other hand there is nothing harmful to management in this proposal.”
He explains carefully that “no detailed information obtained from the books of any company is to be revealed.” This is simply assurance to the corporations that the administration proposes to suppress any facts whose publication might be injurious to the interests of the profiteers.
 
Talking into Vacuum
But even with this proposition, so favorable to the corporate interests, Truman has found himself talking into a vacuum.
For the reality of the situation is that America’s power- drunk ruling class, the clique of Wall Street monopolists, is determined on nothing less than unconditional surrender of the labor movement.
This was made patent by the arrogant action of General Motors in walking out of Truman’s fact-finding hearings in the GM strike – an action which evoked only the feeble complaint from Truman that “you have seen how the General Motors Corporation has refused to cooperate with this fact-finding board.”
Moreover, Congress, which so completely reflects the interests and desires of Big Business, has pigeon-holed Truman’s “fact-finding” proposal, a matter of considerable distress to the President. Congress is preparing far more savage anti-labor laws.
For its part, organized labor, 15,000,000 strong, is no longer amenable to the type of government intervention it experienced during the war under the War Labor Board. Whatever the inclinations of the labor leaders may be, the union ranks are determined to fight for their rights tooth and nail with their most effective economic weapon – strike action.
 
Truman’s Choices
In this situation of a remorseless Big Business union-busting offensive and a defiant, militant resistance by labor, Truman’s attempt to dampen the conflict with a proposal inacceptable to both class contenders, is a futile one.
Nevertheless, he is impelled to this futile course, at this moment, by considerations of political expediency. Fundamentally he represents the interests of Big Business. But he is fearful of any decisive move against labor which will irremediably sever labor’s powerful political support from the Democratic administration.
Truman’s attempt to reconcile the bitter class opponents without sacrificing the basic Interests of Big Business or granting genuine gains to labor is utterly utopian. He will soon have to make the choice: either to crack down with full ferocity and all the power of government compulsion upon the striking workers, as Wall Street demands, or yield, substantial concessions to the mighty insurgent labor movement.
 




Have You Contributed to Aid the GM Strike?
The bitterest and most significant strike struggle in American labor history – the heroic General Motors strike – is being prolonged by the corporation in hopes of starving out the strikers and forcing them to accede to the company’s terms.
Last week, E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co., the billionaire munitions and chemical trust known as the. “Merchants of Death,” issued its annual report showing an admitted 1945 net profit of $77,600,000. Of this, the report discloses, $28,030,086 represents income on General Motors stock “after taxes and applicable expenses.” The du Ponts control almost a fourth of GM common stock and have the controlling interest.
The valuation of du Pont holdings in GM is $254,000,000 – which means that the du Ponts last year got a return on their investment of 11 per cent. This is a phenomenal rate of profit even if we discount the inflation of stock values.
All this wealth was squeezed out of the GM workers by parasite stockholders who actually didn’t invest one tenth of the value of their present claimed GM holdings in the corporation.
Will these billionaire parasites now force the GM workers to accept onerous terms of settlement through the weapon of starvation? The answer is up to the entire labor movement.
A National Committee to Aid Families of GM Strikers has been formed, with headquarters at 212 E. 49th Street, New York 17, N.Y. Speed funds to aid the GM strikers NOW!
*

A Stab-in-the-Back to the GM Strike
Anyone really concerned with the welfare of the General Motors strikers could only praise such a demonstration of labor solidarity as the contribution of $500,000 to the GM strike fund by the AFL International Ladies Garment Workers Union. This column last week hailed this magnificent contribution by the ILGWU.
The Daily Worker, organ of the Communist (Stalinist) Party, instead of warmly greeting the ILG aid to the GM strike, used it as an occasion to launch a slanderous attack on ILGWU President David Dubinsky and Walter Reuther, leader of the GM strike. This attack, published March 1, attempted to belittle and discredit the contribution of the AFL garment workers to the GM strikers. It was written by George Morris, Daily Worker hatchet-man.
The chief intent of the article is to smear Reuther, who has opposed the Stalinists in the UAW, by linking him through the ILG contribution to Dubinsky, who in turn is linked by a fantastic slander to none other than the “anti-Semitic radio priest Fascist Father Charles Coughlin.”
Morris’ article shows how blinded the Stalinists are by factional frenzy. Every assistance to the GM strike is viewed by them only as aiding the position and prestige of Reuther, against whom they are conducting an hysterical campaign of vilification. The Stalinist leaders would rather see the GM strike weakened and undermined than have an opponent of theirs in the labor movement get credit for any contribution to labor’s interests.
We hold no brief for Dubinsky’s or Reuther’s politics and union policies. But the Stalinists descend to the lowest depths of unprincipled factionalism when they throw mud at the splendid contribution of the ILGWU members to the GM strike. This could only operate to discourage similar contributions from other organizations and is a stab-in-the-back to the GM strike.
And this comes on top of the sneaky, back-room settlement made by Stalinist leaders of the CIO United Electrical Union in the recent strike of 30,000 UE workers in GM’s Electrical Division. The exceptional maliciousness of the attack on the ILGWU’s aid to the GM strike is no doubt inspired in part by the Stalinists’ desire to divert attention from their own treachery.
*

Labor Solidarity
An example of the labor solidarity being inspired by the GM strike is the action of the New York Branch of the AFL Seafarers International Union in voting $1,000 to aid the GM strikers and pledging an additional $100 weekly for the duration of the strike. The latter pledge was made “retroactive” to February 1.
Not only labor organizations, but other progressive-minded groups are rallying behind the GM strike. Last week the National Farmers Union pledged a contribution of $25,000.
 




Small Steel Locals Still Out on Strike
From steel workers still on strike in fabricating plants in Pittsburgh, northern Jersey and other areas, The Militant has received reports that they have been forced to continue their walkouts for many weeks after the CIO steel workers’ leaders settled the strikes in basic steel last month.
Apparently, Philip Murray secured a settlement for the 400,000 workers in basic steel and sent them back, but secured no real assurances of settlement on the same terms for nearly 350,000 other strikers in the smaller fabricating plants. It didn’t help the latter workers any when Truman declared that the 18½ cents an hour increase in basic steel did not apply to the smaller companies.
Thus, there are hundreds of the smaller and weaker steel locals which have had to pull their belts tighter and tighter and continue their strikes. The March 18 CIO News reports that up to the week of that issue there were still 426 plants employing 160,000 workers which had not signed up.
One steel striker writes us from Pittsburgh that “as soon as the strike vote was taken last fall, we raised the following questions to the International: We’re all going out together, will we all go back together? Or will the big companies sign up and leave us stranded? Murray’s representatives threw a lot of words around on this to avoid saying yes or no ... Now we certainly are left holding the bag, or you might say, holding empty bellies.”
The same worker informs us that in an effort to sign up the hold-out firms, Murray’s district directors, contrary to the instructions of the union’s wage policy committee, are making agreements for less than the full terms of the U.S. Steel “master” contract. “Some of the nut and bolt factories started signing up for 18½ cents, but without the 9¼ cents back pay.”
It is clear that there is a great deal of indignation among the remaining steel strikers at what they consider Murray’s failure to sufficiently consider their interests and to fight for them at the time the basic steel agreement was secured.
* * *

Some Stalinist Fakery About the GM Strike
From the first moment of the GM strike, The Militant pointed out the incorrectness of the “one-at-a-time” strategy authored by UAW Vice President Walter Reuther. The Militant pointed out the need to combat the concerted offensive of Big Business by a planned extension of the CIO strikes and a unified CIO strategy.
The Communist (Stalinist) Party, whose members in the UAW are very discredited, has seized upon the “one-at-a-time” strategy as a club to belabor Reuther, who is an anti-Stalinist and therefore an opponent of the CP in the unions. The Stalinist Daily Worker is running big articles attacking Reuther.
But the Stalinists, in order to attack Reuther and still cling to the coat-tails of the other UAW and CIO leaders, have to resort to a piece of real fakery. Thus George Morris, the Daily Worker’s leading hatchet-man and labor “expert,” writes that “Reuther jumped the gun with the GM strike with a ‘one-at-a-time’ theory in defiance of the CIO’a strategy of concentrating its major strikes for an all-at-once quick showdown.”
This is sheer fraud. What CIO “strategy” is Morris talking about? When was it determined? Who determined it? How was it supposed to operate?
The plain truth is that the CIO unions had no unified strategy. It was the GM strike which first forced the Truman administration to recommend a 19½ cent increase. Only after this did the other unions, steel, packinghouse, UE, go out on strike – and they settled for less than 19½ cents.
In fact, Murray once called off the scheduled steel strike without consultation of his own membership. He certainly did not consult the CIO packinghouse workers who were scheduled to go -out one day after the steel union, but who were forced to go out, like the GM strikers, on their own.
It is unlikely that the strike wave would have taken on such scope and power if it had not been for the initiative and inspiration provided by the GM strikers.
Reuther’s “one-at-a-time” strategy was in fact the policy of the entire UAW leadership, who voted for it and supported it. It was also the strategy. If one can call it such, of the whole CIO leadership.
What the Stalinists have to answer for is the conduct of the CIO Electrical Workers leaders in making a back-room settlement for 30,000 UE members in GM’s Electrical Division which undercut the demands of the GM auto workers.
* * *

“Incentive Pay” Comes Home to Roost
The Stalinists who complain about Reuther “prolonging the GM strike” are having a tough time with Westinghouse Electric, which refuses to grant an 18½ cent settlement to its 75,000 striking workers despite such a settlement in General Electric. The Stalinists dominate the UE-CIO which is conducting the Westinghouse strike.
Last week, Westinghouse contemptuously offered a 9½ cent raise, according to the UE leaders. Its proposal, which “shocked” the UE leaders, was contained in a lengthy 25-page document.
Of particular interest is the fact that Westinghouse attempts to justify its miserly wage offer on the ground that its “incentive pay” system permits its workers to make more than in other sections of the industry. This is the notorious speed-up plan which the Stalinists themselves ballyhooed during the war, and which they put into effect wherever they could shove it down the workers’ throats.
 



ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., March 30. – Some 1,877 delegates to the 10th National Convention of the CIO United Automobile Workers this afternoon adjourned their eight days of tumultuous deliberations.
This convention recorded, though in a distorted and unclear form, two far-reaching achievements. It approved and vindicated the bitter strike and advanced program of the General Motors workers. And again indirectly, it chalked up an important triumph of program over factional, machine politics.
Not a single basic issue was thrashed out openly on the convention floor. Nevertheless, the issues of the General Motors strike and the program it advanced were implicit in the central and dominant conflict of the convention, the battle for the UAW presidency between GM strike leader Walter Reuther and the incumbent R.J. Thomas.
 
Issues Implicit
Reuther was elected, though by a narrow margin, because he was the aggressive leader of the GM strike and because in the course of that strike he had advocated hew and far-reaching progressive demands.
In electing Reuther, the majority of the auto workers were voting for the program which in their minds his leadership of the GM strike represented. They expressed in this fashion their approval of a policy of militant union struggle and their desire for a program, going beyond immediate wage issues, aimed at resolving those basic economic and political issues which emerged on the crest of the titanic strike wave.
But because the battle over program was conducted within the narrow framework of struggle for posts rather than in the open arena of direct debate on the actual issues, the triumph of the progressive and militant delegates was limited and inconclusive.
The old-line conservative leaders of the Thomas-Addes faction, supported by the Stalinists, were able to swing enough votes away from the Reuther caucus to win three of the four top executive posts and a majority of the executive board.
 
Coming Struggle
Both the top bureaucracy of the CIO and the capitalist press clearly indicated their appreciation of the underlying significance of the Reuther-Thomas fight. CIO President Philip Murray appeared in person at the UAW convention to throw his prestige and influence behind the Thomas-Addes-Stalinist machine.
At the same time, the boss press treated the UAW convention and particularly the race for the UAW presidency as news of top-ranking national importance. The preference of the capitalist press for the Thomas- Addes leadership as against the “socialistic” Reuther was made plain.
From the very outset of the convention, in the opening “keynote” address of R.J. Thomas on Saturday, March 23, the character of the central convention struggle was indicated. The major point of Thomas’ speech was a scarcely-veiled attack on Reuther and the conduct of the GM strike. This was cloaked in a slanderous accusation, lifted bodily from the Stalinist press, that Reuther was plotting with AFL International Ladies Garment Workers’ president David Dubinsky, whose union had contributed $86,000 to aid the GM strikers, to swing the UAW into the AFL.
This lying accusation, expressed only by innuendo in the convention itself, was repeated openly in the corridors and hotel rooms, and in the meetings and literature of the Thomas-Addes caucus.
 
Lying Accusation
But the crux of their opposition to Reuther and the militant forces who supported him was their opposition to the GM strike and the advanced slogans which had been projected in that strike. This real issue the Thomas-Addes caucus plus their Stalinist supporters never dared to bring out openly on the convention floor.
The GM battle had been fought out on the picket lines, it had spearheaded the whole strike wave which won the largest single wage increases ever attained by key American unions. The policies and demands of the strike were approved by the GM workers themselves through, their rank and file delegates to the representative GM Delegates’ Conference. They had made national issues of not only the immediate wage question, but of such crucial factors as prices and profits, through their progressive demands of “Open the Books of the Corporation!” and “Wage Increases Without Price Increases.”
 
Thomas-Addes Method
By contrast to this in the Ford negotiations the Thomas-Addes leadership had compromised on the wage issue without any real battle. They conducted the negotiations behind the backs of the Ford workers. They yielded to the company’s. demand for “company security” and agreed to the inclusion in the Ford contract of a clause which would permit the company to victimize union militants for “unauthorised strikes.”
None of the key issues was brought directly before the convention. The first four days of the convention were occupied primarily with organizational questions. Everything was pointed toward the fight for leadership in which the real issues were reflected only indirectly.
Such discussion of issues as did occur took place in the big caucus rallies held at night after the Convention sessions. Here, however, there was little opportunity for a thorough airing of the questions by the ranks. Discussion was limited to the onesided presentation of speeches by the respective caucus leaders.
 
Issues Not Discussed
Thomas, Addes and the Stalinists concentrated on reckless and crude personal attacks against Reuther, not excluding red-baiting against his “extremist” and “socialistic experimentation.” This reached the low- point when Thomas bellowed in the course of one caucus speech, “Don’t forget that Mussolini was once a socialist too!”
On the other hand, the Reuther caucus meetings were distinguished by a greater attention to program. Reuther spent one entire evening discussing in detail a program for the union dealing with many of the important problems confronting the workers.
He avoided, however, as did the Thomas-Addes group, any discussion on the key issues arising from the strike wave, such as “company security,” the participation of the union leaders on the pro-corporation government boards, and offered no program of independent labor political action through the formation of an independent labor party.
The closest approach to a convention discussion of issues occurred during the closing moments of the third day’s session. The Reuther caucus had issued a leaflet challenging Thomas to a formal debate with Reuther on the issues in the GM strike. The
Thomas-Addes group had issued a counter-leaflet contemptuously rejecting the idea of a debate on the issues.
During the last hour of the Monday session, while Secretary-Treasurer Addes was in the chair, Delegate Murphy of Detroit Dodge Local 3 secured the floor on a point of special privilege. The convention was thrown into pandemonium when she introduced a motion for “a closed session tonight at 8 o’clock in order to have the candidates discuss the issues involved between Brother R.J. Thomas and Brother Walter Reuther.”
 
Addes Evades
Delegate Murphy called directly on Thomas to answer if he would “agree to debate this question tonight.”
Addes sought to divert the matter by giving the floor to another delegate, but persistent shouts arose from all sections of the vast auditorium, “Answer the question! Answer the question! Are you afraid of a debate?”
A Thomas supporter. Delegate Paul Silvers of Local 351, took the floor amid constant boos and interruptions to argue against the proposed debate because “Sister Murphy would have made her request on Saturday if she was as disturbed as she contends she was.”
Delegate Thornton of Flint Buick Local 590 demanded that the convention “bring them (Reuther and Thomas) together and have them make their statements in the presence of each other” and “deny them if they can.”
Then the Thomas-Addes-Stalinist group put forward the discredited Vice-President Richard Frankensteen. Frankensteen, who had announced his intention to retire from office to take one of the “fine opportunities” offered him, was greeted with a tremendous demonstration of hostility. His sole argument, when he finally could be heard, was that the debate proposal was “tomfoolery?’ He said “when President Roosevelt was running for re-election, and Tom Dewey knew he was beat, he challenged Roosevelt to a debate, too, because he wanted an out.”
Delegate Shelton Tappes of Ford Local 600 tried to come to the rescue of the Thomas-Addes forces by a motion to table the question of a debate. After twice taking a standing vote. Chairman Addes had to rule the motion to table lost.
Finally, the question of the night session to hold the debate was put to a vote. An overwhelming majority of the delegates supported the motion for a debate. But Addes ruled that the motion was lost because a motion to amend the rules of the convention “requires a two-thirds vote.”
The desperate maneuvers of the Thomas-Addes forces to avoid a real discussion of the issues left a majority with the well-founded suspicion that the Thomas-Addes group feared any direct debate.
 
Election Session Tense
On Wednesday morning, March 27, the climactic point of the convention was reached, the election of a president. The auditorium was packed to capacity. The atmosphere was tense and explosive. The long press tables below the huge platform were jammed, testifying to the significance the boss publications and radio networks placed on the outcome of the UAW convention.
Ben Garrison, of Ford Highland Park local 400, nominated Thomas. The opportunist Garrison had become known through his opposition to the no-strike pledge at the September 1944 UAW convention. He was used to try to swing the votes of militants against Reuther.
At a previous session of the convention, Garrison, a reporter for the Resolutions Committee, had launched a full-blown red-baiting attack against the Stalinists during a discussion on Negro discrimination. It was this red-baiter who nominated Thomas, the candidate whom the Stalinists supported all down the line.
Reuther was placed in nomination by Delegate Cote of Detroit Local 174. The nomination and seconding speeches for Reuther provided an opportunity for a discussion of Reuther’s policies in contrast to Thomas’, but the Reuther spokesmen failed to avail themselves of this opportunity.
Each nomination was followed by boisterous and tumultuous demonstrations and parades intended to stampede wavering elements.
 
Narrow Margin
The decision was in doubt almost to the last moment of the hours-long roll call. It was finally reported that Reuther had won by the narrow margin of 124 votes, with more than 8,800 cast. This announcement touched off another tremendous demonstration.
Reuther spoke briefly and called for “unity” of the top leadership. He stated “I extend my hand’’ to Addes and pledged to work to make the UAW a “source of strength to President Murray” of the CIO, who had tried to swing the convention against Reuther.
The jubilation of the Reuther caucus and its hopes for “unity” were short-lived. The very next day the Thomas-Addes group came back to capture by narrow margins the three other top officers’ posts, two vice-presidencies and the secretary-treasurership.
Reuther had attempted to get agreement for a division of the two vice-presidential posts between the two contending caucuses. In a surprise move, the Thomas-Addes group nominated Thomas to run against Reuther’s man, Melvin Bishop, for first vice-president. This was clearly a declaration of continuing warfare.
The nomination of Bishop, the result of a purely factional deal, played an important part in the election of Thomas. Bishop, as Regional Director for the important Detroit East Side region of the UAW, had aroused real enmity because of his bureaucratic and reactionary policies. He was heartily disliked by most delegates from the East Side region. The powerful Detroit Briggs Local 212 delegation, staunch militants and supporters of Reuther’s candidacy, did an about-face in protest against Bishop and demonstratively voted in a bloc for Thomas. The tide swung decisively in Thomas’ favor.
Secretary-Treasurer Addes, who ran unopposed, was reelected.
The Thomas-Addes group then secured a three-to-one majority of the executive officers when Richard T. Leonard, Ford negotiator and leading exponent of the notorious “company security” clause, won by a narrow margin of 42 votes over his Reuther opponent, John Livingston. The Reuther caucus had failed to expose the “company security” position of Leonard. Had they done so, they might have rallied many more votes for Livingston.
The election of executive board members left the decisive voting strength in the top leadership of the UAW in the hands of the Thomas-Addes faction. There were only two changes on the board of 18.
 
Emil Mazey Elected
One of these was extremely significant. The delegates from Detroit East Side Region 1, which contains some of the oldest and most militant locals in the UAW, elected former Briggs Local 212 President Emil Mazey to replace Melvin Bishop.
Mazey, a GI on his way back from Okinawa, was elected in his absence as a delegate from Local 212. At the 1943 UAW convention, he led the fight against the no-strike pledge and called for the formation of a labor party. He received prominence only a few months ago as a leader of the soldier “Get Us Home!” protests in the Philippines.
Mazey was elected by the large Region 1 delegation on the very first ballot. He received more than 1,000 votes, nearly double the number cast for the leading contender against him, the well- known Stalinist floor-whip, John Anderson of Detroit Amalgamated Local 155. Mazey is expected to fight on the board for more militant policies.
A number of key resolutions on policy questions were not acted upon by the convention but “referred” to the incoming executive board. These included resolutions on the union’s wage-price policy, a subject of sharp difference between the Reuther and the Thomas-Addes groups, and on “So-Called Company Security.”
The wage-price resolution, drafted by the Resolutions Committee, correctly exposed the threat of Big Business and the Truman administration to rob the workers of their wage gains by deliberate price inflation. It condemned the Wage Stabilization Board, but made no reference to the “fact-finding” boards which have served to whittle down the workers’ wage demands. It said nothing about withdrawing union representatives from all government wage-freezing, semi-compulsory arbitration bodies.
 
“Company Security”
The resolution entitled “So-Called Company Security” declared the union “stands unalterably opposed, and will struggle to prevent or eliminate, any and all types of penalty systems which the corporations have falsely labeled ‘company security’.” This position, which undoubtedly expresses the opinion of the great majority of UAW members, never came to the floor for action.
No resolution on labor political action was reported out by the Resolutions Committee. On this most crucial question neither Reuther nor the Thomas-Addes faction offered a program for genuine independent labor political action through a labor party. Both continued to speak of support for “progressive” candidates of “both major parties” and merely gave lip service to the idea of a possible “third progressive party.” Reuther, in a press interview, spoke of the “impracticality” of “a third party” even in the 1948 elections.
The one vital question the delegates did have an opportunity to discuss was the issue of discrimination against the Negro workers. Several resolutions, containing many progressive points, were adopted by the convention.
But several Negro and white delegates pointed out that similar resolutions had been adopted in the past but the leadership had not carried them out effectively. Representative Negro delegates rose to plead for “more teeth” in the anti-discrimination resolutions.
The Stalinists, taking advantage of the failure of the Reuther caucus to make a clear-cut and militant stand on the question of discrimination and demagogically seeking the support of the Negro delegates, introduced a proposal to provide a post on the Executive Board for a Negro representative.
This proposal was fought by both the Thomas-Addes group, whom the Stalinists support, and the Reuther followers, except for some of the most advanced militants. The latter, despite the fact that the proposal for a Negro Board member had been introduced by the Stalinists for factional reasons, favored it as a demonstration of the sincerity of the union in eliminating discrimination and giving recognition to the Negro members.
 
Anti-Discrimination Proposal Debated
The debate on this issue began the second day of the convention on a resolution for the establishment of a Fair Practices and Anti-Discrimination Department, headed by the International President who shall appoint its administrative staff.
Nat Ganley of Local 165, a leading Stalinist, proposed that the Fair Practices Department be headed by a Negro member who would be a member of the International Executive Board. Hodges Mason, of Local 208, a Stalinist supporter and prominent Negro delegate, also spoke in favor of the idea.
Members of the Resolutions Committee opposed the proposal with the stock arguments that this would lead to special posts for “all groups” and “we don’t recognize any differences in our ranks.” This, of course, ignored that fact that, even in the outstandingly progressive UAW, which has done more than any other union on the question of discrimination, qualified Negro members still have to buck under-currents of discrimination which deny them an equal opportunity to secure top office.
This was pointed out by Delegate Irwin Bauer, of Detroit Budd Local 306, who scored both factions in the leadership for their failure to nominate any Negro delegate for a top office. He declared that “either we must create a special post in the top Executive Board for the Negroes so they can have representation in the top leadership of the union, or the top caucuses of this union, the Addes and Reuther caucus both, must combine on an agreed top officer for the Union.”
The issue was then referred back to the Resolutions Committee, which returned the next day with a majority and minority report on the question. The minority report, which was presented by the Stalinists whose position was represented by Shelton Tappes of Local 600, this time eliminated the question of a Negro representative on the board. It called only for an additional board member, to be elected by the convention at large, to head the Fair Practices Department.
At that point delegate Garrison, who spoke for the majority of the Resolutions Committee and who was later to nominate Thomas for president, launched into a red-baiting tirade against his Stalinist colleagues in the Thomas-Addes caucus. He opposed what he called an organizational policy “on the basis of lines adopted by the Soviet Union” and the establishment of “a commissar over any particular segment of our membership.”
The Stalinists this time evaded the question of a Negro board member, but merely pointed out that the minority proposal for an additional board member elected by the entire convention offered a more favorable opportunity for the election of a Negro to the board.
 
“A Disgrace”
Briggs Local 212 Delegate Ernest Mazey, brother of Emil, the newly-elected board member, gave support to the minority resolution, pointing out that it “is regrettable and a disgrace” that the top leadership had permitted the issue to be raised in the manner it did, when the issue could have been easily settled “if the four top leaders had gotten together and agreed on a mutual candidate, a Negro candidate.”
With the whole top leadership supporting the majority resolution, it was passed, overwhelmingly. The minority resolution was supported by about 300 delegates.
Some resolutions of a generally progressive and constructive character on which there was no controversy were acted upon by the convention on the opening day and in the last couple of hours before adjournment. These included resolutions supporting the CIO’s campaigns to “Organize the Unorganized” and “Organize the South,” a program of demands for the veterans, and the establishment of a $1 assessment for a special strike fund to aid GM workers and all other UAW members still on strike.
A special resolution in support of GM strikers still out because of the corporation’s refusal to settle local grievances was unanimously adopted.
 
Democratic Character
The democratic character of the UAW-CIO and the membership’s suspicion of any moves by the top leadership to strengthen its bureaucratic hold on the union were demonstrated several times on important organizational questions.
The first of these was the unanimous proposal of the Constitution Committee to extend the officers’ term to two years instead of one. The argument that this would “prevent politics” in the union was hooted down by the delegates, who after brief debate voted virtually unanimously to continue the one-year term of office.
Another issue was the proposal for a dues increase, to raise the present monthly dues from $1 to $2. The leadership had also cooked up an alternative proposal for $1.50 dues, with most of the increase going to the International.
The delegates voted down both proposals. They adopted instead a proposal for $1,50 dues, the additional 60 cents to be equally divided between the local unions and the International. The motion provided for the allocation of the International’s additional 25 cents to special funds, including 5 cents to an emergency strike fund.
The Constitution Committee, with the behind-the-scenes support of the top officers, also tried to put over an across-the-board salary increase for the executive officers and board members. Present salaries range from $5,000 for board members to $9,000 for the UAW president.
 
Reject Increases
Among the arguments were that the top officers were “entitled to” a “17½ per cent increase like they had won for the members” and “it would look bad” if the union which has fought for wage increases denied proposed annual increases of from $1,000 to $1,500 to the officers.
It was pointed out by several delegates that the officers had had a substantial increase voted in 1943, while the workers wages were frozen. The delegates made it clear they did not want their officers to live too far above the standards of the membership. By an overwhelming vote, the membership flatly rejected all proposals for salary increases to officers.
The 1946 UAW convention, as reflected in the policies implicitly endorsed by the election of Reuther, marked a high point in the militant, progressive trend of the auto workers. The failure to thrash out the issues openly, however, has left the settlement of these issues inconclusive.
The relationship between program and leadership received a clearer expression than ever before. But this was insufficiently appreciated to effect a cleanout break with the old leadership.
 
Coming Issues
The mounting inflation and pressure on the workers’ living standards, the Increasingly reactionary attacks of Congress and the Truman administration on labor, the new anti-labor offensive which Big Business is preparing, serve to clarify the questions of program and will widen the cleavage between the ranks and the top conservative leadership.
The auto workers have in an indirect fashion shown their readiness to break with conservative, bureaucratic leadership. They have indicated their desire for militant policies and for a program which will meet fundamental economic and political problems.
The next period will see the continuation of the fight on the issues which this convention failed to resolve – the elimination of “company security” clauses, the withdrawal of union representatives from all government wage-freezing and arbitration bodies, and above all the formation of a labor party.
 



Spearheaded by a multi-million, dollar campaign of the National Association of Manufacturers, American Big Business has launched a powerful offensive to destroy all price controls and rob labor of any wage gains won in the current great strike wave.
Full-page advertisements are appearing almost daily in 600 newspapers throughout the country heralding the demand of the NAM for the removal of all price controls as Wall Street’s “answer” to “inflation.”
These advertisements are timed to coincide with House Banking and Currency Committee hearings on extension of the Price Control Act after June 1946.
The NAM advertisements carry a brazen threat to sabotage production and increase the scarcity of goods unless the profits-swollen corporations secure the “right” to raise prices without restriction.
This threat is contained in the key sentence of the NAM ad: “Remove price controls on manufactured goods and production will step up fast.”
 
Corporation Blackmail
If price controls are not removed, the implication is clear. The manufacturers threaten to impede and restrict production and force up prices by a deliberately contrived scarcity. In this fashion, the corporations are attempting to blackmail the American people into granting their outrageous inflationary demands.
The green light for this intensified offensive against even the prevailing ineffective price controls has been given by the Truman administration. The government has compliantly granted exorbitant price increases to the steel magnates and proposes to provide no less than a billion and a half dollars in government subsidies to the meat-packing and other food trusts.
At the same time, the administration is fearful of the political repercussions that will inevitably ensue in the event of the completely uncontrolled inflation, which the corporations desire in order to make a monumental price “killing” and sustain their super-profits at wartime levels.
This fear that Big Business may push inflation too far and too fast, and thus provoke further great labor struggles as the workers fight to defend their shrinking purchasing power, was reflected in the appeal of Economic Stabilization Director Bowles before the House committee hearings on price control.
Bowles defended the principle of permitting price increases to guarantee “normal” high profits to the corporations. But he cited as a frightening example of the unrestricted greed of Big Business the fact that the Ford Motor Company had asked for a 55 per cent price increase! This, he said, offered a “pretty good idea” of the devastating inflation that would sweep the country if all price controls were eliminated.
Bowles’ reference to the price extortion attempted by Ford infuriated Congressmen at the hearing. They rose not to protect the people against the price-gougers but to defend Henry Ford II, scion of the billion-dollar Ford empire. One Congressman irately demanded: “Did Congress give you the right to browbeat Mr. Ford?”
Citing government figures, Bowles pointed out how generous the government has been to the profiteers. He declared that “in the last three months of 1945, dividends were as high as at any time in our history. Corporations are looking forward to an excellent year in 1946.”
But grave danger exists that the Big Business-dominated Congress will either kill price control altogether or emasculate it to a point where it will be totally ineffective.
 




National Phone Strike Scheduled March 7
The National Federation of Telephone Workers, 260,000 strong has set 6 a.m., March 7, as the deadline for the greatest strike In the history of modern communications.
A three-day stoppage in sympathy with striking Western Electric Workers in New Jersey and New York last January virtually paralyzed telephonic communications in 44 states.
The NFTW, with 17 affiliates, represents every worker engaged in every phase of the phone system, from manufacture, installation and repair of all equipment, to the “hello” girls. It is in position to cripple the giant American Telephone and Telegraph international trust in a dozen different fields.
For several years America’s telephone workers have been battering away at AT&T and the government for substantial wage increases, shorter hours and elimination of the company’s “Gestapo system”. There have been repeated strikes, beginning with the Thanksgiving Week wartime walkout in 1944 initiated by the Dayton, O., operators.
Wages begin at $18 for switchboard operators and clerical workers, and $22 for production workers and craftsmen. The union is seeking a $10 weekly “across the board”. increase, a 65 cents an hour minimum and a 40 hour week.
* * *

Aid to GM Strike
Typical of the aid being given the heroic GM strikers who are faced with a corporation attempt to starve them out, is the $1 a week special membership assessment fund voted by Detroit Briggs Local 212, CIO United Automobile Workers.
The Briggs workers’ paper, Voice of Local 212, reported on February 7 that Local 212 members had already contributed more than $10,000 to their GM brothers and sisters. The paper pays tribute to the GM strikers, stating:
“It was the heroic struggle of the GM workers which set the the pattern for wage demands and caused Ford and Chrysler to come across with substantial wage increases. In this battle for higher wages GM workers were the pioneers ... Had GM been able to break the spirit of its workers and drive them back without any gains, every other auto company would have been encouraged to ‘get tough’ with labor.”
* * *

ILG Gives $500,000 GM Strike Aid
Special commendation is due the members of the AFL International Ladies Garment Workers Union, which is collecting a $500,000 fund to aid the CIO auto workers in the GM strike.
Reporting the response of ILGWU locals to President David Dubinsky’s appeal for the half million dollar fund, the union’s paper Justice says: “Many shops have voted to contribute several hours of work, while others are pledging to raise specific bulk sums.”
The New York Cloak Joint Board is pledged to raise $100,000, Dubinsky’s appeal stated, “This is a duty of labor solidarity we must not delay or shirk.”
* * *

GM Office Workers
One weakness revealed in the course of the General Motors strike is the fact that the GM office workers are largely unorganized and have been used in many instances by the company in attempts to open the GM production workers picket lines. A number of anti-picketing injunctions have been issued on the pretext of protecting the “right” of office workers to cross picket lines.
UAW Chevrolet Local 14, Toledo, O., has launched a campaign, as have other locals, to bring the office and plant protection people into the CIO auto union.
One recent appeal of the Chevrolet local to these unorganized wage-earners, whose wages and conditions are very bad, reminds them:
“Do not be fooled and misled into believing that because you work in an office your interests are different from those who work on the production line.
“The days of Horatio Alger success stories are over! If you are to receive a higher standard of living, it must and can come only as a result of organized struggle. Join our ranks today!”
 




Capitalist Press and Sour Grapes
One interesting sidelight of the GM strike victory is the attempt of the anti-labor press to “explain” away the gains of the GM workers and to minimize the significance of their well-earned triumph.
Typically, the N.Y. Times, March 14, carefully pointed out that “It was apparent that the wage increase of 18½ cents an hour and other concessions fell short of the original demand for almost twice as much.” It gloated because the “net take-home pay on a 40-hour week will be less than it was at the old rate during the war.”
True enough, the GM workers didn’t get their full and justified demands. But they came a long way from the demands of the corporation which originally proposed a wage cut in the form of a 45-hour week at straight time, elimination of union security and seniority provisions, and demanded union-busting “company security.”
By their magnificent and unyielding fight the GM workers paved the way for the biggest single wage increase for American labor in its history, frustrated Wall Street’s union-busting offensive, placed an obstacle before the all-out price inflation slated by the auto barons, and forced the mighty General Motors, spearhead of the open- shop offensive, to beat a retreat.
Well, one can hardly blame the capitalist press for exhibiting) an aggravated case of “sour grapes.”
* * *

Judases in Search of a Market
George Morris, hatchetman of the Stalinist Daily Worker, wrote an article called A Market for Judases, in which he bemoaned some “disquieting signs” and “a serious danger within the CIO.”
Said danger, explains Morris, is the “type of degeneration one meets these days” among “certain” union leaders who recently have gone over to the bosses’ camp as highly paid “personnel managers,” “labor relations advisors,” etc.
It is illuminating, however, to examine more closely the three examples cited by Morris. Each – as Morris carefully refrains from stating – went to the Stalinist “finishing school.”
Morris is “nauseated to vomiting” at Edward Cheyfitz, formei head of the CIO Die Casten Union. Cheyfitz has lined up a $15,000-a-year job as “advisor” to Eric Johnson, U.S. Chamber of Commerce president. Cheyfitz will be recalled as the lad wha started out as a Young Communist (Stalinist) League member is Toledo, was sent expense-free to the Soviet Union for a couple of years, returned to a cushy job with the Doehler Die Company. He took over the lead of the union, worked his way up to local CIO recording secretary and finally became a key Stalinist trade union functionary. His specialty for many years was baiting “Trotskyites” and sending goon squads against union militants.
When in Ohio, Morris “was told” of “a regional head of another union who suddenly quit” to become “personnel director for the company.” Morris “forgets” to mention this individual’s name, but we will jog his memory.
It was Victor DeCavitch, international vice-president of the CIO United Electrical Workers, and long a leading and notorious Stalinist in the CIO.
The case which most turns Morris’ delicate stomach is that of UAW Vice-President Richard T. Frankensteen. After a career in New York and Miami night clubs, Frankensteen recently announced he was contemplating accepting one of the “fine opportunities” being offered him by Big Business firms.
Although Frankensteen was never a Stalinist, he and the Stalinists maintained a reactionary bloc for years in the UAW. Together they sought to put over “incentive pay,” expel militants, and conducted a super-jingo wartime policy. He is a Stalinist “correspondence school” graduate.
These graduates of the Stalinist school of betrayal have merely followed the examples of their teachers, like Earl Browder, 16 years the head of the Communist (Stalinist) Party, and Louis Budenz, former editor of the Daily Worker.
Morris himself acts like an accomplice who tries to cover himself up by appearing as the most “zealous” hunter of his fellow criminals.
Yes, indeed! The labor movement is well-advised to look out for Judases – especially Stalinist Judases – in search of a market.
 



ATLANTIC CITY, N.J., Mar. 24. – Hot from the battlefronts of the greatest labor upsurge in American history, some 2,000 delegates of the mighty CIO United Automobile Workers have been meeting here at the Civic Auditorium since yesterday in their scheduled week-long 10th National Convention.
Dispensing with the usual practice at most union conventions, including the CIO, of wasting the delegates’ time with numerous wind-bag guest speakers and elaborate ceremonies, the convention got down to business quickly yesterday afternoon. Before the first recess it had acted on a number of important resolutions, including the plan for a big “Organize the Unorganized” campaign.
 
Key Issues
However, many of the key issues that developed out of the great strike wave, which was spearheaded by the General Motors workers, have not yet hit the convention floor. These include such questions as “company security,” government “fact-finding” boards and the launching of an independent labor party.
Much of the interest and attention of the delegates is being centered on the struggle for the presidency of the union, between Walter Reuther, UAW vice-president and GM strike leader, and UAW President R.J. Thomas. This issue will come to a head Wednesday, when the election of officers is scheduled.
This afternoon saw the first real outbursts of debate and controversy on vital questions.
The delegates vociferously and overwhelmingly voted down the unanimous proposal of the Constitution Committee to amend the UAW constitution to provide for the election of national officers every two years instead of annually.
The convention also referred back to the Constitution Committee a proposal to establish a Fair Practices and Anti-Discrimination Department after delegates insisted the proposal be strengthened to include provisions for greater representation for the Negro members in the top councils of the union.
 
Storm of Boos
As in previous conventions, the proposal to extend the terms of the top officers beyond one year was immediately greeted with a storm of boos and other strong expressions of disapproval. Shouts of “sit down” met the spokesman of the Constitution Committee, Ben Garrison of Ford Highland Park Local 400, when he tried to sell the convention the top leadership’s unpopular proposal – which none of the latter had the guts to openly and personally advocate.
After the chairman, Thomas, pleaded to “give the speaker a chance,” Garrison made a demagogic plea for the longer term in order to “limit politics” and because, he claimed, “if we permit continuation of internal politics we are not going to have a union.” Shelton Tappes of Ford Local 600, another member of the committee, who has been known as a close follower of Stalinist policies, also spoke for two-year terms in order to “eliminate politics from the union.”
Although the floor was flooded with the upraised hands of delegates, principally those who opposed the proposal, Thomas managed to give the floor mainly to those who favored the proposal. This brought loud and strident objections.
 
Voice of Ranks
One delegate, from Local 365, who clearly voiced the true sentiments of the ranks, pointed out that “if the officers do a good job they will be elected again without politicking. But if they don’t do their job we want to be in a position to eliminate them as quickly as possible.”
The call for the vote was soon made from the floor. The proposition was then voted down almost unanimously to the accompaniment of a great outburst of applause and cheers. This action reflected the mistrust of the auto militants, steeped in the tradition of union democracy, of any move that might help the top leaders to entrench themselves in a bureaucratic position over the union ranks.
The very next proposal of the Constitution Committee brought forward the question of providing representation for the Negro members, who constitute a sizable and very active portion of the union, on the top bodies of the UAW. This proposal has repeatedly been supported by most Negro delegates. They wish to protect the interests of the especially oppressed Negro workers, and to secure a demonstration by the union of its earnest desire to show the world it takes its no-discrimination policy seriously.
The debate arose after the Constitution Committee reported out its proposal for the establishment of a Fair Practices and Anti-Discrimination Department to be headed by the International President.
A proposal was made from the floor by Nat Ganley, Local 155, that an additional amendment be added to provide for the election of a Negro to the International Executive Board. This idea was supported by several representative Negro delegates, as well as several white members.
 
Examples Cited
Opposition was voiced to the representation proposal giving the stock argument that officers should be elected strictly on the basis of “qualifications” and that if you start with guaranteeing Negroes representation, then “every other group” will want special provisions. This argument evaded the significant factor that it is only the Negroes who lack, even in the democratic UAW, full and equal opportunity to gain key offices because of still remaining, underlying currents of discrimination.
Examples of this discrimination, as well as the failure of both factions of the top leadership to seriously implement the fine anti-discrimination resolutions passed at previous conventions, were cited by several Negro delegates, including Hodges Mason, of Local 208.
The Stalinists, whose spokesmen were Ganley and Hodges, had at previous conventions introduced this proposal. Their purpose has always been demagogically to exploit the sentiments of the Negro delegates in a factional maneuver against Reuther. They did this in 1943 when Reuther opposed their speed-up “incentive pay” plan. This maneuver was made possible because of Reuther’s incorrect position on this question and his catering to certain Jim Crow elements in his caucus.
Erwin Baur, Detroit Budd Local delegate, summed up the issue most clearly when he stated: “It is quite obvious from observing the action of the Negro delegates that they want to have more than what the Constitutional Committee proposes. This question can be solved here only in one of two ways. Either the two caucuses, neither of which has nominated a Negro candidate, must combine to elect a Negro to the top committee, or we must adopt an article to the constitution which will provide a post for a Negro representative.”
 
Real Situation
This statement brought out into the open the real situation. Neither the Thomas-Addes group nor the Reuther group has nominated and fought to elect some of the unquestionably qualified Negro members. In this respect both groups are catering to the more backward and prejudiced minority of delegates.
The convention voted to refer the committee’s recommendation back to the committee for further consideration and to bring back a proposal with “more teeth” and greater assurances of a sincere desire to give the Negro members proper representation.
The “keynote” speech of the convention was delivered by President R.J. Thomas yesterday afternoon.
His remarks created scarcely a ripple in the convention. He spoke in broad generalities about the problems facing the workers, briefly outlining the numerous attacks which the employers and their agents are aiming at the workers. His one positive point, which no one could possibly contest, was his plea for the organization of the unorganized in line with the big campaign being mapped by the CIO.
 
Thomas Skirts Issues
He skirted all the key issues, however, such as “company security” and government boards. Although he attacked Truman as “weak and spineless” and asserted “we must strengthen our political action,” he wound up by proposing the same old bankrupt policy of tying labor to the political parties of Big Business, simply pleading that “we must demand that both major political parties in this country have more progressive candidates.” The present reactionary Congress is made up of many of those “progressive” capitalist candidates whose election was hailed by CIO-PAC leaders as a “great progressive victory” in November 1944.
The real intent of the speech was factional, as was revealed when Thomas made an underhanded and concealed attack on Reuther, whom he tried by implication to link to a “plot” allegedly being engineered by AFL Ladies Garment Workers’ President David Dubinsky to swing the UAW into the AFL.
Thomas took a slanderous attack directly from the Stalinist Daily Worker and tried, without naming him, to smear Reuther. He sought to throw suspicion on the splendid contribution of $86,000 which the ILG made to aid the GM strike. Thomas referred back to the time in 1939 when Dubinsky is reported to have aided Homer Martin with $25,000 when Martin tried to split the UAW into the AFL. He said he “was worried about the situation” and by innuendo tried to cast doubts on Reuther’s CIO loyalty because the ILG, like many AFL unions, contributed to the General Labor Committee to Aid the GM Strikers, which was supported by both AFL and CIO leaders including CIO President Philip Murray.
Thomas’ speech was met by only a brief flurry of polite applause and widespread boos.
 
Reuther Rally
Reuther has the support, it is quite apparent, of most of the more militant and progressive elements. Last night his caucus held a “Reuther for President” rally, which attracted about 800 delegates.
Reuther, at this rally, spoke generally in defense of his leadership of the GM strike, which is the main reason for the support he is now receiving for the union presidency.
Although there is a tendency among a section of his followers to resort to red-baiting against the Stalinists, Reuther in his speech avoided red-baiting. He sharply assailed the underhanded secret deal of the Stalinist leaders of the CIO United Electrical Workers who violated an agreement with the UAW and settled the strike of 30,000 UE members in GM Electrical Division for less than the GM auto workers were demanding.
Reuther correctly attacked Thomas for his conduct during the GM strike, such as Thomas’ proposition to reopen GM parts plants during the strike, his attempts to settle the strike on less favorable terms, etc. Reuther went back to the wartime period of “wild-cat” strikes before V-J Day and accused Thomas of not having “the guts to take a stand” in support of the Kelsey-Hayes and other strikers.
Reuther admitted that the responsibility for so-called unauthorized strikes lay with the leadership for its failure to defend the interests of the workers. He also admitted that the huge pile-up of local grievances whose settlement has prolonged the GM strike came during the period of the no-strike pledge.
 
Reuther’s Own Past
Reuther, however, failed to recall his own support of the no-strike pledge and how he helped to enforce it. Reuther avoided discussion of many of the main issues growing out of the GM strike, such as the now-clearly false “one-at-a-time” strategy which he authorized and which the entire UAW Board voted to follow.
He also neglected to explain his capitulation on the issue of Truman’s “fact-finding” boards, in whose proceedings he participated, although he had previously denounced the “fact-finding” procedure as aimed to whittle down the union demands – which it did.
He referred pointedly to the fact that the GM contract contained no “company security” clause, a positive achievement of the GM strike, But he did not mention the fact that the UAW Board, with his participation, approved unanimously the original and worst proposal for “company security” offered by the UAW leaders to Ford Motor Company.
Reuther in his talk avoided the question of program. Because the meeting was conducted solely as a “hurrah” rally, members of the Reuther caucus who desired to, did not have the opportunity to make proposals on program. But, aware that this question was foremost in the minds of a number of those present, Reuther concluded by saying he would “discuss the question of program at another meeting.”
However, his program was released in a convention paper issued by his group following the meeting. Except for language and phraseology, it scarcely differs from the program of Thomas- Addes. It contains no proposals for action on such vital questions as “company security” and the withdrawal of union support from government wage-freezing and wage-fixing bodies like the “fact-finding” boards and Wage Stabilization Board.
On the question of labor political action, the key to labor’s most crucial problems, Reuther proposes “an aggressive program of political action to elect candidates pledged to this program within the existing party structure.” This means to back capitalist vote-catchers of the Democratic or Republican machines who give cheap pre-election promises to “support labor’s program.”
The need for a real political instrument of labor, a labor party, is recognized in a number of resolutions submitted by important locals to the convention. But Reuther does not propose any concrete steps whereby the UAW might advance the formation of a labor party now. He merely asks labor to “join hands with farmers, professionals, small business and other functional groups” to “build the base” for what he vaguely describes as a “new progressive party.”
It remains to be seen whether the convention will have the opportunity to come to grips with the major questions or whether, as has happened in previous conventions, the delegates will be sidetracked into preoccupation with a narrower factional struggle around posts.
 




New Big Strikes Loom
Balloting in the strike poll of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, two key railway unions, was running 68 per cent in favor of strike, it was announced on March 1, with 90 per cent of the vote completed. The final total is expected to be announced by March 6.
Unlike other railway unions, the trainmen and locomotive engineers have correctly rejected arbitration of their basic wage demands for a 25 per cent increase and 45 improvements in the working rules. The 215,000 organised trainmen and 78,000 locomotive engineers could effectively tie up virtually the entire railway system.
In addition to the pending railway walkout, the country’s militant coal miners, whose bituminous contract expires April 1, may be putting their traditional “no contract, no work” policy into effect on that date unless the operators meet the new demands of the AFL United Mine Workers.
UMW President John L. Lewis on March 2 informed the soft coal operators of the union’s desire to reopen wage negotiations on March 12. He simultaneously filed, a 30-day strike notice with the NLRB.
It is reported that the miners will seek wage increases above the 16 to 18½-cent “pattern” fixed by the administration in the packinghouse and steel cases. The miners cracked the Little Steel formula during the war – but it was not split wide open because the other unions failed to follow the miners’ fighting example.
Perhaps the miners will crack the new “Big Steal” formula before it hardens into a real wage freeze.
* * *
Chrysler Contract

There has been a general hush-hush about the terms of the new Chrysler contract which the CIO United Auto Workers leaders concluded in January.
This contract was concluded in an utterly bureaucratic fashion over the heads of the Chrysler workers. The reason for this high handed conduct can be gleaned from two letters sent by UAW officials to the Chrysler Corporation on January 26. The letters reveal some of the impermissible concessions made to the corporation – concessions which the Chrysler workers would have rejected out-of-hand if there had been any prior full and free discussion of their real meaning.
in a letter to Robert W. Conder, director of labor relations for Chrysler Corporation, Norman Matthews, UAW-CIO National Chrysler Director, states that the International union disapproves of “violation and abuses by union representatives of the bargaining procedure” which were “due to lack of understanding and because of changing conditions during the war.” He states further that “a large percentage of time has been spent by Union representatives on matters other than provided for in the agreement” and that the UAW will “assign a full-time representative to see that this abuse of the bargaining procedure will discontinue.”
Thus, the resistance of local unions to the continued provocations and contract violations practiced by Chrysler during the war when the workers were shackled with the no-strike pledge is now slanderously labeled “abuses” by Matthews. He proposes to spend the union’s money for an International representative, not to safeguard the workers from contract violations by the company, but to PROTECT THE COMPANY from the “abuse of the bargaining procedure” when local unions and grievance men seek to end company provocations!
Another vicious feature of the Chrysler contract is revealed in a letter from the International union office to Conder. This states that “the union and the company disapprove and will discourage their members or representatives from using or issuing statements in their official papers, handbills, newspapers or other literature which are inconsistent with amicable industrial relations between the parties.”
This capitulation to the corporation’s demand that the union surrender its rights of free speech and press is a most sinister precedent for the whole labor movement. Even if the corporation abides by this agreement, which is very doubtful, it can continue its anti-union propaganda indirectly through a thousand channels. It has the daily press and radio, Big Business political spokesmen from the city halls all the way up to Congress, “front” groups like the NAM and Chamber of Commerce.
This restriction is really aimed exclusively at silencing local unions and militant workers when they seek to expose the corporation’s anti-union practices, provocations and contract violations. It would forbid them the right to publicize corporation profiteering, price hiking and political activities. Moreover, the whole lying inference of the “non-criticism” agreement is that the union in the past has been unjust and untruthful in its printed attacks on the corporation.
This concession to the corporation will be used by the company, in collaboration with the union officials, in attempts to suppress the voice of the workers when they seek to fight company abuses. It is a flagrant attack on freedom of speech and press which can only further encourage the invasion of the democratic rights of the unions.
 




The American Federation of Labor craft chiefs intend to ride to labor “unity” over the broken bones of industrial unionism.
That was made clear by the just adjourned sixtieth annual convention of the AFL in New Orleans.
Despite William Green’s reiterated pious prayers for “peace and harmony” and his self-righteous denunciation of John L. Lewis as standing in the way of unity, the AFL head and his lieutenants failed to make the one simple declaration which might have given substance to their charges against Lewis. All Green had to say in order to clear the, path to unity was:
“I deny that we intend to obstruct industrial organization or to dismember the mass unions of the CIO in the interests of the craft organizations. The AFL is ready to aid in the building and extension of industrial unions in the mass production industries.”
The deliberate silence of the AFL spokesmen on this one crucial point speaks more loudly than all the flowery “unity” talk unloosed on the delegates. The AFL chiefs are ready to “unite” with the CIO only around the funeral pyre of industrial unionism.
The resolutions and proceedings of the convention merely underline the real meaning of this silence.
One of the first acts of the convention, on November 22, was the endorsement of a proposal contained in the report of the committee on local and federal organization, to deny local AFL councils’ the right to receive communications from any organization not, affiliated with the AFL – a measure aimed at preventing any possibility of united action against the employers by local AFL and CIO bodies. This resolution assumes a particularly vicious character in the light of the inspiring example of labor solidarity given by the various AFL locals in their support of the CIO workers on strike at the Vultee Aircraft plant in Downey, California.
A choice example of how the AFL craft moguls are setting traps for the industrial unions, in the event of unity, is the resolution passed by the convention, on the endorsement of the Executive Council, giving the Council power to suspend international Unions “in cases where 2 or more national and international unions unite and conspire to create and launch ail organization for any purpose dual to the American Federation of Labor.”
David Dubinsky, head of the Intern’al Ladies Garment Workers who deserted the CIO industrial unions [line of text missing] ed would be greener pastures inside the AFL. attempted to oppose this resolution. Dubinsky complained that this resolution was an effort to skirt around a promise which he alleges the Executive Council made to him as a condition for his return to the AFL fold, that no international union would be suspended from the AFL without the majority approval of a convention.
One indication of how the industrial unions would be cut to ribbons if the CIO unions should return to the AFL was given during the session of November 26. Representatives of several local “federal” unions, which have a semi-industrial character, caused a minor storm in the convention by charging the craft unions with raiding their membership.
 
Craft Raids Protested
Michael O’Gorman, representing a federal union of 2,800 members at the Midvale Steel Co. in Philadelphia, attacked the craft unions on this score and pleaded with the craft internationals “to leave us alone.” Morris Pratt, speaking for the Refinery Workers federal union of East St. Louis, charged that the Operating Engineers Union was trying to “take over” his organization. Other delegates from federal unions made the same plaint.
Even Dubinsky, making a violent denunciation of the CIO and Lewis on the question of unity negotiations, was forced to call attention – in his own cowardly and feeble way to be sure – to the real hostility toward industrial organization still burning fiercely among the AFL tops. During the session of November 28, Dubinsky pleaded with the craft chiefs, declaring, “There is no need for differences between labor. But there, must be a broader attitude toward those who favor industrial organization.” He admitted sadly that he would prefer a “more progressive” attitude in the AFL toward the problem of organizing the unorganized and the industrial form of union.
 
Jim Crow Continues
In striking contrast with the brotherhood with which the many Negro delegates were treated at the CIO convention, and the various progressive steps taken by the CIO to unite the Negro and white workers, the AFL convention reaffirmed its traditional Jim-Crow policy. The modest proposal of A. Philip Randolph, President of the Sleeping Car Porters, for the setting up of an inter-racial committee within the Federation to remedy discrimination by unions against Negro workers, was rejected. The convention merely repeated the hands-off formula it has used so often before, merely asking the international unions “to give most sincere consideration” to the problem – carefully avoiding the setting up of any machinery which might actually do something on the matter. The action of the convention brought a bitter and merited rebuke from Randolph who year after year has vainly sought justice for his people from the craft-moguls.
 
Fawning Upon Roosevelt
One of the most disgusting aspects of the convention was the manner in which Green and Co. fawned and scraped before the government and its representatives. While graciously accepting an $8,000 increase, bringing his yearly salary to $20,000, Green was eager to offer the “sacrifices” of the workers for the sake of “national defense.”
Green went so far as to state: “There are a number of ways in which we (!) can sacrifice – by giving service of the highest order and by preventing the interruption of production through stoppages for any trivial reason – or for any reason.”
The next day, it is true, Green back-watered on this extreme assertion by excitedly informing them press, “I meant no such thing as giving up the right to strike. I was referring to the need of setting up tribunals or other machinery to safeguard against the necessity for strikes.” No doubt a lot of heat had been turned on Green by some of the delegates between the two statements.
 
The “Racketeering” Issue
The sorriest spectacle at the convention was Dubinsky.
He introduced a resolution to give the AFL executive council power to oust any union official found guilty of “any offense involving moral turpitude.”
All Dubinsky received for his efforts was a good sock in the mouth and the enmity of all his “friends” among the AFL officialdom.
The officialdom, in turn, presented a cowardly front on the whole matter. Instead of telling the bosses to go to hell and keep their snouts out of the internal affairs of the unions; denouncing the smear campaign “to help Labor for its own good” as nothing but an attempt by the bosses to get their fingers into the union affairs; and instructing the bankers and industrialists to have a mind for their own racketeering which takes billions for the thousands taken by the relatively few labor racketeers; the AFL leaders passed a feeble resolution condemning racketeering in general as a concession to this boss pressure.
Nothing is more condemnatory of the entire conduct of this convention than the fact that a major share of its time was spent in fighting and fumbling over the Issue of’ “racketeering.”
To add spice to the mess concocted at the convention by the craft chiefs, Madame Perkins, Milo Warner, head of the American Legion, and Sir Walter Citrine, and a whole parade of similar types, whooped it up for war, unlimited support to the Roosevelt administration and its anti-labor pro-war program, and for more “sacrifices” from the workers. Citrine, who was knighted by the British monarchy and not Without cause, described “with pride” the “voluntary” surrender by British labor of the right to ‘strike and the acceptance of “practically unlimited” working hours in the interests of British imperialism.
In every respect this AFL convention demonstrated that the CIO is still the basic and progressive union organization of American labor.
 




I've just sat through most of a two-day convention of the New York District of the Socialist Workers Party. I’ve come away with the impression that maybe I've had an attack of amnesia and accidentally wandered off to my old bailiwick out in the mid-west, where a party gathering has always meant a gathering of workers.
When I first entered the convention hall. I was struck by a flaring banner. “Beat Minneapolis in The Fund Drive: Quota $1,000 Each.”
Now, I know the New York local from the old days, when a sign like that would have wound me up with taped ribs from laughing so hard. The idea of New York’s dilettantes challenging Minneapolis teamsters to anything! But things have changed.
From start to finish this was a workers’ convention. In its composition and in its serious concentration upon the problems of the working class this convention reflected the fact that the New York section of the party has at last overcome the poison of its petti-bourgeois past and is spreading deep roots into fertile proletarian soil.
Almost the entire two days were devoted to reports and discussion on trade union problems; to the recital of experiences in the organized labor movement; to planning the party's program for advancing the principles of militant class-struggle.
Active union fighters in the food, maritime, ship-building, electrical and radio, garment and other industries spoke. Their reports painted a graphic and living picture of the workers’ struggles in the New York area, a picture made real because these delegates are a vital part of these struggles.
Gone are the phrase-mongers, bohemians, and fake intellectuals. Gone with the wind-bags, –  the petty-bourgeois splitters of last April. In their place are loyal and serious-minded workers striving to plunge themselves deeper and deeper into the task of organizing and leading the working class to the conquest of power.
 
Who’s Who Now in New York
Over 50 percent of the New York party members are active trade unionists. 35 percent of the New York party members are concentrated in the three huge and vital industries, food, electrical manufacturing and marine transport.
An additional sizeable sector of the party are workers in trades and industries as yet unorganized. These, taken together with those in organized trades, make a party membership that is decisively proletarian in character. A complete reversal of the condition that existed just eight months ago under the domination of the petty-bourgeois play-boys!'
A day and a half of listening to reports distilled from the daily experiences of the class struggle has convinced me that the old days of phoney gab-fests that passed for an SWP convention in New York are ended – but definitely!
One incident which occurred during the convention deserves special mention. Two former SWP members from Gloversville, N.Y„ workers who had been misled temporarily into the ranks of the petty-bourgeois opposition at the time of the split, paid a visit to the convention. They had just come from a call on the so-called Workers Party.
“But we couldn’t find any workers there,” they explained, “So we’ve quit them.”
A few hours in attendance at our convention revealed enough real live workers. They asked for re-admittance into the SWP and were immediately welcomed by vote of the convention.
 
Watch Their Smoke, Minneapolis!
Every phase of party activity came in for thorough discussion. A vigorous drive was made on the question of building the mass circulation of the party press. Real plans were outlined; and they won’t be pigeon-holed either, like in the old days.
I might not have believed it, if I hadn’t seen it with my own eyes. But I’m here to tell the Minneapolis comrades not to take lightly the New York challenge about beating them in the Trotsky Memorial Fund Drive. Stop reading last year’s newspapers, Minneapolis. You’re not confronting Bronx hill-billies. You’re up against proletarian fighters. And they’re not kidding!
 




The problem of racketeering occupied an altogether disproportionate place at the AFL convention at New Orleans. It is a very minor problem in the trade union movement as a whole. Had the AFL chieftains been grappling, with the basic problems facing the workers, the racketeering question would have automatically been relegated to the subordinate place it should have taken. But since the convention was given no real problems to deal with – the main time was consumed with canned speeches from government officials and other people who had no business being on the platform – it is no wonder that both at the convention and in the press the question of rackeetering loomed out of all proportion to its importance.
 
Dubinsky’s Proposal
Dubinsky, too yellow to tight on real issues – he didn't open his mouth even to second Philip Randolph’s eloquent plea against Jim Crow – picked this “popular” issue – i.e., popular with the capitalist press.
Dubinsky’s proposal to empower the AFL Executive Council to suspend any union official “convicted of an act of moral turpitude” would have placed in the hands of the reactionary Council the exact powers which Dubinsky had opposed when, they appeared in the form of the right to suspend international unions for “dual” unionism. Militant union leaders, convicted or framed-up in strike activities, could be tossed out of the AFL by a simple vote of the Council.
By its terms only, “convicted” persons could be suspended. The well-known tie-up between the police, courts and racketeers precludes many such convictions. Except, of course, in the case of honest union strikers.
Further, this proposal placed the responsibility for dealing with racketeers on the shoulders of a few leaders, instead of on the rank-and-file of the unions.
The convention leaders turned this proposal down. Green and Co. didn’t want to be placed in a position where at any time in the future they might be compelled to act against a “pal.” The defeat of Dubinsky’s proposal also reflected the concern of the various international officers for their jealously-guarded control over their individual unions.
As a counter proposal to Dubinsky’s, the Executive Council merely put. through a resolution piously “condemning” labor racketeering in general and suggesting that the various internationals “take steps” on their own initiative.
The convention failed to expose the real character and causes of racketeering, and to open the way for strengthening the democratic processes within the local unions which would enable the membership to make short shift of dishonest elements.
 
Little Racketeering Exists
What is the extent of the “racketeering” within the AFL? Contrary to the impression deliberately fostered by the boss press there is relatively very little.
Such racketeering as does exist is almost entirely confined to small unions, and these mainly in a few secondary service industries.
This fact is made clear by Louis Stark in an article in the New York Times, Dec. 1: “Investigations by prosecuting officials in New York, Chicago and other large cities have disclosed that racketeering is prevalent in small industries where cut-throat competition prevails, such as in cleaning and dying, laundry and restaurants.”
 
Bosses Responsible
What is more significant than the limited extent of union racketeering. is the fact that it is directly invited and sanctioned by the bosses in these industries. As Stark points out, “Almost invariably the union racketeers have been found linked with dishonest business men, crooked politicians and outright criminals.”
He adds:
“Small employers in these industries, by their own motion or through outside instigation, form so-called trade associations to limit or increase prices. The crooked union leaders lend themselves to the associations at a price. They ‘police’ the industry and supply the ‘police’ from criminals among their number.
“Racketeering union leaders cooperate with dishonest business men to force other business men to join trade associations or to keep them out of trade associations. In either case the object of the trade association is monopoly and higher prices.”
From this it is apparent that racketeering is a direct measure of the influence of the bosses within any union, and not a phenomenon native to unionism itself, as the bosses try to claim.
 
Why It Isn’t Ended
The question is: If the extent of such racketeering is really so limited, if the vast bulk of the AFL local unions and leaders are free of any such taint, why is it seemingly so difficult to eradicate the evil?
The answer is simple. A policy which would clean out the Racketeers in double-quick time is possible: But it poses a threat to the reactionary craft leaders, and it is the one policy of which the bosses – those who cry loudest against the evil – are in deadly fear.
That simple policy is to restore democratic rank-and-file control within the unions of the AFL!
The prevalent leadership dominates the ranks with an iron fist. Concerned primarily with the questions of dues collections, ironing out interminable jurisdictional disputes, and curbing the desires of the 'members for militant trade union action, the leadership enforces the principle of dictatorial control from the top. So long as these unions pay their dues, Green and Co. do not care whether the members attend meetings, or whether local meetings are ever held. If members who dare to oppose the policies of their officials are arbitrarily expelled without proper trial, that’s no skin off Bill Green’s nose.
 
CIO Hasn’t Any Racketeering
The proof that it is the lack of democratic practices within the AFL which enables the few racketeers to flourish within it, and that racketeering flourishes only in small crafts, is demonstrated by the complete freedom of, the CIO from racketeers. It might seem that the new unions of the CIO, formed quickly of inexperienced workers and prey to many unknown and untested elements, would be duck-soup for the penetration of boss racketeers. But it isn’t.
No handful of rats or gangsters who valued their necks would dare try to intimidate a meeting of industrial workers who had stood up to clubs, revolvers, rifles; machine guns, sawed-off shot-guns and tear gas in the hands of police and National Guardsmen!
It is hard to conceive of the appearance of a racketeering situation in an industrial union. To appear it would require a type of connivance with the bosses which is alien to a mass-production industry and an industrial union. It pays a boss to connive with a small craft union, even to the extent of paying relatively good wages. He could never feel that way about a mass-production industry, where the wage bill looms as the key factor and where an industrial union is bargaining on behalf of all the workers in the plant.
The CIO is thus well-nigh guaranteed in advance against, racketeering. The less favorable situation of the smaller craft unions in the AFL could, however, be overcome if the rank and file in any union were aided by the national AFL leadership to establish genuine democracy and use it against any racketeer.
But real union democracy – that means militancy and strikes; and you can’t get the Greens and Wolls to go for that!
 




I.
The pay-off on a tremendous historical shell-game is now due. On November 5, the American working masses were lined up behind two empty walnut shells, labelled “Roosevelt” and “Willkie.” They were wagering not merely their rights and security, but their very lives.
They were certain losers whatever their choice. For the only winner in the “old army game” is the manipulator. The manipulator of the 1940 Presidential election was Big Business. The little pea, that is, the welfare of the American masses, was hidden under neither shell. It was “palmed” in the dextrous hand of Wall Street.
Every racket employs a “come-on.” During the past eight years, the workers have been placing their bets on Roosevelt. They were permitted to “win” a few small bets, – just enough to give them confidence in the game. Again they have staked everything on Roosevelt, – maybe this time they will gain some real winnings! But, by a sleight of hand called “war,” Wall Street is ready now for a grand “kill.”
“America’s Sixty Families” are already counting the take. The Magazine of Wall Street, September 7, informed its silk-hat subscribers:
“Tentative Washington guesses put it (immediate PEACETIME ‘national defense’ appropriations) at probably not less than $10 billion more for the Navy and $10 billion more for the Army – an aggregate ‘capital investment’ of some $35 billion.”
THIRTY-FIVE BILLION DOLLARS – just as a starter! For the “Defense of Democracy”? No! As a CAPITAL INVESTMENT!
But that’s just pin money to Wall Street. Barron’s, one of the Wall Street financial weeklies, August 26, declared:
“However, by close examination of the testimony before Congressional committees and other expert opinion it becomes evident that the total sum involved takes oh staggering proportions. Certainly it is much greater” than tiny that has been publicised so far. The minimum is perhaps 50 BILLION DOLLARS and the maximum may be as much as 75 billion dollars ... These ’figures, large as they are, ARE BASED ON THE ASSUMPTION THAT THE UNITED STATES WILL NOT ENTER THE PRESENT CONFLICT. (Our emphasis)”
A FIFTY BILLION DOLLAR MINIMUM TAKE FOR WALL STREET – IF THE U.S. DOES NOT GO TO WAR! That’s what every worker voted for when he voted for Roosevelt. 50 billion dollars – that’s not hay! And it’s coming out of the flesh and bones of the American workers. That’s the Old Army Game of 1940!
 
Wall Street’s Second Choice
If Roosevelt is really the tool of Wall St., why did so many of the bankers and industrialists and the big business press endorse Willkie?
The answer to that question is, first, that they regarded Willkie as a more tractable tool, not a different but a better instrument for their designs than Roosevelt.
But even more impelling than this reason, is the completely unvarnished reactionary character of the ruling class. Through the just completed election campaign the ruling class has served final warning on the workers that it is through with the nonsense of “reformers.” Its program, henceforth, is merciless warfare on labor. In “attacking” Roosevelt, Wall Street did not attack him as its tool, but as the symbol of “liberalism” which he represents to so many misguided workers.
For, in luring an unwilling people into war, Roosevelt has proved supreme in the art of deception. His liberal camouflage often appeared so realistic that it frightened many capitalists. They have always opposed yielding to labor even “in principle.” They have always preferred to address labor in a more direct tongue, the conciliatory end of a black-jack.
Although led by Roosevelt to the “kill,” Wall Street regards him with distaste. In the past, Roosevelt cleverly held the financial pack in leash whenever its impatience threatened to frighten off the labor quarry. Wall Street is used to free-ranging, and dislikes even the mildest restraints. Although the leash is now off, Big Business dislikes even the fact that it still dangles from Roosevelt’s hand. If only the leash could be destroyed altogether!
That is why Wendell Willkie was Wall Street’s first choice for War President. Willkie is one of the pack itself, who has tugged hardest at the leash. He would have been certain, had he been elected, to have led the assault on labor with undisguised ferocity.
Yes, it is true that the majority of Wall Street magnates preferred Willkie. But they are not greatly concerned about the re-election of Roosevelt. They understand fully well that Roosevelt has no choice but to represent them. And, after all, the bankers and industrial bosses can’t feel too harshly toward Roosevelt when profits for the first quarter of 1940, prior to the “shoot-the-works” war spending, were already 67 percent higher than the same quarter of 1939: in fact, higher than in 1928, a peak prosperity year.
 
“My Friends ....”
Roosevelt’s ability to make the masses think they are getting something has been his greatest contribution to the preservation of capitalism. For his primary objective ever since first taking office has been to save the American capitalist system. He attempted to do this by reconciling the workers to the interests of the bosses.
From the start, Roosevelt yielded to labor only “in principle,” not fact. His first act as President revealed this. He consolidated the leading finance capitalists through the bank moratorium, while wiping out most of the small independent banks and millions of small depositors. Next, through the National Industrial Recovery Act, he further entrenched industrial monopoly. Under this Act, the big industrialists exterminated a large section of competing small businesses by monopoly price-fixing and similar measures.
Finally, he attempted to stabilize the light, or consumers goods industries by “pump-priming.” Through farm loans, unemployed relief, etc., he tried to start the flow of profits once more. These funds were intended primarily as indirect hand-outs to the chain and department stores, and the textile, furniture, tobacco, chemical, radio, auto and other manufacturers. The meagre benefits from these measures gleaned by the workers were included in Administration costs under the headings. “Riot Insurance” and “Smart Politics.”
 
Labor “Appeasement”
While stabilizing capitalism, Roosevelt was compelled to “appease” labor. He affirmed verbally certain rights of labor, embodied in Section 7A of the NIRA and, later, in the Wagner Act. These measures merely endorsed an established right – so long as labor could enforce it by organized action – the right to collective bargaining by organizations of labor’s own choosing.
This grant in “principle” was gained in fact solely by labor itself. From 1933–1939 there were 17,862 strikes, involving 8,261,000 workers. (Labor Information Bulletins, U.S. Dept. of Labor) These strikes occurred in every single industry without exception, and were fought with a fury unequalled in American labor history.
The fury was required. During Roosevelt’s administration the National Guard, financed and equipped with federal funds and trained by Regular Army officers, has played its most active strikebreaking role. From 1933-35 alone, out of 42,737 National Guards who were called to active duty, 32,645 or 77 percent were used, to break strikes. In the one year, 1935, the National Guard was employed in 73 strikes in 20 states, a majority of them under “New Deal” state administrations. During the National Textile Strike, Roosevelt himself threatened to send Regular Army troops against the Rhode Island strikers.
In 1934, Roosevelt already clearly demonstrated that his labor “platform” was jerry-built. He permitted General Hugh S. Johnson, then his NRA administrator, to publicly denounce the textile strikers and the San Francisco general strike. New Dealer Paul V. McNutt, as Governor of Indiana, terrorized the Terre Haute strikers for two months with martial law. Roosevelt later rewarded him with the post of Social Security Administrator. F.D.R.’s New Deal governor in Ohio, Martin L. Davey, smashed, the Little Steel strike in 1937 with armed troops. The New Deal Kelly-Nash machine in Chicago murdered ten unarmed workers in the Memorial Day Massacre in 1937.
These are but a few of the endless facts which give irrefutable proof that Roosevelt “gave” labor just what labor has been able to take – without any boss politician’s blessing!
(To Be Continued)
 




III.
During World War No. 1, 21,000 new American millionaires were created. Every slaughtered American soldier was worth $500,000 net profit to Wall Street.
As for labor, it received an average 30 percent monetary wage increase. This was more than wiped out by an average price increase of 100 percent. The fiction that all the American workers wore silk shirts during the war, is refuted by the fact that total overage real wages declined as much as 40 percent.
 
Labor Regimented
In addition, the entire labor movement was regimented. Strikes were met by ruthless suppression; strikers were court-martialed and given long prison terms. In some instances Army troops marched into struck industries and operated them at Army pay, $21 a month. When the war was over, the “defenders of democracy” came back to unemployment and accumulated debt. By 1921, there were over 5 million without jobs. The national debt, which was $9.88 per person in 1914, was $228 per person at the end of the war.
Despite terrorization, patriotic pressure and the complete capitulation of their own leaders, the workers were compelled to fight back against unendurable conditions. Starting with 1916, a tremendous strike wave swept the country. In 1917, there were 4,450 strikes, more than in any year except 1937.
 
Vivid Memory
The memory of this tremendous struggle is vivid in the mind of the ruling class. Through its agents, like Roosevelt, it now seeks to re-assure labor in preparation for the coming war. This time, say the pay-triots, labor is in for a fifty-fifty break.
The initiation of this “break” started in July 1939. During mounting unemployment, WPA appropriations were suddenly sliced in half. But more significant, the Roosevelt administration abandoned the principle of the “prevailing wages.” This was a calculated provocation of union labor.
 
Strikers Thrown in Jail
When the WPA workers struck, Roosevelt declared, “You cannot strike against the government,” Federal agents, acting as spies, brought charges against 156 Minneapolis strikers. 32 received prison sentences. Roosevelt ignored the plea of the entire labor movement to pardon the convicted men.
The principle layed down by Roosevelt in July 1939 is now in effect in private industry. During the past year, the government has moved into every important strike to break it with the dictum, “You can’t strike against the government.” Every industry becomes part of “national defense;” every strike is “against the government.”
 
War Orders to Open Shops
While Bethlehem Steel received over a billion dollars in war orders, despite a federal court ruling that the company is in violation of the federal labor laws, the government ruthlessly curbed a threatened strike of Bethlehem workers.
At the same time, it struck a deadly blow at all New Deal labor legislation by openly declaring a policy of granting war orders to the vilest open-shoppers, DuPont, Ford Motors, Bethlehem Steel, etc.
The General Motors Corp, cracks down on the auto workers with a thousand provocations, speed-up, wage-cuts, firing of job stewards. A strike threat in Flint is countered by a lock-out, and the cry, “Fifth Columnists!” Big Business drapes itself in an American flag, and hopes to crush labor with impunity.
 
Civil Liberties Threatened
A gigantic program for handcuffing labor is underway. The American Civil Liberties Union, in its recent annual report, stated:
“At no period in the twenty years of its existence have the Civil Liberties Union and other agencies engaged with protecting civil rights been confronted with such an array of threatened measures of repression.”
These are tokens of the “fifty-fifty” break labor will get from the third-term. And there are other straws in the wind. From August 1939 to November 13, 1940, according to official government figures, average wholesale commodity prices advanced 17.2 percent. All labor has taken a huge wage-cut – “the easy way.”
 
Workers Taxed
An income tax on incomes as low as $800 a year, $15 a week, was slipped over last July. New “defense” taxes on movies, tobacco, gasoline have been slapped on the workers. A hint is given of the tax burdens yet to come by the announcement of Treasury officials that they are going to propose new taxes on soft drinks, etc.
Labor is playing checkers with the Roosevelt administration. The “jumps” permitted labor by the New Deal have been “give aways,” – to maneuver labor into position where all its pieces can be swept off the board.
Behind Roosevelt’s chair Wall Street stands grinning, holding the bets. Behind labor stand Hillman, Green and the rest of the labor “kibitzers” nudging labor’s shoulder, urging it to the fatal moves toward boss war. “That’s your play! What are you waiting for?”
Labor scratches its head and studies the board. It senses something tricky in the set-up.
Yes, your move, labor! – And watch out for traps!
End
 




A devastating indictment of the officer caste in the army has just been made by an authoritative spokesman, Major Malcolm Wheeler-Nicholson, in his book, Battle Shields of the Republic (Macmillan Co.), published last week.
His chief charge is directed against the promotion system in the army, which is based not on capacity to lead troops in battle but upon favoritism and seniority.
The young officer out of West Point is sent to an army post where he is buried in pure paper-work, records and red-tape routine reports. He has no urge, the book states, to study the problems of modern warfare.
The chief concern of the young officer is not the readiness of his unit for battle, but securing a favorable “efficiency report’” from his colonel; for his promotion is based on seniority and the good graces of his superior officers.
The basis of the colonel’s “efficiency” report is personal opinion. As a result, the young officer must play up to the colonel’s prejudices and wangle his way into the same social circles. Major Wheeler-Nicholson cites the case of a lieutenant who received an unfavorable “efficiency report” after his dog chased the cat belonging to the Colonel’s wife.
As a result of this system, the Major points out, most of the officers reaching high rank – by the process of stepping into dead mens’ shoes and pulling all the strings – are amateur diplomats first of all, and rarely first-class soldiers. In addition, their entire training has been in paper-work administration, and they are wholly unfitted for leadership in real war.
The book makes thoroughly clear the corruption and connivance which characterizes the army regime.
In addition, Major Wheeler-Nicholson asserts that the same system is in force in the Reserves and National Guard, where the officers are even more inadequate. He maintains that the average officer in the American Reserve or National Guard knows less about war than the average German private.
A most serious effect of the present army system, as the book points out, is that the officers are brought to high rank when they are already too old. The general officers average about 60 years in age, almost exactly that of the French and British generals who failed against Hitler. The heads of the Nazi army average but forty-five.
 
Civil War Officers Were Different
The North might have lost the Civil War if Grant, Sherman, Sheridan, Emery Upton, James H. Wilson and Alexander Mackenzie had not finally been placed in command of the Union Armies. The average age of these six when they took command was thirty-three years, and not one was forty-five at the end of the war. Wheeler-Nicholson states that if the present system had been in force back in 1863 not a single one of these brilliant military men could have become a general, for the system does not permit promotion for ability, only demotion for demerit – which most often means failing to smooth some officious general the right way.
This system can provide only the type of army leadership which abandoned the French workers and soldiers to the mercy of the Nazi.
But all is not lost, according to an article in the October 18 issue of United States News, an “inside” political dope-magazine for Wall Street. The evils pointed out by Wheeler-Nicholson, begrudgingly acknowledged by the News, will be changed.
 
“Reforms” That Change Nothing
According to the News, promotion from the ranks has become a definite part of the future army program. Special schools are being planned to prepare enlisted men – not draftees – for commissions. But not all enlisted men. The plan provides that any enlisted recruit may enter one of these schools after a year of regular training – “if he has a college education”. This contemplated reform may provide a lot more paper-work officers from the ranks of the well-to-do who can afford to send their boys to college, but gives little hope for competent leadership where the bullets fly thickest.
The U.S. News article also reveals plans to reduce the snobbishness and “stuffed-shirt” attitude of the officers. The officers are being encouraged to become more close to the ranks, but, “Of course” this does not mean “drinking and chumming with them.” Just an occasional pat on the head!
This new attitude is not motivated by genuine sympathy for the ordinary recruit. Oh, no! The article makes this clear when it states, “Operation of a tank or plane with three or four men cramped into a tiny cockpit leaves the officer-in-charge little inclination to be thought a ‘stuffed shirt’ by the mechanics on whose skill his life may depend.”
Harsh martinet discipline is to go also. According to recent instructions from the army high command, new recruits are not to be given disciplinary confinements – “where such punishment can be avoided”.
Instead, a more inspiring influence will be employed to keep the recruits in line. Says the U.S. News, “The Army is relying on the women’s influence. Now each army post is to have a post matron or ‘mother’.” Come, son, tell mother all!
This balderdash proposed as reforms for the army ruling system merely adds further proof of the hopeless weaknesses of the whole officer system. It cannot be otherwise. For the present army command is an extension of the ruling regime of the degenerate capitalist system. So long as the boss class runs the army it will move heaven and earth to close the doors of the officers corps to the talented workers and tested union fighters.
* * *
Capitalist war is exactly like capitalist economies: we go to war to get the peace to get the strength to go to war to get the peace, etc., etc.
 




II.
The “New Deal” was indeed short-lived. As early as June 1935 Roosevelt had declared, “All the basic innovations of the New Deal are completed.” Business appeasement became the key-note of his 1936 campaign.
Relief appropriations began to be tapered off. The Federal Emergency Relief Administration was then liquidated at the initiation of Roosevelt. From June 1935-Noveber 1935, six million jobless families faced outright starvation What F.D.R. saved in this period was partially added to the 1936 WPA appropriation for use just prior to the 1936 election campaign.
But from the very start of his Presidential career, Roosevelt held an “ace in the hole.” Starting with 1933. war appropriations began to sky-rocket. Each year thereafter the arms budget was accelerated; and each succeeding appropriation was termed “the greatest in America’s peace-time history.” By 1939, the Roosevelt administration extracted from the masses over 10 billion dollars in war appropriations.
It must be remembered that these appropriations were approved by Democrats and Republicans alike. For they were the material expression of the real policy of America’s ruling class, its “long-term” policy taking precedence ever all divisive domestic issues.
These appropriations were the calculated initial preparations for the time, in art epoch of world capitalist crisis, when American capitalism would dispute with armed might for control of the world markets and resources.
Roosevelt intensified his war drive with his famous Quarantine the Aggressors speech in Chicago, October 1937. It was timed for the precipitate business collapse following a flash-in-the-pan “boom,” which had reached its peak in August 1937.
It was at this point that Roosevelt openly abandoned the methods of priming the pump from the bottom, to greasing it at the top.
Roosevelt began in earnest to give direct “relief” to the capital or heavy goods industries, steel, auto, railroads, etc. “The augmented arms program was intended, in part, to provide immediate profits to the capital goods industries, whose continued depression charted the chronic fever of American and world capitalism.
But beyond this was an impelling drive toward imperialist war, the inevitable outgrowth of capitalism itself.
By the beginning of Roosevelt’s second term, it became transparently clear to Roosevelt that his New Deal “reforms” could never cure the deadly ills of American economy. At the peak of the Roosevelt business “boom” in 1937, a national census had revealed 11,000,000 unemployed as living symptoms of the chronic capitalist disease.
For the inability of American capitalism, despite all internal measures, to unload huge unmar Retable surpluses on the domestic market drives it to seek markets abroad. And this task is hampered by the equally stalemated capitalist nations everywhere.
The collapse of the internal economies of every capitalist nation in the world has meant an intensified fight over exploiting foreign holdings, over defending these ’holdings from competitors and expanding into new areas.
American and British capitalism arrived first on the imperialist “ground floor.” The “late” nations, like Germany and Japan, must “hijack” their way in. Thus two sets of gangsters fight for the right to thrust “protection” on the masses.
World capitalism, of which the American sector is the most highly developed, struggles wildly in a strait-jacket of contradictions. The re-arming of German capitalism was done with the aid and consent of British and American imperialism, an off-set to French control on the European continent. French capital has had a thousand links with German. Even while their opposing troops slaughtered each other. French steel flowed into Germany; German coal, into France.
General Motors, whose chief executive, William S. Knudsen, heads the National Defense Commission, owns the huge Adam auto plants in Germany. In 1933. these plants produced 36,000 autos. In 1938, they produced 140,000 units, plus tremendous equipment for the Nazi war machine. Standard Oil is half-owner of the Hydrierwerks Poelitz, which supplies synthetic fuel for the German war tanks and planes.
American policy toward South America, of which Roosevelt has been a chief exponent, likewise reflects this fantastic pattern. While aiding German production, American capital fights against German penetration into Latin American markets. German methods of direct barter of manufactured surpluses for raw materials are violently denounced. With the aid of the British blockade South America is deprived of the German and European market.
Corn piles up in Argentina Chilean nitrate exports shrink Brazil sadly contemplates 6 million bags of unmarketable coffee. The U.S. cannot absorb these products. No wonder one Chilean delegate at the Pan-American conference, considering Roosevelt’s plea for unification of the Western Hemisphere countries against the menace of Nazi dictatorship, declared, “Freedom is no satisfaction if you cannot sell your crops.”
Now the Roosevelt administration offers $500,000,000 through the Export-Import Bank to buy up Latin American surpluses, thus indirectly financing U.S. exports. This is likewise one of the ways in which the “cash and carry” clause of the Neutrality Act can be evaded; America lends the cash to Argentina, for instance, which buys up war materials to re-sell to Great Britain.
Like a squirrel in a revolving cage, the faster capitalism runs, the less it travels. Driven to madness, it smashes itself against the prison bars of profits. Through the violence of war, it seeks its “escape.”
Roosevelt may “loathe war” and “hate war now more than ever,” but he also loves capitalism. This greater love dictates his course. He is married to the system which breeds war.
War will come, with or without any directly hostile act, either of Germany or Japan. The Magazine of Wall Street, September 7, made this fact crystal clear, declaring:
“We will not (at least for several months) consider joining the war ‘unless the war comes to us’. Germany has been scrupulously careful to avoid any incident which would give us an excuse to declare war, but we have done many things which a victorious Germany could well hold against us for aiding and abetting her enemy. Administration spokesmen have made it clear that there is no doubt that if England is defeated the war will come to us, AND NOT NECESSARILY THROUGH ANY OVERT ACT OF GERMANY.” (our emphasis)
The Magazine of Wall Street never kids its own ruling-class subscribers. Wall Street turns the lie manufacturing over to the dally press, which is read by the workers.
Indeed, peace would be a major catastrophe for Wall Street. While Willkie, the Wall Street mouthpiece, was attempting to demagogically corral anti-war sentiment, the Magazine of Wall Street, September 7, was stating:
“There is not the slightest doubt that the American armament program will eventually produce an industrial boom the like of which we have never known before – PROVIDED WHOLLY UNEXPECTED WAR DEVELOPMENTS DO NOT PERMIT US TO SCALE DOWN THE EXPENDITURES NOW CONTEMPLATED (our emphasis).”
The article adds:
“For years we have been speculating about some major new industry that would be capable of stimulating the economy ... This is it.”
And how! And it’s the chief reason why [the] majority of Wall Street supports] Roosevelt’s re-election with tongues in cheek.
Stetinius, U.S. Steel president and Roosevelt appointee to the National Defense Commission, isn’t too broken up over U.S. Steel profits increasing 1740 percent in the first half of 1940 over 1939.
Knudsen can sleep easy knowing the DuPonts won’t starve on the $113,575,460 net profits General Motors cleared for the first six months of 1940, although only 13 percent over the mere $100,992,531 take for the first six months of 1939.
And John Biggers, president of the Libby-Owens-Ford glass monopoly, can’t complain too loudly because his patriotic sacrifices on the NDAC promise to net his corporation a 1940 profit increase of 95 percent.
Wall Street calmly re-assured its following during the fake bluster by Roosevelt about “taking the profits out of war.” As early as August, Forbes, an authoritative big business monthly, declared, “What are new Federal taxes going to do to business profits? What happened during our last great re-arming period provides one clue. As the chart shows, Federal taxes took a big slice of corporate net income; but war orders so increased net income before taxes that the profits remaining after taxes had been paid were substantial.”
Substantial indeed! For the accompanying chart reveals that net corporate profits for the four years preceding the last, war averaged 3.8 billion dollars yearly; for the war years, 1916–1919, net profits were 6.9 billion dollars yearly, with a 1917 peak of 8.6 billion dollars.
When the Excess Profits bill was finally passed and signed by Roosevelt, it provided such a brazen guarantee of unlimited war profits, that even the expectant Wall Street magnates gasped!
And when the Russell-Overton Amendment, which permits the government to “take over” plants at a “fair rental” if the owner refuses “emergency” war orders, was attached to the Conscription bill – eliciting the cry of “state socialism” from Willkie – Barrons, Wall Street financial weekly, September 2, candidly admitted:
“It should be added that there is no sign of any intention on the part of anyone to misuse the power (to take over non-cooperative businesses). SO LONG AS KNUDSEN, BIGGERS AND CO. ARE IN CONTROL, THERE WON’T BE.” (our emphasis)
And they are in control, despite the efforts of Sidney Hillman, and the rest of the pro-Roosevelt labor stooges, to convince the workers differently.
National Business magazine, in September, at the time when many corporations were refusing defense orders to bring pressure for a favorable Excess-Profits bill, reported:
“The Defense Commission is defending business against charges of a capital strike, putting profits before patriotism, etc. ... AND SO FAR IT HAS BEEN SUPPORTED IN THIS BY PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT. CONTRARY TO EXPECTATIONS. THE NEW DEAL REFORM ELEMENT HAS BEEN KEPT COMPLETELY OUT OF THE DEFENSE PICTURE.”
Yes, Roosevelt in the saddle in Washington is riding for Wall Street. When, in the name of “National Unity,” he placed Henry L. Stimson and Frank Knox, two big-business Republicans, at the head of the War and Navy Departments, this was Roosevelt’s fire-side way of telling Wall Street, “Don’t shove, boys! You don’t need more than your snout in the trough!”
(To Be Continued)
 




On September 6, a formal statement of the National Defense Advisory Commission was issued declaring, “All work carried on as part of the defense program should comply with Federal statutory provisions affecting labor wherever such provisions are applicable. This applies to the Walsh-Healy Act, Fair Labor Standards Act, National Labor Relations Act, etc. ...”
The Commission’s statement was seconded on September 9, by a formal endorsement from President Roosevelt.
On September 11, the Bethlehem Steel Corporation, most notorious open-shop corporation in the country and branded as a violator of the labor laws by the NLRB, was granted the largest single war order yet released, for $625,000,000.
Phillip Murray, head of the CIO Steel workers Organizing Committee, expressed “utter astonishment” at this award to Bethlehem Steel just five days after the Defense Commission had presumably called on all war contractors to obey the labor laws.
The workers in Bethlehem Steel were puzzled by this contradiction between implied policy and applied fact.
Whereupon Sidney Hillman, as head of the Labor Division of the Defense Commission, sought to reassure the workers by a press statement on September 13, proudly quoting the Commission’s original statement and adding, “You will further observe that, in this statement of conditions underlying the awarding of contracts, the Commission has not limited itself merely to the requirements that contractors observe existing laws. It has gone substantially beyond that.”
But war contracts continued to go to Bethlehem Steel – to the sum of over $1,000,000,000. The Bethlehem workers became uneasy, and the CIO – organized Sparrows Point shipyard of Bethlehem Steel went out on strike. The CIO wrote Hillman for a little further clarification.
On October 3, Hillman hastened to send a letter citing an “informal” opinion of Attorney General Jackson to a gathering in Pittsburg of several hundred SWOC representatives who were considering the crisis in Bethlehem. This opinion declared; “It seems too clear to admit of controversy ... that the findings of the National Labor Relations Board that an employer is in violation of the National Labor Relations Act are binding and conclusive upon the other agencies in the executive branch of the government unless and until these findings are reversed by a court of competent jurisdiction”.
This obviously means, and was so interpreted by every capitalist newspaper, that no government agency may ignore a ruling of the NLRB and award contracts to outlawed corporations. Among several score corporations publicly listed as hit by this ruling were Standard Oil, the duPonts, General Motors, Ford Motor and Bethlehem Steel.
The Bethlehem conference of the SWOC looked on the Hillman assurance and the Jackson ruling as good coin. No action was taken to spread the Sparrows Point strike. Instead, they hastened to discourage direct action. The Sparrows Point shipyard stride was called off on the urging of Philip Van Gelder, national secretary of the CIO Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers of America, who declared that Jackson’s opinion “could be used as a weapon for enforcing collective bargaining in the Sparrows Point and other Bethlehem plants without the necessity of strike action.”
 
And After Stifling the Strike
The capitalist press showed no gratitude to Hillman for spiking the Bethlehem strike. It did not like the method he employed, and demanded an unambiguous rejection of the principle implied in the Jackson ruling. The New York Times cynically likened a violation of the National Labor Relations Act to the violation of a municipal ordinance forbidding smoking in the subway. What! Hold up “national defense” for such trivialities?
The pay-off came – the day of the return to work of the Sparrows Point strikers on Oct. 8.
That afternoon a procession filed before the Smith Committee, the Congressional body “investigating” the NLRB. First came Under-secretary of War, Patterson. Said he, “It is not my understanding that a labor dispute is any bar to a contract. It is merely one thing to be considered.” Next, Secretary of the Navy Knox declared, “His (Patterson’s) words accurately reflect the navy’s attitude.” Hillman sat quietly listening to Knox and Patterson brazenly repudiate their own previous statements in letters to him.
Jackson then testified. There had been “a great storm of misunderstanding” about his previous opinion. “The effect,” said he, “was not intended to direct or imply that the Defense Commission should withhold contracts from persons or corporations declared by the NLRB to be in violation of the Wagner Act.”
 
Judas-Hillman Apes His Masters
Finally, Hillman was called to the stand. He cold-blood[ed]ly put the period to the end of Jackson’s sentence. As the New York Post described it:
“Of all the apparent back-tracking, Hillman’s was the most startling, causing gasps among the committee members and spectators.”
“I’ve got to agree” with the gentlemen who had preceded him on the stand, said Hillman. “The army and navy have the power (to determine the conditions for the letting of contracts). In every case the first consideration is whether it will help or harm national defense.”
After the hearing, Hillman further clarified his stand.
“If the cause of national defense is to be served it is entirely obvious that there may be times when a person should not insist upon the final technical letter of the law.”
The next day the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals upheld an NLRB ruling against an appeal of the Bethlehem Steel corporation. The court declared Bethlehem Steel was guilty of “a plain violation” of the National Labor Relations Act.
Two days later, Bethlehem Steel was awarded another fat war contract, for $54,000,000. This was an example of Hillman’s non-insistence upon the “final technical letter of the law.”
 







(Ed. Note: This is the second of a series of three articles by Art Preis on the great Toledo strike. Art Preis was the editor of Strike Truth, the Chevrolet strikers’ bulletin.)





Two-fold were the lessons of tie Auto Lite strike, lessons which quickly permeated the entire Toledo labor movement, and which in turn affected through the Toledo labor movement the Chevrolet strike. The first lesson was that better conditions for the workers are won on the picket lines. Secondly, the Toledo workers had learned that the struggle of one group of workers is the battle of all workers, in which all labor must cooperate if victory is to be assured.
Side by side with the progressive growth and development of the auto workers union, Local 18384, a new spirit began to animate the other unions as well. One of the significant indications of this fact was the increasing participation of the Toledo Central Labor Union in every strike battle and its response to the appeals for assistance from the organized unemployed.
 
The Organized Unemployed
It was a well established fact that the Lucas County Unemployed League, acting with the assistance of the Workers Party, had taken the Initiative and aggression in smashing the Auto-Lite injunction and reviving the lifeless strike. This action on the part of the organized unemployed served to drive home to the union men that the unemployed, instead of being a serious menace to their jobs and wage-standards, a huge reservoir of potential “scabs,” might become an invaluable ally on the picket lines. In the Armour and Swift and Larrowe Milling strikes, which shortly followed the Auto-Lite, the Lucas County Unemployed League was officially invited to aid the strikers and in actuality formed the backbone of the mass picket lines.
One of the significant contributions of the Workers Party to the Toledo labor movement, and one which has had a vital bearing upon the present characteristic solidarity, was the weapon of the united front. While the Unemployed League was demonstrating the effectiveness of joint action between the unemployed workers on the Auto-Lite picket lines, a united demonstration was secured for increased relief between the Central Labor Union, the Unemployed League and the now defunct Relief Workers Association. A successful united front anti-injunction demonstration, originally proposed by the W.P., was carried through by the Workers Party, Socialist and Communist parties.
 
The Famous Death March
In the fall of 1934, on the initiative of the Unemployed League, a Joint Action Committee was organized with several other local independent unemployed groups. A continuous fight of several months duration was conducted to better the relief standards for unemployed single men. A series of extremely militant marches and mass demonstrations, climaxed by the famous six-day-and-night Single Men’s Death March and the seizure of the Lucas County Court House, were organized and led by Sam Pollock and Ted Selander.
During the latter part of February of this year, the Toledo Building Trades Council initiated a strike among the skilled workers on the Federal Emergency Relief projects in Toledo. The Unemployed League soon stepped to the fore in this strike. The program of the Unemployed League for the conduct of this strike was adopted in entirety. A Joint Action Committee, representing the entire Building Trades Council, the U.L. and the Workers Alliance, was set up and a general FERA strike was effected. Mass strike tactics, hitherto completely outside of the experience of the skilled craft unions, were adopted. Again W.P. and U.L. members organized and led the picket lines and a series of splendid demonstrations.
A May Day United Labor demonstration was organized by the Joint Action Committee, endorsed by the Central Labor Union. This was the largest May Day demonstration ever held in Toledo, with A.J. Muste as the principle speaker. It ended in a militant march upon the Lucas County Relief headquarters.
 
“March of Labor”
While the FERA strike was reaching its height, four other strikes occurred, the outstanding being the general Milk Drivers strike. An unofficial Joint Board of Strategy was devised, composed of the leaders of all the strikes including Sam Pollock, representing the Joint Action Committee. The forces of the various groups of strikers, under the leadership of Pollock, were combined into a joint picket line, called the March of Labor, which by a series of quick concentrations on various struck plants and projects closed them all down effectively.
It is only on the basis of an understanding of this simultaneous development – the organization of the progressive forces within the auto union and its expansion and achievements by virtue of the militant policies fostered by these forces, and the corresponding development in the entire labor movement of the attitude of working-class unity and mass action, with a weakening of class-collaboration policies – that the subsequent unionization of the Toledo Chevrolet workers, their strike and its unique aspects, can be correctly understood. In the final analysis, what preceded and immediately followed the Chevrolet strike is as significant from a broad perspective as the strike itself.
 
Showdown Comes in Autos
Following the unionization of the vast majority of the Toledo auto-parts plants by March of this year, the auto workers’ union finally approached the last major challenge in its path, the transmission plant of the Chevrolet Motor Ohio Company, employing 2,300 workers. Previous attempts to organize this plant had met with almost total failure. Certain more backward elements and leaders in the union balked at the seeming magnitude of the task, for this was poaching upon the previously inviolable domains of the General Motors Corporation whose illimitable resources would be fully and unhesitatingly used to smash the union. Nevertheless, the progressive forces in the union pressed unceasingly for an organizational drive on the Chevrolet plant. They recognized that all previous union activities had been merely preliminary skirmishes and training for this major onslaught, which carried with it the possibility of a general auto strike and a genuine show-down on the issue of unionism in the automotive industry.
Three primary factors determined the ultimate success of the progressives’ program for organization of the Chevrolet plant. The first of these was the general atmosphere of unionism which pervaded the air of Toledo and the steady succession of labor battles and victories and partial victories which followed in the wake of the Auto-Lite strike. The Chevrolet worker might have shunned direct union appeals, but he could not avoid the experiences of his friends and neighbors who were in the unions nor the daily evidences of union activities and achievements which constantly forced themselves into the Toledo press.
The Company Maneuver
Secondly, the officials of General Motors connived with the Automobile Labor Board in attempting to put over a crude maneuver to place the official stamp of company unionism upon the Chevrolet workers. This was an “election” called in the Chevrolet plant for April 9, under the supervision of the completely repudiated Board, to determine what agency the workers desired to represent them in collective bargaining. The real union had not even requested such an election, but it was the intent of the company to force through a vote favorable to the company union before the genuine union could secure the slightest foot-hold in the plant. The obvious crudity and arrogance of this maneuver acted as a boomerang against the company and served to drive the workers in desperate defiance to the union.
Then there was Jimmy Roland. Jimmy was a plain everyday production worker in the Chevrolet plant. He joined the union in its early stages prior to the Auto-Lite strike. In short order, he got the “can.” During the Auto-Lite affray he was one of the handful of union militants who fought the injunction. He was one of the real mainstays of the fight. During his period of unemployment he joined the U.L. and became one of its leading members. He likewise established himself as a leading progressive in the union and was elected to the position of trustee on the executive board.
 
One-Man Picket Line
Despite his inexperience and youth, Jimmy was class-conscious to the core, intelligent and eager to learn, tireless in his efforts to build the union, honest and incorruptible In every fiber and, above all, a bull dog fighter for his principles. He refused to back down before General Motors. When the Auto Labor Board avoided his appeal for reinstatement on his job, he put on his one-man picket line before the Chevrolet main gate. He was re-hired in short order – and placed in an office post at his original wage.
With its hand forced by the imminent Auto Labor Board election, the union was compelled to act promptly and decisively. Ten days before the election a meeting of the Chevrolet workers was called. The phenomenal number of 600 showed up. Jimmy Roland was chairman and acting organizer. Other successful meetings were called in quick succession. The union was flooded with applications for membership. When the elections were finally held, despite the fact that the union advised the workers not to participate in it, the vote of the Chevrolet workers went overwhelmingly for the representative of the union, the business agent, Fred Schwake.
 
Acted Quickly
Once the vote was over, there was no stalling or delay. Moving quickly and decisively, guided by the strong and militant leadership of Jimmy Roland, as chairman of the elected executive shop committee, the new union men acting through their committee drew up a union contract and presented it to the plant executives on April 19. Roland firmly and skillfully directed the inexperienced committee through this first treacherous conference, and indicated thereby the undeviating position he would maintain throughout the strike. The committee refused to discuss anything but the terms of their own contract. They would not accept cigars or non-union brand cigarettes offered by the bosses. They declined to lunch with the bosses or deal with them in any but a formal and business-like manner. The class lines were strictly drawn.
Every significant condition in the union contract was flatly rejected by the bosses. That very night a mass meeting of the Chevrolet workers was held and a unanimous vote for strike taken. A strike committee of nine was elected with authority to call the strike. Jimmy Roland was the chairman.
 
Trying to Stall
Desperately, General Motors sought to delay the action. Top-notch G.M.C. officials flooded into Toledo from Detroit. Monday, April 22, at 5 A.M. and called the shop committee into another conference. General Motors was obviously on the defensive. They knew they were dealing with leadership of a different calibre than that of the weak, vacillating, conciliating type of the A.F. of L. officialdom, personified by individuals like the national auto union organizer, Francis Dillon. They kept the committee closeted in conference for twelve straight hours so that the strike could not be called that day. The committee held to its demands like the Rock of Gibraltar.
At 6:15 A.M., April 23, Jimmy Roland and his committee went through the plant and spread the word. The power was turned off, the wheels stopped moving. In a disciplined organized line, the workers marched from the plant. The company foremen tried to threaten and cajole the strikers not to leave. Company handbills, calculated to distort the issues of the strike and confuse the workers, were circulated. The company tactics were useless. In short order, the plant was entirely shut down.
At the plant gate, the strikers were met by a group of the union men, headed by Bill Prior. The progressives aided the strikers to organize a solid, effective mass picket line.
Then the strike committee, as guided by Jimmy Roland, sent a number of telegrams. One went to Washington to the surprised and chagrined Francis Dillon, informing him that the strike was on. The others went to all the union locals in General Motors plants throughout the country, telling them of the strike and urging them to take similar action. Every one of these moves had been previously calculated by the union progressives.
 







BULLETIN
As we go to press news comes from Toledo that the power strike which threatened to shut down power in a radius of 800 square miles and effecting twenty-three cities in three states has been called off pending negotiations on their demand for a 20 percent increase in wages. It is understood that these negotiations are to start Monday with officials of the Henry L. Doherty Company in New York, parent company of the Toledo Edison. Oliver Myers, business agent of the union, attributed the sudden termination of the strike to pressure “from many sources,” The union workers voted 237 to 22 to end the strike. The men are to be paid in full for the day of the strike.



* * *
TOLEDO, Ohio, Jane 5. – A strike of employees of the Toledo Edison Co., which supplies the electrical power for Toledo, northwest Ohio, northeast Indiana and southeast Michigan. Including a score of communities, began at 7:00 A.M. this morning. 500 maintenance, production and technical workers, members of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 245, were the first to walk out. 126 office workers also struck and picketed the Toledo Edison Building. Plans for the strike, announced by Oliver Myers, business agent of the local, indicated that it will not be totally effective until tomorrow morning, as the shut-down will be progressive, only a portion of workers having been called on strike today.
Hysteria has struck the local press, as well as all the other agencies and groups of the capitalist class of the city. Operation of industrial plants, street cars, street lights and other major sources of electrical consumption has not as yet been seriously curtailed.
 
Frenzied Attack on Strike
There is a strong possibility that the strike may be suspended or terminated before morning. Terrific pressure is being exerted from every side, press, government, “outstanding citizens,” business and church groups – and the international officers of the union – upon the local strikers and their representatives to suspend the strike for arbitration or pending negotiations. A meeting of striking electrical workers will be held at midnight tonight to act upon the suggestion of the international officers that the strike be suspended pending further negotiations.
The striking office workers have already voted in meeting tonight to return to work if the maintenance, production and technical workers decide to accept the proposal of the international officers.
There is a strong feeling in organized labor circles here that such a move may prove to be disastrous for the strikers, as arbitration or negotiations without picket lines will mean another shell-game settlement which will give the workers nothing. Edward F. McGrady, Assistant Secretary of Labor, and notorious government strike-breaker who did such effective work here just three weeks ago in the Chevrolet strike, is expected on the scene momentarily.
 
Press Demands Violence
The company has already announced its intentions of operating the power and transmission plants in the face of mass picket lines. The newspapers are openly calling for police force and demanding that the plants be operated under any conditions. Should the strike continue and go into full effect, a certain amount of power will be brought into the city from outside Ohio communities. This will be sufficient only for emergency maintenance of electric power for hospitals and similar institutions, it is believed.
The question of the maintenance of the strike rests largely at present upon the position taken by Oliver Myers, in whom the almost sole leadership of the strike now rests. While Myers has been known to have strong progressive and militant tendencies, it is felt that his long association with the old-line A.F. of L. officialdom may influence him to agree to suspension of the strike under this terrific pressure.
The strike was called following lengthy negotiations with the Toledo Edison management, when union requests for a 20 percent wage-increase were flatly turned down. The Toledo Edison Co. is one of Henry L. Dougherty’s holdings. It has been making enormous profits and has been exacting terrifically high rates from the consumers.
Failure of the strikers’ representatives to issue statements or a strike-bulletin or leaflets to offset the unrestrained lies and frenzied distortions of the press has been a distinct weakness of the strike tactics so far.
 







(Ed. Note: This is the last of a series of three articles by Art Preis on the great Toledo strike. Art Preis was the editor of Strike Truth, the Chevrolet strikers’ bulletin.)





From the outset of the Chevrolet strike, the line-up of opposing forces was clear-cut and marked. On the one side were the strikers, a minority of the strike committee and the progressive forces in the union local. On the other, were General Motors, the organized commercial and industrial interests such as the Chamber of Commerce and Merchants and Manufacturers Association, the capitalist daily press, the “leading citizens” including prominent socialites, university and school officials, ministers, public officials, etc., the government, and finally, certain union officials themselves, particularly those representing the national leadership of the A.F. of L.
The strategy of the union progressives was first of all to maintain the Toledo strike on a militant, mass action basis, to keep the leadership of the strike in the hands of the elected strike committee, and to prevent the settlement of the strike by Francis Dillon and the A.F. of L. officialdom over the heads of the strikers. Further, the progressives realized the necessity of spreading the strike to every General Motors plant and, if possible, to inspire a general auto walk-out.
 
No Try at Scabbing
For the first four days of the strike, under the aggressive leadership of the progressives, the strikers pushed forward with irresistible power. Apart from the newspaper propaganda – anti-strike stuff thinly disguised under a veil of impartiality – and misleading advertisements on the strike paid for by General Motors and the Chamber of Commerce, no effective counter-attack was launched. No effort was made by the company to run scabs into the plant, for memories of the Auto-Lite strike still provokes sleeplessness among the industrialists in Toledo.
Mass picket lines kept a 24 hour vigilance about the deserted plant. Plant managers and officials were forced to beg the permission of the strike committee to enter upon their own premises. The company was compelled to pay the strikers off the property and while on the picket line. By keeping one step ahead of the company, by taking the aggressive, the strikers prevented the company from carrying through a coordinated counter-offensive. The company simply did not know how to deal with progressive labor leaders of the caliber of a Jim Roland.
 
Combating Company Propaganda
Moreover, from the standpoint of demoralizing propaganda, the strike committee began to show the “public relations councils” of General Motors a thing or two. When the company issued lengthy statements to the public through press channels, the strike committee promptly replied through the same channels with equally lengthy but extremely devastating prepared statements that quickly forced the company to change the substance of its propaganda. Further, the strike committee issued a strike bulletin, Strike Truth, which had wide-spread distribution among the Chevrolet workers and workers in other auto-parts plants. The militant tone, the factual material anl the clear-cut analysis of the strike issues contained in this single bulletin tremendously strengthened the morale of the strikers and laid the basis for the progressive principles which strongly directed the further conduct of the strike and the negotiations.
One primary consideration motivated the union progressives as they mapped out their tactics. They understood well enough that in this particular situation the most dangerous forces they had to combat were within their own camp. They knew they were dealing with inexperienced, uneducated (from a working-class standpoint), inarticulate workers, fearful of “public opinion,” subject to confusion in the welter of rumor and misleading propaganda, raw with indoctrinated prejudices against “radicalism,” suspicious of everything they could not unlerstand – , but nevertheless anxious for competent guidance and willing to make a stand-up fight. The real enemy they would have to combat would be the A.F. of L. top officials, Bill Green and his lieutenant, Francis Dillon, whose policies were opposed to strikes and militant action, who believed in asking favors of the bosses and keeping on friendly terms with the labor exploiters and the government. In every major industry these elements had succeeded in curbing necessary militant action by reliance on compromising methods of arbitration and the diversion of action into the deadening channels of endless conferences and government boards and agencies which were promptly converted into instruments for the protection of the interests of the employers.
 
The Negotiations
From the outset, the progressives put forth the idea of direct negotiations between the elected committee of the strikers and the employers. They impressed upon the strikers the dangers of permitting the government to direct the terms of the strike settlement, or to allow other than those from their own immediate ranks to have final authority in negotiations.
The first move of the company had been to proffer counter-proposals to those contained in the union contract. These proposals were in effect the acceptance of company-unionism, the notorious “merit” and “proportional representation” clauses of the now defunct Automobile Labor Code, “conditional” promises of slight wage increases, all hidden behind neat sounding phrases. Francis Dillon did not arrive in Toledo until four days after the strike was under way. Even had he desired to, he could not have forced the company’s proposals down the strikers’ throat. For the time being he had to appear to go along with the sentiment of the strikers, in order to gain their confidence by a display of militancy and to seize in his own hands the leadership of the strike. At a mass meeting of the strikers, held on the day of his arrival, he urged them to vote down the company’s offer. This they did unanimously.
 
Conflict Sharpens
Once Dillon arrived on the scene, the conflict of forces within the union ranks, between the reactionaries and progressives, became more sharp. The company refused to deal further with the strikers’ representatives or to negotiate until the men returned to work. This left the situation in Toledo at a complete stand-still. It was obvious that the strategy of General Motors (and Francis Dillon, who was equally anxious to have the strike terminated) was to keep the strike isolated, undermine the morale of the strikers through propaganda and the threat of permanently closing the plant and starting operations elsewhere, demoralize them through inaction and subversive methods and, if possible, starve them out.
The next move of the progressives was to spread the strike. On the day of Dillon’s arrival in Toledo, a group of Chevrolet strikers had gone to Detroit where copies of Strike Truth were circulated at the Chevrolet plant there, and the office building of General Motors was picketed until the group was arrested by Detroit police. Although the closure of the Toledo plant threatened shortly to stop production throughout the entire Chevrolet Corp. because of shortage of transmissions, every effort was being made by General Motors and the press to keep news of the strike from reaching outside of Toledo. Francis Dillon had safely concealed and ignored for some time the vote of numerous auto union locals throughout the country in favor of strike action. The nation’s auto workers, speeded up and exploited to the hilt, wanted action. Telegrams had been sent by the strike committee to numerous other locals telling of the strike and urging them to take similar action.
 
Strike Spreads
Dillon moved north, following his first mass meeting in Toledo, to confer with the Detroit union officials. The strike committee and the Toledo union progressives went south, to Norwood, Ohio. They succeeded in persuading the workers in two General Motors plants there to strike, without benefit of Dillon. At the same time, plants in Cleveland and Atlanta, Ga., were shut down by company officials just prior to strike action. Other strikes threatened, involving important key plants. Each day reports of plant closures due to lack of parts were received. The next move of the progressives was to Flint.
While the representatives of Bill Green were moving in on the strike from the outside, there were numerous elements within the local union, particularly the executive board members and the business agent, Fred Schwake, who were opposing the progressives and attempting to undermine the influence of Jimmy Roland and the strike committee. Under the pressure of Dillon and T.N. Taylor, another of Bill Green’s organizers, they began to obstruct progressive moves. They withheld funds from the strike committee and prevented the further publication of the strike bulletin. In the mass meetings and on the picket-lines they attempted to edge the strike committee out of the leadership. A red-scare was started by Schwake who induced a small group of the more backward strikers to chase individuals distributing literature of other working-class organizations. Representatives of the Communist Party received the brunt of this attack, due in large measure to the stupidity and tactlessness of some of the statements: contained in an initial leaflet.
 
Welcome W.P. Literature
Members of the W.P. reported these reactionary actions to the Joint Action Committee which immediately sent a strong protest to the strike committee and the union executive board. The W.P. members continued to distribute leaflets in the name of our party which were widely accepted by the strikers and read with keen interest. The strikers shortly made a distinction between W.P. literature and that of other groups, and always welcomed the distinctive appearing leaflets of the W.P. which contained a positive program of action explained in clear terms and which fearlessly and factually exposed the policies and maneuvers of Dillon and his machine. Thousands of New Militants, containing uncompromising attacks upon Dillon, Taylor and Schwake, pointing out the correct tactics to be used, the role of the government, etc., were distributed on the picket lines and at the meetings. This literature of the W.P. had an incalculable effect in molding progressive sentiment and arming the progressives against the influence of the reactionaries.
During the second week of the strike, the company started to open its attack. It began the swift setting-up of a transmission plant to replace the Toledo one in Muncie, Ind., which the newspapers played up to frighten the Toledo workers back to work. A strike-breaking agency, hiding behind the spurious name of “Independent Workers Association,” was organized by the company officials and foremen. Government “concliators,” including the Department of Labor’s chief strikebreaker, Edward F. McGrady, were sent into Toledo.
The “Independent Workers Association” claimed to have sent a request to the G.M.C. officials, together with a petition containing the signatures of a majority of the Chevrolet employees, asking for a vote on the company’s proposals under the supervision of the Department of Labor.
 
Dillon’s First Trick
Dillon, persuaded by a superficial show of strength on the part of this strike-breaking outfit that a majority of the workers were in favor of returning to work, urged such a vote in hopes that the union forces would be outvoted and the strikers forced to capitulate in a manner which would not put the finger of betrayal upon him. After terrific pressure had been brought upon the strike committee, all but Roland and two others agreed to the vote.
The following night, Sunday, Dillon went to the Buick local in Flint. This local had previously voted to go on strike the next morning at a meeting held several days before when a delegation of Toledo union militants headed by Jimmy Roland had visited the Flint local. Dillon influenced the Flint workers to postpone strike action until after the vote by misleading statements regarding the courage and strength of the Toledo strikers. The progressives, once the vote had been called for, started a drive to defeat the company’s proposals. A huge mass meeting of Toledo labor was held. Another issue of Strike Truth was published, under a different editor, somewhat weakened, but following the general form of the first one. When the vote was taken three days later, the union won hands down.
 
Turn Down Proposal
Dillon did not cease his stalling tactics. He came to an agreement with the G.M.C. representative, through the agency of McGrady, for another line of attack. The company agreed to meet with the representatives of the strikers for further negotiations. Dillon used the pretext of the negotiations to again restrain the Flint Buick local from striking until after the negotiations. During the negotiations all but one member of the strike committee refused to accept the company’s second proposal, which included only some minor concessions and no guarantee of union recognition or seniority rights. The one member of the committee who fought on the side of Dillon, McGrady and the G.M.C., was Ben Bonner. This is the same Ben Bonner whom the Daily Worker described on May 13, the day of the betrayal, as a leading “militant” and “progressive.”
The progressives began to organize the strike militants in preparation for the meeting on May 13, when the question of the company’s second proposal was to be presented. Dillon, breaking an agreement made with the strike committee, issued a widely featured statement to the press telling the strikers to accept the company’s proposals and, by indirection, denunciatlng the loyal members of the strike committee as “reds.” The newspapers put on an extra heavy barrage urging the strikers to follow Dillon’s advice. On May 12, A.J. Muste addressed an open meeting on the strike, in which he vigorously scored Dillon, Schwake and the other reactionaries, and urged the strikers not accept the company’s terms. Many of the leading strikers and picket captains attended the meeting.
 
The Showdown
So strong had the sentiment become against Dillon, that at the May 13 meeting the strikers first voted to refuse the floor for discussion on the company’s proposal to anyone but the strikers and members of the strike committee. Dillon went into a tantrum and stormed from the hall, loudly declaring that he would withdraw the union charter. The subsequent developments of the meeting, with its disquieting results for the strikers, can be attributed solely to the inexperience of the strikers and the inarticulateness of the members of the strike committee.
The executive members of the union local, fearful that Dillon had power to carry out his threat and still largely under conservative influences, induced Roland and the other committeemen, from the standpoint of union loyalty, “fair play,” “free speech,” etc., to secure a vote permitting Dillon to speak. Dillon spoke, using every device of cajolery, alarm and threat to induce the strikers to accept the company’s terms. He was roundly booed during the entire course of his speech, and it is generally admitted that his remarks carried insufficient weight to capture the strikers. But when Fred Schwake, whom the strikers considered one of their own and whom a great number still had confidence in because of his public appearance of militancy, spoke in favor of acceptance while the voting was going on, a great number of the strikers, who shortly thereafter bitterly condemned their own capitulation, became discouraged and confused and voted, against their own desires, for acceptance. The vote resulted in favor of acceptance and the strikers returned to work the next day.
 
Role of Parties
One of the important and significant phases of this strike was the role of the various working-class political parties. The Socialist Party was conspicuous by its complete absence from the strike. As Tim McCormack, one of the local S.P. leaders, exclaimed on the day of the settlement to the organizer of the Toledo W.P. branch, “Jesus Christ! The S.P. hasn’t done a goddam thing during this strike.”
The same can he equally said of the Communist Party. Aside from the usual passing out of leaflets which were largely illiterate and illegible and usually making suggestions on policy three days after the progressives of the union had already taken steps to put them into effect, the C.P. had neither direct nor indirect influence on the strike. Officials of the S.P. and C.P. came to representatives of the W.P. on the afternoon of the settlement and for two hours begged and pleaded with the W.P. for a “united front” When the W.P. pointed out that this was a rather belated step in view of the imminent crisis and that these other groups were in disrepute with the strikers and the W.P. was not, the representatives of these groups agreed that such a “united front” would act to hurt the progressives rather than help them.
The final consideration of the effectiveness of the organization of the progressives has come since the strike. The night following the settlement the Chevrolet union members again met in full force. There was no demoralization. Dillon and his machine were denounced by the entire body. Representatives of the Central Labor Union spoke at this meeting and likewise denounced Dillon.
 
Progressives to Meet Soon
Today the union is stronger than ever in the Chevrolet plant The progressives in the entire local are more influential and organizing more strongly than ever. A conference of auto union progressives from all sections of the country will be held definitely in the near future. Local 18384 passed a resolution last week, which all the locals in the country will be asked to adopt, demanding that Dillon be fired as an A.F. of L. organizer. Schwake’s star has dimmed and he will undoubtedly be deposed from his position in the union very shortly. The Chevrolet workers have conducted several inside strikes since their return to work, all of them completely successful.
The Chevrolet strike must be regarded as merely the preliminary skirmish of a greater battle to come. The progressive program, which the W.P. has been advocating, the militant policies, are becoming more strongly ingrained in the union. From the standpoint of the immediate gains secured in the strike, the strikers suffered a partial defeat. From the standpoint of the development of the progressive forces, the strengthening of the union, the splendid fight that is being made against the union reactionaries, the Chevrolet strike must be regarded as a magnificent victory.
 




TOLEDO, Ohio – The youth section of the local Stalinists succeeded in capturing themselves and several Y.W.C.A. secretaries at the Toledo Youth Congress held at the Central Labor Union Hall, Saturday afternoon, November 30. Going one better on the Elders of the Church (Stalinist), who held the fort at the recent American League Against War and Fascism conference, the fledgelings succeeded in preventing entirely any discussion on the war and sanctions question, which had been introduced into the conference by a joint resolution against support of imperialist governments and their sanctions submitted by the Young Peoples Socialist League and Spartacus Youth League.
Highly advertised and ballyhooed, the conference began on the evening of November 29, with a meeting at the Civic Auditorium featuring a symposium of representatives of the Republican, Democratic, Socialist and Communist Parties on What Our Party Offers American Youth. For over three hours, the 300 of the faithful who lost themselves in the echoing vastness of the huge auditorium were, drenched by the greatest outpouring of reactionary balderdash ever spewed over a helpless audience, – saved only by the forthright utterances of Ben Fisher, national secretary of the Yipsels, who openly denounced the chauvinist policies of the Stalinists and attacked the support of sanctions and one’s own imperialist government in a war crisis.
 
The Minimum Is Zero
William Weinstone, who represented the Stalinists in the Symposium, completely skirted the entire war question, ducked the direct challenge of Fisher on the C.P. position on sanctions, and confined the greater portion of his remarks to sugary sentimental plea for organic unity between the Socialists and Stalinists. Waldo McNutt, Chairman of the American Youth Congress, one of the two main speakers on the program, distinguished himself in his remarks by declaring the purpose of the Congress to be “the uniting of the youth on a minimum program on which everyone could agree.” Everyone agreed on the minimum program offered – the minimum being nothing at all.
The wind-up speaker, and chief attraction of the evening, however, was Reverend Theodore Adams, pastor of the Ashland Avenue Baptist Church. The Reverend put on a regular revival and offered as the solution of the problems of American youth the slogan “Come to Jesus!” (sic!), and punctuated his pious exhortations with an attack on the Soviet Union, linking the workers’ fatherland with Nazi Germany! Reverend Adams is the respectable front the Stalinists in control of the Congress are using to appeal to the church groups. The actual conference, attended by 40 delegates, a majority of Y.C.L. and New America members in a bloc, lasted about 4 hours on Saturday afternoon. One hour of this time was spent in again listening to Mr. McNutt say nothing in the polished platform manner of a washing-machine salesman who just slays the Y.W.C.A. secretaries. Then the conference was divided into “commissions,” directed in reports on youth and “unemployment, industry, education, war and fascism. This was intended to prevent any full and open discussion before the entire congress on resolutions introduced by the Yipsels and S.Y.L.
However, a majority report in favor of the joint anti-sanctions resolution was reported by the commission on war and fascism, of which Sam Pollock was elected chairman. When the report was read to the congress, Lottie Gordon, Y.C.L. representative and wife of the district C.P. organizer, took the floor and charged the contents of the report to be out of order. After an hour’s fight on the floor, in which the Y.C.L. members by parliamentary conniving, succeeded in preventing any discussion on the actual contents of the resolution, it was tabled. During the course of the debate, however, it was revealed that the leaders of the A.Y.C., those staunch defenders of democratic rights, were opposed to “any controversial subject being discussed, since such subjects are against the program of the congress which is limited only to those questions on which all are in agreement.” (sic!)
The one significant phase of the entire affair was the genuine and principled united front affected between the Young Socialists and Young Fourth Internationalists on the basis of a fundamental agreement on the war question.
 



TOLEDO, May 14. – After three weeks of magnificent battling, the union auto workers of the Chevrolet Motor Ohio Company, whose mass picket lines had stopped the production of Chevrolet transmissions and closed down almost the entire Chevrolet Corporation, voted last night to accept the offer of a four cents an hour wage-increase and other slight concessions and to return to work. For three weeks these inexperienced workers, who have been in the union but a month, fought back blow for blow against the financial might of General Motors, the pressure of the government, the cunning propaganda of the capitalist press. They went down to temporary and partial defeat at last through the treachery of Francis Dillon, national organizer for the A.F. of L, in the auto industry, and Fred Schwake, the business agent of their local whom they had trusted. But they went down fighting.
In one of the most spectacular and rousing floor fights ever waged, the militant progressives in the union, denounced as “Muste men” by Dillon, took the meeting last night by storm, hooted Dillon from the Civic Auditorium at the outset of the session, and were on the verge of tearing to pieces the General Motors offer, which failed to grant them one important concession, including their demands for union recognition, a signed contract and straight seniority without the notorious “merit clause.”
Lack of Experience
Their lack of experience and desire for “democracy” and “fair play,” which was appealed to by equally inexperienced members of the strike committee, caused them to rescind a previous motion which they had passed excluding all persons from speaking on the proposals but the strikers and the members of the strike committee.
Dillon was recalled into the meeting and given the chance to speak on the agreement which he, Edward F. McGrady, assistant secretary of labor, and William S. Knudsen, executive vice-president of General Motors, had devised last Saturday. Dillon had already expressed his sentiments on this union-busting agreement Monday in the daily press, which featured his statement urging the strikers to accept the terms of the proposal, and hinted that the progressives who fought its acceptance, including every one of the elected strike committee but one, were “reds,” through a vague allusion to “those who presume without authority to speak in the interests of the workers the language of a Soviet Dictatorship.” His public statement was in direct violation of an agreement made with the strike committee not to express himself on the proposed settlement prior to the meeting.
 
Fulminates at Muste
Dillon was given the platform to speak. Two hours before he had raged from the auditorium howling that the union was expelled from the A.F. of L. The press reported him as saying then, before he entered a cab to go to his hotel, “Let Muste run their outfit. If they want an I.W.W. or a communist outfit let them have it. They’re out! They’re out! I disown them.”
Three times during his ensuing speech Dillon was booed and hissed down. But with infinite cunning, demagogy and the basest lies he shouted and threatened. His big club was the threat to withdraw the charter of the entire local if the strikers did not accept the company’s offer. The local has members in nineteen Toledo plants. Slowly he ground into the minds of many of the strikers the fear that he would smash their union if they did not end the strike. In return for the “democratic” gesture pf the strikers, Dillon used the foulest and most undemocratic tactics ever devised to force the company agreement down the strikers’ throats. He used their very union loyalty, their desire to maintain their union at all costs, to betray them.
During the course of his tirade, Dillon snarled an attack at A.J. Muste, who has been in Toledo assisting the local branch in developing the forces and strategy of the union progressives in the strike. He shouted “Muste won’t feed you!” A score of voices hurled back, “Neither will you!”
 
Schwake Rats for Dillon
Despite Dillon’s threats, lies, cajolery and brow-beating, it is doubtful that Dillon would have succeeded in his purpose of smashing the strike, had it not been for Schwake.
While slips of paper were being passed out for ballots intended to record a secret vote – a maneuver to catch the “weak-sisters” in the union put over by the pressure of the executive committee of the local which has been stringing along with the Dillon gang and bucking the progressives on the strike committee – Schwake stepped to the “mike” and pleaded with the strikers to accept the proposals. He told the strikers to think of their wives and children going hungry if the strike continued further, he argued that they weren’t strong enough to battle General Motors despite the fact that the strikers had forced the company to terms on point after point in the course of the strike, he pointed to Dillon’s threat to lift their charter.
Schwake swung enough of them to carry the vote for Dillon. Until he spoke, the strikers were dead-set against acceptance. But Schwake was the man whom they regarded as one of their own trusted leaders. It was he they had voted for in the Auto Labor Board election one month before. All during the strike he had presented himself as a militant, although behind the scenes he went along with Dillon, fought the progressives under cover, prevented the publication of the strike bulletin, helped keep strike funds from the strike committee, tried to start a “red scare” and prevented the distribution of hand-bills by other working class organizations, and sought to take over the leadership of the strike from the elected strike committee. Knifes Roland
But the strikers didn’t know, or perhaps didn’t understand, these things. They didn’t know Schwake was betraying Jimmy Roland, their fighting chairman of the strike committee and leader of the militants. They didn’t know that it was Jim Roland who was most active in the organizing of the progressives in the local after last year’s Auto-Lite strike, in ousting Ramsey and Bossier, the former reactionary leaders, and putting Schwake in as business agent. They didn’t know Schwake was inexperienced and vacillating and that he had been run for office with the promise that he would accept the advice of the experienced union men like Roland. When Schwake turned tail, the props were knocked from under many of them. They became confused. Their confidence in the correctness of their militant position was shattered. Many faltered as he spoke all through the vote-taking. Only after the vote was announced and the meeting officially adjourned did they begin to realize that they had voted for something they did not want, that they had been fooled and tricked.
Several hundred of the most militant remained in the hall for an hour after adjournment. They were fighting mad. They wanted to hold another meeting to reconsider. They wanted to return and man the picket lines despite everything. In this group were the best fighters, the most self-sacrificing, the picket captains, strike committee members. But it was too late. For the moment demoralization had set in. The majority of the strikers had dispersed, most of them in disgust. They were weary of body and torn in spirit. Some of the bravest of them wept.
Jimmy Roland had given the real militant leadership and direction, had fought Dillon and his gang almost single-handed, had kept the strike committee time after time from capitulating to the pressure of the government, the press and the General Motors officials, had personally spread the strike to other cities in the face of the opposition of the A.F. of L. bureaucrats, was indeed the spark-plug of the entire fight. He fought in his grim bull-dog honest fashion to the bitter end, but he seemed in a daze during the entire meeting. Only 24 years old, he did not as yet possess the skill and knowledge to offset the maneuvers of Dillon. His very incorruptible honesty and sense of fair play betrayed him. For it was he who finally persuaded the strikers to permit Dillon to speak. He did it in the sense of demonstrating to Dillon what democratic unionism means. And then Dillon thanked him by knifing him and the strikers in the back.
 
Progressives Organize
The results of this strike cannot be termed an utter defeat, however, although the auto workers have lost their finest opportunity to date to force the auto barons to their knees throughout the country.
Out of this fight has grown, a force of militant progressives in the auto unions who have demonstrated conclusively their power and ability. The struggle they put on in Toledo, although meeting with temporary defeat, has already aroused progressives in the auto unions throughout the country. Tonight these progressives are planning to get together, to lay out a national program, to organize, train and discipline themselves more thoroughly.
Moreover, this strike has proved to the auto workers that the auto barons and corporations are not invincible. A small handful, comparatively, of Toledo strikers, militant and determined, forced General Motors to negotiate with them directly, against all the previously declared policy of General Motors. They won some concessions, even though meagre and apt to be withdrawn if the union men fail to push forward their organization and fight every attempt to violate the terms. Further, they have demonstrated the power of organized labor in action, when even a small group of workers, willing to fight, can successfully cripple a giant organization like the Chevrolet Corp.
 
W.P. in the Strike
The methods by which the progressives in this strike were organized have laid the groundwork for more successful and wide-spread attempts in the future. Although most of the strikers were new union men, the militants were drawn together. Bill Prior did a splendid job on this. A real floor machine, inexperienced as it was, was developed, and it put up a magnificent battle when all the circumstances are considered. A regular series of leaflets were issued to the strikers by the Workers Party. These were eagerly read and were tremendously effective in suggesting to the strikers the practical and necessary course to be pursued in the strike. Key men, rank and file leaders, were educated and trained in parliamentary procedure, strike tactics, and militant unionism. For one brief period, despite all the handicaps, it seemed as though the progressives would carry the day.
This year the production season is almost over. But the seeds of clean, progressive, fighting unionism which the W.P. has succeeded in implanting in the minds of the auto union members will bear fruit.
At a meeting of the Chevrolet local held tonight, a thousand union men cheered the President of the local when he said: “In three weeks you won more than General Motors has granted any group of workers in twenty years. What can you do in another six months! Build the union for the next fight.” Walter Gunthrop, President of the Central Labor Union of Toledo, denounced the settlement as a bastard affair whose mother was Francis J. Dillon. Midwife at the birth was James Wilson, Green’s personal representative, he stated. The men unanimously pledged themselves to stick in the union, throw out their false leaders, and build the organization toward a fight to a finish with General Motors.
 







(Ed. Note: This is the first of a series of three articles by Art Preis on the great Toledo strike. Art Preis was the editor of Strike Truth, the Chevrolet strike bulletin.)





No one will deny that the Toledo Chevrolet strike was one of the most remarkable labor battles ever fought in this country.
1,300 raw recruits to unionism, from a group of production workers formerly considered among the most docile in industry, for three weeks fought to a stand-still one of the most powerful corporations in the world. But one week in the union, they over-rode the timidity and actual hostility of their own national leaders in calling the strike and conducted themselves with a militancy, discipline and precision scarcely ever excelled in American labor history. On their own initiative, in the face of the outright opposition of their own higher officials, they spread the strike to tens of thousands of other auto workers in distant cities and effectively paralyzed an entire giant corporation.
They distinguished themselves not merely on the picket lines, however, but in that complex and treacherous field of negotiations. They demanded and secured direct negotia tions between their employers and elected workers from their own ranks. The pressure, authority propaganda and intimidation of the government, press and employers combined could not deceive or demoralize them. They forced some measure of concessions from an hitherto unyielding gang of industrial overlords.
 
Went Down Fighting
If in the end they bowed to the shameless and brazen treachery of some of their own leaders and returned to work with very partial gains, they did so only after the most stirring resistance and protest conceivable under the circumstances. Far from succumbing to a disillusionment and demoralization which might well have shattered their ranks, as has happened in similar circumstances with other older and more experienced union groups, within 24 hours they met again to denounce those who had betrayed them, to analyze their successes and mistakes in preparation for a future battle which they are determined to make, and to present an unbroken front of loyal unionism more fighting and progressive than ever.
No competent observer would regard such an example of working class struggle and solidarity as something spontaneous. The record of the present leaders of the A.F. of L., their methods and attitudes as proved in similar past instances in steel, rubber, auto, textile and other basic industries, would indicate that more was needed than spontaneous will to offset the demoralizing and shattering effects of their restraining, demagogic and bureaucratic domination. From vhat occurred in the Toledo Chevrolet strike, certain questions must inevitably arise. What was the leadership and guidance, what the program, what the forces that determined the course of these events. Further, and more significant, what were the means and methods employed by this leadership?
 
Role of the W.P.
The answer to the first question is generally known and conceded. All competent observers for the capitalist press of the nation, including such an informed reporter as Louis Stark of the New York Times, attributed the leading influence to the Workers Party. It was publicly recognized by Francis Dillon, national A.F. of L. organizer who fought the progressives and temporarily curbed the strike. It has been openly acknowledged directly and indirectly by official representatives of both the Socialist and the Communist parties in Toledo.
More vital for the future guidance of the American working class however, is the answer to the second question. That answer lies correctly not merely in the immediate and apparent events preceding and during the strike, but in events which are rooted in the entire course of the labor movement in Toledo for the past two yelars. It derives entirely from the activities and development of the Workers Party in Toledo.
 
Toledo Before Auto-Lite
Until the time of the Auto-Lite strike of last May, Toledo to most people was merely a stop-over between Cleveland and Detroit or the place where a boxer named Dempsey gained immortality by successfully pounding with his fists a fellow named Jess Willard. Its only other claim to distinction was the fact that all but one of its ten banks had collapsed two years before Roosevelt stabilized the banking system of the nation by closing all the banks. In 1932, 60 to 70 percent of its formerly gainfully employed population was unemployed.
Toledo was also a notorious cheap-labor, “scab” town. Whatever unions were in existence were weak and ineffectual craft unions among the skilled trades. Year after year they continued in their sleepy and ineffectual way. There was no expansion, vitality or activity.
 
Latent Power of Workers
For a labor movement built on exclusive and craft lines solely, totally unconcerned about developing genuine power so long as they could fortify the comparative handful in their own ranks, the fact that Toledo was the glass and auto-parts center of America was not even recognized. They did not know, or were unconcerned about the fact that a stoppage of production in even a few plants in Toledo would be sufficient to paralyze automobile production, and indirectly affect the production of steel, coal and other basic products which for the past few years has been sustained largely by the continued expansion of the automobile industry. The Toledo industrial workers had a weapon for power in their hands which they did not know either existed or how to use.
Today, Toledo is a union town to a very great extent. Within one year it has won a name for itself as a stronghold of progressive and militant unionism. Over twenty successful or partially successful strikes have been waged in the past 12 months in all of which mass picket lines and mass action have been the characteristic weapon of labor. In almost every strike those who have organized and led the picket lines have been Workers Party members. Starting with the famous Auto-Lite strike, through the Larrowe Milling and Armour and Swift strikes, up to the General Milk Drivers and FERA strikes, the Workers Party has laid down the lines of the militant strike strategy employed, and its members have personally led the struggles. Their participation was known and welcomed, often officially invited, their advice and tactics were considered and largely pursued.
 
The First Battle
It was in the Auto-Lite strike that the W.P. first showed its mettle and sowed the seeds of militant unionism and working-class solidarity which are today the characteristics of the Toledo labor movement. With but five or six actual party members at the time, none of whom were connected with the union, the Workers Party, with the aid of the Lucas County Unemployed League, which the W.P. had organized and in which its members had been most active and prominent, went on the picket-lines, at a time when the strike was completely demoralized, defied the injunction against mass picketing, to which the reactionary leaders of the auto union, Ramsey and Bossier, had timidly submitted, revived the strike, built up mass picket lines, reorganized the scattered ranks of the strikers and personally led the workers on the firing line in the six-day “Battle of Chestnut Hill” against all the forces of the police, deputies and National Guards.
But the activities of the Workers Party only began with this strike. The next job was to clean out the union, weaken the reactionary and backward influences, and establish the union on a fighting, progressive basis. Several of the most courageous, intelligent and active members of the union were brought into the W.P. Working under the guidance and discipline of the W.P., they began to organize a progressive bloc inside the union. These progressives drew up a slate of officers which they ran in the union elections, capturing seven out of twelve offices. Among those who were placed in office was Jimmy Roland, the fighting leader of the Toledo Chevrolet strikers, who, from the beginning, was a leader of the progressive forces. Progressives were elected to positions on their executive shop committees of the different plants which were organized and were placed upon the general executive committee of the local. The W.P. inside and outside of the union began to expose the policies of Ramsey and Bossier. Its members built up an air-tight case based on iron facts with which to lay open their anti-union activities. When the progressives were organized to sufficient strength, they placed charges against these corrupt leaders, fought them openly on the floor of the union and had them ousted from office.
 
In Passing
In this connection, a passing word should be given to the stupid charges voiced in the Daily Worker editorial of May 6, titled Renegades in Toledo. This editorial, obviously written in New York by some hack entirely ignorant of the Toledo situation, asserted that the “American Workers Party” was making an alliance with Ramsey, “an A.F. of L. official,” to split the strike. This is not merely a deliberate lie, but a silly one, since everyone in Toledo knows that there is no such official as Ramsey in the union, and that it was the W.P. members and progressives in the union who forced his ousting eight months ago.
Following the cleaning up of the union, the progressives pushed forward a program of intensive organization in the union. Plant after plant was organized, signed contracts secured from the employers, and the union’s position consolidated and company unionism smashed in all the plants already organized. The militancy which the workers had learned in the Auto-Lite strike held good. Violations of the terms of the contracts by the bosses met with immediate and strong action. Inside and departmental strikes were numerous. The union men were constantly vigilant in the maintenance of their rights.
 
General Motors Next
One plant alone remained, in particular, to be organized. But this plant was a harder nut to crack than the others had been. This was not the plant of some local capitalists. It was a part of that huge network belonging to the seemingly all-powerful General Motors Corp., the Chevrolet Motor Ohio Company, key transmission plant for the Chevrolet Corp. Workers in this plant had always shunned unionism They would not even accept leaflets. Not more than a small handful had ever been induced even to attend an open union meeting. The spy-system, the black-list, the company union reigned supreme. But forces were at work inside and outside of the Chevrolet plant which all the power and intimidation of General Motors could not offset.
(Continued next week)
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 




Over one and a half years have passed since that memorable night in May, 1934 when some ten thousand embattled Toledo workers besieged the stronghold of the Toledo Auto-Lite plant and fought through those six days of magnificent struggle against all the armed hosts of the capitalist state. The echo of that victorious “Battle of Chestnut Hill” beat against the eager ears of the American workers and inspired the first great strike wave under the “New Deal.”
Hard in the wake of the Auto-Lite strike came the two famous and historic battles, of the Minneapolis truck-drivers under the leadership of Local 574, the general textile strike, the San Francisco general strike, and a flood of other militant labor struggles.
 
Toledo a Union Town
Emboldened by the lessons of the Auto-Lite encounter, Toledo labor began a steady organizational, upsurge. Although every step of the path toward a solid and fighting union front has been marked by the fiercest opposition, both from the employers and government on the outside and reactionary union bureaucrats from within, the onetime notorious “scab-town” Toledo is today a genuinely union town.
This development did not spring to full flower overnight out of the earth. Following the Auto-Lite affair, Toledo experienced one strike battle after another, the Armour and Swift, Larrowe Milling, General Milk Drivers, FERA strikes and a flock of others. The primary Issue of most of these scraps was the establishment of the union, union recognition and the fulfillment of the grandiose promises of the late-lamented NRA.
 
Chevrolet Strike
It was therefore no mere coincidence that in May of 1935, but one year after the Auto-Lite strike, Toledo labor again set oft the spark which revitalized the apathetic workers in the giant auto industry and launched the second strike wave under the Roosevelt regime. The Chevrolet strike, under the leadership of hard-hitting, intelligent union progressives, served not only to entrench unionism in several General Motors plants, but exposed to the workers of the nation the treacherous role of Green, Dillon and other enemies of industrial unionism, stimulated the fight for union progressivism and the organization of the workers in basic industries.
The three weeks battle of the Chevrolet workers, climaxed by the unforgettable demonstration of the strikers against Francis Dillon, right-hand Green man, on the night when they were finally, bludgeoned into partial but short-lived defeat, served to crystallize anti-Dillon-Green sentiment in the auto, rubber and other unions, led to the formation of autonomous internationals in these industries, and spurred the fight for industrial unionism in the recent A.F. of L. convention and subsequently.
 
The Unemployed Leagues
No history of the class struggle in Toledo for the past two years, however brief, would be accurate or complete without some mention of the Lucas County Unemployed League. The militancy and persistent fight of the Unemployed League here on almost every picket line is traditional. For three years the Unemployed League has inspired the Toledo unemployed to steady battle for their rights. A half dozen or more organizations, including the Unemployment Councils, have risen and sunk into quiet oblivion, but the Unemployed League continues in a stable and steadfast fashion. It is the Unemployed League which has led and organized every unemployed demonstration in the past two years, which was the backbone of the Single Men’s Death March and the FERA strike. It was the Unemployed League which first violated the Auto-Lite injunction, revived a dying strike and inspired that first victorious struggle. The Unemployed League has been a powerful ally in numerous other industrial conflicts.
 
W.P. Active and Influential
The W.P. and its members have played no small role in this entire labor development. It has projected the idea of genuine fighting unionism, of class struggle, inevery labor issue; out of the accumulated experience which it represents, the W. P. has helped devise strategy and lent suggestions and guidance which have proven sound and invaluable for successful working class struggle.
Today, Toledo workers are making ready for a further step forward, a step which may well lead to the beginning of the third great “New Deal” strike wave. The Chevrolet union men are now faced with an attempt to weaken and smash their union. General Motors, after laying off 2,500 men for machine replacements several weeks ago, is rehiring only 1,400 with the reopening of the plant. But the Chevy men are not taking this lying down. They are demanding the rehiring of all those laid off. Meanwhile, the auto workers in Detroit and other centers are beginning to stir. The clouds are gathering and the storm may break soon.
 




TOLEDO, O, Nov. 4. – “We can’t be against government sanctions. What would we do if an invading army attacked our homes?” This was not the statement of the Liberty League, nor an appeal by “Stinker” Hearst against the Red and Yellow perils, nor even a quotation from the constitution of the National Civic Federation. It was the full-blown wisdom donated to the Northwest District Conference of the American League Against War and Fascism, November 2–3, by a leading Detroit member of the Communist Party.
Fearful lest his party comrades might not make the position of the C.P. on imperialist sanctions sufficiently clear, Francis Murphy, local secretary and organizer of the American League, stated, “The American League is not concerned, with League of Nations sanctions. The U.S. is not a member of the League. Therefore, we are not concerned about the actions of the League of Nations.” Reinforcements were brought from the rear to support Murphy, when Sam Sponseller, New America organizer, emphatically stated, “The American League is against all wars.”
These were the arguments used to “prove” that a resolution against imperialist sanctions, submitted by Sam Pollock, a W.P. member who represented the Lucas County Unemployed League, was “pacifist.” The resolution, which was undoubtedly the most important submitted and the only one even discussed or disputed, was permitted only six minutes of debate (two speakers from each side, limited to three minutes apiece) by the mechanical control of the C.P. and its stooges. The resolution, which exposed the entire jingoistic Stalinist structure of the American League, is here quoted in its entirety:
“1. Resolved: That this conference goes on record against any war engaged in by American imperialism; and be it further
“2. Resolved: That this conference does not recognize any idea that justifies support of one’s imperialist country during war, because that country {has an allegedly democratic form of government, against ft country in which fascism or reaction are in power. Any such war would still be an imperialistic war, a war of despoliation and conquest and would not be and could not be in the interests of the overwhelming majority of the peoples; and be it further
“3. Resolved: That this conference is against extending any support to any sanctions that the U. S. government may apply to Italy in the present controversy; such sanctions being only a prelude to a new imperialist war and a world-wide slaughter of the masses of the world; and be it further
“4. Resolved: That this conference support only working-class sanctions against Italy, in the form of strikes, refusal to handle Italian goods, etc., etc.
                                                                                                                          Lucas County Unemployed League.”
The conference had its auspicious start Saturday, Nov. 2, at a luncheon meeting ($1.00 per plate) at ritzy, Jim-Crow Commodore Perry Hotel, held in honor of Dr. Harry F. Ward, titular national head of the American League. This was followed in the evening by a “monster,” “gigantic” “People’s” rally against war at the huge Civic Auditorium (seating capacity 5,600). After titanic preparations, 300 of the masses were lured into the echoing desolation of the auditorium to hear Dr. Ward and such other fighters against war and fascism as Charles Hoover, vice-mayor of Toledo and an official of the Auto-Lite Co.
Resolutions were finally submitted to the evening session, which started late and from which a great share of the delegates were absent. Prior to the report of the resolutions committee, the C.P. majority bloc took the precautions to limit the debate to two delegates for either side of an issue with three minutes apiece. In its report, the resolutions committee “overlooked” the Unemployed League resolution against sanctions. When attention was called to this omission, the chairman hastily reported non-concurrence by the committee, but refused to give the reason for this position.
 
Trade Unionists Balk
When the recorded vote on the resolution was taken, of the 36 delegates present, 26 delegates, all of Stalinist or New America connections, voted as a bloc against it. Three delegates, including 2 bona-fide representatives of large trade union groups, endorsed the resolution. The remainder of the delegates, representing unions and other genuine mass groups, abstained from voting. Several of the abstainers later stated to Sam Pollock, “What was the use of voting? he meeting was stacked.”
Besides Sam Pollock, a militant trade unionist, representing a local of over 1,500 members, took the floor in support of the resolution, emphasizing in brief and straightforward terms, “Here the government is preparing 24 hours a day for a new war, with most of the money coming from relief funds in one form or another. This is the government which clubs us and jails us, and do you want us workers to support the sanctions of such a government?”
The only resolutions passed on the question of war were on a boycott of Italy and Germany and a protest to Japan. The whole question of sanctions was deliberately avoided.
While this farcical “conference” was dragging out its fruitless end, another meeting was being held a short distance away at the Toledo Workers School Hall, the regular Open Forum of the local W.P. Comrade Burke Cochran gave a splendid and eagerly attended talk on the 55th Convention of the A.F. of L. before a full audience of workers, the largest share of whom were active trade union progressives. There was no gag-rule at this meeting, for the floor was given over to an hour and a half of free and open discussion, with members of the auto union and other A.F. of L. groups and the M.E.S.A. participating.
 




Toledo and Minneapolis newspapers have been heaving editorial bouquets at each other recently, each one offering the palm to the other’s city for the distinction of having the most militant labor movement in the country.
The following editorial published in the Toledo News-Bee (Scripps-Howard sheet) on October 16 is a humorous commentary on how the bourgeoisie is “whistling in the dark,” and likewise an eloquent tribute to the effective work of the Workers Party in helping to make Toledo and Minneapolis the “hotspots” of the class-struggle in America. The editorial, entitled The Pot to the Kettle, is here given in its entirety.
 
“The Pot to the Kettle
“The Minneapolis Journal evidently has had a young man out over the country, engaged in ‘drawing the fire.’
“The Journal, in a city with the worst record for strike violence of any city in America, came out on Oct. 11 with a piece entitled New Factories Shun Toledo, City Torn by Violence of Strikes.
“We can imagine that they had a staff meeting at The Journal, following that city’s latest killing on the streets, and the editor told ’em: ‘Boys, we’ve got to do something to show that Minneapolis isn’t so bad, after all. Let’s get a piece about Toledo. That ought to make Minneapolis look pretty good.’
“We will give The Journal piece credit, nevertheless, for its recognition that things have changed for the better in Toledo during the past summer, and particularly since the philosophy of the Toledo Plan has been applied.
“Throughout the country, however, there has been a lot of finger pointing at Toledo. Cities in trouble of their own have striven to boil up Toledo labor stories running back to the old Auto-Late rioting story to draw the fire from their own labor controversies.
“Toledo has had troubles to be sure, but at no time have these been a circumstance to what they have been painted by our loving rival cities.”
 
Short Memories
Of course, that crack about things turning for the better in Toledo during the past summer – meaning that the industrialists, etc., of Toledo have, succeeded in putting the quietus on the labor movement here – is merely wistful wish-thinking. The Auto-Lite strike was merely a beginning, and not an end, as the News-Bee editors would, have their Minneapolis confreres believe, – or it is necessary to refer them to their own back-flies on the General Milk Drivers, FERA, Chevrolet and a dozen of other militant battles.
The first wave of labor struggle in Toledo is ended, the flood that started two years ago with the “Battle of Chestnut Hill.” Labor here is utilizing the present lull in strike activity, similar to that throughout the country, to entrench itself in its new won positions and to lay the groundwork for more and greater battles to come. The organization of the Labor Political Congress, while in itself an ineffective agency for genuine working class political action, is an indication of the breaking away of Toledo workers from old-line capitalist party loyalties and a desire for class action.
 



BULLETIN
TOLEDO, O., April 9. – Despite instructions from the A.F. of L. to the workers not to participate in the election at the Chevrolet plant in Toledo arranged by the Auto Labor Board, 1,326 men voted for the A.F. of L. and only 508 voted for no affiliation. Only a handful failed to vote at all. Organization sentiment is running high, and the workers are flocking into the Federal union. Action talk is heard everywhere and a strike appears likely in the immediate future.

TOLEDO, O., April 9. – Organization of the production and skilled and office workers in the large Toledo plant of the Chevrolet Motor Corp. is proceeding rapidly following two jammed and enthusiastic mass meetings conducted by the Toledo local of the United Automobile Workers Federal Labor Union.
Over 900 workers have attended the meetings and it is expected that all will be signed up in the union by this Saturday. This is one of the most successful attempts which has been made to unionize a plant of the giant General Motors Corp.
As an evidence of the growing progressiveness in the union, the colored sweepers in the Chevrolet plant were brought into the Federal Auto Union along with the fellow-white workers.
Over 400 of the new union men appeared today in the plant this morning wearing their red union buttons for April. Hundreds of workers from the Willys-Overland plant, are likewise joining the Federal Auto union. With the addition of these two major corporations, the entire auto parts and production industry of Toledo, excepting the Champion Spark Plug Corp., will be unionized.
The rush to the genuine union has followed the calling of an election, by the Detroit Auto Labor Board, in the Chevrolet and Willys-Overland plants on April 9, for the supposed purpose of determining which group the workers wish to represent them in collective bargaining. This election was engineered by officials of the two plants, which up until a few weeks ago were non-union, and the Auto labor Board, in an effort to foist company unionism upon the workers. The real union has publicly repudiated these elections, which it did not call for, and has flatly stated that its members will not participate in them nor abide by their results.
This fake maneuvering on the part of the companies has served as a boomerang against the bosses, because it angered the workers and drove them voluntarily into the federal union. Terrific speed-up, differentials in wages and unbearable working conditions have aided to the workers’ desire for genuine organization.
Jim Roland, Chevrolet employee, who is famous for his “one-man picket line” on the Chevrolet plant last June whereby he compelled the company to reinstate him after he had been fired for joining the union, is the acting chairman of the Chevrolet shop section of the union. Among the union members who have taken an active part in organizing these key plants have been several Workers Party members.
Organization of the Toledo Chevrolet plant is of major importance for the entire motor industry, as this plant produces all the transmission parts for the Chevrolet Corp. Demands for a 6 hour day, 30-hour week, union recognition and wage increases are being drawn up to be presented to the Chevrolet company. It is very probable that the intensive union drive is the prelude to a strike which will break in the immediate future.
 



AKRON, O., April 14. – The great strike involving 35,000 Akron rubber workers, which was to set the spark to the 1935 wave of strike struggles in America, is over before it began – the latest and most sinister betrayal of organized labor by William Green and his lieutenants.
A group of militant progressives, which has been growing in the last few weeks, led the opposition battle and, only after hours of desperate lighting, was defeated by the better organized official machine, which finally shoved through the agreement by a series of deceptive maneuvers and outright railroading. This progressive tendency, which has been greatly strengthened and clarified by the events of the last 4 hours, will find a clear public expression in a mass meeting to be held by the Akron branch of the W.P. April 17, at which James P. Cannon will analyze the betrayal and outline the next steps in the fight to build an effective union. The Game of Delays
The imposing of the treacherous agreement upon the rubber workers and the breaking of the strike by the A.F. of L. officialdom followed a carefully designed course. The strike, which has been looming for eighteen months past, was delayed month after month on the urging of the A.F. of L. officials, even after the rubber companies brazenly defined the rulings of the National Labor Relations Board that an election be held on the matter of representation for collective bargaining. When the government further demonstrated its unwillingness or inability to enforce its own ruling, these officials continued to point to the government as the agency from which union recognition might be secured instead of to the mass strength and militant action of the workers.
 
Last Minute Promises
Following an overwhelming vote by the unions last week in favor of strike, a last-hour course of delay was pursued by the A.F. of L. leaders in order to give the forces of the national government and local press a chance to get into full play. Every effort to set a definite strike date was deliberately brushed aside. While still urging the workers to prepare for action, the officials implanted in the minds of the inexperienced union members the belief that a strike might still be averted and that the demands for union recognition might be secured through the intervention of Francis Perkins and the pressure of the government.
As late as twelve hours before the signing of the actual agreement, Claherty and other organizers boldly proclaimed through the press that they would agree to nothing less than an election conducted by the Department of Labor off the companies’ properties, in which the companies would unconditionally recognize the group securing the majority vote. It cannot be doubted that the terms of the final settlement were well known to Green, Claherty and Co. even while these misleading statements were being made to disarm the workers and leave them unprepared for the last crushing blow.
 
C.P. Plays Claherty’s Game
A new angle was the role of the Communist Party in the Akron betrayal. During the last and most critical days leading up to the debacle, the C.P. in effect collaborated with the A.F. of L. officials, and in return for an indirect endorsement from the A.F. of L. leaders withheld all criticism of the obvious step-by-step course of treachery. The “non-aggression pact” with a vengeance!
Claherty, Bill Green’s personal agent and chief figure in the betrayal, was several times played up in the Daily Worker during the past week in militant role. His statement that “he was not going to fight the communists, etc.” was given prominence in a first page story. Day by day. as progressives looked to the one-time denouncers of the A.F. of L. as a “company union” and its bureaucratic officials as “fascists” to point out in uncompromising words the openly apparent moves toward the betrayal, the C.P., instead of uttering any warning or denunciation of the betrayers, imparted an air of radicalism to these leaders in return for the right to trail in their company and gain “respectability” in the eyes of the workers.
 
Browder Swallows His Tongue
Earl Browder, national secretary of the C.P., spoke Friday night to over nine hundred workers in Akron and deliberately refrained from even mentioning Green, Claherty and Co. In last Saturday’s Daily Worker, at the very moment when the entire scheme to break the strike should have been clear to anyone with even a pretense of class-conscious judgment, Browder issued a statement on the Akron situation in which he warns the workers against the government but not against their own treacherous leaders with whom he was in alliance. These he addresses in the Daily Worker with “comradely words”! So capitulating to the bureaucrats was Browder, that Wilber Tate, an official A.F. of L. organizer, who spoke from the same platform, was reported in the Akron daily press as being more militant than Browder!
Akron press reports on the morning following the signing of the agreement fully indicated the extent of the rubber bosses’ victory. Officials of the Big Three plants and heads of the company unions were described as “jubilant.” One rubber official declared, “We don’t see what all the fuss was about. We have always given our employees precisely what the terms of this agreement call for.”
 
Dragging Through the Courts
The terms of the agreement place company unions on an equal status with real unions, contains no guarantee of recognition to the genuine union, prevents the calling of a strike while the injunction cases against the companies are tried in the Appeals Courts and through the U.S. Supreme Court, which may drag on for endless months, and forbids the holding even of an election until the court decisions are handed down.
The unions must now prepare to fight an attempt to discharge and black-list the outstanding militants and progressive local leaders and to withstand a reign of intimidation and terror which may be launched against union men in the plants as the companies continue their counter-drives to smash the union.
Workers Party members in Akron will continue to assist in organizing the progressive unionists to fight the reactionary A.F. of L. officialdom, and help renew the courage of the union men to continue to fight for their union and build it to greater strength by more correct and militant leadership and policies.
 



BOWLING GREEN, Ohio, Jan. 22. – A cheering, jeering, clapping, stamping assemblage of Wood County workers and farmers packed the court room here today and forced the release of 50 Unemployed League members who were arrested last Saturday evening after they stormed the relief headquarters and occupied it for eleven hours in an attempt to obtain relief for 26 strikers in a county-wide strike on relief projects.
The defendants formed solidly into a “56 or None Club”, modeled on the famous “46 or None” trial of the Toledo Auto-Lite strikers, defeated attempts of county officials, acting as agents of “No Work – No Relief” Duncan, county relief czar, to isolate and frame Ted Selander, Sam Pollock and Art Preis, Workers Party members and League leaders, by giving them a separate trial.
The 56 workers, 47 men and nine women, were tried in a body, and by raising the demand “If one goes to jail, we all go to jail”, forced Justice-of-the-Peace Nearing to suspend sentence on all on a charge of “illegal trespass” on the public property of the county relief building. A second charge of “unlawful assemblage” against 55 men and women is set for hearing Jan. 28 with the officials wanting to continue it because they realize what a “hot potato” they had grabbed.
 
Force Leaders’ Release
At the close of this hearing, when deputies started to take Pollock and Selander back to jail until their hearing on the second charge or until ball of $1,500 was raised, the entire assemblage surged around them while the “56 or None Club” seized the prisoners, shouting their slogan. The police, deputies and officials were helpless: they could not feed or house the hundreds who demanded to be taken to jail with the two prisoners, and the prosecuting attorney and sheriff had to appeal to the prisoners to protect them from the crowd.
Upon assurance by the prosecuting attorney of a drastic bail reduction and release as soon as the legal arrangements were carried out, the two prisoners quieted their defenders. The entire group settled back into their seats to wait until Pollock and Seander were released and pledged themselves to join them again in the county jail if they were not.
Following several maneuvers by the officials, such as an offer to release the prisoners if they would promise not to return to Bowling Green and veiled threats that a “vigilante” group was forming and they had better leave the county – which the presence of hundreds of League members in the court room made laughable – the defendants’ offer of $300 bail was accepted.
 
Are Back on Job
The released prisoners walked right back to the court room, addressed the assembly, and went at once to the relief headquarters on another grievance committee.
The entire trial was a farce. It. was obvious the verdict had been reached in advance. Fearing organization of a proper legal defense, the presiding justice refused to continue the hearing. Since the new defense counsel was unacquainted with the case, the justice permitted Art Preis and Pollock to cross-examine the witnesses. When Duncan was placed on the stand, the cross-examination became so hot the justice quickly ruled these two could not legally carry on the questioning.
The justice refused to permit any testimony on the matter of relief conditions and administration.
 
Relief Building “Private”
Unable to find a legal basis for the charge of “trespass”, the justice ruled that the relief building – rented with public funds for a public agency – was the property of the relief administration only and in that sense “private” property. He ruled that the public could remain in the building until the regular closing time.
George McGee, one of the defendants and fighting Negro leader of the Rossford Unemployed League, replied to a question as to why he did not leave the building at closing time, “The closing time of the relief office may be 12 o’clock but when your stomach is empty it’s still open.”
Mrs. Frederick, a militant Leaguer, asked what right she had to walk up the stairs of the relief building, answered, “Because I am a citizen of the U.S. I believe I have the right to remain as long as it takes to get food for starving children.”
Charges are being preferred at once against Duncan before the new state relief administration and a committee of the Ohio Unemployed League will demand his immediate removal.
 




The Stalin-Hitler “non-aggression” pact of August 23, 1939, which Hitler has ground to dust just 22 months later, struck a crushing blow at the workers of the world, and destroyed the sympathy which millions of class-conscious proletarians felt coward the Soviet Union.
All but the most deluded or the most corrupt Stalinist flunkeys recognized that the pact was the go-ahead signal for Hitler’s war of imperialist conquest, a guarantee to the Nazis that they could march without fear of fighting on two fronts.
Such was the revulsion of the workers against the pact, that Stalin was compelled to justify it by sweeping declarations to the effect that the pact was a guarantee of “peace” for the Soviet Union and a “blow for peace” n the entire world. Pravda, Stalin’s personal organ, issued an extensive “explanation,” which was reprinted in the Daily Worker, Aug. 25, 1939, under an eight column headline: PravdaSays Non-Aggression Pact Serves Cause of World Peace.
 
How Stalin Whitewashed the Menace of Hitler
Pravda’s statement said:
“The foreign policy of the Soviet Union is invariably based on striving to defend and preserve the cause of world peace. In this policy the U.S.S.R. Invariably strove to support and strengthen friendly and business relations with those states which share this position ...
“The non-aggression pact concluded between the Soviet Union and Germany fully corresponds to the position of the Soviet Union as defined by Comrade Stalin.”
Thus Nazi Germany was pictured as one of “those states which share this position” of the Soviet Union in “striving to defend and preserve the cause of peace.” Pravda said further in that same statement:
“There is no doubt whatever the the non-aggression pact just concluded liquidates the strained relations which existed between the U.S.S.R. and Germany. However, the significance of the pact concluded extends beyond, the framework of settling relations only between the two contracting countries.
“It is concluded at a time when the international situation is very tense and aggravated. The peaceful act which the non-aggression pact between the U.S.S.R. And Germany represents will undoubtedly help to ease the tension in the international situation, will undoubtedly help to disperse this tension.
“The conclusion of the pact between the U.S.S.R. and Germany is undoubtedly a fact of the greatest international significance, for the pact is an instrument of peace which is called upon not only to strengthen good-neighborly and peaceful relations between the U.S.S.R. and Germany, but also to serve the cause of the universal strengthening of peace.
“An end is being put to hostility between Germany and the U.S.S.R. Differences in ideology and political systems should not and cannot serve as an obstacle to establishing good-neighborly relations between both countries.
“The friendship between the peoples of the U.S.S.R. and Germany, which reached a blind alley as a result of the efforts of the enemies of Germany and the U.S.S.R., should from now on receive the necessary conditions to develop and, flourish. (Our emphasis)
Thus was the vigilance of the Soviet workers disarmed against the menace of Hitler. And thus were the workers everywhere assured that the pact was a guarantee of the security of the Soviet Union from an attack by Germany, and, even more, a guarantee of world peace.
The Soviet government organ Izvestia, on August 24, 1939, went further than Pravda, categorically predicting that the pact was “bound to pacify the extremely tense international situation and contribute to the consolidation of peace,” and that it “ends a hostility which the enemies of both sides have tried to fan and perpetuate.”
 
Browder Swore There Was an “Escape Clause”
When the pact was first announced, Earl Browder tried to sugar-coat the bitter pill, he swore that it would contain an “escape” clause, whereby the Soviet Union could denounce the pact if Germany attacked another nation.
The actual terms of the pact, however, contained no “escape” clause; and nine days later Germany invaded Poland.
Stalin sent the Red Army into Poland, and many people, including the workers in the territory seized by Hitler, were led at first to believe that Stalin’s intentions were to proceed against Hitler. Molotov made a speech to the Russian people, explaining why the Red Army was marching; his concluding point was:
“At the same time, the Soviet government intends to deliver the Polish people from the disastrous war into which they have been plunged by their unwise leaders and to give them an opportunity to live a life of peace.” (Daily Worker, Sept. 18, 1939)
For the majority of the Polish workers and peasants that “opportunity to live a life of peace” was to be enjoyed under the heel of Hitler. On September 28, 1939, in Moscow, the Nazi and Soviet governments drew up a treaty defining the borders of their jointly-conquered territories and recognizing each other’s conquests.
 
Stalin Helps Hitler In His “Peace” Offensive
A joint statement was issued the same day, signed by the representatives of both governments. This statement declared:
“After the German Reich government and the Soviet Russian Republic have definitely settled by the treaty signed today the question resulting from the disintegration of the Polish State, thus creating a safe foundation for lasting peace in Eastern Europe, they unanimously express the opinion that it would correspond to the true interests of all peoples and make an end to the war existing between Germany on the one hand and England and France on the other hand. Therefore, both governments, if necessary in conjunction with one of the befriended nations, will direct their joint efforts toward searching this aim as soon as possible. But should the efforts of both governments fail then the fact would be established that England and France are responsible for the continuation of the war, and in case of continuation of the war the Governments of Germany and Soviet Russia will consult each other regarding the necessary measures.”
Thus Stalin come to the aid of Hitler’s “peace offensive” and helped to spread the lie that Hitler had no further imperialist aims and that the continuation of the war would be the sole responsibility of Germany’s enemies
The Soviet-Nazi treaty which divided up Poland was hailed as “creating a safe foundation for lasting peace in Eastern Europe” and Stalin solemnly concurred in Hitler’s formula that if England and France would recognize the conquest of Poland that was all that would be needed to “make an end of the war.”
 
Molotov Boasts About Nazi-Soviet “Swift Blow”
Molotov’s speech of October 31, 1939, gave further support to the “peace offensive” of Hitler:
“Today, as far as the European great powers are concerned,” said Molotov, “Germany is in the position of a State that is striving for the earliest termination of the war and for peace, while Britain and France, which but yesterday were declaiming against aggressors, are in favor of continuing the war and are opposed to the conclusions of peace. The roles, as you see, are changing.” (Daily Worker, Nov. 1, 1939)
Molotov, in the same speech then cynically boasts about the collaboration of the Nazi and Red armies:
“One swift blow to Poland, first by the German Army and then by the Red Army, and nothing was left ...”
Stalin’s collaboration with Hitler in dismembering Poland was justifled by Stalinist apologists by the argument that, as a result of the collaboration, the 11-million population of the provinces conceded by Hitler to Stalin had been “liberated.”
But the Stalinist apologists conveniently overlooked that another result of this same collaboration was the enslavement of more than 22 million other people by Hitler – an awful price to pay for the “liberation” of half as many.
And the Stalinist apologists would not face the fact that, far more than Stalin gained in this collaboration in Poland, the Soviet Union lost: it lost throughout the world mass proletarian support for the Soviet Union, just as the Stalin-Hitler pact had stunned and disoriented the world working class.
We Trotskyists saw at that time how heavy a price the Soviet Union was paying for Stalin’s diplomatic “victories.” But only now, after 22 months of the Stalin-Hitler pact, can one realize to the full what the Soviet Union has paid. While all Europe was falling under Hitler’s domination, making the danger to the Soviet Union ever greater, the Stalinist justification for the pact drove the Soviet and Comintern press to conceal the impending danger of Nazi attack. The fiction that the pact guaranteed “peace” for the Soviet Union had to be preserved at all costs!
In December, 1939, Stalin sent a message to Von Ribbentrop, expressing his satisfaction at the outcome of the pact and the resultant seizure of Poland. This message was published in the Daily Worker, December 26, as follows:
“The friendship of the peoples of Germany and the Soviet Union, CEMENTED BY BLOOD, has all grounds to be prolonged and stable.”
That “friendship” is indeed being “cemented by blood” – by the blood of the Soviet soldiers dying under the Nazi onslaught, dying in the defense of a Soviet Union weakened and disarmed by the perfidy and treachery of Stalinism. That pact is being “cemented in blood” by the Russian workers and peasants being blown to bits by Nazi bombs.
What remains of all the blustering lies and absurdities with which Stalin surrounded his alliance with Hitler, his assurances that his “friendship” with Der Fuehrer was a bulwark of Soviet defense, his boasts that the pact ensured world peace, his braggart deception that the pact reflected the “fear” of Hitler of the “might” of the Soviet Union?
What has that pact given the workers of the world of all the blatant promises made for it?
It ushered in not “peace” but the most devastating war of human history. It did not safeguard the defense of the Soviet Union, but paved the way for the most deadly attack upon the Workers’ State.
 




On June 9th, when Roosevelt sent the Army to break the North American aviation strike which had been on but a few days, there was elsewhere, unknown to the public, a far longer and more important cessation of work. Since early in May, work on the giant Boeing bombers had been halted and was not likely to be resumed until some time in July.
Why didn’t Roosevelt send the troops to get work started on the Boeing bombers?
Because he couldn’t blame that on strikers. Boeing was shut down because of lack of aluminum. On May 24 the New York Herald Tribune reported in an obscure item that work on Boeing bombers had “ceased entirely early this month and will not be resumed until some time in July.” Nor is Boeing the only plant affected. It is now officially admitted that potential production of military aircraft will in all probability be curtailed by some 25 per cent for lack of aluminum.
That loss is equivalent to a three-month continuous strike shutting down the entire aircraft industry. If such a strike took place, the Army would be shooting down the strikers. But neither the Army nor any other agency of government is doing anything to the Mellon family’s Aluminum Corporation of America, the monopoly which deliberately engineered this aluminum shortage.
This shortage is not a result of miscalculation. On the contrary, it is a deliberately contrived shortage, as the following account will demonstrate.
 
OPM Connived at Concealing Shortage
For a year and a half the OPM and other government agencies issued misleading reports assuring the country that there were ample production facilities for aluminum. These reports were based solely on the estimates supplied to the government by the Aluminum Corporation of America – ALCOA.
That this was a conscious deception, carried out in the interest of ALCOA, has been established by the facts uncovered by the Truman Senate Investigating Committee, which issued its report on June 26.
“It is reasonable to conclude,” charged the Truman report, “that ALCOA had convinced OPM of the adequacy of the supply in order to avoid the possibility that anyone else would go into a field which they had for so many years successfully monopolized.”
ALCOA, as the committee discloses, was producing only 327,000,000 pounds of aluminum in 1939, the total national supply By next year it will be unable to produce more than 730,000,000 pounds. Yet the total civilian and war needs for this vital metal in 1942 are fixed by the committee at not less than 2,100,000,000 pounds, – 1,600,000,000 for military purposes alone.
When the Reynolds Metal company sought government aid in 1940 to enter into aluminum production. Stettinius, acting for the OPM, cold-shouldered the proposition, stating that the production facilities were already adequate. Reynolds went instead to the RFC, and finally secured a loan with which it is building a plant in the Tennessee Valley which will be able to produce 120,000,000 pounds by next year. Thus, the total production of aluminum by 1942 will be not more than 850,000,000 pounds as compared to a need for 2,100,000,000 pounds.
The OPM ignored offers of other companies, including that of a Swiss company which proposed to build a plant here entirely at its own expense.
 
ALCOA Reaps the Fruit Gained by Its Lies
Why did ALCOA lie about its producing capacity? What was behind this fraud, the Truman report makes clear:
“They (the company) may have reasoned that in its desperation the Government would do almost anything to increase the supply and that ALCOA would be favorably treated by the Government in order to insure an adequate supply for defense purposes.”
That’s just what is happening. Instead of being punished for its lies, ALCOA has the government doing “almost anything” for ALCOA.
The main item in the cost of production of aluminum is electric power. Power production, says the Truman report, represents “the greatest dollar investment in the facilities for the production of aluminum.”
But for decades ALCOA has been battling with the Federal Power Commission, refusing to build power plants under the government regulations, which set certain limitations on profits chargeable to power plants. For example, in 1937 ALCOA abandoned plans to build a power plant in North Carolina, for reasons which the Federal Power Commission termed the company’s “complete unwillingness, to accept the provisions of federal law.” Likewise, despite an announcement by the OPM in October 1940 that ALCOA had agreed to build a power project at Fontana on the Little Tennessee River as its “contribution to national defense,” no actual steps to build it have occurred.
And why should ALCOA spend its own money to build power plants? When it can get the government to build them with its own money and “sell” the power to the company at the cheapest possible rates? When it can get the government to arrange for tens of millions of people to curtail their use of electric power for the benefit of ALCOA?
Southerners are being told to do without, lights, air-conditioning, electric fans. Movie houses are being run on short schedules and night ball-games are being cancelled. Atlanta turned out its brightest street lights, required merchants to shut off their electric signs, etc.
OPM chiefs William S. Knudsen, and Sidney Hillman, in a “message to the people of the South” on July 1 called on them to “make every possible effort to save electric current in their area so that it could be devoted to the production of aluminum so vitally needed for airplanes.”
ALCOA’s plan to get the people to foot the bill for its major production cost, power, is thus bearing fruit!
 
Government Will Build for Alcoa’s Benefit
Although the desperate aluminum situation could not be concealed after February, the OPM did not in any way propose to intrude on the ALCOA monopoly. Instead of preparing to erect goverment plants to meet the needs of “national defense,” the OPM simply instituted priorities, that is, it arbitrarily diverted aluminum supplies from civilian consumption goods to military needs, thus immediately raising the prices on aluminum products and throwing thousands of workers in the consumers goods industries out of work. Even so, aluminum production was still short by some 600,000,000 pounds of military needs alone.
Than began a heightened campaign to get scrap aluminum from civilians. Housewives were, to sacrifice their pots and pans, etc. The impression was falsely given that this would help to meet the need. Yet all that OPM experts expect to get by this means is 15 million pounds of aluminum – 2½ per cent of the shortage!
Now the government has announced plans to build eight new aluminum plants, with a total capacity of 600,000,000 pounds. When these plants are completed, they will bring the supply of aluminum, including imports, from ALCOA’S Canadian subsidiary, just about up to military needs, with none to spare for civilian goods.
But these plants will not be ready for a year and more; and when they are completed, the government announces, they will be operated by the Reynolds Metal Company, Bohn Aluminum and – ALCOA. ALCOA is to get the lion’s share!
As for power, TWA is now building four new dams, with a capacity of 300,000 kilowatts a year, and $40,000,000 was appropriated last week for the construction of four more TVA dams and additional turbines and transmission facilities. These additional facilities will just about meet the needs of ALCOA, which is the largest industrial consumer of TVA power.
The government is thus planning to provide just enough additional power to give ALCOA the cheapest possible production costs, but not enough to infringe on the private power companies or to prevent the restriction of electricity in the homes.
Meanwhile, the Department of Justice monopoly suit against the Aluminum Company of America, which was instituted last February, has been pigeon-holed, like the similar suit in 1937.
The aluminum situation gives immediate and decisive point to the demand of the Socialist Workers Party:
Expropriate the war industries and operate them under workers control!
 




A “before and after” summary of the concrete slogans and activities of the Communist Party, as revealed in the Daily Worker for the week immediately preceding the Nazi assault upon the Soviet Union, and the week after, bold-faces the extent of the latest Stalinist betrayal of the class struggle.
The Stalinists have surrendered the fight on every battleground – on workers’ rights, on Negro rights, and. against the “imperialist program of war-time suppression and economic degradation.”
On June 17, William Z. Foster wrote a front-page editorial in the Daily Worker stating:
“... When President Roosevelt sent Federal troops against the aviation workers and broke their strike, it was a taste of the Hitleristic terrorism that Wall Street capitalists have in mind for the working class. These war-mongering imperialists, who dominate the Roosevelt Administration, are determined to compel the workers to accept lowered standards of living and restricted civil liberties, as part of their bigger plans to force the unwilling American people into a ‘shooting’ war.
“Roosevelt’s use of troops at Inglewood was not an isolated act of impatience with these strikers, but a considered phase of a developing anti-labor policy.”
 
What Foster Proposed aWeek Ago
What concrete conclusions did Foster draw from this absolutely correct analysis?
“Organized labor should draw the full political conclusions from Roosevelt’s use of troops against the Inglewood strikers. It should realize that an Administration which commits such a monstrous act is an enemy of the workers and cannot be supported by them ... Roosevelt’s whole line, dictated by Wall Street, is contrary to the most basic interests of the masses of the people.
“Labor therefore, on pain of disaster, needs to break its alliance with the Roosevelt administration, in the so-called ‘National Unity’. In its great new strength of more than 10,000,000 members, labor needs imperatively to begin an orientation toward independent political action, together with the farmers; against involvement in the imperialist war and in defense of the toilers’ economic standards and civil liberties ...”
 
What Budenz Said the Day Hitler Struck
On June 22, the day Hitler launched his attack on the Soviet Union, Louis Budenz, editor of the Daily Worker, explained the kind of political action the Communist Party advocated. Budenz declared:
“Thus, the warning of the Communist Party to labor – that the Roosevelt administration’s engaging in war abroad also entailed warring upon the workers at home – takes on flesh and blood. Its truth is visible in life before the eyes of the workers.
“What does such realization oblige labor to’ do? It makes it imperative that the workers strive more vigorously to take this country out of war. It makes it urgent that they recognize the Roosevelt administration as their enemy, bound in ‘national unity’ against them with the Bourbons and the Republican Party. It puts upon the immediate order of business for the workers, the inauguration of an anti-imperialist Farmer-Labor political party.”
The Daily Worker, June 18, four days before Hitler began his war on the Soviet Union, proclaimed editorially:
“The events of the past week – ‘labor’s blackest week’ – should serve to make more evident than ever the need for a new party of labor and the people ... What is needed is leadership and the organizational work which can weld these masses together in an anti-imperialist Labor-Farmer political party.”
On June 16, six days before the outbreak of the Soviet-Nazi war, the Daily Worker reported that the Stalinist-led left-wing of the New York American Labor Party was calling a city-wide convention to be held June 27–28 to consider “the most effective means in the September 16 primary of advancing the party’s program, to promote the election of the most progressive, efficient and honest anti-war administration possible for the people of New York City.”
 
What They’ve Abandoned Since June 23rd
On June 30, the Daily Worker, in a tiny and obscure item announced the postponement of the ALP convention to July 10. No mention was made of anti-war candidates.
The Daily Worker, since June 23, the day after Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, has not only discontinued all references to an “anti-imperialist” Labor-Farmer Party – it has ceased calling for “independent labor political” action” altogether.
The entire week preceding the beginning of Hitler’s attack on the Soviet Union, the Daily Worker was flooded with stories and union resolutions in denunciation of Roosevelt’s strike-breaking use of federal troops and the administration’s strike-breaking legislation and edicts.
The Daily Worker, June 21, featured a call by the “National Labor Committee against War, an American Peace Mobilization affiliate” asking all organized labor “to observe the week of July 27 to August 2 as ‘National Peace and Labor’s Rights Week’.” Since June 23, the “National Peace and Labor’s Rights Week” has disappeared completely from the Daily Worker, as have the “National Labor Committee Against War,” the “American Peace Mobilization,” and the resolutions and articles announcing Roosevelt’s strikebreaking.
On June 18, four days prior to the Soviet-Nazi war, the Daily Worker wrote in connection with the bulletin of Labor’s Non-Partisan League which attacked the anti-labor acts of Rooseveltt
“The acts which the LNPL castigates arise directly from the entire war drive of the administration. They are bound up integrally with that war drive, as the Daily Worker has repeatedly stated ...
“The anti-labor barrage of the administration, moreover, is ... a product of the ‘national unity’ which has welded together all the Wall Street monopolists in one common pro-war and anti-labor front ...”
And what action does the Daily Worker now propose against this anti-labor drive “bound up integrally with the war drive”?
Since June 23, the Daily Worker has not printed a word about all its campaigns, committees, projects, resolutions, etc., etc., to defeat Roosevelt’s anti-labor, strikebreaking war program.
 
What Stalinists Then Said on Fight for Negro Rights
One of the principal points of the Communist Party program two weeks ago was the fight.for Negro rights against discrimination in the war industries and the armed forces.
The Negro Job March on Washington, which had been planned for July 1, was criticised by the Stalinists, because they claimed the march did not have a militant-enough program.
The Daily Worker, June 16, featured an extensive article, which sharply denounced the leadership and motivation of the march on the following score:
“... (The March) is the supreme effort of America’s big shot businessmen to win the masses of the Negro people for the war program of the Administration ...
“Their supreme aim is to build up a nationalist movement among the Negro people, with Randolph as its leader, in an attempt to direct the healthy strivings of the Negro people for full equality, for full citizenship rights, into channels of support for the imperialist war ...
“But this march on Washington can become a real demonstration for the rights of the Negro people. To become that, the Negro people while giving support to the March, must make their demands known. They must first of all demand their right to live, a demand that cannot be realized by those who, with support of an imperialist war program, are consciously betraying the Negro masses. Therefore the Negro people must make their sentiments known. Opposition to the imperialist war! Demand that our country get out and stay out of the war! End Jim Crow in the ‘defense industries’ and armed forces!”
On June 22, the day Hitler started his march against the Soviet Union, the Daily Worker correctly denounced the Social-Democratic New Leader for placing the blame for Negro discrimination on “the American people.” The Daily Worker declared:
“This is a shameless whitewashing of the sinister anti-Negro capitalists who rule the country and want to plunge it into a shooting war ... Who issued the order officially up-holding jim-crowism in the armed forces, ‘the American people’ or President Roosevelt? Who continues to give contracts to ‘defense’ employers, who arrogantly refuse to employ Negroes, ‘the American people’ or President Roosevelt? Who refuses to enforce the constitutional rights of the Negro people, ‘the American people’ or President Roosevelt and the Department of Justice? To ask these questions is to answer them.”
On June 17, the Daily Worker declared:
“The President is the fountainhead of this discrimination and set the pattern himself ...
“... All of these and other vital rights of the Negro people and various minorities are being ruthlessly sacrificed by the President in the name of ‘defense’ ... The President spoke, therefore, not to end discrimination, which he could do, but to deceive the Negro people and their supporters into surrendering to the war program. Since this program is the root of the intensified violations of Negro rights, the fight against job discrimination necessitates opposition to every move of the President toward belligerency ...”
James W. Ford, the Communist Party’s “beloved leader” of the American Negroes, graced the front page of the June 17 Daily Worker with a solemn warning to the Negro masses:
“Backsliding on the part of the initiators of the March is in the making. With bitterness and fear Roosevelt and his agents are getting alarmed ... The Negro people must continue their fight against the whole jim-crow set-up. They must not allow any backsliding and turn-coating on the part of the initiators of the March to Washington.”
When Randolph did “backslide” and call off the march, one reason he could do so was that the Stalinists were now pro-Roosevelt. The Daily Worker, June 26, casually reported the fact in one paragraph in the middle of another story.
The Daily Worker and Ford have said not a word in criticism of this turn-coating. Since June 23, the Daily Worker has become dumb as a stone about the whole fight for Negro rights. Roosevelt has become a “defender” of the Soviet Union and is no longer, according to the Stalinists, the “fountainhead of this discrimination.”
 
Abandoning The Fight Against The Profiteers
Prior to June 22, the Daily Worker conducted an elaborate campaign against the high cost of living, the war tax program, and war profiteering.
On the high cost of living, the Daily Worker wrote, June 20:
“A well organized national fight against the high cost of living is in order, taken up by the trade unions and community organizations. But such a fight has to be, at the same time, a campaign to get this country out of the war. Let the trade unions tell the nation ‘to protect your living standards from high prices, you must battle against this war!’” (Emphasis in original)
On June 16, the Daily Worker said:
“Only the American people, and above all, the organized labor and progressive movement, united in militant struggle, can defeat the war and hunger plans of the Administration.”
Since June 23, the Daily Worker has carried one small article and one weak editorial on the question of food profiteering and high prices. Both appeared on June 27. Neither made a single reference to the war! The rising prices and profiteering, according to the new line of the Stalinists, grow out of a vacuum.
When the Daily Worker, just two weeks ago, was stating that the intensification of labor suppression, the increase in Negro discrimination, the higher prices and taxes were a direct product of Roosevelt’s imperialist war drive, and could be combated only by combatting that war drive, the Daily Worker spoke the truth.
Today, the Stalinists have dropped their opposition to the imperialist war drive and at the same time, naturally, have dropped their pretence of fighting for the rights of the workers and the oppressed minorities. Supporting the war drive, Stalinism must therefore support “the bitter consequences of the war drive.” (Daily Worker, June 16)
 




A deep split in the ranks of the Socialist Party became public in connection with the appearance of Norman Thomas last week before the House committee hearings on the Lease-Lend bill.
Coincident with Thomas’ testimony, a group of leading figures in the Socialist Party issued a statement to the press, repudiating Thomas’ opinions on the bill and declaring that he did not represent the true sentiments of the majority of the Socialist Party members.
The press statement accompanied a petition to Representative Bloom, chairman of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, requesting that a spokesman of the petitioning group be afforded an opportunity to speak at the hearing in full support of the bill granting unlimited war powers to the president.
 
Thomas Loses His Chief Lieutenants
The extent of the cleavage in the Socialist Party and the strength of the opposition to the Thomas faction is indicated by the fact that the petition signers included Thomas’ chief lieutenants. Among them were Jack Altman, former secretary of the New York local; Professor Reinhold Neibuhr of Union Theological Seminary; Frank Crosswaith, general organizer of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union; Alfred Baker Lewis, former Massachusetts party secretary; Murray Gross, former chairman of the National Labor Committee of the Socialist Party; Lazar Becker, of the New York state committee; and Gus Tyler, former editor of the Call.
Those of us who were in the left wing of the Socialist Party in 1937 may be forgiven if we laugh in glee at the sight of this roster of denouncers of Thomas. For these were the gentlemen who upheld Thomas’ right arm as he smote the left wing of the party in 1937. With their backing Thomas resorted to the desperate venture of expelling the left wing, without daring to wait for the verdict of an honestly-elected party convention. The interested reader – particularly any worker of revolutionary spirit who may have wandered by accident into the Socialist Party since 1037 – should read the story of the 1937 split in the issues of the Socialist Appeal (now The Militant) of that period. He will find that we predicted the degeneration of the Socialist Party into a chauvinistic sect like the Social Democratic Federation, once the left wing was not there to prevent it. The left wing is now in the Socialist Workers Party.
Jack Altman, next to Thomas the most important figure in engineering the split in 1937, predicted in a press statement last week that the Norman Thomas group will be repudiated at the S.P. national com-mit.ee meeting next mouth. Altman claimed – and the next issue of Thomas’ Call has not denied it – that the two largest units of the party, Illinois and Wisconsin, support the Altman group.
Although his name was not attached to this statement, Daniel Hoan, former mayor of Milwaukee, has already gone completely over to the pro-war Roosevelt camp. He is now a member of one of Roosevelt’s “national defense” boards.
 
What the Split Is About
The Altman group has adopted a completely pro-war position, indistinguishable from that of the Roosevelt administration, whose policies it now accords full support.
The split in the Socialist Party ranks is not a fight between an anti-war proletarian wing and petty-bourgeois capitulators. It merely mirrors faithfully the differences that exist within the capitalist camp, the “isolationists” versus the interventionists. At no point does the conflict in the Socialist Party take on the aspect of u struggle between two opposing class tendencies.
The basis of Thomas’ opposition to the Lease-Lend bill was identical with that of Hanford MacNider, former national commander of the American Legion, who spoke at the same session of the hearings as Thomas and represented that section of the Republican party and Wall Street who disagree with the administration only on the tactics to be pursued leading up to the war.
Thomas, like MacNider, based his principal objection to the bill as it now stands solely on the fact that it is “undemocratic” and gives the President too much individual power.
In the same breath that he condemned Churchill as “an imperialist to the core,” Thomas declared that he was for aid to Britain and a British victory. Even in his opposition to the powers given Roosevelt in the hill, he hastened to make clear that he recognized the “excellence” of Roosevelt’s “normal intentions.”
It is true that Thomas qualified his support of aid to imperialist Britain by stating that he is for only such aid as will help “to repel the Nazi invasion” but will not assist Churchill in his plans for a “reconquest of Europe.”
At what point aid to Britain ceases to be for the purpose of repulsing a Nazi invasion and become an aid to British imperialist ambitions, Thomas failed to make clear.
How little principled difference there is between the two Socialist Party factions is, indicated by Thomas’ recent endorsement of Mathew Woll’s committee to aid Britain. The program and sponsors of this committee are completely pro-war and in entire accord with Roosevelt’s foreign policies.
 







For many months, British imperialism has imposed an almost impenetrable censorship over all news from India. Occasionally some brief dispatch from India appears in the American press, with the obvious imprint of the official British propaganda ministry. “All’s well,” cries the British government. “The Indian peoples are giving loyal support to the Empire’s war efforts.”
American foreign news commentators, such as Ludwig Lore of the New York Post, have been supplying the American people with “interpretive” analyses of what goes on in India behind the black veil of British censorship. Their analyses show a striking conformity with British government press releases, whose “optimism” grows as their “facts” shrink.
What is the truth about India? The Militant herewith presents the first eye-witness account to appear in the American labor press of what has been happening since the war in the greatest colony of the British Empire, where over 350,000,000 human beings are preparing to cast off the British Imperial bondage which they have suffered for three centuries.
The giver of the interview is a young American sailor who has just returned after a five months voyage to the Far East on an American freighter delivering supplies to the Burma Road at Rangoon. He spent a month visiting the principal cities and ports in India.
He observed India with a fresh and clear eye, with class-conscious understanding. This sympathy combined with a friendly and agreeable personality enabled him to meet many Indian natives – workers, students, soldiers – and to penetrate their reticence toward all foreigners, particularly those whom they have reason to suspect might be friendly toward the British rulers.
No one observer in a month can hope to catch more than the minutest segment of India. Bearing this in mind, the reader will nevertheless appreciate his account as an authentic clue to the present mood of the Indian masses.





“If I were to give one general impression about my experiences in India, I would say: ‘This is the horrors of war, without the war.’ This thought persisted in my mind wherever I went in Karachi, Bombay, Calcutta. It was like looking at some scene of war refugees, starving, homeless, diseased. Only there Has been no war. No bombed buildings, no wreckage, no burnt homes. It’s just, how shall I explain it – as if some terrible war had passed over the country sparing everything but the people themselves.”
For a moment, the young seaman paused. A shadow seemed to pass over his face; his eyes looked off into space. He was staring back through time at unforgettable experiences.
At another point in the interview, he stated:
“You know, whenever I’d get in with one of the natives – of course, after I’d broken down his natural suspicions – and we’d get on the question of the war, sooner or later I’d have the same question popped at me: ‘How soon do you think the British will be defeated?’
 
Natives Anti-British but Not Pro-Hitler
“It’s not that they’re pro-Hitler, or anything like that. When I asked one friendly native soldier if they weren’t afraid of what would happen to them under Hitler, he just slowly swung his arms out and said softly, but with such bitterness ... ‘Look at us ...’ It was all he could say, ‘Look at us ...’ What he meant was that nothing could be worse than what they were already suffering.
“I got the impression that Hitler is something too far away from their present misery. He just doesn’t concern them. I can’t say how wide-spread the feeling is, but I came away from India with the notion that they would welcome a military defeat of Britain for one reason – it would be an opportunity for them to drive out the British and gain their independence.”
 
”If We Only Had Arms ...”
At a further point in his narrative, the young sailor supported his impression about the widespread desire among the people of India for a British defeat by recalling that on different occasions he had heard the wish expressed among groups of workers, “If we only had arms ...”
“When I heard a worker say this in Karachi, our first stop in India, I thought it might be just an isolated sentiment. But I heard it in Bombay and again in Calcutta. And always the same words, ‘If we only had arms ...’ A weakened British army and arms for themselves. That’s what many of them seem to be thinking about – and planning about.”
The speaker then told of meeting a group of workers in Bombay whose complete confidence he managed to secure. A leader of these workers in greatest secrecy drew for him a rough map of the surrounding section of the country, marking the points of British troop concentrations and arms stores. “He burned it up again on the spot. I never saw such longing in any man’s face as when he said to me, ‘If we only had arms... If we only had arms.’”
The interview with the young seaman had started in the customary fashion, with the reporter asking questions about the trip – the ship, the cargo, the length of time at sea, the ports where they stopped, how long the sailors had leave at each port, etc.
He had shipped on a large freighter out of New York last November. It was his first trip to the Far East. They were at sea for 31 days before docking at Capetown, Union of South Africa After only 12 hours ashore, the continued their trip around the Cape of Good Hope. They ploughed through the Indian Ocean for another 22 days, hitting Karachi, India, for their next stop.
 
Conditions in Karachi
“Karachi was quite a shock to me. It was only after I saw Bombay and Calcutta that I realized^ that Karachi was quite a decent place by comparison.
“The first thing I noticed when we docked was the condition of the native longshoremen who came aboard the ship. They seemed so thin and scrawny that I wondered how they could lift the heavy loads they had to carry. They wore nothing but loin cloths – no shoes. I guess they have tough feet, but I couldn’t imagine an American longshoreman working around lumber and heavy steel cargo without heavy shoes and clothing for protection.
“We had two days ashore. I’ve seen some of the foulest East Side slums and been down around the Negro quarters in Baltimore and Washington. But the worst in America couldn’t equal this. The natives live in tiny shacks, some of rotted wood, others just weeds. Whole families – and several families live in a shack about ten feet square. Ten and 15 persons sleep together on the ground in one shack. Here I got my first smell of India – that mixture of dirt, dung, crowded bodies and rotted flesh, diseased or dead. And the beggars! But that was nothing in Karachi! Wait until I tell you about Bombay and Calcutta.
“I was taken through one area of a few square blocks in Karachi which I was told housed more people than the rest of the city. After one trip through that particular area, I was convinced that this was true.
“But remember that conditions in Karachi are far better than in the rest of India. It’s a comparatively new city being built up as a port. Many British officials have built palatial homes on the city outskirts.”
 
Bombay Crowded with Beggars
At this point, he seemed so anxious to tell about Bombay and Calcutta, the two chief cities of India, that the reporter switched the question’s over to his experiences in these two ports.
“Bombay was our next stop. Bombay! That’s where you’ll see a real example of the true conditions in India. The first thing that hit me were the large troops of beggars everywhere. They reminded me of human beings out of a nightmare. They were in every condition of disease and disfigurement. Many seemed to be in the last stages of starvation dying on their feet. Many bore the open sores of terrible contagious diseases, small pox and, especially, leprosy. You could see their bodies rotting away. The British government does nothing to help them. Human life is the cheapest thing in India. I shall never forget the feeling of horror I had the first time a pitiful leprous beggar came up begging for an anna (2 cents American) and touched me with his hand.
“Here I saw tens of thousands of people, whole families, who had no homes but the streets. They sleep in the streets, amongst incredible filth. They have no place else to go, and the British haven’t got around to giving them such benefits of civilization as street cleaning departments and sewage. They lie uncovered in the streets. I saw only a few who managed to get hold of some old rag or cloth to cover themselves with. Most of the men have only a loin cloth covering. Children up to 12 go naked. I frequently saw little infants playing in the gutters amidst mud and manure. This is typical. Tens of millions live like this throughout India. It’s the normal thing. Every other native one passes on the streets seems to have the obvious signs of disease. Nine out of ten have the physical marks of acute hunger – from the emaciation of continuous undernourishment to the last stages of outright starvation.”
It was at this point that the speaker used the expression, “like refugees in a war zone – but worse.” He broke in with an observation summing up his entire impression.
“I’ve tried to do some reading. I’ve read some of Trotsky’s writings. I remember he once wrote about fascism being an attempt to organize the misery of the people. Well, I got the feeling that the British in India can’t do even this. The poverty just spills over into the streets like pus from a running sore.”
 
Riots and Revolts Suppressed
Was there any resistance to the British now? Did he have a chance to talk with any industrial workers in Bombay?
“I had the luck to meet a British dock official who came aboard our ship in Bombay. I managed to get him to open up to me a little, although I had to be very cautious in asking him any questions. American sailors are watched very closely. The British know how well organized and how militant the American seamen are. He told me that just recently – that would be about three months ago now – there had been virtual civil war in a town north of Bombay, “uncontrollable riots” he called it. British Militia, which are mainly English troops – they don’t trust native soldiers for jobs like this – took four days to suppress the revolt using all the modern paraphernalia of war, including artillery. He said there were only 40,000 people involved.
“It immediately occurred to me what a job it would be for the British to suppress a revolution of 350,000,000 people, if it took four days for trained troops with machine guns and artillery to subdue 40,000 practically unarmed people. Incidentally, all news of this was suppressed within India itself. It’s hard to say how many similar incidents have occurred that we cannot learn about.
 
Workers Receptive to Revolutionary Ideas
“Another piece of luck I had was to get in with a group of workers employed at a big printing plant in Bombay. After we talked for a while, and they became assured of my sympathy for them and their fight against British imperialism, they eagerly asked me all sorts of questions about the American workers. I told them some of the things I knew about the labor and radical movements in America. When I mentioned, among other groups, the Trotskyites, they shot questions at me through a couple of workers who spoke English and acted as interpreters. It turned out that they were extremely receptive to revolutionary ideas, and, in fact, volunteered the information that they themselves were preparing for a revolutionary situation in India which they were certain was going to come soon.
“It was during this conversation that I again heard the question which I first heard in Karachi, ‘How soon do you think the British will be defeated?’ They hastened to assure me that this implied no sympathy with Hitler, but ‘we are unarmed ...’ and they felt that a decisive military defeat for Britain would accelerate their own struggle for freedom.
 
Underground Movements Thrive
“It was during this conversation that I first learned of the many underground political groupings that are growing throughout India. Many of these groups believe in socialism. Most of them are becoming convinced that the British will be driven out of India only by forceful means. All of them are for national independence and. don’t want any part of the British rulers’ war.
“The printing plant workers were particularly pleased when I explained what I knew of the Trotskyist international outlook. When I mentioned the fact that I believed that if a workers revolution developed in America the American workers would do everything possible to aid their Indian brothers, their faces lighted up. They were so glad to hear about support for themselves in other countries. They are so isolated from the outside world, that they have felt all alone in their struggles. They did not even know up to then that an international revolutionary movement existed. After this, they displayed an almost touching effort to show their appreciation of my news by offering me little services, bringing me coffee, a chair, posting a look-out for the ‘dicks’ who infest the sections around plants and spy on every little grouping of workers.
“They did know a little about the Stalinists, but said the Stalinists were mainly among the students and had very little connections with the workers and the general masses. They also informed me that strikes were continuously breaking out among the various sections of the workers in Bombay, and that these strikes were bitterly fought and suppressed with much bloodshed. I was able to confirm this by a daily reading of the British papers. Every day I would see some obscure paragraph about 20 workers being killed, 30 workers being killed, in some ‘disorders.’ That’s all it would say. They don’t bother to mention the number injured.
 
British Graft
“There was one incident in Bombay that gave me a real idea of the graft and exploitation that operates against the Indian people. Some of the sailors from our ship wanted a day’s shore leave and were permitted to hire native longshoremen in their place. The American sailors paid the longshoremen each a dollar a day. This is enormous pay in India, longshoremen usually get around 12 annas – 25 cents – for a twelve to 16 hour day. We later found out that the British port officials had grafted two-thirds of the money paid the longshoremen away from them. We were plenty burned up, but what could we do in a British port dealing with British officials whose whole system is one big graft from the ‘dirty beggars,’ which is what British officials term the natives on whose backs they live.”
 
Life in Calcutta
The main portion of the interview dealt with the young sailor’s two weeks in Calcutta, largest city in India.
“Calcutta was the worst city of all. As we tied up in the mouth of the Ganges River, the first thing we saw were human bodies and dead cows floating down the river. All waste – including dead human beings – is thrown into this river, it seems. The corpse of a cow caught in our anchor chain, and we had a little trouble in freeing the chain. Then there were the vultures. They fly all over the city, circling above dead bodies. All the signs of death, the very smell of death hangs over this city. It is impossible to escape the terrible foul odor.
“The docks were swarming with beggars. I thought I had seen the worst in Bombay, but the human misery which crawled and dragged itself over the Calcutta docks was beyond description.
“And then I noticed that it wasn’t merely the beggars who were begging. The longshoremen who came aboard the boat also were furtively begging the American seamen for a cigarette or a spare anna. The longshoremen, mind you, are among the BETTER PAID workers of India!
“It wasn’t, lack of self-respect that drove these workers to beg even while they were working. I soon found that out. They had to work as long as 16 hours a day at inhuman physical labor for a few annas. Among these longshoremen I met educated men, white collar workers, college students. Their food was enough to make you heave up. All it was – or looked like – was a mixture of wormy rice and dirt.
“A crust of bread, I found out, was a luxury. These longshoremen used to hang around our mess-room eager for the scraps from our tables. A piece of the most rotten food dropped on the filth of a Calcutta street is snatched up in a second. The vultures haven’t a chance against human hunger.
“When we got shore leave, we began to get a real picture of Calcutta. As you head toward the. main center of town, the conditions get worse and worse. In the center of town we saw the most revolting sights. That is where they burn the dead bodies right out in public view. The burning ghats are all along the river bank. The air reeks with the smell of burning flesh.
“But then, this is the only measure of sanitation permitted the Indian people. At least cremation provides a sanitary means of disposing of the dead. And the death rate is enormous.
 
The Blessings of British Civilization
“British civilization – in Calcutta, a city of almost two million people – doesn’t even provide inspection of city water. Only in the few places where the British and the few native rich live is there purified water. Typhoid plagues are so common, the natives think nothing of it. Hundreds of thousands are wiped out each year in epidemics.
“There are beggars on every block, some obviously dying where they sit or lie. Mothers with infants appeal to you everywhere. I saw infants lying on the ground patting their swollen stomachs. And disease, sores, rotting flesh everywhere. Little naked children of one and two will toddle up to you and pat their stomachs and say the only words of English they have learned, ‘Me dirty beggar’. Dirty beggar! They don’t know what it means. But it’s the only English they have learned from the British.
“Everywhere we went, we were swamped by hordes of beggars, mostly women and children. They stopped our taxis and even the trolleys on which we rode. Once a group of us seamen riding in a cab were stopped for a matter of 10 minutes by about 50 to 60 hungry women and children. The ‘Bobbies’ broke it up finally – and they weren’t gentle about it.”
 
British Police Abuse the Natives
What was the outward attitude of the British officials and police to the natives? Was there much open, general physical cruelty?
“I just scratched the surface. But what I saw on the streets of Calcutta with my own eyes was sufficient to make me understand why the Indian people don’t jump every time the British yell, ‘Hitler!’ I saw the way the police – mainly British – customarily treat the natives.
“I remember one incident particularly. A group of us sailors were walking along a main street through the market place. A miserable old beggar came up and begged for an anna. A British officer approached and without warning slammed the old fellow across the knee-caps with a heavy club. From the crack, I am sure the knee-caps were fractured. The old beggar staggered away. At a little distance, he stopped and muttered something in Hindustani at the cop. For me, the expression of hatred on that old beggar’s face was the symbol of all the faces in India.
“I noticed that the native passers-by were looking on. Their faces bore the same look as the beggar’s.
“That is the way the British police treat the natives everywhere. Aristocrats in big cars drive through the swarming streets, never slackening pace. If some poor soul is knocked down and injured, that’s his tough luck. And besides, he knows better than to complain to the police. The British rob the natives right and left. In a shop, a British official will name his price for an article. The shop-keeper will give it to him even if he loses money on the sale. He does not dare to argue. One of our boys got run in for being drunk, and later told us about what he saw at the police court. The arrested natives were openly kicked about and clubbed in the court room.”
 
Universal Poverty and Filth
What else about living conditions?
“Well, as an example, the closer you get to the town center, the more people you see lying in the gutters. Tens of thousands of men, women and children have no homes but the streets. There are no sidewalks in many sections, just mud and filth, including animal and human dung. At times the streets are so packed with sleeping humans that a car cannot pass without running over them.
“Without an adequate water supply, no cleaning materials, the British being too cheap to provide even a semblance of municipal sanitation, the dirt and dust almost blinds and chokes you on certain streets. In the market places the food is handled with hands covered with filth. Food will pass through 20 different hands before it is finally bought. Cleanliness is secondary when poverty is so acute that the masses will shop around in a dozen places to get the best bargain for an anna.”
 
Meets Longshoremen
On one occasion, during his stay in Calcutta, he had the opportunity to speak to a group of 12 to 15 longshoremen on board the ship. This was while there was an absence of officers about. He discovered a couple of the workers who could understand English, and translated for the rest.
“After I had won their confidence, I asked them what they thought about unions. ‘Very good,’ I was told. They wanted to know about American unions, because their wages were so miserable compared to that of the lowest paid American seamen. When I described something of the American labor movement, they crowded around with eager attention. One of those who spoke English expressed the keen desire of the India workers to attain to some of the conditions of the American sailors. They look up to the American workers, with much respect.
“They then told me something of the workers organizations in India. Organization among certain groups of workers, including-the longshoremen, is illegal. Nevertheless, the workers maintain an illegal organization. The longshoremen have a tradition of militancy in struggle, and are particularly suppressed by the British authorities, lest their struggles give an impulse to other workers.
“Among the jute and textile workers, there are legal unions, of rather semi-legal unions. Strikes are always breaking out. In Calcutta, as in Bombay, I was able to note in the British papers a hint of the continuous struggles taking place, despite the fact, as the longshoremen informed me, that strikes were very difficult to conduct at this time. All strikes are immediately physically suppressed. The strikers are shot down without mercy. Thousands are thrown into jail, from which they are lucky ever to come out alive. The British authorities impose 10 to 20 years at hard labor just for striking.
“A few lines at the bottom of a Calcutta, newspaper will tell that so many and so many were killed in a strike yesterday. One day I read in such a brief and casual item, of over 100 workers being killed. But the papers never mentioned anything about unions or give details.
“When I told the longshoremen that the time would come when the American workers would be able to help them in their struggles, they became very excited and enthusiastic. They stated that they were very anxious to get the aid of the American sailors and hoped that we would bring back to the American workers word of their conditions and struggles.
“They were all bitterly opposed to the war and to aiding the British government’s war efforts. I found this same sentiment everywhere I went, incidentally. All the enthusiasm for the war was in the controlled press. But nowhere else. The papers were carrying big ads for recruits to the army, but I heard that the results were very meager. Among all types of native peoples whom I met, from many different stations of life, I got the same response on my questions about the war. They didn’t want any part of it. I wouldn’t want to be a British official in India when the natives start demonstrating in earnest their ‘loyalty’ to the government.
 
Opposed to War
“From these same longshoremen I heard some significant political remarks. They seemed to feel that there was a tremendous, leftward tendency taking place in India. They stated flatly that only force would drive the British out. I asked about Ghandi. They declared, that he was losing much support among his followers. They said he was getting rich in the pay of the British. I cannot tell how widespread this idea is, but other workers I spoke to had the same viewpoint.
“In reference to Ghandi and the native capitalists he represents, who have aided the British in maintaining their rule, one of the longshoremen said, ‘You American workers have only one club to dodge. We have two.’ By that he meant the native and foreign exploiters combined.”
 
Talks with Army Officer
The, young sailor then related a conversation that he had accidentally struck up with a native dock official. The official was a Mohammedan and a lieutenant in the army. He was well-dressed, but was paid only one-third as much as ordinary American seamen, although he held the highest army post open to natives of India.
“I soon discovered that he was an ardent nationalist and hated the British. When I told him of my own international outlook and my sympathies with the Indian independence movement, he expressed deep appreciation.
“Then he told me his ideas, which amazed me, coming as they did from an army officer in the pay of the British. ‘There is no reason for this, appalling misery,’ he told me. ‘We have all the natural resources to become a great industrial country. But India can only develop after she has won her independence. In the last few years in particular, there has been little industrial development. The British have strangled it. The British say that if they left the country the Mohammedans and Hindus would turn the country into a shambles in a religious war. This is an outright lie. The British themselves are deliberately stirring up conflict between the two native groups. But we should unite. That is our only solution. Why – when we are all one in this filth and misery – should we not unite against those who strangle us both?’”
“I don’t imagine the British regard the native soldier-recruits with too much trust. I’ve told you about this high-ranking native officer. I occasionally witnessed native soldiers marching by. They were invariably led by British officers on horseback. I managed a brief conversation with a couple of native soldiers on guard near the docks. I found out they were very dissatisfied with their pay – $4 or $5 a month.”
 
Feelings of British Seamen
He recalled an interesting meeting with some British seamen off a captured French freighter.
“They had been having a pretty tough time of it. They asked us for hand-outs and spare cigarettes. I saw them pick up our discarded cigarette butts. They have been receiving as little as $20 a month pay. Although many of them are married, they get scarcely any news from home, and some of them have been away from their homes for three and four years. They have to send every penny of their pittance home, and have nothing for themselves.
“These British seamen told us that, there have been strikes on a number of British boats. In at least one instance, the government sent out a battleship which took over an entire ship. The leaders or ‘trouble-makers’ were shot. Other seamen were given 10 year prison sentences at hard labor.
“They were eager to trade ideas with us. They wanted to know all about the war bonuses which the American union seamen are getting for travelling in the war zone. They were astounded to learn that we were getting three times as much regular pay sis they. They wanted to see Hitter defeated, but they expressed quite bitter hatred for their own capitalists. They mentioned the huge profits the British corporations were making out of the war sacrifices of the common people. They were particularly angry about the taxes, and spoke of the 101 different taxes on food, etc. ...”
 
Trotskyism in India
Did he come across any evidences of an international revolutionary sentiment in India?
“My impression was that there was no centralized or leading revolutionary organization at present in India. But there was a general revolutionary sentiment which would enable such an organization to grow very quickly.
“I did manage to meet several professed Trotskyists, but under circumstances which do not permit me to disclose any details. Suffice to say, there are Fourth Internationalists in India.
“I did notice, both in Bombay and Calcutta, that Trotsky’s works, particularly his History of the Russian Revolution were widely displayed in the book shops. I went into one Calcutta book-shop and asked the dealer if he had any other Trotsky works beside the History. He showed met a couple of others. Then he said that he had heard that Trotsky’s last book, on Stalin, was coming out soon, and that he had received many inquiries about it. While he was telling me this, several others in the store gathered around us and began asking when the Stalin book would be available.”
 
Attitude Toward Indian National Congress
What had he been able to learn about the Indian National Congress?
“The Congress now represents; the small group of native bourgeoisie almost exclusively. And these feel more in a blind alley than during the last war. All their old privileges are being taken away, because the British no longer have any confidence in the native bourgeois leader’s ability to stem the tide of revolt. I did not come across any signs of enthusiasm for this group. Their only sign of protest at the treatment they are now being given by the British rulers is to resign, from the National Congress. But they are a miserable lot. Even when they resign, they take pains to make it clear to the masses that their actions are not to be misunderstood as suggestions for mass revolt. No one has confidence in the British promises any longer. In fact, I learned that, the papers which used to play up the British promises, don’t bother to mention them any more. The British no longer make promises anyway.
“I’ll tell you one thing about the people of India, though. They hate the British rule with an everlasting hate. You can feel it like a live thing in the air. I felt it by indirection, just as a foreigner, even when I was buying something at some small street store. Until I let my sympathies be known, that is.
“Everywhere you go, you hear the British referred to as ‘gonametika’ – that’s as close as I can get to the Hindu word. It means ‘bastard’, – with special trimmings. I hear shop-keepers, workers, beggars refer to the British as ‘British pigs.’ I didn’t hear anything about ‘loyalty’ to the British Empire. But I did hear, wherever I went, such sentiments as these: ‘Now is the time’, and ‘How soon do you think the British will be defeated’, and ‘If we only had arms ...’”
 




Joseph Curran, president of the National Maritime Union (CIO), is guilty of attempting to break a bona-fide strike of the CIO Marine Engineers now striking the ships of the American Export Lines at the Jersey City docks.
Indisputable proof of this was presented to The Militant in an interview, last Monday afternoon, with Edward P. Trainer, secretary and business agent of Local 33, Marine Engineers’ Beneficial Association (CIO) which is conducting the strike.
Trainer not only proved that Curran is attempting to break a legitimate strike, but had documentary evidence which established beyond any doubt that Curran lied to the members of the NMU in order to get them to carry out Curran’s strikebreaking moves.
On May 1, Curran ordered members of the NMU to cross the picket line of the MEBA and man the S.S. Siboney, an American Export Line ship, which the marine engineers had struck on its arrival at the Jersey City dock on April 26.
The Siboney had been transferred recently from the Ward Line, with which the MEBA has a contract, to the American Export Line which has a company union for licensed men. When it took over the Siboney, the Export Line tried to force the ship’s MEBA staff into the company union.
This was the principal cause of the strike, which then spread to two other Export Line ships as the engineers on them, mostly MEBA men, joined the strike.
 
Curran Changes Alibi
“Curran has given two different excuses, both of which can’t be true, for violating our picket line,” said Trainer.
“Last week Curran issued a statement published in the NMU paper, The Pilot, that the engineers couldn’t maintain a picket line, that they were afraid to picket because of fear of company discrimination.
“But the week before that, Curran admitted were maintaining a picket line when he gave as his excuse for violating our picket line that we were paying the pickets.
“I asked Curran, ‘What should we do? Let them starve?’ Sure we paid the pickets, $7 a day. That’s what we have a strike fund for.
“The truth is that not a single engineer who walked off those three ships has returned to work.
“The company brought on strikebreakers and when the NMU unlicensed men went on board the Siboney they violated a legitimate union picket line in order to work with strikebreakers.”
 
Curran’s Lies Nailed
What about Curran’s claim that the company union was not the issue, and that the fight was over the question of the war bonuses, and that the bonus issue could be settled without a strike ? I asked Trainer.
“The issue is company unionism and nothing else,” he answered. “Sure we asked for improved conditions, including war bonuses, but these are not the main issues. The main thing is how can we get anything until the company agrees to discontinue the company union and recognize us. Even Curran has to admit that we’re fighting a company union set-up.”
But, I said, Curran claims in The Pilot that the company union has won an election and has been certified by the NLRB.
Trainer brought out a May 9 issue of the Pilot and together we read a paragraph in it, from a statement of the NMU National Office, which said:
“There is a company union organization among the officers of the Export Line which has been certified by the National Labor Relations Board, as an independent union. Because of this, the company claimed that before they could sign another contract, it would be necessary to hold another election.”
Well, what about it? I asked.
With a broad grin, Trainer handed me a letter from the NLRB, a copy of which he gave The Militant for publication. This letter is dated May 9, 1941, and is signed by Elinore M. Herrick, Regional Director, Second Region, NLRB. The letter is addressed to Trainer and reads:
“This will acknowledge your letter of May 5th in which you inquire as to the date the National Labor Relations Board designated the Brotherhood of Marine Officers as the bargaining agent for the marine engineers employed by the above company (Export Steamship Corp.)
“We have no record of any proceeding under Section 9 (c) of the act involving the Brotherhood of Marine Officers. The only matter affecting this union, of which we have a record, is an 8 (2) charge filed by you on February 4, 1939, which was dismissed on September 9, 1939, the dismissal being sustained by the Board on November 4th, 1939.”
Trainer said:
“So you see, there’s never been any election held, so the NLRB could never have certified the company union. This letter proves that Curran’s excuses for violating our picket line are absolutely phoney!”
 
Engineers Helped NMU
Trainer then told the story of how the MEBA had helped to found the NMU.
“Our union is one of the oldest in the country. And we’ve always been a militant outfit. We’ve conducted more strikes than any other maritime union in the country.
“In 1936 we began to make real headway. Right now we have over 300 contracts. And while our jurisdiction – licensed men – does not cover more than eight men on any ship, our membership is more than half as large as the NMU’s. And they have anywhere from 40 to 400 unlicensed men to organize on a ship.
“Our men went out in the Fall of ’36 on the West Coast along with the West Coast sailors. We began to picket the West Coast vessels when they arrived on the East Coast. When we went to the old – now dead – International Seamen’s Union and told them we were setting up picket lines on the inter-coastal vessels from the West Coast, Grange, Hunter and their other officials said they were going to crash the picket lines and that they were out to smash the West Coast Sailors and Harry Bridges’ union.
“That’s when we got together for the first time with Curran. It was over the question of the ISU attempt to break a picket line that we got together. Curran was representing the unlicensed men. They didn’t even have a regular union affiliation. We’d never heard of Curran before, never met him.
“Well, we went out on strike five days before Thanksgiving Day 1936. The engineers came out solid. Few of Curran’s men came off. But we gave the unlicensed men, who were trying to get their union started, 100 per cent backing.
 
First Export Line Fight
“And now,” said Trainer grimly, “We come to the story of the Export Line fight – the story that begins not in 1941, as the Pilot seems to indicate, but back in 1936.
“Five days after we pulled out on strike, on Thanksgiving Day 1936, the Export Line offered the MEBA a closed shop contract and a 15 per cent wage increase if we’d sign without Curran. We flatly refused to sign unless the company also signed with Curran’s organization.
“As a result of this, we finally lost out on the Export Line, because Curran’s organization then couldn’t enforce its strike against the Export Line. But we did stick it out together with Curran and won five joint contracts on other lines.
“We stood by the unlicensed men even when they couldn’t really be called a union. The companies held out two days in those negotiations on this account. All the unlicensed men could call themselves was the ‘Strike Strategy Committee.’ It took the lawyers a couple of hours to decide what to call them in the contract. And they finally called them the ‘Strike Strategy Committee.’ That was the embryo NMU.
“Well, when we lost the strike on the Export Lines in ’36–’37, the strikebreakers took the places of our union men. These strikebreakers were the ones who formed the nucleus of the company union – we call it the ‘Mystic Knights of the Sea’ – that is the Brotherhood of Marine Officers. But strikebreakers never did make satisfactory engineers, so the company had to take back some of our men. But 44 of our men never did get back.
 
Curran’s Gratitude
“In ’37 ... there was a scarcity of unlicensed men. Three months after the ’36–’37 strike, Curran pulled another strike on the Export Lines. Through the strike and an NLRB appeal, the NMU won recognition. But when we went to Curran to give us support in getting recognition for the MEBA on the Export Lines, he refused to do anything for us.
“We’ve had our case before the NLRB over three years now. But because of the political tie-up of the company, which is owned by the Lehman banking interests, with the NLRB officials, Mrs. Herrick threw our case out of the second Region board. This board under her has a company union bias to begin with. The figures show that this one board has certified four-fifths of the total company unions certified in the entire country. We appealed to Washington, which ordered another hearing before the regional board again.
“We’ve won any number of cases with one-tenth the evidence we had against the Export Lines, But Mrs. Herrick deliberately stalled us off for nine or ten months before calling another hearing. By then most of our witnesses were working and not available. They were all out to sea.
“That’s the kind of set-up we were up against and we knew that the only way we could crack the company union set-up was by striking the line. And that’s what we finally did when the proper occasion arose.”
 
Danger to NMU
Trainer repeatedly stressed the fact that Curran’s present strikebreaking actions are paving the way for the shipowners to strike deadly blows at the NMU itself.
“The heaviest defeats of the NMU – not only defeats, but complete annihilation – have occurred on those lines where the owners have succeeded in first forcing the licensed men into company unions. That’s what happened on the tanker ships of Standard Oil of New York and New Jersey, Tidewater and Texas Company. That’s what happened out on the West Coast with Standard Oil of California and the Union Oil Company.
”And that’s exactly what the Export Line is aiming to do. When Curran sends his men through our picket line in this Export strike he’s helping to cut the throat of his own union.
“Curran can’t point to a single company where the unlicensed seamen have been forced into a company union set-up, where the licensed men had not been forced in first.”
 
Curran Ducks Hearing
The MEBA has asked for a hearing on the dispute with Curran before the New Jersey CIO state body, in addition to wiring a protest against Curran’s actions to Philip Murray, CIO president. The hearing is asked before the Jersey council because the strike is within New Jersey.
Trainer has already sent a statement of the MEBA’s case to the Jersey CIO body, which asked Curran to make a reply. But Curran has as yet failed to comply with this request.
Instead, Curran tried to get the MEBA to accept as a substitute for the Jersey hearing an appearance before the Greater New York Industrial Council – a preposterous proposition since the New York council has no jurisdiction in the matter. This body, in which many CIO unions do not participate, is Stalinist-controlled and through it Curran could, of course, give himself a clean bill of health.
Trainer stated that the MEBA had withdrawn from the New York council in protest against its failure to condemn Curran’s strikebreaking. “They’re a too well oiled machine,” he said.
Curran had previously asked him to appear for a “hearing” before an NMU meeting, Trainer informed me.
And then he laughed heartily.
“That’s not the kind of hearing we want. I didn’t intend to go to any one-sided meeting. Curran was just offering me a Moscow Trial.”
 
Why Curran Finked
Toward the end of the interview, Trainer showed me a mimeographed Statement on the MEBA-American Export Line Dispute issued by the National Council of the NMU. He pointed out one paragraph and said, “This tells the whole story.” The paragraph read:
“We called to Mr. Trainer’s attention the fact that a meeting had been arranged between the American Merchant Marine Institute and the NMU to discuss the war bonuses. The dispute on the Export Lines prevented this meeting from materializing because the companies claimed that the refusal of the unlicensed personnel to sail these ships constituted a violation of contract. They stated that until such time as the dispute was straightened out, they would not meet with the NMU to discuss the important question of war bonuses.”
Trainer rapped the document with his knuckles.
“That’s the way Curran’s paid us back for our refusal to sign a contract on the Export Lines without a contract being given the unlicensed men in the ’36–’37 strike. The companies want the Export strike ‘straightened out.’ So Curran obliges them by strikebreaking.
“This is a clear case of Curran sacrificing the interests of the striking MEBA men in return for some quick concessions for his own members. It’s pretty significant that within 24 hours of his violating our picket lines, after his return from a conference with the ship-owners in Washington, that increases for the NMU men were announced on a number of lines, including the American-West African and the East African.
“There was a good reason why the owners were willing to make this deal. They have always wanted to break up the industrial set-up on the ships, the cooperation between the different crafts and between the licensed and unlicensed men. By creating a rift between us now, the employers hope to be able to hit the NMU later.”
 




From a once militant revolutionary youth organization, the Young Communist League has degenerated into a politically ignorant body dominated by a clique of careerists zealously imitating all the bureaucratic vices of their elders of the Communist Party.
All freedom of expression has long since been smothered. The members are kept in ignorance of even the simplest Marxist concepts. They arc held in line by a system of terrorism which has all the aspects of GPU methods.
The YCL leadership is hag-ridden with fear of Trotskyism, against which they warn night and day. They find Trotskyism in the slightest inflection of the voice, the most innocent question. They hunt for it in a word, a gesture. Each member is encouraged to spy on the others, to find in the most far-fetched symptoms the signs of the Trotskyist. “disease.”
Such is the picture of the YCL given to me this week by a YCL member who has become a Trotskyist. Although still in his early twenties, this YCL’er is a veteran of the Stalinist movement, having laterally “grown up” in it, starting his activity at the age of 9 as a Young Pioneer.
 
Tells Story of the YCL’s Degeneration
“Back in the early Thirties the YCL was a really militant organization. We were in the thick of the class struggle, in hunger demonstrations, leading rent strikes, halting evictions. “Looking back on it now, I realize that even then we had no basic freedom of discussion on political questions, but at least within the framework of the political line handed down to us we were permitted a certain latitude to elaborate ideas and enlarge on policies.
“Then came the period of the ‘People’s Front.’ It was slipped over on us little by little, starting with the Franco-Soviet pact in 1934. The change of line to collaboration with the bourgeois democrats was presented first as a ‘struggle against sectarianism.’
“We were then told that we had to adopt a ‘new approach to the social-fascists.’ We were to become more friendly to the Socialists and trade unionists. Then we were told that we had to press for the United Front with the ‘social fascists.’ And finally, they sprang the People’s Front, unity with the bourgeois democrats against the fascists.
“There was no discussion or vote over this change of line. By this time the YCL had learned to accept whatever the leaders said. Not all of us accepted the new line without misgivings. That’s when I got my first suspicions, back in ’36 and ’37, that something was wrong.
 
Woe to Those Who Asked Questions!
“But whenever any attempt at arguing or questioning the line was made, YCL big-shots were sent to the meetings. Those who questioned the line were expelled as Trotskyists. The rest went along.
“During this period, the entire composition of the YCL changed. Many of the militants and older members dropped out or were expelled. The YCL was flooded with raw elements who had no political knowledge and no conception of the class struggle. In fact anyone could join, regardless of what position he held, so long as he was opposed to Trotskyism. That became the one position you were held down to.
“All the old militant, revolutionary attitudes were wiped out. We became ‘20th Century Americans.’ We were restricted; to the most namby-pamby type of activities, being constantly impressed with the idea that we had to be ‘respectable’ so as not to lose our middle-class friends and sympathizers.”
Why did you stay on in the Stalinist movement so long, when you were becoming aware of its political degeneration? I asked the ex-YCL’er.
 
He Hoped the YCL Would Straighten Out
“My whole life was in the movement. It was the only life I knew. I lived in hopes that this was only a temporary thing. I deluded myself, like many others, that we would soon go back to a revolutionary line, that this was just a temporary maneuver.
“It was during this period that the struggle against Trotskyism rose to a very high pitch. There were constant expulsions. Trotskyism was presented as any number of things; ‘associating with the wrong people,’ was Trotskyism, etc., etc..
“The greatest opposition arose in this period – not much of an opposition, I’ll admit – but the most there ever was, over the clause which was put in the YCL constitution in 1937 forbidding YCL members to have any relations of any kind with ‘Trotskyites and other counter-revolutionaries.’
“I learned that one-third of the delegates at the YCL convention had voted against this.
“But it was put over anyhow with the assurance that it would be applied in only a very broad sense. There was a. lot of resentment among the rank-and-file about this clause. But it was not openly expressed.
“The greatest shock came to some of us when an official declaration came out informing, us that we were no longer carrying on an immediate fight for socialism. By this time, however, the old comrades had largely disappeared. Activity in the YCL became little more than dances and good-times. We older comrades were swallowed up by the new elements brought in on the basis of a program calling on the democratic capitalist nations to fight the fascist nations.”
When Stalin Signed the Pact with Hitler
What was the reaction, when the Stalin-Hitler pact was signed? I asked.
“No one conceived the possibility of such a pact. Despite the fact that by this time the organization was composed 99 per cent of politically ignorant elements, still there was quite a stew about the pact.
“County officials and functionaries began to flood the branches and desperately explained away the pact. They told us that the pact showed Hitler’s fear of the tremendous military power of the Soviet Union. That the Soviet Union wasn’t conceding an inch to Hitler. I recall one functionary assuring us that if Hitler invaded Poland, that the Soviet Union would consider the non-aggression pact broken. We were especially assured that the pact contained an escape clause. How we waited and watched for the announcement of that escape clause! But it never came.”
Didn’t this finally make the YCL members see the true political character of Stalinism? I asked him.
“You don’t understand what we had become. We had grown used to accepting every new line without discussion or debate.
“Besides, we were left with the impression that collective security wasn’t really abandoned, etc. We were kept in a confused state of mind.
 
How the Stalinist Bureaucrats Operate
“You’ve got to get an idea of what the nature of the bureaucracy is inside the Stalinist organizations.
“Right above the rank and file members in the YCL there is a whole strata of petty officials, branch presidents, organizers, functionaries, etc. There is an abyss between them and the members. The petty officials are careerists of one sort or another, who have adopted the attitude of the top bureaucracy of the Communist Party. They all have ambitions to become Little Stalins. “The average member lives in real fear of the officials, who treat the ranks with suspicion. The members are always afraid of making a misstep. Whenever a member does say nything, he is always mindful that he must speak carefully lest he say something which the bureaucrats can use against him.
“If a member does get up enough courage to ask a question he asks it in a way which would show the officials that he is just a dumb, stupid guy who should really apologize for his ignorance. To ask a question in any other fashion would be to indicate a doubt as to the correctness of any policy. I have helped to vote expulsions for just such a question.
“In one YCL branch a county official was sent to give an ‘educational’ talk on Trotskyism. Someone asked a question: ‘How can we detect a Trotskyite at a YCL meeting?’ The reply was: ‘Nine out of ten times anyone who asks a question is probably a Trotskyite’. This was so raw, that it brought quite a surprising reaction from the members. Another county official had to be sent out to the next meeting to cool off the branch with a lot of elaborate explanations.
 
Ersatz Discussion, Stalinist Style
“I’ll give you an illustration of how ‘discussion’ is carried on in the YCL. Shortly before the war and just before the Stalin-Hitler pact changed the line, we were suddenly confronted with an extension of the People’s Front line. We were now to unite with anyone – even the vilest capitalist reactionary – who was ‘against fascism,’ even with J.P. Morgan.
“We had never heard of this new twist until a county leader came down to our branch to deliver an ‘educational’ lecture. We Were told: ‘We must develop something new, something that goes even beyond the People’s Front, a Democratic Front that will take in everybody.’
“There was no discussion, no convention. We were handed the new line out of a clear sky, off-hand, in a branch ‘educational’ talk. That’s how the political line was changed.
“To understand the atmosphere, you would have to attend a regular meeting of a YCL branch. There is no political discussion of any description. Even on questions of purely organizational character, the members are so scared to take an independent position or show any initiative, that any question of consequence is immediately referred to the officials. The whole meeting will be taken up with such safe matters as selling tickets for some social affair or function, etc.
“The educational life of the YCL is a joke. During the most recent period, when the bureaucracy is attempting to create the illusion that Stalinism is now revolutionary, an occasional suggestion is given that the YCL members should read some of Lenin or a pamphlet of Marx. But this is just lip-service. By and large, most of the members are so conditioned not to do any independent reading and thinking, that they don’t bother to read any Marxist literature at all.
“One of the last ‘educational’ lectures I hear was a discussion on the ‘correctness’ of the Communist Party’s positions in the various periods, including its support of Roosevelt in 1936. This was pointed out as a very brilliant maneuver, particularly the fact that it wasn’t ‘support’ – just non-opposition. After this discussion there was a heated controversy among the members as to whether this was ‘support’ or simply non-opposition.
“Of course, the leaders will say the party is not infallible. But if you should try to get them to give an example of one specific mistake which the party has made, they cannot state any. The party makes mistakes in the abstract, never in the concrete.”
Tell me more about the question of Trotskyism in the YCL, I urged.
 
The Trotskyites Will Get You If You Don’t Watch Out!
“Trotskyism! It’s like a nightmare in the YCL. The leaders raise it constantly as the main spectre. It’s like a hysteria. Everything that’s in opposition to Stalinism they identify with Trotskyism. They harp on it all the time.
“Trotskyism isn’t presented as a political program or an ideology but like a physical disease.
“It’s represented like, something you can catch out of the air. Members are forbidden not merely to read Trotskyite literature, but even to touch it. It’s pictured as such a contagious disease that even to associate in the most innocent fashion with anyone who in turn is suspected of associating with a suspected Trotskyite means to run the danger of catching the disease.
“Members are told that if anyone in their immediate family is suspected of having Trotskyite leanings, the members must leave home. I have heard organizers tell of having persons kicked out of boarding houses for being ‘Trotskyites.’
“You.simply can’t imagine the holy terror the leaders have of Trotskyism and their attempts to communicate this fear to the membership. The members are incited to spy on each other. If a YCL’er is suspected of merely having a lenient attitude toward the question of associating with any form of radical dissidents from the Stalinist line, even if he has no such actual association, he is immediately placed under the closest scrutiny. His closest comrades are quizzed about him. Does he meet any strange people? Does he go to any strange study circles? Does he read any strange literature?
“All this has had a peculiar effect. The rank and file tends to band together against the bureaucratic hierarchy. They avoid snitching on each other. Members do meet with dissidents, but they literally meet in dark alleys.
“Formerly, we were told that we were politically isolating the Trotskyists. Now the Stalinist leadership is trying to do just one thing: to physically isolate the YCL rank-and-file from the Trotskyists.”
 




Overwhelming government and employer pressure, aided by the refusal of the Hillmanite-Stalinist leaders of the CIO to give more than lip-service to the fight of the United Mine Workers, CIO, has forced the “captive” coal mine workers to end their strike for the union shop with an agreement to submit the issue to binding arbitration.
Faced with the threat of large- scale military intervention – 50,000 fully-equipped regular army troops were mobilized for strikebreaking duty – and lacking the assurance of decisive support from the pro-war leaders of the CIO, representatives of the “captive” mine locals met last Sunday and agreed to the settlement approval by the UMW policy committee at the demand of Roosevelt.
It is possible that Dr. John L. Steelman, “resigned” director of the United States Conciliation Service who was named as the decisive arbiter on Roosevelt’s three-man arbitration board, may finally vote the union shop or some compromise to the “captive” miners as an attempt to revive faith in the government’s “impartiality.” But there is no question that labor has suffered a blow with respect to those basic issues – the right to strike and to oppose compulsory arbitration – that developed out of the mine controversy and far transcended the immediate union shop demand directly involved.
Roosevelt used the strike to invoke his “no-strike” policy and to establish in practice the principle of compulsory arbitration. This raised the mine strike from the plane of a dispute over the union shop to a conflict between the entire CIO and the government over the right to strike.
 
Roosevelt’s Anti-Labor Hand Strengthened
In this latter sense, the miners’ acceptance of arbitration under compulsion of Roosevelt’s threat of army strikebreaking has undoubtedly strengthened the antilabor hand of Roosevelt and heightened the assurance and boldness of the Administration in its drive to force the union to surrender their right to strike and submit to government domination and control.
It is no discredit to the militancy and courageous union loyalty of the striking miners that they have been compelled to yield on their traditional opposition to compulsory arbitration. They showed by their overwhelming support for the strike, backed by the growing sympathetic strike action which involved almost 200,000 commercial mine workers by the time of the settlement, that they were ready and willing for a last-ditch fight. They held their picket lines in the face of the murderous violence of the companies, whose agents shot and knifed over a score of strikers, and against the almost unprecedented pressure of the government, big business forces and the propaganda barrage of the capitalist press.
 
Miners Faced Tremendous Odds
If the miners retreated it was because they felt that they were confronting insuperable odds against which they would be smashed to pieces in a continued frontal assault. They had to withdraw to a defensive line which they continue to hold.
This position was forced on them in part by the attitude of the Hillmanite-Stalinist leadership of the CIO. which ran hog-wild in the recent CIO national convention in its sycophantic demonstrations of support for Roosevelt’s war program. They were restrained from openly backing the Administration against the miners only by the tremendous pressure from the CIO ranks and the fear that their own union would be undermined by a ruinous defeat of the mine union, the very heart of the CIO.
The action of the CIO convention in voting unanimous support to the miners unquestionably was the decisive factor in staying the hand of Roosevelt from an immediate and violent strikebreaking attack on the miners.
But this action was so far nullified by the unqualified political support accorded Roosevelt by the vast majority of CIO leaders, that the CIO resolution of endorsement for the mine strike constituted no guarantee of continued united CIO backing should the strike have eventuated in a real showdown.
 
Strike Brought Out Contradictions
The mine strike brought into sharpest focus the insoluble contradiction in the policies of the CIO and the trade union leadership generally. The necessities of Roosevelt’s imperialist war program, which the Hillmanite-Stalinist CIO leaders support unconditionally, demand a totalitarian organization of the economic and political life of the country. The boss war economy comes into inevitable conflict with the needs of the workers, whose rights and freedom of action the government seeks to stifle at all costs. The trade union leadership wants to reconcile this fundamental conflict of interests. This is impossible.
An example of this is the policy of that group in the CIO which is centered around Philip Murray. CIO President and former right-hand man of John L. Lewis. At the CIO convention, Murray initially took a strong stand in support of the mine strike. But this support became increasingly weakened as his political support of the war became the dominant expression of his position. He could not reconcile the Irreconcilable contradictions between his support of the strike and the war. His political line determined his final attitude, which was a clear readiness to capitulate on the mine issue.
Murray’s position was distinguishable from that of the Stalinists and Hillmanites only to the extent that he still reflected some desire to attempt to reconcile the basic contradictions. The Hillmanite-Stalinist leaders have since abandoned the attempt. They are unreservedly for the war and have openly made their choice with the bosses as opposed to the workers.
As for John L. Lewis and bis followers, their position in the mine strike was weakened basically by the failure of Lewis during the past two years to mobilize the CIO forces around a program of fundamental opposition to the war.
As a result there was an absence of sufficient pressure from the ranks of other unions upon the CIO leaders to fully support the strike.
 
Immediate Conferences
As an immediate consequence of the advantageous position Roosevelt has achieved through the outcome of this strike, the Administration is now pressing ahead with its plans for legislative curbs on labor. It is a virtual certainty that Roosevelt will demand the enactment of antistrike and compulsory laws despite the opposition of the unions, confident that this opposition will not express itself in militant and effective forms.
This does not at all mean that Roosevelt has already succeeded in shackling labor. It merely means that he is in a more favorable position to do so. On the other hand, the actions of the Administration in this union struggle have made the labor policies of the government more suspect than ever to millions of workers Roosevelt’s open partiality to the steel corporations, his strikebreaking threats, the exposure of the anti-labor role of the National Defense Mediation Board, have immeasurably reduced the prestige of the government in the eyes of important sectors of the workers.
Moreover, as the war progresses, Roosevelt will attempt to make greater and greater inroads into their living standards and impose ever severer regimentation. Inevitably, the conflict between the needs of the war and of the workers must flare up into renewed and fiercer battles.
The mine strike crisis has revealed the crisis of organized labor as a whole. It is a crisis of program and leadership. Defense of the interests of the workers is predicated squarely on opposition to the war. Only that leadership can successfully lead the workers in defense of their rights and conditions which upholds a program of uncompromising opposition to the imperialist war.
 




Among the obligations undertaken by the bourgeois democrats in line with the diplomatic needs of their new-found friendship with Stalin, is a “re-evaluation” of the frameup Moscow Trials. Belated “justifications” are being advanced for the monstrous purges, which up to now, no one but GPU hirelings, professional apologies for Stalinism, and the official Stalinist press dared appraise as anything but the frameups they were.
Far from serving their purpose of discrediting the Trotskyists, the trials boomeranged on Stalin. During the period of the Stalin- Hitler pact, the Stalinist press maintained strict silence about the trials, and the Trotskyists, charged in the trials with being agents of Hitler and the Mikado, were transformed overnight by the Stalinist press into agents of Anglo-French imperialism.
Now, such representatives of the American bourgeoisie as Harry Hopkins and former ambassador to the Soviet Union, Joseph E. Davies, are assisting the GPU in its task of whitewashing the Kremlin. Leading publications, such as Time and Life magazines, and the New York newspaper PM, through articles by its editor, Ralph Ingersoll, also have given support recently to the GPU versions of the trials.
 
Davies and the Trials
The crudest expression of this campaign so far is contained in an article by Davies in the November issue of American magazine. Davies, after admitting that he had attended some of the sessions of the Moscow trials and had considered them “fantastic” at the time, now claims to have gained “new light” on them. Just what “new” evidence he has uncovered he does not state. He merely gives full credence to the trials and the “confessions,” seeking to implicate Leon Trotsky and his co-thinkers as agents of German and Japanese imperialism.
Davies indicates the purposes of his article in his conclusion, stating: “There are no saboteurs, secret agents or Fifth Columnists to co-operate with the invaders, because the Russians were sufficiently far-sighted to eliminate them before it was too late. That is a fact which other liberty-loving nations might well ponder.”
Unquestionably this bourgeois support is extremely welcome to Stalin. The sustained defeats and losses of the Red Army have raised new doubts about the Kremlin’s policies among the Soviet masses and the workers everywhere. It has become increasingly difficult for Stalin to conceal the direct connection between the present catastrophic Soviet defeats and the 1937–38 purge of the Red Army command, in which no less than 40,000 officers and technicians were executed or imprisoned.
The American imperialists are serving their own ends by aiding Stalin in his criminal task of discrediting and destroying the proletarian revolutionary opposition to his betrayal of the international class struggle and his support of the “democratic” imperialists in the war.
Davies is pointing to Stalin’s Moscow Trial frameup method, “which other liberty-loving nations might ponder,” as a pattern to be followed against the working class opponents of the war in this country.
 
Findings of the Dewey Commission
The conclusive and irrefutable evidence uncovered and made public by the Commission headed by Prof. John Dewey, which exhaustively investigated the Moscow frameups, has exposed the complete falsity of the “confessions” in the Moscow trials. The Dewey Commission produced documentary evidence which proved the falsity of every alleged material fact permitted to slip into the “confessions.” Since the publication of the Commission’s findings in 1938, literally no individual or group has dared to offer a specific refutation of them.
So unanswerable are these findings that the American magazine, after printing Davies’ article, refuses to permit mention of them in its columns. The Nation, Nov. 15, reports:
“The American magazine has rejected an article by John Dewey answering one by Joseph E. Davies in which the former Ambassador said that the Soviet Union’s resistance to Hitler was made possible by the purging of pro-Nazis in the Moscow trials.”
A despicable role in this attempt to justify the Moscow trials frameups is being played by the liberals. Echoing the direct spokesmen of the imperialists, the liberal exponents of the “war for democracy” are likewise beginning to “revise” their estimates of the trials and purges.
The most recent examples of this are contained in the New Republic, November 17, in a lengthy compendium of articles on Russia Today.
 
Some “Liberals” Help Out
Some of the writers, wary of stepping on slippery ground, manage to discuss the most fundamental aspects of Soviet military and industrial policies without even mentioning the purges. Max Werner, in Prospects for the Red Army, and A. Jugow, in the Results of the Five Year Plans, write as though the trials and purges had never been.
Others offer various “explanations” designed to provide belated hindsight justification for the Moscow trial frameups.
Vera Micheles Dean, in discussing the Kremlin’s Foreign Policy, states: “It would seem more accurate to say that, the spectacular Moscow trials reflected a widespread outburst of xenophobia – mistrust of all foreigners.” According to this view, Stalin was only yielding to the “xenophobia” of the Soviet masses in the purges which wiped out the old Bolshevik party, decimated the trained leadership of the Soviet army, government and industry and wound up with – a pact with Hitler.
John Scott, who shortly before the Soviet-Nazi war began was ordered expelled from the Soviet Union for articles he wrote in the London News-Chronicle, gives as one reason for the purges:
”I am convinced that many of those high, top-flight functionaries who disappeared between 1936 and 1938 got into trouble originally because of their failure to agree with Stalin’s far reaching and ruthless plans for industrialization.”
Scott then goes on to imply that tens of thousands of leading officials, technicians, army commanders, etc., had entered into the services of the German and Japanese fascists.
“One of the most important accomplishments of the Soviet administrative system has been the elimination of enemy fifth columnists ... In Russia we have seen no evidence of the existence of any effective Nazi organizations or agents. These were eliminated by the systematic vigilance on the part of the Soviet people, the Communist Party and the NKVD (GPU). From 1936 to 1938 thousands of individuals who were accused of hostility to the Soviet Union were purged. Many innocent men and women suffered unjustly, but the Quislings and Antonescus were liquidated.”
 
What the “Liberals” Are Really Helping
John N. Hazard (The Legal Framework) brazenly states:
”... There was no path open for society except self-protection. This approach was extensively adopted for the political offender, whether the sincere dissenter or the paid agents of outside forces. The fifth column was exterminated before it could form.”
If Stalin exterminated a “fifth column” before it could form,” that means it never existed.
No, these trials were not directed against “paid agents of outside forces.” By giving credence to this GPU argument, Scott, Hazard and the others who repeat this lie are supporting the very essence of the frameups, the deliberate Stalinist amalgam between the hundreds of thousands of pro-Soviet elements who were executed or imprisoned and spies, provocateurs, and wreckers.
The disorganization in Soviet military and industrial life that accompanied the purges was as harmful to the defense of the Soviet Union as any conceivable acts of actual imperialist spies and saboteurs. The debacle which today confronts the Soviet Union is in large part a result of Stalin’s ruthless destruction of the competent military and industrial leadership.
In order to uphold Stalin as a defender of “democracy,” the liberal apologists for Allied imperialism must become apologists also for the abominations of Stalinism, not the least of which were the Moscow trials frameups and the bloody purges. At the same time, these liberals aid Stalin’s attempts to discredit the Trotskyist revolutionary opposition to his ruinous policies.
These “defenders” of democracy are playing the game of the most reactionary American imperialists who are willing to learn from the methods of Stalinism how better to persecute and frameup the Trotskyists and other labor militants in this country.
 




The Nazi offensive against Moscow, Rostov and the Caucasus goes relentlessly forward. With utter disregard of the cost in human lives the Hitlerite high command throws millions of men into the conflict to gain even the smallest ground in their advance. Hitler is ready to incur these losses to achieve the conquest of Moscow, even though it may not be decisive for winning the war, because he hopes that the hated swastika flying over the spires of the Kremlin will have a demoralizing effect on the Soviet population.
For more than two months the Red Army and the Soviet workers before Moscow and Leningrad have stayed the march of a military machine that routed and dispersed the forces of the great western powers, France, Britain and Belgium in less than two months. The Soviet workers have been building a barricade of human bodies to keep the arch-representative of world capitalist reaction out of Moscow. It is not for want of courage or valor or stamina or any of the fighting qualities that constitute the morale of an army of victory, that the Red Army has been beaten back for the Soviet soldiers have exhibited these qualities in superabundance. The Soviet workers lack qualified leadership and allies – to these glaring defects, the fruits of Stalin’s policy. Hitler owes his victories.
 
Imperialists Will Not Save USSR
Even today, as the war approaches a fatal climax, Stalin’s policy is one of dependence on the treacherous capitalist rulers of the British and American Empires, on Roosevelt and Churchill. It was a foregone conclusion that the chiefs of Anglo-American imperialism would promise much and give little, that they wanted not a Soviet victory but a new battlefront to give them a respite to prepare their military forces for the next stage of the war. For months Stalin and his flunkeys have pleaded with Churchill to create a military diversion for the harassed Red Army – to open up a “western front.”
Churchill politely declined: it did not Conform to the tasks or the policy of the British Empire. The very conference on the high seas between Roosevelt and Churchill, hailed by the Stalinists as an inspiring and liberating event for the masses of the world, was reported to have considered the question of opening a Western Front and to have turned it down. Only two weeks ago, Churchill announced that nothing need be expected in the way of decisive overseas action until 1943.
Now when the Nazis hammer at the very gates of Moscow, we learn that the British have opened a “new front” – on the desert sands of North Africa! What is this “new front”? By no stretch of the imagination can a revival of the whip-saw situation in North Africa be considered a military diversion for the Red Army. Hitler’s campaign in the Soviet Union can drive to a successful conclusion without regard for the shifting tides of war in North Africa. The conquest of Russia is Hitler’s main business today – to win this war Hitler can well afford a British victory in the desert.
This is no diversion for the Red Army and Churchill knows it. It is rather a “diversion” for the British masses whose sympathies are ardently with the embattled Soviet masses, who have been clamoring for real assistance to the Soviet Union. The new desert war is Churchill’s reply to this clamor. By this diversion, Churchill quiets his easily-quieted loyal Laborite opposition and disconcerts the Stalinists.
Moreover, the war in Libya is a necessary part of the war for the preservation of the British Empire, and for the Churchills this is a thousand times more important than saving the Red capitals of Moscow and Leningrad.
 
Stalin’s Policy
Only Stalin and his bureaucracy, concerned primarily with saving their skins and their jobs, could picture the Churchills and the Roosevelts as interested or capable of assisting in the defense of Leningrad and Moscow. It will be small consolation for the defenders of the USSR to hear from these bureaucrats that Churchill has opened a front in Libya and that – victory of victories! – British tanks have driven over a hundred miles of sand.
That the workers of the Soviet Union and the world should be victims of the cynical duplicity of a Churchill, is due to no other reason than Stalin’s desertion and betrayal of the real allies of the Soviet Union, the workers of Germany, Europe and the world. Imperialists cannot and will not create any new front except a front for imperialism – the military and political interests of British and American imperialism have nothing in common with the real defense of the Soviet Union.
 
Who Can Save the USSR?
Only the workers of the world can create a new front for the Soviet Union. That front today is in Berlin, Rome. Paris and London, it is in the workers’ poetical struggle at home against their capitalist masters.
The defense of the Soviet Union rests only in the hands of the international working class. Those who say differently, those who turn over this defense to Churchill and Roosevelt prepare the road for defeat or capitulation to Hitler.
 




According to the official federal indictment and recent statements by the prosecution, the Roosevelt administration is trying to convict and imprison the 28 defendants in the Minneapolis ‘sedition’ trial because they “did feloniously conspire ... to destroy by force the Government of the United States of America ...”
But all the evidence of the public record and the circumstances and statements leading up to the opening of the trial indicate that this was not the reason for this indictment being handed down at this time.
Rather, the evidence shows that the government was trying to achieve three ends by the indictment and the prosecution:

To aid Daniel J. Tobin, AFL teamster chief, in his fight to prevent the members of Local 544 from exercising their democratic right to belong to the union of their own choice, and to strike a blow at the leaders of this union who were noted for their opposition to all moves to stifle the militancy of the labor movement in the name of “national defense”;
 
To terrorize, isolate and, if possible, suppress the party which proclaimed its irreconcilable opposition to the war and the warmongers;
 
And to establish a precedent which will be used against all working class opponents of the war in the future.

The government comes into this trial “with unclean hands” because in its haste to achieve these ends, and especially the first, its true intentions were made manifest by the statements issued by the prosecution and Tobin, statements which are a matter of public record.
 
Background of Trial
The immediate circumstance which inspired the administration to undertake this prosecution when it did was the conflict between the Minneapolis truck drivers union, Local 544, and Tobin, climaxed on June 9 when over 4,000 Local 544 members voted to disaffiliate from the AFL and join the CIO.
Tobin, a staunch supporter of the Roosevelt administration, had declared himself unconditionally pledged to the war aims and policies of the government. Furthermore, he had publicly declared that adherence to his pro-war policies were a condition for continued membership in the AFL Teamsters, and that the members of the union must be prepared to make “sacrifices” in the interests of the war program.
The leaders of Local 544, several of whom had been known for years to Tobin and the labor movement at large as members of the Socialist Workers Party or sympathetic to its ideas, had condemned the war as a war for bosses’ profits and had advocated that the unions maintain a militant policy in defense of the workers interests despite war.
When these leaders refused to abide by Tobin’s ultimatum that they renounce their anti-war convictions, and his further edict that they agree to the establishment of a Tobin receivership over their local, Tobin sought to dust them. This move was frustrated when the local’s members voted to join the CIO.
 
Roosevelt Intervenes
Four days later, Tobin addressed a direct telegraphic appeal to Roosevelt, urgently requesting his aid against the dissident local. He declared in part:
“The withdrawal from the International Union by the truckdrivers union, Local 544 and one other small union in Minneapolis, and their affiliation with the CIO is indeed a regrettable and dangerous condition. The officers of this local union ... were requested to disassociate themselves from the radical Trotsky organization ... we feel that while our country is in a dangerous position, those disturbers who believe in the policies of foreign, radical governments must be in some way prevented from pursuing this dangerous course ...” (New York Times, June 14, 1941)
On the very same day that he received Tobin’s appeal, Roosevelt acted. Through his secretary, Stephen Early, Roosevelt issued a statement to the White House press conference, which acknowledged Tobin’s telegram and recognized Tobin’s claim that the Teamsters’ international leadership was being fought “by all subversive organizations and all enemies of the government, including Bundists, Trotskyists and Stalinists” because Tobin and his colleagues “have been and will continue to stand squarely behind the government.”
Early then added:
“When I advised the President of Tobin’s representations this morning, he asked me to immediately have the Government departments and agencies interested in this matter notified, and to point out that this is no time, in his opinion, for labor unions, local and national, to begin raiding one another for the purpose of getting memberships or for similar reason.” (New York Times, June 14).
Three things are established by these statements:

Tobin appealed to Roosevelt for aid on the basis that this was a “political favor” owed him for his support of the administration and its war program.
 
Roosevelt acted promptly on behalf of Tobin at Tobin’s direct request.
 
Roosevelt’s immediate specific actions were to condemn the CIO for “raiding”, without any further inquiry into the situation, and to instruct the “Government departments and agencies interested in this matter” to assist Tobin.
 

The FBI Acts
Within a few days these “departments and agencies” did act. On June 27, FBI agents raided the headquarters of the SWP in Minneapolis and St. Paul, seizing copies of works by Marx, Lenin and Trotsky and various publications of the party, all of which are on public sale everywhere.
Announcement was then made that these publicly available books and publications would be used as “evidence” in a federal prosecution against members of the Socialist Workers Party.
Attorney General Biddle, who was subsequently to brazenly deny that the prosecution had any connection with the fight between Tobin and Local 544, declared on the day of the FBI raids that “the principal Socialist Workers Party leaders against whom prosecution is being brought, are also leaders of Local 544-CIO in Minneapolis ... and have gained control of a legitimate labor union to use it for illegitimate purposes.” (Minneapolis Star-Journal, June 28)
The St. Paul Dispatch, a representative organ of the conservative business interests in the Twin Cities, announced that an indictment was being prepared against the Socialist Workers Party, with the revealing headline: “U.S. TO PROSECUTE 544.”
But Biddle hastened to lie: “The prosecution is not in any sense an attack on organized labor, nor is it an effort to interfere in a dispute between labor organizations.”
However, in reporting this very statement of Biddle’s, the Minneapolis Star-Journal, June 28, added that the federal officials themselves had admitted that “the criminal proceedings were stimulated by the bolt of former leaders of General Drivers’ Union 544 from AFL to CIO.”
 
First Main Reason for the Prosecution
The facts are iron-clad. The initial purpose of the prosecution was to aid in the crushing of an influential and powerful sector of the trade union movement because of its opposition to the Tobin dictatorship on the question of labor’s policies in the war.
There was, it is then apparent, no question of “seditious conspiracy” involved in the events leading up to the opening of the prosecution by the Roosevelt administration. That came later when the prosecution saw that it would have to cover up its real motives.
 
Second Main Reason
The second reason for the prosecution was purely political and stemmed from the administration’s decision to use this case for an attack on the Socialist Workers Party because of its outspoken opposition to the imperialist war.
This was explicitly admitted by Biddle who stated: “The principal basis for the prosecution is found in the Declaration of Principles adopted by the Socialist Workers Party in January 1938.” (Minneapolis Tribune, June 28)
Biddle then made specific reference to those sections of the Declaration which read:
“If, in spite of the efforts of the revolutionists and the militant workers, the U.S. government enters a new war, the SWP will not, under any circumstances, support that war but will, on the contrary, fight against it.”
There was nothing secret or “conspiratorial” about this Declaration. It was made public three and a half years before the indictment was drawn. It is the expression of political opinions and, as such, the SWP and the defendants had, and have, the constitutional right to express them.
But the indictment itself, handed down two weeks later, had nothing whatever to say about “the principal basis for the prosecution.” As a matter of fact it does not even contain the word war.
The prosecution acted hastily in its eagerness to help Tobin before it was too late to help him effectively, and it blurted out some truths. Afterwards, they realized that it would not be very easy under the circumstances to get convictions on the basis of the defendants’ anti-war policies, for millions of others share their opposition to the war and would rally to their defense on this basis.
Unable to tell the truth about why he was prosecuting the Socialist Workers Party and trying to divert attention away from the obvious fact that the fight between Tobin and 544 had been the initial impulse for the action by the FBI and the Department of Justice, Biddle had to cook up the “seditious conspiracy” charge.
To find a legal basis for such a charge, the Department of Justice had to disinter two federal statutes which had never previously been used and which are in clear violation of the guarantees of free speech and free press contained in the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution.
One of these statutes is the Smith Act of 1940, which makes the mere expression of revolutionary ideas a felony; and the other is a similar statute enacted in 1861 for use against the Southern Confederacy during an actual armed rebellion.
The American Civil Liberties Union, which is actively supporting the defendants in this ease, addressed a letter on August 20 to Biddle, which said:
“In our judgment both these statutes violate the First Amendment. of the Constitution; and even if upheld could not be applied to this set of facts under the ‘clear and present’ danger rule.”
 
Third Reason for the Prosecutions
But the government wants to get a conviction precisely on the basis of these unconstitutional statutes, because it wants a legal precedent for the future prosecution of any individuals or groups whose opinions the administration deems hostile to its war program.
That this was one of the major reasons for the prosecution was indicated by Biddle himself, who was quoted in the St. Paul Pioneer Press. June 28, as stating that this prosecution was to be the first step in a nationwide drive against “dangerous radicals.” “It is a fair inference,” said Department of Justice officials, according to the Pioneer Press, “that the St. Paul prosecutions may be followed by others in other parts of the country.”
And Assistant Attorney General Schweinhaut, one of the government prosecutors who signed the indictment, said: “We cracked down here first. Mr. Biddle has said this is only a start. So you can expect other actions to follow shortly.” (St. Paul Dispatch, June 28)
There are those in “liberal” circles who say that the Minneapolis case is not important, that the government is not “serious” in its prosecution, that little or nothing will come of it.
But they are refuting the facts leading up to the indictment, by the desperate lengths to which Biddle and the prosecution have gone in attempting to hide their real reactionary motives, by the obvious contradictions in the statements explaining the reasons for the trial, by the glaring inconsistencies between these statements and the indictment.
No administration would go to such lengths or place itself in such a compromising position unless it was in deadly seriousness. determined to go through with the case and secure convictions, if only to take the curse off what it has already done and “justify” its course up to now.
Most decisive of all is the fact that the Roosevelt administration is serious about the war, and it is serious, therefore, about getting a conviction in this case as an important part of its war preparations.
Let there be no mistake about it. The government is in deadly earnest about railroading the 28 defendants to prison. Progressive workers must mobilize all their forces to help the fight against a conviction in this case, a conviction which will jeopardize their rights and liberties in the war days ahead.
 








BULLETIN
Score, two runs in a row for the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (CIO). The strike of 15,000 steel workers of the Cambria Works of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation at Johnstown, Pa., which began Friday right after settlement of the strike at the parent plant in Bethlehem was ended Sunday, March 30, with a victory for the union. Called to halt a company union election, the strike won an agreement identical with that won in Bethlehem.



* * *
Bethlehem, Pa., March 28 – The victory parade of the Bethlehem steel strikers starts.
“It’s bigger than the day they signed the Armistice!” an exultant steel striker beside me exclaims.
The steel workers pour out. of the smoke-filled, jam-packed Beth-Allen Casino where they have just shouted their acclaim to the agreement with Bethlehem Steel. “Only ‘twenty’ per cent out, huh?” crows a big striker in a leather jacket. “Old Eugene Grace would like to make a profit as big as this ‘twenty’ per cent.”
“God Almighty! Wouldn’t this be some parade if that ‘eighty’ per cent who scabbed were in it?” roars another voice.
“Write this in your paper, will you, Shorty?” says the striker in the leather jacket.
High up in the air they hoist me, on two powerful shoulders. All the way down Broad Street, clear to New Street, is a sea of heads. Eight and ten abreast, pressed chest to back, the steel workers are massed in the street. And behind us I see the line swelling and growing for a block, two blocks, as new hundreds leave the sidewalks and join the parade.
“God Almighty! Eighty per cent!” big Leather Jacket keeps chuckling out loud. “Wait’ll those rats at the plant see our ‘twenty’ per cent.”
The line starts to move. A cheer and a whoop and a holler ripples up and down the marching thousands.
 
Now They Know
Not until this moment have these Bethlehem Steel workers fully understood what the union is, what it represents, its size, its solidity, its power.
Even inside the only available hall in the area, where three to four thousand had managed to squeeze in, while overflow thousands crowded the broad stairs and out into the streets, the full realization had failed to dawn upon them.
Not even when they heard the details of Grace’s concessions – the first ever granted to a union in Bethlehem’s parent plant – did they fully grasp what the union and this strike really means.
Now, when the parade swings forward, they see the UNION as it really is. They see it whole, its numbers, its dynamic power in action, stretched forward and behind as far as the eye can see. “God Almighty!” Leather Jacket breathes one final exclamation to the world in general, “Bethlehem ain’t never seen a crowd this big before.” And turning to me, he shouts: “Write it in” your paper, Shorty, tell ’em what kind of union us Bethlehem fellows have got here at last.”
The parade turns off Broad, the main business street, heads up New Street toward South Bethlehem; across the Lehigh River, toward Steel Town where the Bethlehem plants sprawl five miles along the south river bank; toward the smoke-blackened worn wooden and crumbling brick houses which are home to many of the steel workers.
We are marching uphill now. The head of the line appears six blocks in the distance, rising over the crest of the company’s toll bridge, with its sign “One Cent for Pedestrians, Three Cents for Motor Vehicles.”
 
Symbol of Defiance
Day in and day out the workers who have entered the realm of Bethlehem Steel over this little bridge have given their offerings to the power and greed of the corporation. Millions of pennies have paid for the bridge ten times over.
No pennies today! Over the bridge the parade rolls in a solid stream. Ten thousand marchers and not one penny. “Let ’em try and collect their goddam penny today!” A symbol of industrial servitude is ground into dust under 20,000 feet crossing a small bridge.
All along the way we pass thousands of workers, their wives and sweethearts, cheering, yelling greetings, smiles and joy everywhere. Almost everyone on the sidewalks has an SWOC pin, an “SWOC Picket” slip in bold letters, a “Join the Union” sticker proudly displayed on hat or coat.
All traffic is halted. Hundreds of cars, packed tight with strikers and their friends and families, are wedged along the curbs bumper to bumper.
 
Silent Factories
As we go over the bridge there is a sudden quiet. “Feel that?” “What?” I ask in turn.
“There’s no vibrations. It’s the first time when I didn’t feel the vibrations from the works. If those plants were operating, you could feel the vibrations all through you. Now you know what b—— s—— the company and the Globe-Times have been putting out about 80 and 85 per cent of the men working during the strike.”
A head in front of me jerks sideways and upwards. A huge fist waves high in the air. “Hide you rats, you dirty scabs! Go on, hide! We can smell from here!”
I look where the fist is pointed, I see three pairs of eyes, wide-open, scared, staring over a third floor window ledge of a plant building. “It’ll be a miserable thing for those scabs when this bunch gets back in the plant,” a short, middle-aged Hungarian worker says, almost in half-pity. Another marcher answer with a loud burbling lip-sound, scornful and merciless.
 
Town Is SWOC
The trolleys are halted on the tracks. They are pasted over with stickers, “Join the SWOC.” From every window and doorway the marchers are cheered and greeted. All one can see is “SWOC”-buttons, stickers, banners, picket tags. The whole town has literally become SWOC. For over 12 miles the parade wends through the town, past the length of the plant, and then returns.
This is the vindication of the strike, this is the moment of triumph.
The workers had left the plants on Monday night, the start of the strike, tense, uncertain, not too sure of their power. But now they know.
They have smashed the Bethlehem myth. “Bethlehem plant in Bethlehem will never be organized,” they had been told. “It’s the heart of the corporation. It’s been a company town for 50 years and it’ll be a company town for the next 50. Grace will never yield to a union in this town.” But Grace has.
The company union, the “Employees’ Representation Plan,” whose attempt to hold a plant election precipitated the strike, has been licked. I saw steel workers this morning lined up in hundreds in the lobby of the meeting hall and all down the stairs, waiting to sign up with the SWOC. Thousands of those who had held out, friendly but waiting to see if the SWOC could pull the trick, are now joining up.
 
Settlement Terms
In addition to stopping the company from recognizing the company union as sole bargaining agency for the workers, the company has granted recognition to the SWOC for the first time, explained John Kiffe, SWOC regional director, at the meeting prior to the victory parade. The union will be able to post its bulletins in the plant. A regular grievance machinery will be established, whereby the union men will be able to deal with the foremen and supervisors in the departments, all the way up the line to the company heads themselves.
The company union can no longer claim to represent the workers. The SWOC has been granted the right to bargain for its own members, and that will undoubtedly include 99 per cent of the workers after this.
All the strikers are to return to their jobs without any discrimination, the SWOC committee having balked the efforts of the company to exclude arrested strikers from the terms of the agreement.
 
Workers Know Fight Still Lies Ahead
The demand, formulated after the strike was already on, that the company union be disbanded, remains unsolved. The NLRB election to determine sole collective bargaining rights is to await outcome of the company’s court appeal against the NLRB decision, which 19 months ago ordered the company to disband the company union. This may be a huge stumbling block to the SWOC, in the days ahead, and every worker knows it.
The workers here have few illusions about what it will take on their part to enforce the terms of even this limited agreement.
At this morning’s mass meeting, when the terms were voted on, members of the local strike committee stressed their distrust of the company and advised the workers to carry on their organization drive in the plant with redoubled vigor and crack down hard on every single instance of the company’s refusal to deal with the union according to the terms of the agreement.
“We must back up the contract with strong pressure on the job,” one speaker advised. “We know the company will use every device to evade the contract.”
Another brought resounding. cheers’ when he urged:
“Let’s go back into the plants with our chins out. And when the first damn boss steps on our toes, we’ll have to step back twice as hard. As for the men who haven’t signed up in the union yet, all I can say is, if anybody won’t join up the nice way then we’ll have to use more persuasive ways.”
One committee speaker summed up the feelings of the rank and file in a very picturesque fashion:
“Brothers”, he said, “We have witnessed a marriage today. Bethlehem Steel has just married the SWOC. But it wasn’t a case of love at first sight. This was more in the nature of a shot-gun wedding. Now we have a marriage license, which is this agreement – and a shot-gun. And, brothers, we’d better hold on to both of them.”
 
Story of the Strike
On Monday night, when the workers first pulled out, there was no disorder or violence. The workers massed in thousands around the plant, with their wives, sweethearts and children out to support them. No one was hurt. There were no scabs coming in, except the few hundred who had remained in the plant after the night shift walked out.
(These scabs had a tough time as some of them admitted later. They were compelled to work a 16 hour shift to keep noisy machinery going to make an impression, live for two days on sandwiches and muddy coffee, sleep on benches. By Thursday night the ambulance was clanging in and out of the main plant gate almost continuously, hauling away the scabs who had collapsed).
The company, aided by the city and county officials who are in its direct or indirect pay, immediately wanted to bring in state police. Six hours after the strike started, and when there had been not a single instance of disorder, County Sheriff Nickel appealed to Governor James for state troopers.
 
Police Provocation
The pretext for bringing in the Pennsylvania “Cossacks” – the only name the workers have for these government strikebreakers – was manufactured Tuesday morning.
A car with a company cop in plain clothes drove up to the main gate where several hundred strikers were picketing. The strikers were in high spirits. They halted the car, tipped it over, and made the cop get put. He wasn’t hurt the car was righted without any damage, and he was permitted to get back in the car and drive into the plant.
Several city police scout cars immediately began to circle around the pickets. Without a word of warning a tear gas shell was fired point blank at a group of strikers, blinding five of them. Another shell was fired. In self-defense the workers fought off this unprovoked assault.
When the police continued their provocative tactics, the workers continued to defend themselves. By nightfall the police were routed. The company and city officials called for state cops. During the course of the day, several hundred scab cars in the parking lots around the plant had been overturned and generally “renovated.” A dozen or so were tossed off the Minsi Trail bridge into the “Mud Hole.” Neither the company nor the police have been able to bring forth any evidence that this was the work of the strikers. In fact, the strikers have charged the company with organizing the damaging of these cars as a further excuse for James’ sending in the state cops.
 
Government Strikebreakers
About 8:30 P.M. Tuesday came a dastardly attempt by the state to break the morale of the strikers.
Most, of the active strikers were at a mass meeting of the union at the Beth-Allen Casino several miles from the plant. The union could not get a meeting place in South Bethlehem because the company holds options on all the meeting halls. There were about 1,000 people milling around the area before the main gate.
They included many spectators, women with babies in their arms, children.
A squad of mounted state police rode out of the gates. Without a word of warning they charged into the unsuspecting crowd. Behind them scores more of state cops poured out of the gates on foot, charging the workers with 30 inch riot sticks. Women and children were knocked down, clubbed. The crowd broke and ran. The coppers chased them up side streets.
On one side street the Cossacks encountered a group of women on the porches of a row of frame houses. The women began to jeer the cops. Onto the pavement the police drove their horses, riding along the porches and clubbing the women, driving them into their homes.
 
Were These Cops?
One of the surprising things about these state police was that most of them were wearing the old style London “Bobbie” helmets of the former State Constabulary, the murderous gangsters and gunmen hired by the coal and steel companies and deputized by the state, who used, to spread terror throughout all the coal and iron towns. These coal and iron police were dissolved in 1936.
Yet the uniforms worn by these thugs during this strike was the old long-coated black uniform of the coal-and-iron cops. Onto their sleeves were sewed the Keystone label with “State Motor Patrol.” These uniforms were “explained” away by a statement in the press by Colonel Adams, State Police head, that these “police” had brought the wrong uniforms!
The regular State Motor Patrol police were there also. These were scarcely less vicious than the coal and iron cops but they showed less experience, were younger, not so beefy as the helmeted cops. The faces of the coal and iron cops were those of the pig-eyed, black-jowled killers who used to be brought from the Philadelphia and Pittsburgh underworlds before the outlawing of the coal and iron police four years ago.
When the word of this vicious assault came to the workers at the mass meeting, they wanted to go down in a body. Their instinct was to attack and not retreat.
 
Riffe Stops Pickets
But John Riffe and other SWOC top leaders, who had shown a certain vacillation throughout the strike, and had done little to help the inexperienced local committee to organize the picketing, urged caution. Many of the workers had tears of anger in their eyes. But they accepted the advice of these leaders to discontinue the picket lines temporarily.
The picket line was pulled off until Wednesday afternoon. This was the most critical point of the strike. Had the company been able to secure scabs enough to operate the plant during this period, the strikers may have become demoralized and the strike broken.
One of the reasons advanced by Riffe for this yielding up of the right to picket was the assertion that the government would make the company come to terms. The-workers soon understood how untrue this was.
On the very day of the assault the government had awarded another $75,000,000 war order to Bethlehem Steel and did not lift a finger to enforce the NLRB order to disband the company union. Riffe also said he had withdrawn the pickets at the request of certain government officials whom he did not name.
 
Picket Lines Renewed
The workers won this strike themselves, Their insistence on starting heir picket lines again and fighting back led to an ultimatum to the state police on Wednesday that if the workers were not permitted to picket, they would fight for the right ...
The actual weakness of the state police force, when confronted by this bold ultimatum backed by thousands of steel workers ready to give battle, was immediately revealed. The police backed down at once and agreed to permit “limited” picketing. The workers felt that they should enforce their right to mass picketing, but here again accepted the advice of Riffe and on Wednesday afternoon: re-established only small official picket lines of 10 and 11 strikers at each gate.
These were, however, immediately supplemented by an “unofficial” picket line of hundreds of workers formed across the street from the main gate. On that “unofficial” line one heard repeatedly: “Hell, what are we doing picketing these here restaurants? We ought to be on the other side of the street picketing the company.”
 
Company Tricks Fail
In addition to the police terror, the company used every device used so successfully against the Johnstown, Pa., workers in the 1937 Little Steel strike.
As in Johnstown then, the Bethlehem Globe-Times carried huge headlines every day about the plant being operated at capacity. They quoted the plant management to the effect that 80 per cent of the workers, 85 per cent, were back in the plant,
But as one workers said to me during the parade today, “There was more smoke in our meeting hall this morning than’s coming out of those chimneys.”
These workers know the plant like a mother knows her own child. They couldn’t be fooled.. They knew they had the plant almost completely stopped.
At night there was none of the typical red glare over the plant coming from the huge slag heap after the hot slag is poured on it when the plant is running. The hammers in the drop forges were clanking metallically, “die on die,” because there was no soft hot steel between. The “bleeder” at the coke ovens was the only light to be seen over the plant at night: the pipe which burns off the excess gas generated by the coke ovens. This was burning continuously, and showed that the gas was overflowing the tank and was not being used.
The picket lines began to build up again on Thursday, as the workers kept edging into the lines about the nine gates, “chiseling” away at the picket “limitation.”
On Thursday the company agreed to meet with the union committee. The workers sensed the coming victory then. If the company’s fake reports of plant operations had been true, Eugene Grace would never have consented to such a meeting. And victory did come!
 
Their One Regret
During the victory parade this afternoon, the mighty forces of the passing strikers contrasted sharply with the feebleness of the state police force who were still out at the plant. I repeatedly heard the regrets of the workers that they had not come out in this great mass after the police attack Tuesday night and given the state cops a lesson.
“Don’t I wish those Cossacks would try to stop us now.”
“They’re not up against women and kids how. We’re ready for ’em now.’’
“If we’d have had a line like this Tuesday and Wednesday, we’d have shipped those bastards out of town in wooden crates.”
 
AFL Workers Help
Contrary to the lying propaganda put out in the boss newspapers here and everywhere in the country, the people of this town were overwhelmingly behind the strikers.
Particularly inspiring was the example of the AFL union men and women in Bethlehem. The Lehigh County Central Trades and Labor Assembly (AFL) passed a resolution supporting the strike and has invited the CIO to a joint meeting to protest the use of the state troopers.
The AFL Bricklayers, building the new coke ovens, walked out in a body. The International Ladies Garment Workers, girls working at the Lehigh Dress plant, pulled a half-day sympathy strike the first day of the strike, and marched in a body in the victory parade. Any ILGWU member whose husband or brother was found to be scabbing was warned that she would be put out of the union.
The AFL top officialdom, however, tried to get AFL workers to help break the strike. Borrelli, general vice-president of the Structural Iron Workers, wired Local No. 36, with many members in the steel plant, to go through the picket lines or each man would be fined a hundred dollars.
The local wired Borrelli back, telling him where to go. Borrelli flew into Alletttown, six miles from Bethlehem, Wednesday. To avoid losing their union cards, the local SIW members went through the picket lines in a body. This was in technical obedience to Borrelli’s order. In a body, they went and secured their pay. In a body, they quit the job cold.
It was this unity of all the workers in Bethlehem which made the final victory possible. Even when the gates were temporarily cleared of pickets, the company just couldn’t mobilize any scabs. This, more than any other thing, brought home to the strikers the truth of their own slogan, “Cops can’t make steel!”
 
The Children’s War
The smallest tot in this town is union conscious. After the breaking of the picket line Tuesday night, bands of forty and fifty children, from the ages of 8 to 14, roamed the streets and alley-ways leading off from the plant and made life miserable for the state cops.
They would taunt and jeer the cops, lure isolated police down dark alley-ways, and then pelt them mercilessly with rocks, bricks and broken bottles. One cop, caught in a dark alley between two bands of rock-heaving kids, howled for mercy, and received the bitter answer, “Did you show any mercy to our Daddies?” They put all the lights out on Emery Street, near the Saucon plant, taunted the mounted police to charge them, and tripped up the horses with a concealed cable stretched between two poles. Twelve state cops are reported to have required medical treatment Tuesday night.
 
Then and Now
The workers outside this city don’t know the full meaning of walking down Bethlehem streets proudly displaying a union button.
This has been a completely company town ever since anyone here can remember. The company has controlled everything, and everyone in this town of 58,000 people, the majority being steel workers and their families. The newspapers, the Mayor, the banks, the property, everything has belonged to the company.
When I was in Bethlehem last, in 1934, unemployed steel workers trying to organize to get relief had to meet in complete secrecy, in the dead of night, in groups of four and five. Even so, the company spies, ever on the alert for the first signs of any kind of workers’ organization, would report back to the company any worker at whose home they had seen a group entering or leaving. These workers would find their relief cut off altogether.
The Bethlehem mayor tried this week to emulate the tactics of the mayor of Johnstown in 1937. He blustered about organizing a “secret” vigilante committee to preserve “law and order.” The members of the committee would remain “secret” because they might be physically attacked if they were known publicly, Mayor Pfeifle declared.
 
Workers Learn Politics
At the mass meeting this morning one of the local speakers declared: “We steel workers, put Pfeifle in four years ago. But at the next election, we’re going to put one of our own men in, a union man who won’t threaten us with vigilante terror and ask for the Cossacks to come in and ride down our women and kids.” These workers are learning that their struggles must also be extended to the political field!
And they are learning about national politics too. The company and the local press raved about “national defense,” but no striker seemed to bother about it. During the mass meeting this morning, and from individual strikers throughout the strike, I heard repeatedly, “National defense or no national defense, we’re going to get ours now. Grace is getting his aplenty from the government. That national defense line is just an alibi.”
One of the most vicious pieces of strikebreaking slander against the strikers came from Mayor Pfeifle who said he had asked for state cops after learning that “500 to 1,000 gangsters had been imported into Bethlehem by the union.”
The only gangsters I saw were the thugs in the coal and iron police helmets and uniforms. It might be embarrassing to Governor James for the union to ask him to make public the names and records of these men, and how long they have been “State Motor Patrol” members. They look and act just like the gangster scum imported into the coal and iron towns during the days of the State Constabulary.
Incidentally, it is significant that these state cops were housed on the company property, and admittedly were fed by the company in its cafeteria and on dining cars rolled into the plant.
 
The Next Step
The workers are going back into the plants flushed with a victory. But they know they still have the biggest battle ahead: to force the company to discontinue the company union altogether, to end the speedup group bonus, or “bone-less” system, and get their base pay jacked up from the present minimum of 42½ cents an hour. They must go after a complete signed contract, covering wages, hours, working conditions and sole bargaining rights.
Perhaps the most frequent phrase I heard today was, “The next time we strike ...” The word, “strike,” no longer sounds as forbidding as it did a week ago. It is taken for granted that sooner or later there is going to be another strike, unless the company gives in to the full demands of the workers.
The experiences, the lessons, the mistakes of this strike have sunk deep roots into these Bethlehem workers. The next time they strike, they are going to know who their friends and enemies are. They are going to know that the government and the officials are on the side of the company. They are going to know the tactics the company and the police will use. Above all, they will know their own organized strength and power, and they will use it.
 




“They talked a lot at this American Peace Mobilization convention about fighting to win democracy here at home first before sending an army to fight for democracy in Europe. Well, after sitting through this so-called convention for two days, I think the fight for democracy ought to begin right inside the American Peace Mobilization outfit.”
That is how Ernest Mazey, vice-president of Detroit local 29, State, County and Municipal Workers of America (CIO) and his union’s delegate to the two-day American Peoples Meeting of the American Peace Mobilization held April 6–7 here in New York, summed up the APM convention to this Militant reporter.
“Fight for democracy at home? A rank-and-file delegate would have needed a whole Army division to get to the ‘mike’ in that ‘Peoples’ Meeting. I ought to know, because I tried it for two days,” said Mazey.
Mazey has the distinction of being the sole delegate, of the “4,225 delegates and 748 official observers” whom the APM claims attended the convention, who even had the temerity to ask for the floor during the general sessions of the convention. In fact, his insistence on being permitted to discuss the main resolution of the convention, after its presentation to the general session Sunday afternoon, created almost a full-blown panic amongst the sundry top officials who ran this “peace” travesty with an iron hand.
 
A Stalinist Fraud
The story of Mazey’s attempt to exercise his right as a delegate to speak at this “Peoples” convention demonstrates the fraudulent character of the APM as a genuine peoples movement against the war.
“The delegates never had a chance to discuss any of the resolutions or the program. The whole first day, Saturday, was spent in getting the delegates straightened around, registering them, and so forth. In the afternoon, they trotted us out in the rain to Randall Island stadium and after we soaked around there for about half an hour, they trotted us back.
“We didn’t get down to business until. Saturday evening,” Mazey went on. “Then we found that there were no general sessions for that day at all. We could merely sit in on one of a dozen or so discussion ‘panels’ and commissions. The conference on the topic Labor and War was divided into six different sections alone. Imagine trying to have a voice on the resolutions or trying to discuss before all the delegates in that kind of set-up.
“These ‘panels’ were a joke. The chairman, ‘keynoters’ and secretaries of these ‘panels’ were all hand-picked in advance. We didn’t have a chance even to vote on them. They came in with the complete drafts of all resolutions and programs prepared in advance. These resolutions were shoved through on greased skids. Everything was cut and dried.”
Mazey then described in detail how he tried unsuccessfully to get the floor Sunday afternoon at the general session.
 
Stalinist Gag Rule
“I wanted to represent my union honestly, and fight for the program against war which I believe is in the interests of the workers. I was determined to speak if 1 disagreed with any resolution. I was sitting up on the platform not more than 15 feet from the chairman, at the Sunday afternoon session in Mecca Temple.
“The main business of the Sunday afternoon general session, which began about four in the afternoon, was the report on the Declaration of the American Peoples Meeting. This was the key document of the convention and was supposed to summarize its entire program against war.
“When Fields, the executive secretary of the APM, finished his report on the Declaration, I rose to my feet before the entire assembly and in as loud a voice as I could muster I shouted: ‘Mr. Chairman, I want to discuss this Declaration!’
“The Chairman just ignored me as if he didn’t hear me. He went on to introduce the next speaker. That’s all there was to this ‘convention’, anyway. A bunch of hand-picked speakers, most of whom didn’t represent anyone but themselves, who took up the whole time of the, convention, The delegates were just shoved out in the cold.
“Right after the chairman had introduced the next speaker, Donald Henderson, who was to give the report of the Resolutions and Program committee – which the delegates didn’t elect – I went to the chairman to find out why a delegate couldn’t get the floor in this convention.
 
Stalinist Runaround
“The chairman gave me a very evasive answer to my question. He tried to say he hadn’t heard me – and I was shouting at the top, of my voice just a few feet from him. Then he told me to put my request in writing.
“Well, I’ve been to a lot of big union conventions, but if’ the chairman of any of those conventions had told any delegate who wanted to speak on a serious question that he had to ask for the floor in writing the conventions would have been stopped right then. I’ve seen and heard about a lot of bureaucratic practices, but nothing to come close to this.
“Alright, I wrote my request for the floor on a slip of paper and gave it to one of the ushers and told him to give it to the chairman. He went up and gave it to the chairman. The chairman read it and passed it on to Rev. Thompson, who was the general chairman of the whole convention.
“Then I saw Thompson leave the platform immediately with the request note in his hand.
“I waited quite a while, maybe an hour, to see if they’d give me the floor. Meanwhile, the resolutions and program were being presented and adopted. Every single one wag simply read off and put to a voice vote without any discussion. There were plenty of things on which I am sure many of the delegates disagreed, but a lot of them must have seen what happened to me when I tried to discuss, and so they just kept their mouths shut. The chairman didn’t even call for discussion.
“By this time, I was getting plenty sore. I moved up to the very first row of seats on the platform where the chairman couldn’t say he couldn’t see me or hear me.
“Then I went up to the chairman again, just a couple of feet from the loud-speaker, and again loudly asked for the floor. Somebody else hastily grabbed the ‘mike.’ The chairman began to argue with me and deliberately lied about not having received my written request for the floor. Then he said there were too many ‘regular’ speakers for the delegates to be given a chance to speak.
“By this time, I was burned up. I pulled out my credential, wrote out another request on the spot;’ and personally handed it to the chairman, who then handed it again to the Rev. Thompson, who in turn, went into immediate private conference with Field, the executive secretary.
 
Just a Circus
“Some ‘peoples’ convention! We heard Congressman Marcantonio, we heard Paul Robeson sing, we heard that well-known Stalin stooge, Corliss Lamont, tell all about how the Soviet Union was not in Hitler’s camp and ‘makes pacts with both sides.’ But we didn’t hear one authentic voice from people, the real people, the workers like me who had come hundreds of miles thinking we were going to discuss and draw up a program which would be really effective in the fight against, war.
“Finally, someone started to make some announcements over the loud-speaker. I was startled to hear a high-pitched voice frantically calling all over the hall, ‘Will Ernest Mazey please contact Frederic Fields on the stage immediately!’ Wasn’t that a hot one, and me standing within ten feet of Fields all the time.
“Fields began by asking me why I wanted to speak. ‘What do you want to say? What do you want to discuss?’
“I answered plenty sharply, ‘I don’t have to tell you what I want to discuss. I’m a bona-fidedelegate and I want the floor thrown open for free discussion. What I have to say, I want to say to the delegates. That’s my elementary right as a convention delegate. Do I have to submit to a censorship before I can get the floor?’
 
Then Come Threats!
“I guess I was getting a little too tough for Fields to handle so he then called over a fellow named De Lacy, who had been the chairman in the morning session and who is president of the ‘Washington Commonwealth Federation
“De Lacy got pretty ugly. ‘I’m a politician,’ he started out, ‘And I don’t think you should get the floor. If you should get the floor by any chance, I’m warning you now, you’ll be attacked!’ Attacked? Why, that fellow didn’t even know what I was going to say! He went on, ‘I’m a politician, and if you speak, I’ll get up and denounce you as, a disrupter.’
“Then this De Lacy took Fields a little aside and said in an ugly tone, loud enough for me to hear ‘Maybe I’d better get in touch with the public relations committee.’
“Well, he didn’t have to hit me over the head for me to know what he was probably talking about. I’d seen Homer Martin’s ‘public relations committees’ in action against progressive unionists in the auto workers union in Detroit. Only we called them ‘goon squads’.
“I stopped trying to get the floor then. And peace once more reigned over the American Peace Mobilization. But not for long I’m going back to Michigan – I told those birds this – and I’m going to spread the word as far as I can among the 500,000 CIO members there about what kind of fake convention this was.”
Mazey also gave some of his impressions about the composition of the convention, its program and sponsors.
 
Mainly Bourgeois Pacifists
“I never saw any convention like that. Anybody could come in. It was top-heavy with middle class and professional people. Of the 4,200 delegates, only 1,700 were claimed from trade unions, and the biggest single groups of these were from office, professional and government employees unions. There were over 1,000 delegates claiming to represent professional ‘peace’ groups, the kind that howl for peace and then fold up under the first real pressure.
 
A Phoney Program
“I’m not saying there were not a lot of good union elements here, who did represent a genuine following. But these workers surely didn’t come out of this merry-go-round affair with any program that they could honestly offer to the workers as a program which could actually put a stop to war.
“The only thing they added to the ideas that were in the Call they issued before the convention, was the slogan, ‘The Yanks Are Still Not Coming.’ That had about as much sense as the old slogan which the Stalinists used to sling around the unions, ‘The Yanks Are Not Coming.’
“If any worker wanted to understand what causes wars, and how wars are an inevitable product of the economic and social system, and how you have to change the system to stop wars, he didn’t get a chance to learn it at this convention.
“They talked about fighting for democracy within the armed forces, but how, they failed to say.
“As for this being a ‘peoples’ meeting, that’s plain hooey. You show me any ordinary meeting of workers, any union say, where the mention of the name of a book about the Soviet Union will start up a big ovation. Well, when one of the speakers referred to the Dean of Canterbury’s book, The Soviet Power, which I know the Stalinists have been pushing, there was a great big applause.
 
Tomorrow’s War Mongers
“What was Corliss Lamont doing there as an invited speaker? He gave a big speech about what the Soviet Union is doing for peace. The American Peace Mobilization says it’s against sending American troops to fight on foreign soil.
“But Lamont got a hand when he said that the Soviet Union and the United States ought to sign a pact to join together against Japanese aggression. And these same people will be telling us tomorrow, if such a pact is signed, that we ought to support this government in a war against Japan because it will help defend the Soviet Union!
“The plain truth is that this whole outfit is just another Stalinist ‘front’ organization. The whole thing smelled like this morning’s Daily Worker. Most of the speakers and leading figures were persons known for years to be close to the Stalinist movement.
“The whole bureaucratic, high-handed way in which this convention was run smacked of the kind of thing we’ve long since learned was characteristic of the Stalinists in the trade unions.
“This kind of movement can never fight for democracy here at home. It can never stop war. All it can do is confuse and mislead the workers, and discredit and disorient the anti-war fight.”
 




The first symptoms of a new wave of workers’ revolutions are appearing in Europe and, in the first instance, in Italy. Churchill and the “democratic” ruling class have been quick to label it the “Italian disease” – as if this penetrating germ can be exorcised by incantation and prevented from spreading.
The hasty reassurances exchanged among the “democratic” capitalists concerning the peculiarly Italian character of the coming revolution remind one of nothing so much as what happened in Europe when, in the 14th and 15th centuries, the ravages of syphilis spread. The French termed it the “Italian disease”; the Spanish, the “French disease”; while the Italians were absolutely certain that it was the “Spanish disease.” No country would claim it!
The capitalists in each country today likewise label the “disease” of proletarian revolution as one which can strike elsewhere but not in their own country. But in their hearts they know differently. Proletarian revolution was no “Russian disease” in 1917 – it spread across Europe, even though it was drowned in blood.
The first military defeats sustained by Mussolini have sufficed to expose the basic weakness of the fascist grip on Italy.
While no direct manifestations of the crumbling fascist, rule have as yet been able to seep through the totalitarian prison walls of Italy, the admissions and protestations of the official Italian press and spokesmen are revelatory.
It is quite clear that the Italian masses who, since the last war, have suffered a standard of living as low as any in Europe, are now launching an irreconcilable struggle against conditions which the present war has brought to the intolerable stage.
 
Fascists Try to Appease Masses
Mussolini’s regime, unable to gloss over the appalling living conditions, makes haste to lament with the masses. A campaign suddenly blossoms forth against the “hoarders and profiteers.” Not the fascist regime and the capitalists it serves, but anonymous hoarders and profiteers, whose presence had up to this time eluded the all-seeing eyes of the secret police, are held responsible for the plight of the Italian people. Regime Fascista, newspaper edited by Roberto Farinacci, former secretary of the Fascist party, declares – but without naming names – that these profiteers should be shot.
”We do not live by bread alone,” says La Vita Italiana. “There are many other things of prime necessity. With, things increasing at this rate, are wages and salaries to remain unaltered?” La Vita of course offers no answer to its own question, but hopes to mollify the masses by echoing their feelings.
But most of all, it is the increasing spirit of defeatism which preoccupies the ruling regime. On December 10 the leading fascist newspaper. Il Popolo di Roma, admitting heavy Italian losses, increasing vicissitudes and hard days ahead, stated:
“These gentlemen who smell of defeatism are those who read our war bulletins with the air of being fed up, those who know everything, incorrigible rumor-mongers who always have something to add when a communique is read. It seems to us the hour has come to beat them up so it will leave a mark that will not soon be forgotten.”
The violence of this campaign against defeatism is in itself an admission of the discontent with the war so wide-spread among the Italian masses. The same Il Popolo di Roma on December 13 cries against the defeatists:
“We know them. We have identified them for some time now. Soon we shall catch them and make them swallow all their sinister prophecies, all stupid anticipations of their idiotic defeatism which has not and never will have any hold on the granite mass of the Italian people gathered close around their Duce.”
 
The Worker-Soldier Will Not Fight
This defeatism, and it grows with each new military set-back, is the reflection of a much more serious condition in the Italian armed forces.
It is the custom of the “democratic” capitalist press to attribute the defeats of the Italian army in Greece and Albania to the “brave fighting qualities” of the Greek and British forces and the “cowardice” of the Italian fighters. A few commentators, however, know better. Thus Hanson W. Baldwin, writing about the Italo-Greek war in the New York Times on November 26, says, “And the heart of the Italians is not in it – except for officers and a few picked Fascist troops, the Italian army seems to have no illusions of the glory.”
Not courage but morale, is the decisive factor in the Italian military defeats. The Italian soldier – the direct descendant of the magnificent fighters under Garibaldi – doesn’t want to fight in this war. He does not believe in the cause which his arms are supposed to uphold.
Leland Stowe, in a dispatch to the New York Post of December 26 describing an interview with Italian prisoners of war in Greece, writes:
“There is an enormous difference between the attitude of officers and common soldiers. Virtually all the officers profess confidence in and loyalty to Mussolini. and most of them attempt to justify the invasion of Greece. The higher ranking professional militarists show obedience to the regime and unquestioned patriotism. Young lieutenants, aggressively fascist, are frequently defiant and arrogant, sometimes sneering and discourteous.
“On the other hand, the Italian soldiers are mostly a spiritless, pitiful assortment. They are ragged and miserable, and only a few have a vestige of self-assurance left. Again and again, they say frankly, ‘We’ve had enough.’
“They seem to have no shame over having thrown down their weapons. They want nothing except food and for the war to end and to get back to Italy.”
But it is mere wish-thinking, when the Churchills brand it an “Italian disease.”
It is precisely the knowledge that this is not an exclusively “Italian disease” which brought forth Churchill’s recent incitement of the Italians against Mussolini – against Mussolini and not against the entire ruling class of Italy. Churchill calls for the spread in Italy of a “mild” “non-infectious” form of the revolutionary “disease,” one which would leave intact the Italian Royal family, the army generals, the police apparatus, the fascist machine, the profiteers and capitalists – and the hunger and misery of the Italian masses. Above all, a “disease” which would contain no danger of spreading beyond the Italian borders into the British Empire.
For while Italy at the present moment appears most susceptible to revolution, conditions in England also indicate no great immunity to this contagion. The British ruling class fears this more than a thousand military defeats.
 
Strike Struggles in Britain
One of the indicative symptoms that the workers of England are not too ready to “sacrifice” in the interests of British imperialism, is the persistence of strikes in vital British industries. The news of these strikes has managed to trickle through the rigid British censorship. And they are particularly significant because they are waged in defiance of the dictatorial law against strikes.
The New York Times, December 20, inconspicuously carries the following tiny item:
“LONDON, Dec. 19 (UP) – Minister of Labor Ernest Bevin told the House of Commons today that there had been stoppages of work in British munitions factories contrary to the legal procedure of settling disputes. Some of these, he indicated, were due to a ‘settled policy’ of the Communists.”
Bevin, on December 17, reported 844,000 workdays lost in the first ten months of 1940 due to strikes, – in a nation in which Sir Walter Citrine, speaking before the AFL convention last month, declared the workers had “voluntarily” given up the right to strike.
The New York Post, December 17, in a London dispatch quotes the London Daily Express as alleging that the “Liverpool docks were working at two-thirds capacity due to labor agitation and lassitude.”
This same dispatch reveals that the English workers are not so willing to “sacrifice” as Citrine states. Two of the largest British trade unions, the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions, with 450,000 members, and the Amalgamated Engineering Union, with 400,000 members, are both making insistent demands for wage increases to offset the enormous price increases.
A six-day strike of 5,000 garment workers in Lancashire, England, ended on December 27. The strike was ostensibly over the employment of a non-union worker; but the fact that it was conducted in defiance of a law exacting penal sentences, shows that the source of the strike was much more deep-rooted.
 
British “Democracy” Puts the Squeeze On
We can expect that Churchill, like Mussolini, will shortly be forced to denounce the “hoarders and profiteers.” On December 26, the British press announced that Lord Woolton, Food Minister, is expected to introduce a further reduction in the food rations in January 1941. Even the cheapest, poorest meat scraps are to be rationed, under the new regulations, and the present allowance of one shilling ten pence (about 35 cents) worth of meat per person per week, is to be reduced to one shilling six pence (about 25 cents) worth. This, for the first time, will also affect the soldiers, sailors and airmen, who up to now have been permitted a much larger allowance than civilians.
More and more, the British ruling class is introducing those extremes of exploitation which they have hitherto condemned on the part of the Nazi and fascist regimes.
The following item appeared in the N.Y. Post, December 19:
“LONDON, Dec. 19 (AP) – Between 30,000 and 40,000 British women will have to work in the fields next year to keep agricultural production up to present standards, Minister of Agriculture Hudson said today. There are now 9,000 British women land workers.”
The compulsory toil in the fields invoked against the working women of Nazi Germany is here forecast for “democratic” England.
A Columbia Broadcast correspondent, Larry Lesueur, in a broadcast from London, December 12, stated that Liverpool shipowners “complain that the young dockworkers have been drafted into the army and they are asking that the workers return in the form of flying squads of soldiers to unload ships under military discipline.
“Ship owners also would like to have about 3,000 more workers around the ports to create a reserve of men and competition for fobs, but naturally the unions are against this.”
These representatives of the British ruling class are asking, in other words, for slave workers, toiling at the point of a bayonet; and for permanent unemployed reserves to hold as a threat against the employed workers. In this is revealed the real “war aims” of the British capitalists, – aims which differ not a whit in kind from those of the German capitalists.
 
Glaring Extremes Between Rich and Poor
While the Lancashire garment strikers were whipped back to work with prison threats, the New York Times on December 22, published the following:
“MANCHESTER, England, Dec. 22 (UP) – Corporate profits of Lancashire’s cotton spinners this year will be the largest since 1921, a United Press survey disclosed today.”
Milo M. Thompson, chief of the Associated Press London Bureau, who has just returned from England, describes the luxury and comforts of the bomb shelters for the rich in London, such as that of the Savoy Hotel, and contrasts it with those for the ordinary people. The rich sleep in “the beds of luxury you read about, in the mattress advertisements.” They have dance floors, orchestras and bars. There is no crowding; all the comforts of home and aristocratic club are there.
“The ever present nurses and physicians in such places add to the feeling of security. It is easy there to forget the hundreds of thousands cramped in their chill Anderson shelters, the millions who sleep in ordinary basements, and the great army of those who are glad to have concrete subway platforms or the cobblestones under the arches below them if only they are safe from the death and dismemberment rained from above.” (New York Post, Dec. 23)
 
Poverty for Now; Promises for Later
It is a sign of the complete degeneration and incapacity of the British ruling class that it permits this fantastic spectacle to go on. Future historians will record that not all the previous contrasts between rich and poor drove the British masses toward revolution as much as did the luxurious underground playground shelters of the rich.
Nor is it that the British ruling class is unaware of the danger. Every week Harold J. Laski, Raymond Postgate and other “labor” supporters of the war wail in The Tribune: “We wonder if Mr. Churchill is aware that, in spite of all the talk, there is no ... evacuation scheme ... no-improvements of shelters ... The outcome of the war may well depend on the speed and efficiency of adequate sheltering ...” But to no purpose. The ruling class continues to rhumba at the Savoy.
However, the ruling class is perfectly willing to make promises.
Churchill, on December 18, speaking at Harrow, exclusive school for the British upper classes, declared that “the advantages and privileges which hitherto have been enjoyed only by the few shall be far more widely shared” – when the war is over.
Hitler, a few weeks ago, stated that he will introduce the “perfect socialist state” – when the war is over.
Thus it is, that each in turn, offers the benefits of a mild inoculation of “socialism,” to offset the dread “plague,” the workers’ revolution.
But the inoculation will not work. The “Italian disease” will spread.
War and revolution – they were inextricably connected in 1917.
It took three years, the last time, for the first rumblings of revolt. It will not take that long this time!
 




The diplomatic world that William E. Dodd entered he was appointed United States Ambassador to Germany in June 1933 is pictured in his daily personal journal, published recently by his son and daughter under the title Ambassador Dodd’s Diary 1933–1938.
Dodd’s description of a dinner at the French embassy in Berlin is a good introduction to that world:
“There Was a great room for the accommodation of men’s and women’s wraps, with two servants, in livery, to receive them – expecting tips. Up the magnificent stairway there were pages dressed in the gay liveries of Louis XIV’s. time. At the entrance to the reception hall, there were two other servants to hand out cards indicating dinner companions. In the reception room there was a marvelous rug with a huge letter N in the middle to remind one, especially Germans, of the conquests of Napoleon, Dr. Hjalmar Schacht and Count von Bassewitz were compelled to walk over or around the famous initial ...
“The walls were covered with beautiful Gobelin tapestries. The chairs were of Louis XIV style ... I noticed ... also portraits of French generals of the Louis XIV period ... and a lavish table with decorations in the best of form and taste. There were eight or ten servants, in liveries, as pages, all standing at attention. It surpassed the Belgian’s dining hall outfit.
“We ate for an hour. Nothing worth while was said ... After we were through, all marched correctly to the reception room where everyone stood gossiping in little groups until 11:45 when the musicians came to open a concert ... There was nothing else to do, so we went out as the great party moved into the music hall. Such was the show of democratic France to autocratic Germany.” (our emphasis)
 
A Typical Example of Bourgeois Hypocrisy
In one passage, Dodd sums up the hypocritical character of capitalist statesmen and diplomacy:
“I went to the Catholic Cathedral near the old Kaiser’s palace to attend the service in honor of Pilsudski, who was being buried in Cracow, Poland, at the same time ... Hitler took the seat of honor on the right of the altar ...
“To me it was all half-absurd. I do not know much about Pilsudski, except that he was a dictator who put people to death when they opposed him. Why so much religious ceremony when no one could have imagined him to be a Christian? But there was probably not one follower of Jesus in the whole congregation. I wondered how German Lutherans and Catholics would honor Hitler, a professed Catholic, if he should die. He has murdered or caused to be murdered hundreds of innocent people. Yet all of us diplomats would be called into the churches to pay tribute to him as a Christian in case of his death.”
The American State Department took no second place in pretentious display. Its emissaries and officials were, and are, the spokesmen of huge wealth and private gain, ignorant, mercenary and ruling-class consciois to the core. Dodd so describes them:
“... The further I go in my study of State Department policies, the more evidence there is that a clique of kinspeople connected with certain rich families are bent upon exploiting the Foreign Service for their set, many of them Harvard graduates who are not even well informed. Snobbery and personal gratification are the main objects with then.”
 
Dodd’s Descriptions if American Diplomats
Here are some individual portraits :
“The American Minister in Vienna, George Earle, called at 11 o’clock. He is one of the rich men appointed to foreign posts who know little history of their own or any other country ... He is intelligent, but he has a rich man’s estimate of social values. For instance, servants, valets, butlers were to him a mark of distinction. He thought it terrible that less than 300 families in Vienna have as many as three servants each ...”
“Earle thinks Dollfuss was right in his ruthless handling of the Socialist rebellion in Austria during the second half of February.”
Earle is now U.S. Minister to Bulgaria.
“When I accepted this post, I stipulated that there was to be no complaint if I lived within my official income ... However, I had not been in Berlin long before I received notice that the then Counselor, George Gordon, was to be recalled and J.C. White was to succeed him ... I did not realize the purpose of this appointment until some months later when I learned that White was one of the richest men in the service.
“At the same time, I learned that Orme Wilson was to come with the Whites, and he was reported also to be a very wealthy man. This was clearly to supplement my want of millions of dollars. Furthermore, I saw that Jay Pierrepont Moffat, brother-in-law of White and Phillips, uncle of Wilson, both in high position in the State Department, intended to have White and Wilson manage the Embassy.”
 
Dodd’s Picture of the State Department
In March 1934, Dodd returned for a visit to the United States. One journal entry during this period is particularly devastating in its depiction of the character of the State Department personnel.
“In the afternoon I attended a conference of personnel officers in the State Department: Moore, (now Counselor of the State Department) Carr, Sumner Welles (of doubtful Cuban fame), Hugh Wilson and others were present. I reported that American diplomacy had a new role to play. The Louis XIV and Victoria style and times had passed. The nations of the world were bankrupt, including our own. It was time to cease grand style performances. I described Belgian, Italian and French dinners of state in Berlin. There was some amusement.
“I then talked of American staff officials who shipped furniture enough for twenty-room houses with only two persons in the family! An assistant to me in Berlin had a chauffeur, a porter, a butler, a valet, two cooks and two maids. All for two persons! ... I urged that men should not be allowed to spend more than their salaries: $4,000 to $17,000 a year. Besides I urged the necessity of having ambassadors and assistants who knew the history and traditions of the countries to which they were sent, men who think of their own country’s interests, not so much about a different suit of clothes each day or sitting up at gay but silly dinners and shows very night ... Sumner Welles winced a little: the owner of a mansion in Washington which outshines the White House in some respects and is about as large.
“There was much talk and some embarrassment, but general agreement that the time had come for a new kind of service. I was not fooled, however, after two hours of pretended agreement.” (our emphasis)
On June 30, 1937, Dodd records:
“I heard from a friend today distressing news about the new Under-Secretary of State, Sumner Welles. According to the story as I heard it, six Senators secured his appointment by threatening quietly to vote against Roosevelt’s Supreme Court reform if he did not name Welles to the post. He was Ambassador to Cuba early in the Roosevelt regime. His conduct here was most embarrassing, I have heard.
“He has one of the greatest houses in Washington, with fifteen servants, and another house for summer use in Maryland. He prides himself on spending twice as much as Secretary Hull and gives parties hardly matched by any of the Ambassadors in Washington. I was a little surprised to read a day or two ago in the press that Roosevelt had spent a Sunday with Welles at his Maryland mansion. Politics is a strange game, even with a real man like Roosevelt.”
Strange only to a petty-bourgeois history professor like Dodd whom chance placed as a useful tool in the hands of American imperialist diplomacy. As an honest and befuddled Jeffersonian democrat, Dodd gave a liberal front to the machinations of the State Department in Nazi Germany. And when he had played his part, he was summarily withdrawn by Roosevelt in December 1937. He died shortly thereafter.
But Welles, as Under-Secretary of State, now has the special task of convincing the semi-totalitarian and totalitarian governments of Latin America that their job is to defend “democracy” under the direction of American imperialism.
 




At this time, every steel worker should remember the lesson of the 1937 strikes.
* * *
Borne forward on the relentless upsurge of industrial unionism which started to sweep the country in 1933–35, the steel workers began to assail the fortresses, of Big and Little Steel.
Several abortive attempts to organize were made through the machinery of the decrepit, craft-ridden, dues hungry AFL Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers.
Then, in 1936, the Committee for Industrial Organization, based on industrial union principles, was formed. In July of the same year, the Steel Workers Organizing Committee (CIO) began its campaign.
Whereupon the companies dusted off their “employee representation” plans. Overnight hundreds of company “unions” began to flourish “contracts.” The Iron and Steel Institute spent millions on publicity and full-page ads to attack the SWOC and denounce the CIO as a “red menace.” But to no avail.
 
The Union’s Growth
By January 1937, the SWOC numbered 150,000 members. In a score of leading steel plants, the SWOC took over the company unions bodily. The company union system of Carnegie-Illinois, largest U.S. Steel subsidiary, with 130,000 workers, fell to pieces.
Insurgent industrial labor throughout the country was smashing at the bulwarks of the open-shop. The embattled auto workers of the giant General Motors Corporation forced signed contracts from the Morgan-DuPont financial coalition by their militant sit-down strikes.
Seeing the hand-writing on the wall, the heads of the U.S. Steel Corporation, the greatest aggregate of industrial capital in the world, began to get jittery.
The nations of Europe were on an armaments spree, in preparation for the impending war. Great Britain wanted to put through a contract involving hundreds of millions for armor plate ant steel products with U.S. Steel. But it wanted guarantees of unimpeded production. The United States government had passed appropriations for $650,000,000 for new battleships, and also wanted prompt delivery for steel.
Greedy to seize these profitable war orders, fearful of the tremendous sweep of the CIO organization drive and the power of the workers as demonstrated in the auto sit-down strikes, U.S. Steel after secret negotiations with John L. Lewis and other CIO heads, announced that it would sign an agreement with the SWOC.
 
Union Growth Continues
In May 1937, Murray, head of the SWOC, was able to announce that the union had 350,000 members, 600 new lodges, and contracts with 90 companies, including all U.S. Steel subsidiaries and many important independent companies. On May 20, after a 36 hour strike, Jones & Laughlin, employing 27,000 workers, signed up with the CIO.
The tide of steel unionism seemed irresistible. And then came the battle with Little Steel.
* * *
“Little Steel” includes the Bethlehem Steel Company, second largest steel corporation in America, Republic Steel, Inland Steel, Youngstown Sheet and Tube Corporation and the National Steel Corporation. The combined production and profits of these five corporations usually equal or excel that of U.S. Steel.
 
Big Steel’s Game
But contrary to the general impression, Little Steel and Big Steel are very closely aligned. Bethlehem Steel is controlled by the House of Morgan through interlocking directorships, just as is U.S. Steel. In the same fashion, interlocking directors tie the other Little Steel companies to the giant steel trust.
If expediency forced U.S. Steel to sign up with the SWOC, that didn’t mean it yielded an inch on its former open-shop designs. It was planned to smash the union in Little Steel, thus preserving a large open-shop field as a future springboard for a direct attack on the union in Big Steel.
When the SWOC demanded union recognition from the Little Steel corporations, it was met with a flat turn-down. Instead the companies began firing union men, putting up barbed wire fences about their plants, importing hundreds of gunmen and thugs.
It was an open challenge to the union. As the LaFollette Senate investigating committee later disclosed, these companies purchased no less than $50,000 worth of guns, munitions and tear gas in May.
 
The Strike Begins
Late in May and early in June 1937 70,000 steel workers were called out on strike from the mills of Republic Steel, Youngstown Sheet and Tube, Inland Steel and the Johnstown plant of Bethlehem Steel.
The focal point of the strike was in the Ohio Valley, ranging from Youngstown, Warren, Niles. Massillon, Canton to Cleveland.
Youngstown was the key point of this area, with Youngstown Sheet and Tube and Republic Steel dominating the city. At the start of the strike, the plants were shut down tight.
 
Murder for Profit
The local authorities in Youngstown supported the companies. On Monday night, June 21, the companies announced they were going to open the Youngstown plants the next day.
From scores of miles away, all through the night of the 21st, thousands of workers began to pour into Youngstown to aid the Youngstown steel workers. By morning, they represented a huge army, determined to fight and prepared to fight. Rubber workers from Akron, men from Canton, miners from Pennsylvania, steel workers from Sharon, Newcastle, Pittsburgh, Aliquippa.
The companies did not attempt to move as planned that morning. All day the strikers and sympathizers hoped for word from tbe mediation board or the government demanding that the companies obey the labor laws. None came.
Armed deputies roamed the streets, terrorizing isolated workers, murdering several, wounding scores, including women. But they could not break the picket lines.
A “back to work” movement was started, under an “independent’’ union label. The one paper in town, the Youngstown Vindicator, opened up a vicious propaganda barrage on the strikers. But the strikers would not break.
In the midst of negotiations with a government-appointed mediation board, on June 19, a group of armed deputies opened fire on a group of pickets, including women with babes in arms. A number of workers were killed, 50 wounded.
 
Government – Strikebreaker
At midnight, the word came that Governor Davey, “New Deal” representative elected with the support of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, was sending in the National Guard to “prevent disorder” and “keep the plants shut.”
In the councils of the strikers were a number of Stalinists who had supported Davey to office – those were the “Popular Front” days. These, together with several other leaders, urged the workers to disband and return home, assuring them that the National Guard was being sent in to protect the interests of – the workers!
Trust in Davey and Roosevelt was being insisted upon throughout the strike by Philip Murray. John L. Lewis, and the other CIO leaders.
Reluctantly, the workers dispersed. The sympathizers returned to their home towns.
 
Smashing the Strike
When the National Guard moved into Youngstown, it did what it has always done: it opened up the plants. Then began an unparalleled reign of terror, up and down the Ohio Valley. The strike leaders were arrested in their homes and held incommunicado. Individual union militants were picked up off the streets. Dispersed and disorganized, the workers could not fight to protect their leaders and active members.
From Youngstown, to Warren, to Canton, Massillon, Cleveland, moved the troops, systematically beheading the strike, shooting, beating, bayoneting the isolated workers. In a short while, the workers became demoralized. Their local leaders in jail, no new strategy coming from the top CIO leaders, the backbone, of the strike was broken.
 
The Johnstown Formula
The isolated strike of the Bethlehem workers in Johnstown, Pa., was smashed by a combined propaganda and back-to-work movement financed by the company and organized by the officials of the town who were in the pay of the company, and supplemented by vigilante gangs.
Mayor Daniel J. Shields, once convicted and jailed for attempted bribery of a federal official, led the drive. He was given $31,456 by Bethlehem Steel to finance his efforts.
The workers hung on grimly in Republic Steel. But late in June, the strikes at Bethlehem and Youngstown Sheet and Tube were called off. The strike at the Republic plants slowly dwindled. By October, although the strike was not officially called off, all but a few thousand workers were back to work.
But. the SWOC was not smashed. It continued to live and, after a while, to grow again. Once more, throughout Little Steel, the workers are sweeping into the union.
 
The Simple Lesson
And this time, the steel workers are bound to win, if they have mastered the lesson of the Little Steel defeat of 1937, the same lesson learned by their fathers in the 1919 strike and their grandfathers back in 1892 in Homestead.
The steel workers can trust only in their own organized strength and power. The government is a bosses’ government, it is on the side of the steel corporations. To win, the steel workers must be prepared for militant resistance and bitter struggle.
The workers of Lackawanna have just shown it can be done. The auto workers, the Minneapolis teamsters, the West Coast maritime workers, all have met the armed thugs of the bosses and government and come out victorious.
United in fighting action, the workers can tear down the open-shop banner from the ramparts of Little Steel. They can make 1941 the year when the union banner began to fly over Little Steel!
 




The Stalinist and Hillmanite forces at the CIO United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers’ Seventh Annual Convention at Camden, New Jersey, have joined together in a move to place the union, fifth largest in the CIO, behind all-out support of the imperialist war.
The first formal action of this new unholy alliance of Stalinists and Hillmanites on the General Executive Board was a statement on August 31 calling for full support to Roosevelt’s war policies and criticising John L. Lewis as an “appeaser.”
“Inasmuch as this is the first major CIO meeting since John L. Lewis signed the appeasement statement with fourteen leading Republican isolationists, the U.E.R.M.W.’s stand on the Administration’s foreign policy is expected to be watched carefully,” the statement declared.
This direct reference to Lewis, – taken together with other recent actions and statements of the Stalinists – indicates that the Stalinists are seeking a joint onslaught of the Stalinist-Hillmanite forces against John L. Lewis and the progressive sectors of the CIO, who have thus far successfully resisted the efforts of the Hillmanites to place the industrial union movement under the thumb of the government’s war machine.
Undoubtedly the Stalinists have been the prime movers behind this new united reactionary labor front.
Prior to the UERMW convention, the Stalinist and the Hillmanite factions had fought each other in an effort to gain control of the union apparatus. Whatever bureaucratic differences may have divided them in the past, it is the political issues which have finally decided the line-ups – as they always do. Both the Stalinists and the Hillmanites are in basic agreement on unconditional support of the government and the war, and this is rapidly forging them together into a common reactionary front.
The joint action of the Stalinists and Hillmanites in this important convention is only the latest and most dramatic example of the Stalinist efforts to align themselves with the Hillmanites and the most reactionary elements of the AFL on a program of “unity” against the anti-war forces in the unions.
The Daily Worker has been giving increasing and favorable recognition and publicity to the activities and statements of the AFL leaders who have given guarantees to Roosevelt of their willingness to sacrifice every right of organized labor for Roosevelt’s war program.
 
Labor Unity on the AFL’s Basis
On August 20, the Daily Worker featured on its front page the address of William Green, AFL head, at the New York State Federation of Labor Convention, in which Green proclaimed his full and unconditional support of Roosevelt and his “war aims.” The Daily Worker described as a “high point of this morning’s session ...the speech of President William Green of the AFL ... declaring the AFL’s full support of the eight point Roosevelt-Churchill declaration ...” What the Stalinists are driving toward by this playing up of the AFL leaders was disclosed more openly in a Daily Worker editorial, August 24, on the New York State AFL convention, which stated:
“The progressive position of the convention of the State AFL – the largest State AFL organization in the country – is especially encouraging because it shows the great possibilities for labor unity of AFL and CIO behind a program for defeat of Hitlerism.
“In the past, the established policies of the AFL did not provide a basis for unity. Now with the AFL offtcially taking a progressive stand on the most important issue before the country – the defeat of Hitler – a good basis exists for joint AFL-CIO activity ...
“The position of the CIO members on the international situation is well known. They are speaking out more and more, in spite of the general silence of the CIO nationally.”
This is Hillman’s full-blown line on AFL-CIO “unity,” which he projected at the last CIO national convention.
Like Hillman, the Stalinists are now prepared to thrust the industrial union movement of this country back into the hands of the Greens, Wolls, Freys and Tobins, under any terms and conditions. By their wholehearted support of the war, these labor skates have become “progressives” to the Stalinists. The strikebreaking, no-strike, government-collaboration, anti-industrial union policies of the AFL leaders no longer matter to the Stalinists.
It was this brand of AFL-CIO “unity” which Lewis successfully defeated at the last CIO convention. When the CIO is strong enough to crush every attempt of the AFL craft-union leadership to strangle the industrial unions in their “unity” embrace, only then can the CIO unite once more with the AFL, Lewis pointed out.
Lewis today stands in firm opposition to the Stalinist-Hillmanite plan to corral the industrial union movement into the camp of the reactionary AFL under any terms, provided “unity” of organized labor behind the war program is achieved.
 
Open Attacks on Lewis Increasing
That is why the Stalinist campaign to undermine Lewis is becoming more open and bold.
Already, unions under Stalinist control are passing resolutions “censuring” Lewis and attacking him for his “appeasement” stand. The Daily Worker, September 1, reports on its front page such an action by the Chicago Fur Workers Union. This is but the first trickle of a flood of similar resolutions which are bound to follow every union local that the Stalinists control.
The tone of the Stalinist attacks on Lewis and the progressive elements of the CIO Will undoubtedly take on heightened virulence in the coming weeks. Lewis will be condemned as a “Fifth Columnist,” etc. ...
This was indicated in Roy Hudson’s article, Some Lessons of the Auto Convention, in the Sunday Worker, August 31, which speaks of the “desertion of John L. Lewis from the cause of anti-fascism, to the camp of ... the Lindberghs, Wheelers, Coughlins, Hearsts ...”
The Stalinists show by their new alignment with Hillman and their attempts to push Hillman’s program of “unity” with the AFL, that their intentions are to sacrifice every condition and right of labor for the sole end of getting labor to support an immediate AEF. They are ready to go to any length in support of the imperialist government of Wall Street and Roosevelt.
 




CAMDEN, New Jersey, Sept. 5. – The United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America, fourth largest union in the CIO, today ended its five day convention here with its Stalinist and Hillmanite leaders demonstratively joining hands in calling for unity on a program of all-out support of the war policies of the Roosevelt administration and opposition to John L. Lewis leadership in the CIO.
James B. Carey, outgoing Hillmanite president of the UE, sounded the final note of Stalinist-Hillmanite harmony in a speech at the closing convention session this afternoon.
Carey called on the UE members to give full support to the new president, Albert J. Fitzgerald, of Lynn, Massachusetts, the Hillmanite who gained Stalinist backing for the president’s post by agreeing to “compromise” on the red-baiting issue.
Carey, like the Stalinists, pleaded for “unity” on the fundamental issue of support of the imperialist war.
That Carey is not still president of the UE is no fault of the Stalinists. Throughout the convention, the Stalinists made desperate and determined overtures to Carey in an effort to achieve complete organizational, as well as political, accord with him. It was an open secret at the convention that the Stalinist and “compromise” Hillmanite leaders had spent hours with Carey on the Tuesday evening prior to the elections, trying to persuade him to abandon his anti-communist resolution in return for support for his re-election as union president.
 
Carey Insists on Red-Baiting Stand
Carey would not agree to this. He had built up his following on the promise of an “uncompromising” fight tp eliminate the “communists” from the union, and was under pressure from the bulk of his followers to carry out this program. For months prior to the convention Carey had led a campaign to secure the adoption or resolutions by the locals asking the convention to bar communists from union office.
Carey was confronted with the choice of risking the loss of the union presidency and retaining his personal following among the membership, or yielding to the Stalinists’ conditions and remaining president as the captive of the Stalinists, He chose to risk losing the presidency.
Carey no doubt made his choice in the belief that he could win on the red-baiting issue and gain the presidency as well. The approach of the forthcoming CIO national convention has tended to sharpen the fight for union posts and control, as each group in the Stalinist-Hillmanite camp would like to hold the dominant power at the CIO convention.
Thus, much of the convention time was occupied with the dispute over the “red” issue, a dispute which gave the false impression that them was a fundamental cleavage of “leftists” and “rightists” and which served to conceal somewhat the actual Stalinist-Hillmanite unity that prevailed on the basic political and programmatic issues.
 
Joint Report Keynotes “Unity” for the War
The keynote of this unity was struck at the very start of the convention in the joint report of the general officers – Stalinists and Hillmanites combined – which projected the program adopted by the convention.
This report stressed, above all, unity around the program of full support to the war policies of the Roosevelt administration and it set the tone of the entire contention. It contained not a single reference to the need for labor militancy, Roosevelt’s use of troops against strikers, the Administration’s support of anti-labor legislation, the strikebreaking role of the National Defense Mediation Board, or the growing Administration drive against workers’ rights.
Instead the report asserted that the UE made its advances “with very little recourse to labor’s traditional weapon – strikes and stoppages of work.”
This theme was repeated by the convention leaders, Stalinists and Hillmanites alike, throughout the convention. Not once, during the entire convention, did a speaker strike a note of militant labor struggle.
The first two days of the convention produced little beyond the adoption, at the Tuesday session, of a resolution, supported by the entire leadership of the union, approving the government’s war policies and urging the Administration to put its policies into affect “with all possible speed and energy.”
There was no discussion on the resolution. Carey put it to a standing vote. Only five delegates dared to rise in opposition.
 
Stalinists Hide Carey’s Anti-Labor Role
The fight over the anti-communist issue did not come on the convention floor until Wednesday. This fight, which at no time took on the character of a struggle over fundamental issues, at first arose as a “jurisdictional” dispute, with the Stalinists insisting that the resolutions committee, which they controlled, had jurisdiction over the issue, and the Careyites claiming that it properly belonged in the hands of the constitution committee, controlled by. the Hillmanites.
On Wednesday morning, the resolutions committee presented a resolution, inflated by the Stalinists, which offered a compromise to the openly red-baiting Carey proposal.
The Stalinist resolution excluded specific reference to communists and communism, but laid the basis for persecution of genuine union militants.
This resolution declared that the union “has in the past made substantial contributions to the defense of this country” and is “today called on to do still more toward this defense.”
Therefore, the resolution concluded “that this union, firm in its loyalty to this country, to its democratic institutions and constitution, reiterates its vigorous opposition to any person who acts or works against the interests of the United States or of this union ... That any person guilty of such acts can have no place whatever either as member or officer in this union ... That any good-standing member of the union is entitled to all rights and privileges without discrimination, unless such member be proved guilty of acts against the nation or against the union in accord with the procedure set forth in our constitution ...”
 
Stalinist “Compromise” Resolution Dangerous
This resolution is so worded that while it can be used against genuine anti-war elements and union militants who might conduct strikes pr other labor “acts against the nation,” it can not so easily be turned against the Stalinists, who now proclaim their “loyalty to the United States of America and its Constitution.”
The reactionary red-baiting Carey could subscribe to every word of this resolution. He wanted, however, to have “communists” and “communism” specifically mentioned. He was forced, therefore, to oppose the Stalinist resolution on purely technical grounds, arguing that the single section dealing with the rights and privileges of members belonged to the jurisdiction of the Hillmanite-controlled constitution committee. Carey, as chairman, therefore ruled this section of the resolution out of order.
An appeal against this .ruling was made, and the appeal was won by a roll-call of 714 to 450. This vote was the first real test of strength between the Stalinists and Careyites.
 
Carey and Stalinists Pull Their Punches
During the ensuing several hours debate on the resolution itself, it became clear that neither the Stalinists nor Carey cared to attack each other in a forthright manner.
The Stalinists correctly argued that the anti-communist issue was supported by the anti-labor press, the employers and reactionary politicians.
But they deliberately avoided any direct attack on the Hillmanites, Carey or the Roosevelt Administration as being the actual sponsors of this move in the UE and other CIO unions. The fire of the Stalinists was directed at the “Inter-Local Committee of Progressive Trade Unionists,” an organization of Carey supporters, but never at Carey himself.
The Stalinists correctly charged that the proposal to discriminate against persons because of their political beliefs was a violation of the fundamental principles of trade union democracy.
But they did not show why Carey wished to put over this red-baiting proposal. They did not, for instance, point out that Carey’s attack was directed, in reality, at those who were for militant labor action against the bosses, who were opposed to collaboration with the employers and government and who fought against the Roosevelt war program. The Stalinists did not seek to discredit the real purposes of the red-baiters, but to smooth over the differences in order to unite with them.
Carey and his followers, for their part, could not point to anything in the present Stalinist program with which they disagreed. All their real differences had ceased to exist on June 22, when the Kremlin decreed full and unconditional support of the Allied imperialists.
 
CP “Democracy” Not for Trotskyists
The Careyites, through Clifford Haley, Local 1227, Long Island City, New York, resorted to a stupid expedient in an effort to win support for their position.
Haley “dramatically” confronted the convention with a photostatic copy of a pledge signed by several UE members who had attended a Communist Party training school in 1937. Haley did not attack the nature of the pledge, but merely used the document as evidence that certain UE members had been members of the Communist Party.
This pledge included agreement to build the Communist Party and “to drive the Trotskyists out of the labor movement.”
The only thing which the document proved was not that members of the Communist Party should be excluded by constitutional ruling from the union or union posts, but that the Stalinist plea for “democracy” in the union was a fake, as evidenced by their program to drive the Trotskyists out of the unions.
The Stalinist-sponsored resolution was finally voted on by a show of hands, and was adopted by two-to-one majority.
So far as most of the delegates were concerned, this vote expressed an honest opposition to red-baiting policies. From that standpoint, the vote was a blow to the Hillmanite red-baiters and reactionaries and an affirmation of the progressive and democratic sentiments of the UE rank-and-file.
 
“What About Jackson?”
Nevertheless, the Stalinist “compromise” contained certain dangerous implications, as one delegate, Edward Lopez of Bayonne, New Jersey, pointed out. Lopez called attention to the phrase “acts against the nation”, and asked Fitzgerald, the chairman of the resolutions committee:
“What about Jackson? He’s been thrown into a Canadian concentration camp. If he’s found guilty, will he be thrown out of the UE because he’s against the interests of his country?”
This question referred to C.S Jackson, president of UE District Council No. 5 in Canada, who was thrown into a Canadian concentration camp several months ago after he returned from a UE conference in the United States. He has been interned for month without trial, and the UE is conducting a fight for his release. Fitzgerald “answered” Lopez’s question with the single statement:
“That’s Canada. This is the United States we’re in.”
The Roosevelt Administration Hillman, and all the bosses have already termed strikes and militant labor actions in the war industries to be “acts against the nation.” And now they will be so termed by the Stalinists an Hillmanites n the UE.
The defeat of Carey on the red-baiting issue led to his defeat for re-election at the afternoon session Wednesday. The Stalinist backed the Massachusetts, Hillmanite, Fitzgerald, against Carey The combination of Stalinists and “independent” Hillmanites was sufficient to elect Fitzgerald. The vote was 635 to 539. Carey received considerably more votes for president than for his position on the anti-communist issue. This indicated that many delegates, as a result or the Stalinist cover-up of the anti-labor character of Carey’s red-baiting, did not think his red-baiting of enough moment to warrant opposition to his holding the highest office in the union.
 
Stalinists Support Carey for CIO Post
Immediately after Carey’s defeat, Organization Director James Matles, one of the Stalinist leaders, proposed that the UE support Carey for re-election as CIO National Secretary at the coming CIO convention. Such a motion was passed on Thursday morning. Carey, on his part, revealed how shallow was his cleavage with the Stalinists, when he seconded the nomination of the leading Stalinist in the union, Julius Emspak, for UE secretary-treasurer. Carey called for a unanimous vote for Emspak in the interests of “unity”.
Carey made one final move to get his anti-communist .program adopted, when he proposed that union locals be permitted to set up their own qualifications for union officers. This was calculated to permit local unions to put anti-communist clauses in their local constitution. The convention supported a counter-proposal to this, brought in by the constitution committee, by a vote of 789 to 377. The constitution committee, Carey’s own, abandoned his line at the Stalinists’ “unity” plea.
It might be assumed that with the scores of vital issues and problems confronting labor in this war period, the convention would have seen enlivened by much discussion and debate. This, unfortunately, was not the case.
 
Vital Issues Are Not Discussed
The dead-weight of the Stalinist-Hillmanite leadership simply smothered any possible real discussion on the war, the role of the Mediation Board, the right to strike, government strikebreaking, labor participation on government agencies, priorities unemployment, organization of the unorganized, etc
Such of these questions as were dealt with at all merely received passing reference in speeches on other questions or in resolutions hastily passed with little or no discussion, most of them jammed through at the very end of the convention.
The vital problems of priorities unemployment and the organization of the competitive shops, problems of extreme moment to the UE members, were passed off hastily in inadequate and undiscussed resolutions.
Every question, every problem was subordinated to the one reactionary aim: to line up the union behind Roosevelt’s war program.
This convention has established definitely the fact that the Stalinists and Hillmanites, drawn together by fundamental agreement on the war, are in the process of establishing an alliance against the forces of John L. Lewis and all those anti-war elements and militants in the CIO who have thus far prevented the pro-war reactionaries from making the industrial union movement an appendage of the government’s war machine.
 




The Stalinist Daily Worker is making ever more tempting bids to Hillman and his followers to achieve organizational, as well as political, unity against the militant and anti-war sectors of the CIO.
As ardent wooers of the Hillmanites, the Stalinists place no conditions on the terms which they are prepared to accept in the proposed marriage contract.
The Hillmanites, for their part, are quite willing to be the object of such an eager courtship, provided they write the resultant contract in toto, along the lines they have pursued unremittingly in the labor movement.
Thus, the unity forged between these two most reactionary pro-war tendencies in the labor movement, will be a unity built four-square on Hillman’s program. And that is the program which the Stalinists, along with the major section of the CIO led by John L. Lewis, decisively repudiated less than a year ago at the last CIO convention.
What is this Hillmanite program around which the Stalinists today are willing to unite?
It is unqualified endorsement of Hillman’s concrete strikebreaking and union-smashing acts of the past two years.
 
Hillman’s Program of Strikebreaking
Hillman has served as the outstanding “labor” front for the Roosevelt Administration in its attempts to break the strikes of the CIO, hog-tie organized labor with repressive anti-labor legislation, and conceal the corporations’ domination of the government and the government’s war agencies.
It was Hillman who went to the front for the Administration a year ago in sanctioning the policy of granting big government war orders to corporations like Bethlehem Steel, which had consistently flouted every labor law in the land.
In the name of “national defense,” for months Hillman prevented the Bethlehem Steel workers from striking for union recognition, while over a billion dollars of government war orders poured into the corporation’s files. Hillman directly intervened to intimidate the Bethlehem workers and attempted to force them back to work without any conditions.
Hillman’s policy has been to get organized labor to yield its right to strike “voluntarily.” Had his policy been adopted by the CIO in the past year, Bethlehem Steel, Ford, International Harvester, the great aircraft corporations, might still be operating on a completely open-shop basis.
Hillman gave direct sanction to reactionary Governor James of Pennsylvania to send the state troopers against the Vanadium Corporation strikers at Bridgeville, Pennsylvania, last March. Hillman himself issued and signed the order demanding that the strikers permit scabs to enter the plant to ship materials, the order which gave James the go-ahead signal for strikebreaking.
Hillman has intervened directly, or indirectly, against the strikers in every important CIO strike of the past year.
Not one person at the recent CIO legislative conference in Washington attempted to refute John L. Lewis’ specific charges that Hillman had stood at Roosevelt’s elbow when the President signed the order sending regular army troops against the North American Aviation strikers, and that Hillman was behind the action of the National Defense Mediation Board in attempting to put over the proposals of the Southern coal mine operators during the strike of 400,000 miners last April.
Although an associate director of the OPM, Hillman did not raise his voice against the OPM policy of preventing industrial expansion in the interests of the aluminum, steel and other monopolies.
His sole plea against repressive labor legislation was that such laws are “unnecessary at the present time.” He proposed, instead, that union “leaders” like himself be permitted a further opportunity to persuade the union members to a “voluntary no-strike” policy. Hillman, during the few times he testified on such legislation, did not oppose it on any principled basis. He was for compulsion against the unions if “voluntary” methods “failed” to prevent strikes. In this, his policy differed not one whit from that expressed by Knudsen and the rest of the “ex”-corporation heads running the government’s war production program.
At the last convention of the CIO, Hillman and his henchmen proposed that the CIO accept Roosevelt’s demand that the CIO and AFL unite on terms which would mean the liquidation of industrial unionism in America.
Lewis and the great majority of the CIO members, including the Stalinists, wisely and correctly repudiated Hillman’s treacherous proposal.
Today, however, the Stalinists are backing this program of suicidal “unity” to the hilt. It is the proffer of support for Hillman’s “unity” program which constitutes a chief lure now being put forth by the Stalinists to attract the Hillmanites to a united front against Lewis and the CIO progressives and militants.
Hillman has been the most widely despised labor “leader” among the ranks of the CIO. His support of government strikebreaking, his efforts to tie the CIO to the government, his boot-licking of the Administration and the employers, in the past have made his name anathema to most of the CIO workers.
Hillman is preparing to shove over his full pro-war, strikebreaking, anti-industrial union program at the coming CIO national convention. His most devoted followers in this traitorous move will be the Stalinists.
 




“Morale is to materiel as three is to one.”
This famous observation of Napoleon was recalled last week by the United States Chief of Staff, General Marshall, in commenting on the low morale in the new draftee army.
Disciplinary examples, threats, appeals to patriotism or army tradition have not sufficed to stem the tide of draftee discontent. The flood of protests against the army term extension from the draftees, swelled by the clamor from the folks back home, has compelled Roosevelt and the War Department to modify their plans. Last week the administration had to promise the soldiers concessions, the release of 200,000 men from army service by Christmas, and the right of the draftees to apply for release after 14 to 18 months service, instead of the 30 months set by Congress. In addition, General Hershey, director of Selective Service, has directed local draft boards to assist draftees at the end of their service to get back their old jobs, as promised.
The army stuffed-shirts have come reluctantly to admit that army morale is “not what it should be.”
Lieutenant General Ben Lear, of “Yoo Hoo!” fame, voiced the typical officer caste point of view last week, when he said:
“If morale is not high, it is no fault of ours. We have done everything within reason to promote the welfare and comfort of the trainees. If the morale is poor, it is only because the morale of the people is poor.”
There is truth in this statement, in so far as it deals with the effect of popular moods on the army. The morale and attitude of a conscript army parallels that of the civilians.
By and large, the attitude of the draftees is one that has been expressed repeatedly by the people in polls, letters to Congressmen, and the other limited means of expression permitted them. The American people – three-fourths of them at least – are opposed to entering the war.
This sentiment of the people is not an alien force operating upon the morale of the troops, as the officer corps pretends. These are the feelings that the men bring with them into the army.
The officer staff wants the “ideal” soldier, i.e., one who is cut off from all civilian life, and who asks no questions provided he gets his three “squares” a day and a comfortable bunk at night.
The draftees resist. They have – or believe they have – the right to say something about how the army is run. They do not enter the army for a career. And they will fight willingly only for a cause in which they believe so deeply that they will not hesitate to sacrifice their personal welfare and lives to achieve it.
 
Real Reasons for Low Morale
Prom several authoritative sources we have been able recently to get an indication of the real factors underlying the poor morale of the army.
Pearson and Allen, in their syndicated Merry-Go-Round column, wrote on August 8:
“And to date, judging by our poll of selectees, plus the War Department’s own frank fears, the American Army lacks morale ...
“... the War Department has given the boys no conception of what is happening in the world, has made no attempt to show them why they are called upon to serve. It has fallen down on the one big weapon which makes a modern army fight.”
Life magazine, August 18, 1941, reported the things that the soldiers themselves, in one of the large and typical training camps, gave as their reasons for wanting to get out of the army.
“Not more than 5% of the men in this division believe that the emergency is as serious as President Roosevelt insists. They do not want to fight because they do not see any reason for fighting. Accordingly they see little point in their being in Army camps at all. There is very strong anti-Roosevelt feeling.
“A second reason for trouble is that the men have no faith in the officers who are commanding them ... The men complain about junior and senior officers indiscriminately. They say most of them do not know their jobs. The officers argue with the noncoms on tactical points and are frequently out-argued, losing the respect of the men.”
The draftees see that they are commanded by incompetent officers, who look down on them and won’t hesitate to sacrifice the lives of the privates.
As Life indicates, the men are coming to realize that this is not their army; that it is the army of class rule. If officers are incompetent, if the general staff is ignorant, the soldiers must nevertheless submit. There is no way to replace the present officer caste with competent, responsible men from the ranks.
“The men complain that there is no way to get ahead in the army. They say that very few draftees are given a chance to take officers’ training courses. They say that initiative on the the part of the privates is discouraged.”
The War Department and the army staff cannot do those things which would eliminate the basic reasons for the low morale.
They cannot, first of all, provide the soldiers with a cause worth dying for. The draftees sense that they are not being called upon to fight for real democracy or for the “defense” of the nation. They see the preparations being made to send them to Europe or Asia to fight for colonies and markets. They observe the war profiteers growing fatter at their expense; They take account of Roosevelt’s broken promises, the trend toward repression of civil rights, the secret diplomacy and arbitrary acts of the administration driving toward war, the threat of post-war chaos.
Nor can the War Department change the class character of the army rule, for that rule is simply an extension of the rule of the bosses. The first criterion for an officer in this army is loyalty to the ruling class.
That is why the government makes no effort to assist men from the ranks – workers, trade unionists – to rise to positions of leadership in the army. The government seeks, above all, to preserve the army as an instrument of the ruling minority.
Thus, the method whereby the War Department and the officer caste seek to “build” morale is savage discipline and punishments. A striking instance of this is the court-martial sentence passed last week against Private John Habinyak, who was sentenced to ten years and nine months of hard labor, on five counts of “insubordination”: spitting on the floor; refusing to clean up the spit; refusing to clean his mess kit; refusing to sweep the floor; disobeying an order to pick up some broken concrete. (As we go to press, we learn that Habinyak’s original sentence has been reduced to three years and six months as a result of popular pressure.)
Major S. Murrell, judge advocate of the army post where Habinyak was convicted, on August 22 amplified the reasons for the savage sentence. He admitted that the five offenses cited were considered minor. But, he added, Habinyak was sentenced, in reality, for his “attitude.”
The officer staff knows that Habinyak’s “attitude” is similar to that of 95 per cent of all the draftees. And that “attitude” is the essence of their morale.
Morale is not, as the bourgeois officer caste thinks, simply a question of Prussian discipline, good food, fine equipment and training, or recreational facilities.
Pearson and Allen, in the article previously quoted, draw this comparison between the French and the Soviet Russian armies:
“In France, battalions, companies, entire regiments, surrendered en masse. The world was astounded. The French Army had been heralded as the best in the world. Its officers had been trained for years. Its equipment, while not as good as the Nazis’, was the next best in Europe.
“Yet the French Army collapsed in 11 short days.
“... One year later an entirely different story comes from Russia.
“There, a huge, unwieldy, green army facing the pick of Hitler’s mechanized veterans, has retreated, but not surrendered. At times isolated and hopelessly cut off, Russian troops have continued fighting – fighting so desperately that he Germans have complained that they did not obey the rules of war.
“OBVIOUSLY RUSSIAN TROOPS HAVE BEEN DEFENDING SOMETHING WHICH THEY CHERISHED. THEY HAVE HAD WHAT THE FRENCH LACKED – MORALE.”
The Soviet soldiers are indeed “defending something which they cherished” – i.e., their nationalized property, their freedom from capitalist exploitation, their free socialist future, which, in spite of the Stalin bureaucracy, still remains a living reality for them.
The French soldiers were defending the COMITÉ DES FORGES (the French Steel Trust) and the 200 Ruling Families of France.
The American officer staff professes to “marvel” at the morale of the Red Army. It cannot hope to achieve a similar morale in its own armies. American working-class youth cannot be made eager to die for America’s Sixty Families.
The draftees may be whipped together into some semblance of a disciplined fighting force by intimidation and terrorism. But that is not the type of army which will stand up under intensive fire and against imposing odds.
 
Only a Workers’ Army Will Have Morale
An army directed and ruled by the capitalists and their officer caste can never be trusted to fight fascism, whether of the domestic or foreign variety. But the workers of this country must be prepared to repel fascism by the only effective means.
Those means are military. They are blind men or knaves who counsel the workers to pacifism. Those who speak against the workers obtaining military training and learning the techniques of modern warfare would have the workers stand meek and defenseless against the onrushing worldwide capitalist reaction and fascism.
The only kind of army that can defeat fascism is an army which the ruling capitalist class cannot achieve, an army with morale. Morale can exist only in an army which fights for a cause in which it believes.
The American workers and farmers must have such an army. Their very lives and liberties depend on it. It must be an army responsive to the will of the masses, fighting in their interests, controlled and directed by the masses.
Such an army is possible only under a workers’ and farmers’ government. But even before this government is instituted, the’ workers can take effective measures to safeguard their vital interests in the military field. That is the purpose of our military program, which advocates:

Military training of workers financed by the government, but under the control of the trade unions.
 
Special officers’ training camps, financed by the government, but controlled by the trade unions, to train workers to become officers.

 




The Roosevelt-Churchill eight-point statement of “war aims” invited immediate comparison with Woodrow Wilson’s Fourteen Points, enunciated before a joint Congressional session on January 8, 1918, in the fourth year of World War I. The comparison is apt – and devastating.
Wilson’s Fourteen Points, of which the Roosevelt-Churchill statement is a pale copy, has been proved the most fraudulent promise in all history.
The declaration of Wilson included several claims significantly omitted from the present eight-point statement. Roosevelt and Churchill cannot attempt to justify their war even to the extent that Wilson did.
 
“Open Covenants Openly Arrived At”
Wilson’s first “war aim” called for:
“Open covenants of peace, openly arrived at, after which there shall be no private international understandings of any kind but diplomacy shall proceed frankly and in the public view.”
The “open covenants of peace, openly arrived at” was the monstrous Treaty of Versailles, drawn up in secrecy by the representatives of the four largest Allied powers, Wilson, Clemenceau Lloyd George and Orlando. This treaty simply looted and dismembered the conquered nations for the aggrandizement of the victors. Not even the people of the victorious powers, let alone those of the defeated nations, participated in the establishment of this “peace.”
 
An FDR-Churchill Omission
After World War I, diplomacy did not proceed “frankly and in the public view.” On the contrary diplomacy became more secret and devious, on tbe part of the “democracies” as well as the totalitarian nations. The diplomatic dealings of the American and British governments have always been conducted behind closed doors. The very statement of “war aims” just announced followed discussions and decisions of which the American and British peoples had no advance knowledge and in which they did not participate.
The Roosevelt-Churchill statement cautiously excludes Wilson’s first point. A mere mention of open diplomacy would expose the shady character of the negotiations between the American and British “democratic” governments. It would embarrass future negotiations for an imperialist settlement.
 
Freedom of the Seas
Wilson’s second point, for “absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas,” is the model for the Similar statement in the new eight-point declaration. What was meant by “freedom of the seas” was demonstrated after the last war, when the Allies destroyed German sea power, seizing the German merchant marine as well as navy. American and British imperialism then established the policy of maintaining an absolute naval supremacy over the combined navies of all the other nations. “Freedom of the seas” meant freedom to rule the seas.
 
No “Economic Barriers”
The fourth “war aim” of Wilson was the removal – “so far as possible” – “of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade conditions among all the nations consenting to the peace ...”
During the years following World War I, there was an unparalleled extension of “economic barriers” and a frenzied competition between all the imperialist nations for trade advantages and control of world markets. Every European country erected insurmontable tariff walls. For its part, the United States raised tariffs to a point which virtually excluded imported competitive products from this country.
Roosevelt and Churchill repeat this pious pledge of “trade equality,” with the qualifying phrase, “without disregarding their (American and British) present obligations.”
 
“Present Obligations” Excepted
What are these “present obligations”? They are the real war aims of Roosevelt and Churchill, embodied, no doubt, in a secret agreement designating American and British “spheres of influence” with respect to world trade, colonies and markets, in the event of an Allied victory.
Wilson’s fifth point was another grim joke. This promised the establishment of “guarantees ... that national armaments will be reduced to the lowest point consistent with domestic safety.”
 
Disarmament Hoax
This pledge was carried out with the disarming of – the Central powers. But the armaments race did not slacken. It grew more feverish and intense. Wilson’s “peace” – as every imperialist peace – served merely as the interlude for increased preparations for the next war, World War II.
Related to Wilson’s disarmament pledge was his proposal for a “general association of nations,” his fourteenth point. This was the genesis of the League of Nations, which, the United States scorned to join. The League was fashioned merely to further the hegemony of British and French imperialism on the European continent. It crumbled to dust with the impact of the violent resurgence of German imperialism.
The Roosevelt-Churchill “disarmament” proposal frankly states that their “future peace” is based on the disarmament of “nations which threaten, or may threaten aggression outside their frontiers” – that is, the imperialist competitors of Wall Street and the “City.” All else is reduced to the nebulous promise to “aid and encourage all practicable measures which will lighten ... the crushing burden of armaments.”
 
Self-Determination in the Colonies
“Wilson’s fifth point has no parallel in the present, Allied statement. It deals with the disposition of the colonies. Wilson called for “a free, open-minded, absolutely impartial, adjustment of all colonial claims, based upon a strict observance of the principle that in determining all such questions of sovereignty the interests of the populations concerned must have equal weight with the equitable claims of the government whose title is to be determined.”
This did not disavow the principle of colonial exploitation, but it did give some “recognition” to the rights of self-determination of the colonial peoples. After the last war, the victorious imperialist nations fought for colonial spoils like jackals over a piece of carrion. Germany was stripped of her colonies, which were parcelled out mainly to Britain, France and Belgium. The possessions of Turkey in Asia Minor were divided up between England and France. In all these transactions, “the interests of the populations concerned” not only did not have “equal weight,” they had no weight whatsoever! One imperialist marched in as the other marched out.
Nor did American imperialism pay more attention to the “interests of the populations concerned” in imposing its domination over colonial nations, in the period following World War I, American bullets sang the tune of Wall Street imperialism in Nicaragua, Haiti, Porto Rico, the Dominican Republics, the Philippines and in China.
 
A Significant Silence
Roosevelt and Churchill dare not mention the colonial question in their “war aims.” That might raise the question of the “interests of the populations concerned” in the enslaved colonies of American and British imperialism, the questions of India, the West Indies, the Malay States, the African colonies.
Seven of the Wilsonian Fourteen Point dealt with specific questions of the restoration of nations and self-determination for nationalities conquered or ruled by the Central powers.
 
Subject Nations
After the war, each European nation found itself confronting some counter-claim. The need for alignments had induced the lead ing Allied imperialist powers to promise the same territories to different nations. The Versailles Treaty and the other “peace” treaties revamped but did not alter the system of subject, peoples, in Europe. The Austrian Empire oppressor of half a dozen subject peoples, was ruthlessly pared down to a weak dependency of 6,000,000 inhabitants from a country of 60,000,000. Czechoslovakia was established as an independent nation to play the role of pawn for French and British imperialism in Central Europe, and this new nation became in turn the oppressor of national minorities.
An independent Hungary was set up, which included subject Rumanians. Rumania was re-established, with rule over a largc group of subject Hungarians. Poland, which Wilson declared must be established as an independent state “which should include the territories inhabited by indisputably Polish populations,” was given domination over 15,000,000 Ukrainians. “Poor little Serbia” became Yugo-Slavia, the persecutor of the Croatians. Wilson’s “self-determination” resolved itself into a post-war Europe that groaned with the new sufferings of oppressed nationalities.
 
What the 8 Points Slur Over
Wilson was more specific about the restoration of nations in Europe. Roosevelt and Churchill have already made too many conflicting commitments. They have undoubtedly, parcelled out Europe twice over in bribes to win over the small nations to the side of the imperialist democracies. And above all, there are the inevitable conflicting claims between the democratic imperialists and the Soviet Union, a, delicate point which Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin now prefer to slur over.
The most fraudulent of the Fourteen Points was the sixth, dealing with the newly-founded Soviet Union. Wilson declared for:
“The evacuation of all Russian territory and such a settlement of all questions affecting Russia as will secure the best and freest cooperation of the other nations of the world in obtaining for her unhampered and unembarrassed opportunity for the independent determination of her own political development and national policy and assure her of a sincere welcome into the society of free nations under institutions of her own choosing ...”
 
The “Sincere Welcome”
The “fulfillment” of this promise was the imperialist armed intervention against the Soviet Union from 1918 to 1921. American troops, sent by Wilson without the consent of Congress, participated in this war. And the “sincere welcome” accorded the Soviet Union by the United States government was the refusal to recognize the Soviet government for 15 years.
The Roosevelt-Churchill statement fails to mention their new “ally,” the Soviet Union. They dare not place themselves on record, as Wilson did, for the “unembarrassed opportunity for the independent determination of her own political development” of the Soviet Union. Wilson risked that “concession” solely because he believed the Soviet Union of 1918 would not survive for a year.
 
Imperialist “Peace”
History has proved that. Wilson’s Fourteen Points were compounded of hypocrisy and fraud. They were the veneer covering the ruthless imperialist aims for which this nation was thrust into World War I.
That is the character of the present Roosevelt-Churchill eight-point statement of “war aims.” Like Wilson’s Fourteen Points, the Roosevelt-Churchill statement will be blown away by the harsh winds of any future imperialist “peace.”
 




BUFFALO, August, 4 – A muffled roll of drums sounded from, behind the closed doors at the rear of the mammoth auditorium.
Everyone of the thousand auto worker delegates seated at the dozen rows of tables, stretching hundreds of feet along the length of the auditorium, turned his head away from the speakers platform.
The formal opening this morning of the Sixth Annual Convention of the United Automobile Workers Union (CIO) had already taken place. But for the workers from all the automobile and aircraft centers of the country the real opening of the convention was just about to start.
“Here comes the Ford Local 600 band!”
The thousand delegates stood on the tables and chairs, roared, stamped and cheered a titanic welcome to the Ford union local.
It was the tribute of fighting union men and women to the living symbol of their mighty victories of the past year, the victories which have smashed through the greatest bulwarks of the open-shop and industrial oppression and have made the UAW-CIO the most dynamic union in the American labor movement today.
These are no hand-picked delegates, no belarded business agents of the reactionary AFL craft-union vintage. These are the men and women from the ranks, the leaders of the picket lines, the shop stewards, the workers on the job who have won the greatest confidence and respect of their fellow members. There is an electric atmosphere of vitality, of confidence, of boldness, emanating from the assembled delegates.
 
The Union’s Defense Guards
Symbolic of the character of this union, as reflected in this convention, are the hundreds of delegates wearing their brightly colored service caps – the caps of the flying squadrons, the UAW local union defense guards.
One white and purple silk banner is lettered in gold: “Local 581, Flint, Mich., Fisher No. 1, The Flying Wedge.” Another, lettered gold on a green background, says: “The Flying Squadron, Chrysler Local 7, Detroit.” On numerous service caps and on the uniform shirts of delegates is proclaimed their function: “The Flying Squadron.”
The accomplishments of these Flying Squadrons and their union brothers are recorded in the reports of R.J. Thomas, UAW present, and George Addes, secretary-treasurer.
 
Union’s Great Gains
The paid-up membership of the UAW-CIO is today 526,413, an increase of 93 per cent over the membership reported at the last convention. This makes the UAW the third largest international union in the country.
The union has contracts covering 982 plants, protecting a total of 703,760 workers. At the previous convention last year in St. Louis the union had 494 contracts covering 398,000 workers.
During the past year, through the strike struggles in Ford, General Motors, Allis-Chalmers and scores of lesser plants and corporations, the UAW has secured a general average 10 cents an hour wage increase in the automobile industry.
 
Aircraft Is Next
The militant strike struggles at Vultee and North American Aviation have opened the way for an organizational drive in the mushrooming aircraft industry which has already added 50,000 members to the ranks of the UAW. It is clear from the vigorous response of the delegates to every mention of the aircraft organization drive, that one of the key ambitions of the UAW members is to carry through a drive on the scale of the Ford campaign to bring the 500,000 aircraft workers into the UAW in the next year, and thus realize the slogan of this convention – to make the UAW-CIO the largest and most powerful International union in America.
The initial proceedings of the convention today clearly revealed the moods and feelings of the auto workers.
The kind of language they respond to is fighting language. Every note of militancy struck by any speaker was the occasion for loud applause and cheers.
Those speakers who sensed this, and responded in the fashion which the delegates demanded, were greeted with the loudest applause.
 
Thomas Taunts Warmongers
The desire of the delegates for militant expression affected the talks of the various union officers who spoke. It forced R.J. Thomas, when he gave his opening address this afternoon, to strike a much stronger note than was expected of him.
Perhaps the most significant response to any portion of Thomas’s speech was when he dealt with the war question.
After declaring that he was for material aid to Great Britain – a statement which received scarcely any response – Thomas stated:
“I was called a war-monger by certain people (the Stalinists) a few months ago when I advocated material aid to Britain.
“Today we can hear these same people wanting to go much further than I want to go today. I predict that these same people will be advocating we go to war.
“I still say we should keep ourselves on record as against any foreign adventure.”
This last remark brought forth an instantaneous and tremendous volume of applause, and indicated that there is potentially no more powerful an anti-war force in this country today than the auto workers.
 
Union Democracy Jealously Guarded
The delegates are quick to resent and loudly oppose anything that. smacks of high-handed or arbitrary decisions from the chair, and jealously guard every democratic right.
The minority of the Credentials Committee reported that an attempt was being made to refuse seating to the large delegation from the militant Allis-Chalmers local, whose 8,000 members recently won a bitter 79 day strike. The report charged that the seating of these delegates was being held up on the technicality that the local, in violation of a clause in the constitution, had nominated and elected delegates at the same meeting. The minority of the committee put in a motion to seat the Allis-Chalmers delegation immediately.
The minority motion was greeted with a tremendous volume of applause and stamping of feet. When Ed Hall, a former board member, took the floor and condemned any attempt to deprive the Allis-Chalmers workers of representation, and charged that this would be an act greeted most warmly by the open-shoppers throughout the country, he nearly brought the house down.
The storm was quieted finally by the explanation that the committee majority had not acted against seating the Allis-Chalmers delegation – although it had been the decision of a caucus of the right-wing to attempt this – and by a motion instructing the Credentials Committee to bring in its recommendation on the disputed delegates as the first business tomorrow morning, so as to prevent any stalling of the seating of the Allis-Chalmers representatives.
 
Frankensteen Booed
The maker of the motion to refer the decision to the next morning was Richard Frankensteen, the international board member who supported the use of troops against the North American Aviation workers.
No sooner had he approached the microphone to speak than he was met by a chorus of boos from all sections of the hail. Thomas in his published report had denied that Frankensteen had condoned the use of troops, but this has not convinced a large section of the delegates. And many of those who do accept the explanation on this point are still bitter about Frankensteen’s arbitrary action in suspending the officers of the North American local. The lesson of Homer Martin’s union-disrupting tactics has sunk deep.
 
Negro Delegates Active
Once more, at this convention, is shown the freedom from racial prejudice that has marked the policies of the UAW and the CIO. Almost every large delegation at the convention includes Negro delegates, who participate fully and freely in all the convention activities.
It was especially gratifying to see the many Negro workers in the Ford delegation and in the Ford Local 600 band. One of the most vicious features of Ford’s anti-labor policies was his attempt to split the workers by playing Negro and white workers against each other.
 
Many Women Present
Women workers are playing an important role in this convention, reflecting the vital part they are playing in the whole organizational life and struggles of the auto workers.
One of the brightest spots in the convention thus far was the parade of the Women’s Auxiliaries in the convention hall this morning. As they marched down the aisle, all the delegates rose and cheered them and then broke into the stirring tune of Solidarity Forever. The banner which headed the parade proudly announced that the membership of the UAW Women’s Auxiliary has increased 345 per cent in the past year. No other union has been able to draw the wives and mothers of the workers into the union struggles so well as the UAW. The militancy of the women on the UAW picket lines is traditional. Whatever decisions are made – and some of them may be poor and misguided – one thing is certain: The whole character, tradition and composition of the UAW-CIO will not tolerate for long policies which will lead to the destruction of union democracy and militancy. Time and again efforts have been made to enforce such policies on the auto union – Francis Dillon and Homer Martin tried it – but these attempts have failed. Each time the auto workers have spewed forth these poisonous reactionary elements. And each time the UAW has made new giant strides forward.
One has only to sit for a brief time among these delegates to observe their seriousness, their stern sense of responsibility, their boundless militancy and confidence, their innate love of freedom of expression, their hatred of bureaucracy to be convinced that here is a union capable of confronting all the hosts of reaction and ending the struggle victoriously.
 




The Kremlin is making fantastic claims for the results of the Moscow three-power conference on aid to the Soviet Union.
Thanking the representatives of the imperialist democracies for the “bountiful supplies” already sent to the USSR, Stalin on October 1 put forth the claim that the promised aid will enable the Soviet forces “forthwith to strengthen their relentless defense and. develop vigorous attacks against the invading army.” Lozovsky, chief or the Soviet Information Bureau, stated that the Moscow agreement has colossal explosive powers” and “will have a deadly practical nature for the Germans.”
A Moscow dispatch in the Daily Worker, October 4, declares:
“The pooling of the vast resources of the U.S.A., Great Britain and the USSR are guarantees that Hitler will meet his doom, the Izvestia stated.”
The Daily Worker, October 6, calls the conference results a “deadly blow to Hitler.”
These claims about the extent and importance of the forthcoming material aid from the Allies are in sharp contrast to the attitude of the Stalinists and their press in the days immediately preceding the conference.
Harry Pollitt, leading British Stalinist, publicly declared on September 21:
“Churchill’s policy announced on September 9, completely failed to satisfy public disquiet ... Taken in conjunction with statements by Lords Moyne and Clement Attlee in behalf of the government, we have a declaration of definite policy which can be summed up as limited assistance to Russia, rejection of military action and ‘ceaseless study of the problem’.” (Daily Worker, Sept. 22)
On the very day of the conclusion of the conference, the Daily Worker, October 2, still said editorially:
“Some materials have reached the Soviet Union from America, but thus far it has been only a token. Neither the vast quantity nor the full range of materials necessary for effective aid to the Soviet Union has been sent.”
But even material aid is not sufficient in itself to save the situation, added the Daily Worker, stating:
“Not only is much larger and speedier aid necessary for the Soviet Union, but our country ... must undertake equal responsibility for the military destruction of Hitler.”
That is, open up a western front.
 
Situation Not Changed
Has the attitude of the Churchill government, as described by Pollitt, now changed overnight? Has the Soviet Union’s military situation, for which the Daily Worker says more help is needed than mere material aid, now taken a magical turn for the better?
Not at all. These fulsome claims for the results of the Moscow conference are made in order to stifle the doubts and serious concern of the Stalinist ranks everywhere, about the causes for the disastrous defeats continuously suffered by the Red Army since the inception of the war.
This agitation about the significance of the “aid” promised by Churchill and Roosevelt is only a Stalinist smoke-screen to hide the real question: Why has the Red Army suffered only defeats since the first days of the war?
The Red Army, at the outset of the war, was numerically superior to the Nazi army. It possessed arms and material equal in quantity and quality to what the Nazis could immediately utilize against it. The morale of the Soviet soldiers was superior to that of Hitler’s soldiers. The Red Army had the advantage of a defensive position, behind prepared and natural defenses, and could maneuver on familiar terrain. Why, then, the defeats?
 
Stalinist Ranks Asking Questions
The Stalinist leaders are being compelled to explain away questions along this line which events have aroused in the minds of the Stalinist ranks.
Such are the questions which “A Veteran Commander”, Stalinist military commentator, vainly tries to answer in the Sunday Worker, October 5:
“Question 1: How were the Nazis able to cross the Dnieper in view of the following: (a) The Soviets had the advantage of the Dnieper; (b) About equal forces numerically; (c) Sufficient military equipment?”
“Question 2: In quite a number of Soviet military reports I have read that Soviet troops have met with numerically superior forces ... In view of the assertion that the Soviets have a larger military manpower than the Nazis, how can we account for the Nazi superiority admitted in so many reports?”
“A Veteran Commander’s” reply to the question on the Dnieper defeat simply evades the issue by raising all sorts of new speculations. The level of his answer is indicated by this:
“Militarily speaking, no equipment is ever ‘sufficient.’ But this is a fine point, and we better drop it for a moment.”
These Stalinist evasions cannot, however, silence the insistent questions. Why the defeats of the Red Army despite its superiority in manpower, equality in materiel, etc.?
 
The Lack of Leadership
No amount of Stalinist smoke screens can hide the fact that the Red Army command is hopelessly inferior in leadership and staff work to the Nazi officers’ staff.
In these defeats are revealed the consequences of Stalin’s beheading of the armed forces of the USSR in 1937 and 1938.
During the frameup purges of those years, no less than 40,000 Red Army officers, including almost the entire general staff of experienced and trained generals, were executed or imprisoned by Stalin.
The Red Army, with its officers corps depleted by Stalin’s purges, lacks qualified leadership. This accounts in great part for the unending defeats.
While the Red Army goes on from one debacle to another, Stalin continues to hold in his prisons and concentration camps thousands of trained officers and industrial experts, loyal elements who can provide the type of leadership so sadly lacking.
That is why all those who have at heart the true interests of the Soviet Union must raise the insistent demand that the Soviet Government immediately release all pro-Soviet political prisoners and restore them to their rightful place in industry and the Red Army. At the same time, the government must revive the democratically-elected Soviets and legalize all pro-Soviet political parties.
The release of the tens of thousands of loyal revolutionists and experienced officers – men who proved their worth in the Civil War of 1918-20 and in the building of Soviet industry and the army – will provide much of the needed leadership for the military and industrial machine of the Soviet Union. The mobilization of the masses, through the democratically-elected Soviets, will reinvigorate the morale of the Soviet masses, organize them for a total defense, and strengthen their resolve to fight on to victory.
These measures will enable the Soviet forces to hold their ground and beat back the Nazi army. But that alone, however, will not assure ultimate victory.
 
The Economic Factor
For victory cannot be assured on the basis of military factors alone. In the last analysis, the military superiority of the Nazis is a measure of the superior economic resources which Hitler commands.
The industrial productivity of Germany alone is greater than that of the Soviet Union. Added to this initial Nazi economic advantage, is the productivity and resources of all the occupied countries.
This is a factor which even the Stalinists are forced to recognize.
In answering the question why the Red Army with an initial superiority of manpower is reported to be meeting numerically superior forces, “A Veteran Commander” states:
“In evaluating the strength of both sides on the Eastern Front one should not think in terms of pre-war populations, but definitely admit that the 170,000,000 (it is not more than that now) of the Soviet Union are now facing a combination of 400,000,000 people, either fighting, producing for war or threatening war. Now all the answers become clear.”
In a word, Hitler’s admitted superiority now flows, according to this Stalinist, from the peoples of the occupied territories – those people who, under a revolutionary leadership, might be a dagger in Hitler’s back.
This Stalinist “expert”, of course, fails to mention the decisive source of Hitler’s strength, the German people.
 
The German Workers
Hitler’s strength lies, above all, in the fear of the German workers of another Versailles “peace”, the yoke of a foreign conqueror.
By his complete political identification with the “democratic” imperialists, Stalin alienates the German workers from the Soviet Union. The German people are led by Stalin’s policies to associate the Soviet Union with his imperialist “allies”, who, if victorious, would impose a new oppressive Versailles “peace”.
A pledge from the Soviet Union that it is fighting to defeat Hitler in order to aid in the establishment of a Socialist United States of Europe, and that the Soviet Union will fight against a Versailles “peace”, will do more than any other thing to undermine Hitler’s influence in Germany.
The masses of the occupied countries are already seething with revolt. Far from desiring to aid Hitler, they are seeking that program and leadership which will organize and lead them in the revolutionary overthrow of Hitlerism. If Hitler still can utilize the resources of the conquered countries against the Soviet Union, it is only because the peoples of the occupied territories as yet lack the program, organization and leadership to destroy the invader.
 
Stalin’s “Appeal”
How does Stalin appeal to these subjugated peoples? He asks them, in effect, to fight for a restoration of the old traitorous capitalist regimes and appeals to them in terms of the reactionary ideas fostered by the capitalist classes.
Daniel T. Brigham, in a dispatch from Berne, Switzerland to the New York Times, October 5, describes how the Moscow radio addresses the populations of the Axis and occupied countries.
“To stress the righteousness of the Soviet cause against fascism today,” reports Brigham, “the Moscow radio propaganda cites for its hearers’ benefit, with regional incidents, how, although the Communist regime has changed and no longer ‘resists God,’ the Fascist and National Socialist regimes continue those reprehensible persecutions that they originated in the early Nineteen Thirties.”
The masses are not primarily concerned with the fate of religion and the churches. The churches have not been able to save the masses from fascist oppression. They have not shown any ability or willingness to fight for a new social order without classes and exploitation.
The religious leaders, who have sided largely with reaction and supported the ruling regimes, appear to most of the workers as part of the oppressor class.
 
Road to Victory
The masses want socialism, peace, bread, freedom from exploitation. But Stalin appeals to them only in the language of a church father, without reference to their material needs and aspirations. Such an appeal can only repel the masses.
Instead of this reactionary claptrap, it is necessary for the Soviet government to issue a direct, revolutionary appeal to the masses of occupied Europe, and to the workers of Germany, calling on them to join hands with the Soviet Union for the creation of the Socialist United States of Europe.
This is the only road to final victory for the Soviet Union. This is the only hope for the free future of the oppressed peoples of Europe.
 




A face which had not graced the pages of the Stalinist Daily Worker in many a moon suddenly appeared on the front page ot the September 25 issue.
It was a portrait of the lean and wily features of Sidney Hillman, associate director of the OPM, and leader of the CIO faction which has long sought to tie the CIO to the Roosevelt Administration’s war machine.
To those who know the Daily Worker’s policies, the appearance of Hillman’s picture is a significant symbol. The Daily Worker publishes pictures only of those who represent Stalinist views or with whom the Communist Party is seeking to gain favor.
Thus, up to June 22, did John L. Lewis receive recognition and publicity from the Stalinists.
While of Hillman, the Daily Worker (May 17) wrote in those days:
“The workers can now see that when a war government selects a union leader to sit in its councils, it is only for one purpose: to have him act as the spearhead in the open-shop and wage cutting drive against the workers. And Hillman, it can be said, is faithfully living up to these duties.”
 
Whitewash for Hillman
No such condemnation of Hillman is included in the story accompanying his picture in the September 25 issue. This reports Hillman’s speech to the Seventh Convention of the International Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers (CIO) held last week in Atlantic City, New Jersey. The Daily Worker approvingly reports Hillman’s address “praising the shipyard workers for the production records they have already set – but records that he said must still go higher ...”
Hillman, whom the Daily Worker formerly correctly called “the spearhead in the open-shop and wage-cutting drive,” is paving the way, in these words, for longer hours, speed-up, wagefreezing, in the interests of Roosevelt’s war program. That, today, is the program of the Stalinists also, and therefore their one definite aim in the CIO is to establish a formal unit with the Hillmanites against the militant and anti-war sections of the labor movement, and against that sector of the CIO which opposes sacrificing the gains of industrial unionism for the sake of pro-war “unity” with the AFL.
From first to last, in the Daily Worker reports of the IUMSW convention, the Stalinists have sought to establish their affinity with the Hillmanites and their policies. And since the Hillmanites hold outright control of the IUMSW, almost the entire convention was consumed with speeches and resolutions in support of Roosevelt’s war policies, calling for the repeal of the Neutrality Act, etc. All this was fulsomely reported in the Daily Worker.
But. in the very act of bending over to polish Hillman’s boots with their tongues, the Stalinists received a resounding blow on their protrudent posteriors from these same boot tips. On September 26, the Daily Worker, in the middle of an IUMSW convention story, suddenly whines:
“The harmony that marked the convention for two days was broken this morning, and, as usual, red-baiting was the instrument through which prejudices and old squabbles were raked up. It came with a resolution ... throwing Communism into the same basket with Nazism.”
 
Unity with Red-Baiters
After going down the line on their hands and knees with the IUMSW Hillmanite leaders on support of the war, the Stalinists were confronted with a resolution which stated that the union “would not condone the workings of fascism, nazism or communism within our ranks” and “that any member who advocates the overthrow of the democratic constitutional government of the United States shall be, on proven guilty, asked or be forced to resign from national or local membership, in our union.”
Nowhere does the Daily Worker indicate that this resolution, which the convention passed, was the product of Hillman. Instead, the Daily Worker attempts to spread the idea that the resolution doesn’t mean too much and isn’t going to affect the Stalinists materially.
“In some respects,” reports the Daily Worker, “the red-baiters retreated, as from all indications a move to insert a bar to Communists in the constitution was abandoned.”
At the very same session of the convention, however, me Stalinists found out whether the Hillmanites “mean” it, when Carl Bradley and Edward Dorland, expelled from the union’s general executive board and their union local on charges of “communism,” were refused reinstatement into union membership, and even denied the right personally to appeal their case to the convention.
On the last day of the convention, the delegates, led by the Hillmanites, passed a resolution barring “Communists, Nazis and fascists” from holding any union offices. That is how the Hillmanites “retreated”!
Once more, the Daily Worker, September 27, had to report about the red-baiting actions of the Hillmanites – without mention of the Hillmanites.
 
Small Favors Gratefully Received
John Green, Hillmanite president of the IUSMW, gave the Stalinists some small consolation in his final remarks before the convention adjourned. He indicated Hillman’s present position toward the Stalinists when he stated:
“Employers hire communists, and as long as they hire them we’ll organize them. But they’ve got to keep their philosophies out of the councils of this union.”
In a word, Green is telling the Stalinist that they can pay their dues and belong to the union so long as they’re “good boys,” raise their hands promptly for everything the Hillmanites propose, sit in the back rows and keep their mouths shut.
The Stalinists, for all their eagerness to support the Hillmanites under any conditions, have a long row to hoe before they will be accepted on any equal terms by the Hillmanites.
 
Hillman’s Line Toward Stalinists
Hillman and his followers are quite willing to take whatever the Stalinists offer them gratis, but they propose to grant the Stalinists as little influence or control as possible, particularly in those unions, like the IUMSW, where the Stalinists have relatively little strength.
The Hillman gang represents a different bureaucracy than the Stalinists. The Hillmanites are part of the labor bureaucracy directly representing the interests of the American bourgeois democrats, specifically the Roosevelt administration. The Stalinists, as the Hillmanites are well aware, are the agents of the Kremlin bureaucracy. Within the limits of this difference in bureaucratic loyalties, the Hillmanites continue to be wary of any too close ties with the Stalinists.
For their part, the Stalinists want to gain as much union influence as they can, within the framework of their political unity with the Hillmanites on the war question. But the Hillmanites hold the whip-hand. It is they who have the “in” with the Roosevelt administration, and they will not permit the Stalinists to approach the administration except through the Hillmanite pipeline.
The Stalinists are willing to pay any price in servility and treachery to the workers for a bloc with Hillman. That is clearly indicated by the actions at the IUMSW convention and the Daily Worker’s response to them. Hillman’s program includes concretely a red-baiting attack on all militant and progressive elements in the labor movement. “Deplore” as they might this red-baiting – and it is merely to save their own organizational hides that they do so – the Stalinists cannot escape the responsibility for defending and endorsing Hillman’s basic political policies, whose inevitable consequences are just as vicious anti-labor tactics as red-baiting.
 




The existence of the Soviet Union now hangs in the balance. Stalin himself can no longer conceal that he has led the Soviet Union to the brink of catastrophe. No longer does Stalin – the self-appointed Commissar of War, Head of the Council of Defense, etc. – brag about the “invincibility” of Soviet arms.
Hitler’s military machine has already seized or immobilized 75 per cent of the industrial area of the USSR. Leningrad and other vital cities, not only in the Don basin but in the very heart of the Soviet Union, are either occupied or immediately threatened. Nazi armies are driving relentlessly toward the political and economic nerve-center of the Soviet Union, Moscow. The Red Army is being forced back on all fronts.
The latest Moscow dispatches are shot through with the panic that is gripping the Kremlin.
Despite the rigid censorship Stalin has clamped down on dissemination of news of the real situation, Red Star, official organ of the Red Army, on October 10 had to admit that on the Moscow sector “conditions ... are serious; the danger is great; the enemy is advancing.” On October 13, it issued still another appeal to the Soviet troops acknowledging that “our resistance is entering a critical phase; the enemy must somehow be stopped.”
The bewilderment and panic of the Stalinist tops is expressed in that desperate cry, “the enemy must somehow be stopped.” Somehow! These bankrupts admit that they do not know what to do.
Since the start of the war the Soviet rulers have labeled all justified expressions of alarm as “panic-mongering”. For such statements as are now wrung from Red Star, the GPU jails and shoots Soviet workers and peasants as “panic-mongers, spies and diversionists, etc.”
For the first time since the war began, Moscow dispatches contain references to the appalling losses among the retreating Soviet forces. “On the Vyazma salient the Russians have met with great losses,” reports the Moscow correspondent to the New York Times, October 14. And the Kremlin censor dares not delete!
 
Stalin’s Boasts
As the Red Army suffers defeat after defeat, Stalin tries to uphold his shattered prestige by belittling Soviet losses. A Kremlin spokesman recently claimed that the Nazis have suffered a three- to-one loss in trained manpower and a two-to-one loss in guns, tanks, etc. ... Hence the Kremlin boast: The more defeats, the surer the final victory! Hitler is draining away his forces, his resources – this has been the Kremlin’s chief device for minimizing the defeats.
Stalin had boasted on July 3 in his radio address from Moscow:
“Comrades, our forces are numberless. The overweening enemy will soon learn this to his cost.”
That illusion of inexhaustible manpower, which Stalin has projected to cover up the results of the complete lack of military leadership, is exploded.
The latest Moscow dispatches now complain, “the Germans have numerical superiority ... The Germans ... by sheer weight and numerical strength have been able to penetrate the Soviet lines.” (New York Times, October 9)
It is precisely after Stalin openly assumed all posts, including that of Commander-in-Chief, that the Red Army has suffered its most terrible defeats. He tries to brazen it out. He himself, of course, has nothing to say in this hour of crisis. But his Vice-Commissar of Foreign Affairs, Lozovsky, beating on a hollow drum to try and drown out the repercussions of the defeats, declares:
“After every so-called German death blow the Soviet Union seems to grow stronger.” (New York Times, October 12)
The current Stalinist campaign to get the Allied imperialists to open a Western Front is further evidence to the contrary. Stalin whines and pleads with the “democracies” to save his regime by creating a military diversion.
Only two weeks ago, the Stalinists were proclaiming that the promised material aid from Britain and American had dealt a “death blow” to Hitler. Now the Kremlin must provide the Soviet masses with some other illusions. A military diversion – that will “somehow” save the Soviet Union!
What of the “death blow” dealt to Hitler – on paper – just two weeks ago? “Even the full tide of the vital economic help cannot settle anything ... The United States and Britain must assume the joint and immediate responsibility of an active Western Front,” pleads the Daily Worker, October 14, under instructions from the Kremlin. These words conceal the implied threat that Stalin will capitulate to Hitler if such action is not forthcoming immediately.
Stalin cannot and will not this time evade his own responsibility by blaming the defeats on “faithless allies,” as he did when Hitler scrapped the Stalin-Nazi pact.
It cannot be denied that the Soviet Union at the beginning of the war confronted. Germany with at least equality in manpower, a tremendous concentration of mechanized equipment, a higher level of army morale, and the advantages of defensive positions behind natural and prepared fortifications.
The defeats of the Red Army, the terrible blows to the USSR, are the sole responsibility of Stalin.
These defeats are the end product of Stalin’s bloody purge of the Red Army in 1937–38, when he slaughtered or imprisoned no less than 40,000 trained and experienced officers. Stalin beheaded the Red Army. Today, that army faces the fascist foe without leadership, without a unified strategic plan, without competent direction. Stalin has betrayed the entire revolutionary movement, disoriented and cut to pieces the vanguard of the world proletariat. He thus deprived the Soviet Union of its mightiest weapon against Hitler, the revolutionary class struggle of the European working class.
Not a word has the Kremlin issued to arouse and: guide the masses of Germany and the occupied countries to revolutionary combat against Nazi imperialism. All the explosive powers of revolt contained in the peoples ground under Hitler’s heel are being dissipated for lack of leadership and organization, while the Kremlin remains silent for fear of offending its. “democratic” allies.
The conclusion is inescapable:
Unless there is a change in policy, the Soviet Union is doomed.
Unless the USSR ceases to stake everything on aid from the imperialists, and issues a revolutionary appeal to the workers of the world, including Germany, the workers state faces disaster.
The doors of Stalin’s dungeons must be opened to release the tens of thousands of pro-Soviet elements now deprived of their right to defend the Soviet Union. These pro-Soviet elements – who have proved their loyalty and ability in the Civil War of 1918–20 and in the construction of Soviet industry – can make up, at least in part, for the present fatal lack of leadership.
The democratically-elected soviets must be revived to give the masses initiative, reinvigorate their morale and organize them for the revolutionary defense of the workers’ state.
Above all. the Soviet Union must rally the masses of Europe for proletarian revolutionary struggle around the only banner which can have hope or meaning for them in this epoch of the death agony of world capitalism:
For the Socialist United States of Europe!
This is the only herald of salvation for the Soviet Union.
 




Priorities unemployment is the major immediate problem confronting workers in the automobile, radio and electrical appliance, textile and other leading industries.
Hundreds of thousands of workers, who had been led to believe that the war boom would ensure them a measure of job security, are already walking the streets.
It is frankly admitted by government agencies that the dislocation of industry, because of material shortages and the resultant operations of the priorities rationing system, will shortly create a new army of no less than two or three millions of unemployed.
The industrialists and the government are doing little to relieve the situation. But the workers, who face the bleak prospect of repeating their experiences of the ten years of pre-war economic crisis, view the menace of priorities unemployment with growing concern.
A number of plans have been projected by union officials, both AFL and CIO, in an attempt to cope with this problem.
 
The Union Plans
The major emphasis of all these plans – elaborated in detail for the auto, steel, radio and electrical, textile and other specific industries – is placed upon the need for the reorganization of the industries in order to expand production or to replace production of consumer goods by an equivalent production of war goods.
All of these plans, however, immediately bump up against the solid wall of the monopoly control of the basic industries by the handful of capitalist owners. It is these owners who now have the exclusive power to operate industry, regulate production, determine what is to be produced, and when, how, where and why.
They exercise this monopoly of industrial control for one end: Profits.
The very existence of priorities unemployment is the direct consequence of this profit motivation. The shortages in aluminum, steel and other vital materials, which have led to the application of priorities, result primarily from the unwillingness of the big monopoly corporations to expand their own production facilities or permit the government to build other facilities.
Above all, the trusts are determined to maintain their monopolies, to regulate prices and output, and thereby maintain their volume of profit and prevent the possibilities of competition.
The most technically-sound plans for reorganizing industrial production to eliminate priorities unemployment – and there is no lack of such plans – fail to surmount the key obstacle: the control of industry by the monopoly owners.
While every union plan attempts in some measure to deal with the question of control, their proposals end by leaving the control of industry intact in the hands of the owners.
In each case the success of these plans depends on the good will of the bosses or on the illusion that the government is a “neutral” agency which places the interests of the nation as a whole above the interests of the ruling capitalist minority.
 
The Question of Control
The employing class, on the one hand, will fight to the death against sharing the control of industry with the workers. The monopolists ruthlessly brush aside the suggestion that the workers might have even an interest in the control and management of industry. That is a “right” which the owning class reserves exclusively for itself.
On the other hand, the government, which is the agency for administering the state power of the ruling class, pigeon-holes or sabotages all plans for the reorganization of industry which, involve infringement on the present monopoly of control and management by the private owners of industry.
Moreover, all the union plans are an attempt to solve the problem of the capitalist anarchy of production – which is just as much a fact in war-time as in peace-time – within the framework of the existing economic system.
For each capitalist, or group of capitalists, is in ruthless competition with other capitalists. The big industries are trying to drive the small industries to the wall. The manufacturers of one kind of metal compete with manufacturers of substitute metals. Far from being interested in planning and coordinating the production of each industry as a whole, the few big competing corporations within the industry try to wipe each other out and gain complete control.
There can be no question of the necessity for the reorganization of industry in order to provide jobs for the workers. But It is pursuing an illusion to believe that this can be satisfactorily accomplished without first divesting the monopoly owners of their control. For, even should the capitalists succeed temporarily in meeting the immediate crisis of priorities, new and worse crises are certain to follow.
For it is impossible, except on a most limited scale, to separate the problem of priorities unemployment from the general condition of the decline and decay of capitalism as a whole.
That is why any feasible and sound plan to combat priorities unemployment must first of all deal with the question: Who will control and manage industry?
 
Who Shall Control Industry?
It is clear that the owning class is incapable of planning and coordinating production in the interests of the masses of people. Their control has led to priorities unemployment as only the most recent addition to all the other monstrous evils of the existing social order.
Only the working class, upon whom all production and distribution depends in the first place, can possibly organize and manage industry in the interests of the people as a whole.
Today, the only realistic beginnings of a solution to the workers’ problems, of which priorities unemployment is the most immediate and pressing one, is contained in the slogan of the Socialist Workers Party:
Expropriate the war industries and operate them under the control and management of the workers!
But in the meantime, the workers must be provided for when they become unemployed. They cannot sit idle waiting for long-term solutions to their problems and their immediate suffering, as a consequence of joblessness, must be alleviated.
 
An Immediate Demand
Are the workers to suffer hunger and privation because of the mismanagement and greed of the ruling class?
Regardless of what the owning class and government do with respect to the management of industry, the workers must not starve or face the winter without decent homes, clothing, blankets, fuel.
If the government and the bosses cannot provide jobs for the workers, then they must nevertheless continue to provide the workers with the means of subsistence.
Every worker deprived of the right to work by priorities unemployment must receive from the government relief in the form of money equivalent to the wages he normally would receive in private industry, and no less than union wages.
This is the demand which the organized workers, all the trade unions, must raise and fight for. Regardless of what promises and plans the government puts forth for a future solution to the problem of priorities unemployment, the victims of such unemployment must be decently fed, clothed, and housed now.
To secure this demand, more will be required of the unions than a simple plea to the “humanitarian” instincts of the government officials.
Mass pressure and mass action of the workers alone will force the government to provide decent incomes for the millions of workers who will shortly be jobless.
This immediate program must be placed on the agenda of every union which is forced to deal with priorities unemployment.
 




CLEVELAND, O., July 17 – Ranks of the W.P.A. strikers are slowly swelling here as resentment against the Roosevelt pay-cut and dismissal drive mounts. At least 2,000 skilled workers are out, and several thousand unskilled workers.
As yet, however, only a small fraction of the 47,000 W.P.A. workers here are involved, due largely to the failure of the A.F.L. to raise demands for the unskilled laborers, and to the failure of the C.I.O. and Workers Alliance to support the strike.
Over 35,000 W.P.A. workers have been fired here in the past 6 months, only a few hundred of these dismissed W.P.A. workers have received private employment, while the relief load remains about 18,000.
W.P.A. officials announced Saturday that 1,000 pink dismissal slips have been sent to strikers. Eight thousand additional lay-offs are starting to-day under the 18 months clause.
The C.I.O. and Workers Alliance held a mass meeting on the W.P.A. crisis last Friday afternoon in the Public Square. About 1,000 workers participated, who heard from the lips of the Stalinist speakers not a fighting call to support their working class brothers on strike, but open sanction to scab the strike under the guise of simply doing their duty through a one-day “protest.”
Arnold Johnson, chairman of the Ohio Workers Alliance, reached the low-point of his plenty low career, when he branded as a “lie” the story printed in every paper in the U.S. that Roosevelt had condemned the strike.
The Cleveland branch of the S.W.P. is putting out a series of bulletins to the W.P.A. workers on how to win the strike and restore the hourly rates and jobs. The branch is putting forth the demand for joint action between the A.F.L., C.I.O. and independent unemployed organizations and the issuance of a general strike call, organization of picket lines to shut the projects down and spread the strike, and the incorporation of demands for the unskilled workers.
 

