


Dear Comrades,
I was interested to read Keith Narey’s article (Militant, issue 594) on the attitude of the TUC towards Bradford Trades Council’s involvement in the Bradford North Labour Party. The attempt of the right wing to build a Chinese wall between the activities of the industrial and political wings of the movement is not of course a recent development.
In the 1960s the right wing of the TUC and the Labour Party began the process of the breaking up of Trades and Labour Councils. These bodies brought together representatives of both the local Labour Parties and the local trade union branches into effective organisations. They were broken up in practically every case, but not without opposition from local activists. In fact the TUC and Labour right wing had to spend an enormous amount of time on this which could have been devoted to far more useful ends. I agree with Keith that trade unionists should fight against the 1977 TUC ruling which forbids trades councils sending resolutions to CLPs, or being involved in reselection.
However, it does seem odd that this ruling should be enforced only where Pat Wall is involved. At this year’s Wales Labour Party conference a resolution was submitted by Mid Glamorgan County Association of Trades Councils calling for the expulsion of Militant supporters from the Labour Party. Comrades might well ask themselves why, in an area that contains such unemployment blackspots as the Rhondda, Pontypridd or Caerphilly, the CATC should be devoting its energies to witch-hunts.
And after the Bradford North experience, are Len Murray and Co. Going to be hot-foot down to Pontypridd to sort out Mid Glamorgan CATC for getting involved in Labour Party affairs?



 


Yours fraternally
Andrew Price
Cardiff SE Labour Party



 




The life of Aneurin Bevan whose political battles have
important lessons for the labour movement today was the subject of a
recent BBC TV play by Paul Ferris.
Born in Tredegar, South Wales in 1897 Bevin’s early involvement
with the labour movement was as a syndicalist fighting to stamp out
company unionism and establish the South Wales Miners Federation. He
became more involved in political struggles after the defeat of the
1926 General Strike.
During the 1930s as MP for Ebbw Vale Bevan brilliantly
demonstrated how a socialist should use parliament as a platform to
express the anger of the mass unemployed. In the 1945 Labour
Government Bevan was responsible for introduction of the National
Health Service. In the 1950s he was the centre of a witch-hunt
organised by the right wing who wanted to expel him and his
supporters from the Party.
Unfortunately having seen Gaitskellism defeated at rank and file
level in the movement towards the end of his life Bevan sought a
compromise with the right wing. He shattered the faith many of his
supporters had in him when he changed his position on nuclear weapons
in favour of Gaitskell’s.
This play could have been the subject of a serious analysis of any
of these themes. It could have sought to explain to the generation to
whom Bevan was only a name the battles he fought on their behalf.
The play did come of this. Indeed he dealt with the major
political questions in a largely superficial manner, sometimes being
more concerned about gossip about Bevan than in his political ideas.
One partial exception was the establishment of the National Health
Service. Here the mass support this important reform received was
well portrayed as was the selfish and reckless attitude of the
British Medical Association.
Yet the play failed to even mention the tooth and nail opposition
of the Tories to the NHS and their full support for the
extra-parliamentary opposition of the BMA. The play did, however,
bring out Bevan’s insistence that the Health Service should be free
and that private practice should only continue on a temporary basis.
The present devastated condition of the Health Service with the
scandal of private medicine flourishing would horrify Bevan if he
could see it today.
The stormy events of the 1950s in which the Gaitskellites, who
enjoy a majority in the Parliamentary Party, attempted to purge the
constituencies of Bevanite support was subjected to very poor
treatment. At its best the play portrayed the dispute as a clash
between the middle class and working class in the Party; at its worst
to a personality clash between Gaitskell and Bevan.
The fact that Bevan was nearly expelled from the Party, that CLPs
were closed down, that the right wing could only resort to
organisational measures to defeat the political arguments of the
Bevanites were all left out.
Some of those who supported the moves to expel Bevan in the 1950s
now favour organisational measures against Militant
supporters. Both Callaghan and Healey supported the expulsion of
Bevan in the 1950s. That is why those who did not experience these
battles should study actually what happened. Unfortunately Ferris’s
play largely failed to explain any of the mighty events in Bevan’s life.
 




Dear comrade,
I was horrified to read reports that the new hard right majority
on Labour’s National Executive Committee intends to carry out
attacks on the Labour Party Young Socialists.
Presumably Dennis Howell, John Golding and other witch-hunters on
the NEC don’t like the present leadership of the LPYS. The fact
that this leadership is supported by the overwhelming majority of
LPYS members, and that this leadership has succeeded where others
have failed in building a mass LPYS are small details to these
witch-hunters, as their purge gathers its own momentum.
From 1965 to 1970 the LPYS had a stooge leadership imposed on them
by a constitution drawn up by Reg Underhill (yes he was at it in
those days as well). This leadership, whose ideas would be applauded
by Denis Howell today, was as representative of LPYS opinion as John
Golding is of CLP opinion today.
Militant led the fight to democratise the LPYS, and when in
1970 the LPYS was eventually allowed to elect its own National
Committee Militant supporters won a majority.
In 1970, I spoke at a national demonstration organised by the
LPYS. As I recall around 500 youth were in attendance. A few weeks
ago I marched with the LPYS from my own CLP in a demonstration of
over 8,000 youth in Liverpool.
On the South Wales train there were over 300 young people. Many of
them were new to politics, but by the end of the day all of them had
been signed up for the LPYS and the Party. This demonstration was a
magnificent tribute to the dedication of those young comrades who
lead the LPYS, nationally and locally.
In the mid 1960’s when I joined the LPYS I remember Frank Field
being active in the YS. Presumably he remembers a pathetically small
organisation, incapable of campaigning on youth issues, a leadership
totally repulsive to any self-respecting youth, and a tiny movement
policed by Underhill and Bessie Braddock. Is this what this erstwhile
‘left’ MP wants a return to when he calls for the suspension of
the LPYS leadership?
Capitalism has sentenced million of our youth to a life sentence
on the dole. More than ever before the Party needs a strong youth
movement. In the unlikely event of Howell, Golding, Field and company
getting their way in their proposed purge of the youth – the ranks
of this movement will never forgive this abject betrayal.



 


Yours Fraternally,
Andrew Price,
National Vice-Chairman of the LPYS (1970–73)



 




Capitalism, Culture and Decline in Britain, 1750–1990
by W.D. Rubinstein
Published by Routledge, 1993, £25 hb
In our economic analysis of world capitalism, Militant has
explained the reasons for the massive economic boom from roughly
1950–1975 and how the system has since moved to periodic slumps and
booms. Within the general crisis of world capitalism, however, there
are special features of the crisis of British capitalism, which has
witnessed the massive decline of Britain as an industrial nation.
The recent book by W.D. Rubinstein, an Australian academic, is a
contribution to this debate on the decline of British capitalism.
However I cannot conclude that he has helped us understand the
process any more clearly.
Rubinstein devotes the largest part of his work to a string attack
on what he calls ‘the cultural critique’. This argument traces
the massive growth of British industry post-1760 leading to the
establishment of Britain by 1850 as ‘the workshop of the world’.
But this period of industrial hegemony was short-lived. After 1870
came the economic decline of Britain, a process that has continued to
the present day. The ‘cultural critique’ advanced by a number of
economic historians attributes Britain’s economic decline to an
‘anti-business’ and ‘anti-industrial’ culture among people in
power in Britain.
Rather than seriously examine the actual historical relationship
between the development of capitalist economy and the institutions of
the state (government, law, the education system, civil servants,
police, the army etc.) Rubinstein attacks supporters of the ‘cultural
critique’ with the argument that Britain was never really an
industrial nation and therefore has not suffered a process of
industrial decline.
In nearly all of his arguments he is wrong. For example, a British
Conservative writing in 1826, quoted in Trotsky’s Where is
Britain Going?, argues:
“The prospects which are now opening to England almost
exceed the boundaries of thought, and can be measured by no standard
found in history ... The manufacturing industry of England may be
fairly computed as four times greater than that of all other
continents taken collectively, and sixteen such continents as Europe
could not manufacture as much cotton as England does.”
So much for Rubinstein’s claim that Britain was not the workshop
of the world.
Rubinstein’s arguments range from the unusual to the
questionable to the downright ridiculous. Thus having produced
statistical data on Britain’s industrial decline, he claims that it
is not really a question of the rapid decline of British
capitalism rather than the rapid growth of German and US
capitalism! In defending the decision of the British ruling class to
invest in services rather than manufacturing industry, Rubinstein
shows that more people use Heathrow airport than any other airport in
the world. Finally, he attacks those who maintain the superiority of
manufacturing over a service economy in the following terms: 
“It is difficult to believe that there is not some underlying sexual
undertone to the preference for manufacturing rather than services”!
Rubinstein fails to draw a distinction between making money and
creating wealth. The British ruling class has been very skilful in
the former, but have shown little facility for the latter. Early in
the lifetime of the present Tory government, for example, the very
minimal exchange controls introduced by the previous Labour
government were lifted. Since then billions of pounds that could have
been invested in manufacturing industry has flowed abroad. This has
made the ruling class richer as has their colossal investment in
banking and insurance. But British manufacturing continues its
remorseless downward march.
These actions graphically indicate the absolute decline of British
capitalism, and the ruling class’s pessimism for the future.
Ironically they have less faith in the future of capitalism than have
the leadership of the Labour Party. But despite considerable
scholarship and research, this vital point is lost on Rubinstein.
Those looking for an introduction to the complex but vital questions
raised in this book are better advised to start with Trotsky’s
Where is Britain Going?, which retains today all the vitality
and relevance as when it was first published.
 




On 27 October, BBC 2 viewers watched a programme fronted by former
deputy prime minister John Prescott, purporting to explain the class
system in contemporary Britain. Although making a few valid points,
the programme failed to explain class and exposed Prescott’s
hypocrisy as a major figure in the ‘modernisation’ of the Labour Party.
Prescott’s origins are undoubtedly working class, as he began
his working life as a seafarer, playing a key role in what was then
the National Union of Seamen (NUS). On TV he could have used the
opportunity to explain how important trade unions are in representing
working-class interests and how the organised working class needs to
be politically represented.
Or he could have explained how a particularly ruthless set of
employers led him as a young militant to play a key role in the
national strike of the NUS in 1966.
 
No longer believes in trade unionism
Instead we heard none of this, because Prescott no longer believes
in trade unionism as his resignation from the RMT (successor to the
NUS) amply demonstrates. Instead Prescott chose to focus on trivia on
what he thought the working class eats and drinks and how its members speak.
On more than one occasion he railed against private education and
the huge correlation between the numbers in society who are privately
educated and the percentage of such people occupying elite positions.
Fair enough, but he needs to explain why this inequality persists
after eleven years of a government in which he was a prominent member.
The system of British private education has a charitable status,
meaning the schools can claim tax exemption. This in turn means that
the working-class taxpayer subsidises the fees of those who want to
pay £30,000 annually.
In the past there were debates in the Labour Party between those
who favoured the outright abolition of private education and those
who believed that such a policy would frighten middle-class voters.
They argued for the expediency of ending private schools’
charitable status.
Yet Prescott was a major supporter of the creation of New Labour.
This has ended this debate totally, to the extent that his was the
first Labour government that the bastions of educational privilege
felt safe with.
Many trade unionists, especially those like me who are involved
with education, will note the hypocrisy of Prescott’s attack on
private education.
His and Tony Blair’s government privatised part of English
secondary education through the development of academy schools.
Similarly Prescott’s posture as a champion of opportunity for
working-class students could be taken more seriously had he not
supported the introduction of fees and then top-up fees for
university students.
Whatever facile remark Prescott or the BBC chooses to make, the
British class system is not principally about fee-paying schools,
Lords of the Manor or correct pronunciation. It is principally about
an economic system, capitalism, that divides people on class lines
between those who own wealth and the means of producing it and those
who live by selling their labour power through work.
However much beer or tea he drinks or however much Prescott likes
fish and chips, he cannot conceal the fact that under the government
he served, the rich became considerably richer at the expense of the
rest of us.
The reason why Prescott and his mates got away with this is that
they succeeded in changing the class nature of the Labour Party, from
one whose roots were in trade unionism and socialist values to an
unashamedly pro-business party, which in Peter Mandelson’s
disgusting phrase “is intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich”.
At the end of the day Prescott’s programme was of little use to
those attempting to understand class today, but of some use to those
fighting to bury New Labour and build a new working-class party.
 







Welsh members of the University and College Union (UCU)
employed in the Further Education (FE) sector, are currently
voting in a strike ballot in a pay dispute declared by their union
with the Welsh employers’ body Fforwm.




For the last two years Welsh FE lecturers have enjoyed something
as yet beyond the reach of their counterparts in England and Northern
Ireland – pay parity with schoolteachers.
This national agreement was not the result of the generosity of
the employers or the ‘clear red water’ that supposedly separates
New Labour in Westminster from its colleagues in the Welsh Assembly
in Cardiff. It was the achievement of NATFHE (UCU’s predecessor
union), which in Wales was genuinely left-led. We threatened the
employers with a massive programme of strike action unless agreement
was reached.
Now at virtually the first serious test of the agreement, the
employers are blatantly breaking it by refusing lecturers the right
to progress to the top point of the salary scale.
UCU members throughout Welsh FE understand that this dispute goes
a lot further than this. If the employers break the agreement now,
that is the start of a slippery slope.
The agreement has given our membership a small element of
protection from the free-market madness originally introduced by the
Tories but sustained by New Labour in both London and Cardiff, which
once meant 23 Welsh FE colleges all on different pay rates!
It is essential that UCU members throughout Welsh FE deliver a
massive ‘Yes’ vote to both questions on the ballot paper. Voting
results will be watched carefully by both the employers and Assembly politicians.
Recently the Webb review into post-school education in Wales
recommended the reduction in Welsh FE colleges from 23 to 9. Nobody
believes that such a reduction could be achieved without massive
redundancies – mostly compulsory.
Fforwm therefore views this dispute as a forerunner of a future
bigger battle. Most Welsh FE college principals have imposed a 2.5%
pay increase – then awarded themselves an increase way above that.
In the week that Welsh Assembly members awarded themselves an 8%
increase, UCU members have every right to expect decent pay levels.
A victory in this dispute would not just be a victory for our
membership; it would be a victory also for the students throughout
the communities we serve.

Andrew Price was UCU Wales lay negotiator on FE pay.
 




THE BEST result for Labour in the whole of Britain in the May
elections came in South Glamorgan. One of the main planks of the
party manifesto was the policy of no compulsory redundancies, which
the Labour-controlled authority had upheld between 1981 and 1985.
National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education
(NATFHE) members in South Glamorgan were therefore horrified to hear,
on 9 July, that the county council intended to proceed with ten
compulsory redundancies among the teachers at the South Glamorgan
Institute of Higher Education.
Horror turned to seething anger when the full story emerged.
Labour councillors had been discussing these policies with
education officials for a month without informing the college
lecturer’s union. Clearly, Labour councillors believed that
delaying announcements until colleges were breaking up would defuse
trade union action.
The Labour councillors had, however, grossly miscalculated. Our
members at the South Glamorgan Institute went on strike. On Tuesday
10 July over 150 took part in a lobby of the education committee.
To their shame the Labour councillors, to the obvious delight of
the Tories, recommended that the ten redundancies take place.
On Thursday 19 July a similar number of council workers lobbied
South Glamorgan Labour Party’s monthly meeting. To their credit the
officers allowed any council worker who was a party member the right
to attend and speak at the meeting.
An emergency resolution upholding the policy of no compulsory
redundancies was passed overwhelmingly (with a number of Labour
councillors abstaining).
Within 24 hours council leader Bob Morgan announced that the
redundancy notices were to be withdrawn.
 




LAST MONDAY Panorama presented some very well documented
evidence of some of the fascist scum that has floated into the main
sewer of the Tory party.
One named in the programme was Neil Hamilton MP who, Panorama
stated, once dressed up as a Nazi in his student days.
Hamilton, now MP for Tatton, was a student in University College
Aberystwyth in the late 1960s. I was a student there at the same time
and can confirm the correctness of Panorama’s statement.
In an interview at the end of the film Tory chairman, Gummer,
bleated that Hamilton had not dressed up as a Nazi, but as an
“Italian ice cream seller”. Either Gummer is a liar or someone
has really pulled the wool over his eyes.
Perhaps Mr Gummer will reject my memory of events, but he can
hardly challenge the report of the official student union newspaper,
Courier. Writing in 1972 of the hustings for student union
presidency for 1971, the paper says:
“The highlight of the evening was as usual Neil
Hamilton’s entrance; lights off, music playing, slide of a swastika
on the screen, and the arrival of Mr Hamilton in full Nazi
regalia” (my emphasis).
The fact that the student editors found this somewhat amusing
speaks volumes for their middle class flippancy. The relatives of the
six million Jews exterminated by the Nazis or the workers who died in
the “war against fascism” will not share the joke.
The labour movement should not treat Hamilton, Proctor and the
other Tory racist sympathisers as a joke either. The demagogic
appeals to the base and filthy sentiment of racism stands as a cover
behind which they will seek to develop a movement mainly based on the
middle class, but involving demoralised sections of the working class
to smash the trade union movement and democratic rights.
 




THIS WEEKEND’S Labour Party Wales Conference will be
overshadowed by the miners’ strike.
Shamefully last year the Welsh party was the only regional Labour
Party to endorse a witch-hunt against Militant supporters.
Fortunately this year the agenda is free from such divisive
motions and indeed many resolutions look in a positive manner to the
way forward for the Labour Party.
Cardiff Central calls for full support for the NUM and a
massive investment programme for the coal industry. The same CLP, in
a separate resolution, calls for effective economic socialist
proposals.
Other excellent resolutions call for; full support for Liverpool
council (SEA), workers’ democratic control of the NHS
(Caerphilly CLP), a 24 hour general strike against anti-union
legislation (South Glamorgan Labour Party), a socialist policy
for FE students (Ceredignon & Pembroke North CLP), and a
campaign to attract working class women to the party (Swansea East
CLP).
Marxists are also standing, in the various sections, for election
to the regional executive committee: CLP South Wales section: Lynne
Cuthbert (Caerphilly CLP). Affiliated organisations: Andrew
Price (Socialist Education Association). Tony Wedlake
(Cardiff West) and Richard Morgan (Aberavon) have been elected
on from LPYS regional conference.
 




I read with great interest Dave Gorton’s article on the fortieth
anniversary of the stand of Clay Cross council against the Tory
Housing Finance Act (Socialism Today, No. 163, November
2012).
I was one of the generation of Marxists campaigning in South Wales
at the time in support of the councillors. This involved me in
helping to organise a successful public meeting in Cardiff addressed
by Clay Cross councillor David Skinner and confronting within Cardiff
South East Constituency Labour Party (CLP) the local MP James
Callaghan, a right-wing Labour opponent of the council.
In 1972 I attended a huge conference in Cardiff on the Housing
Finance Act organised by the South Wales National Union of Miners
(NUM). On the platform was a young newly-elected Labour MP from the
South Wales coalfields masquerading as a left winger. Eloquently he
denounced the entire Tory Act but was then asked by a miner to
support the type of action favoured by councillor Skinner referred to
in Dave’s article. He refused but his weasel words were drowned by
the loud booing of practically everybody present. His name? Neil
Kinnock.
Twenty-three years later Kinnock famously denounced a similar
stand against the Tories by the Labour group of Liverpool city
council, led by Militant supporters (the forerunner of the
Socialist Party).
The Liverpool and Clay Cross councillors joined those from Poplar
in the 1920s in becoming part of the living traditions of the labour
movement. Their names will be remembered long after those of
political pygmies like Callaghan and Kinnock are forgotten.



 


Andrew Price
Cardiff



 







Neil Kinnock’s speech to the 1985 Labour Party conference signalled the start of a purge of Marxists from the party and anticipated the creation of New Labour. ANDREW PRICE, who was expelled from the Labour Party 25 years ago, looks back.



MANY YOUNGER READERS will only remember the Labour Party as New Labour – a bourgeois political party based on the ideas of neo-liberalism. For most of its history, however, it was rooted in the organised working class and was formally committed to socialism, albeit producing leaders such as Ramsey MacDonald, Hugh Gaitskell, Harold Wilson, James Callaghan and Neil Kinnock, who were far more interested in accommodating themselves to capitalism than promoting socialism.
The party was born at a time of heightened class tensions. In 1918, the same year as the party conference was addressed by a representative of the Russian Bolshevik Party, it adopted Clause IV, Part 4 of its constitution, formally committing it to the socialist transformation of society. (see box)
Such origins are a million miles removed from the sanitised party of Blair, Mandelson and the Milibands which, as the current leadership election demonstrates, is still wedded to neo-liberalism. Because of its prior existence as a bourgeois workers’ party, it made sense for the forerunners of the Socialist Party – Militant supporters – to be individual members of the party and its youth wing, the Labour Party Young Socialists (LPYS).
In 1983, in the wake of a massive election defeat, the party elected Kinnock as leader. He and his followers were ruthlessly determined to rid the Labour Party of Marxists, as I found to my cost when I was expelled from Cardiff South and Penarth Constituency Labour Party (CLP) 25 years ago. Ultimately, Kinnock was successful in driving out the Marxists – at the price of destroying the Labour Party as it had existed until then.
 
Ruling-class pressure
THE 1970s WAS a decade of class struggle that radicalised growing sections of the working class. This in turn affected the Labour Party, as CLPs and party conferences endorsed a number of left-wing policies. The decade ended with the defeat of Callaghan’s right-wing Labour government and the coming to power of Margaret Thatcher whose brutal brand of Toryism was unique in post-war Britain. During the 1980s, support for Militant grew considerably in both the CLPs and the LPYS, particularly in Liverpool.
Thatcherism accelerated the radicalisation of the working class and the shift to the left as many workers expected Labour to champion the working class with the same passion as Thatcher represented the ruling class. Coupled with the radicalisation of the party was an organised campaign led by Tony Benn and the late Eric Heffer, a Liverpool MP, to democratise the party and ensure that future Labour governments did not drift into right-wing policies.
These developments were viewed with consternation by the ruling class which, through the mass media, expressed concern at the growth in support for socialism in the party. They urged their shadows in the Labour Party to take action to reverse these trends. The demand was raised for disciplinary action against Militant supporters, branded as ‘infiltrators’ into the Labour Party. This was an outright lie. From Labour’s inception, Marxists had been party members. And, as a relatively democratic party, Labour had always allowed like-minded individuals to organise. What irked our opponents was our capacity to be better organised than most.
In 1980, Michael Foot became party leader. He was from a left-wing background, had once edited the left paper, Tribune, and had suffered in previous witch-hunts against supporters of Aneurin Bevan. In 1983, however, Foot buckled to pressure and initiated the expulsion from the party of the then editorial board of Militant: Peter Taaffe, Ted Grant, Lynn Walsh, Clare Doyle and Keith Dickinson. Foolishly, Foot and others believed that by cutting off the head of Militant its growth in the Labour Party would stop. This did not happen because working-class men and women had endorsed Marxism of their own volition – not through the ‘manipulation’ by infiltrators.
Labour fought the 1983 election with its most left-wing manifesto since 1918. It called for the reversal of all Tory cuts, scrapping Britain’s nuclear weapons, repealing anti-union laws, and the restoration to public ownership of all industries and services privatised by the Tories.
The Tory press kept up a remorseless campaign against the ‘dangers’ if Labour won. The attacks on three Marxists – Dave Nellist, Terry Fields and Pat Wall – standing as official Labour candidates in Coventry, Liverpool and Bradford, were particularly vicious.
 
Kinnock’s betrayal
THE LABOUR PARTY lost the election, with the Tories securing a massive parliamentary majority (albeit losing 685,000 votes). Clearly, the Tory press campaign, including its promotion of the alliance between the Liberals and a right-wing Labour split-off, the Social Democratic Party, had its effect, but some within the Labour Party also hoped for a defeat. In Cardiff South and Penarth, where Callaghan was standing for re-election, people attending what they thought was a routine election meeting heard Callaghan attack Labour’s defence policy in front of representatives of the international media!
Following the 1983 election, the ruling class and its shadows in the Labour Party argued that Labour’s defeat resulted from a left-wing manifesto with too much emphasis on socialism. None of the proponents of this view were able to explain the results in Liverpool. Given a big national swing to the Tories, Liverpool, where Labour was clearly identified with the left, recorded a swing to Labour which, if repeated nationally, would have been sufficient to form a Labour government.
Such details were ignored as Labour was urged by its political enemies to ‘modernise’, including a purge of Marxists from its ranks. This was the key issue in the leadership election following Foot’s resignation in 1983. One candidate was Roy Hattersley – a Labour right-winger mistrusted by many party members and trade unionists for his record in government. This mistrust led a section of the ruling class to hold back from promoting him as the candidate to bring about the desired counter-revolution in the Labour Party. Another candidate, Kinnock, was not tainted with such mistrust and claimed to be left-wing.
In reality, his links with left-wing ideals were very tenuous. In 1981, he and his supporters effectively sabotaged the chances of Tony Benn becoming deputy leader of the Labour Party. Some Tory newspapers warmed to Kinnock, referring to him as ‘soft left’ – in contrast to the ‘hard left’ of Benn and Heffer and the ‘illegitimate’ left of Militant – and he won by a large majority, with Hattersley as his deputy.
Kinnock’s efforts to ‘modernise’ the Labour Party were frustrated by two major developments. In March 1984, the provocative behaviour of the Tories led to the epic miners’ strike, which lasted until February 1985. At grassroots level most Labour members saw the Tories determined to smash the miners and their union, and expected Kinnock to support them. But Kinnock regarded the strike as the last thing he wanted given his modernisation agenda. In private, he attacked the strike. In public, he maintained a craven silence.
The other development frustrating Kinnock’s plans was the election of a Labour council in Liverpool led by a number of Militant supporters, as explained in the book by Peter Taaffe and Tony Mulhearn, Liverpool: A City That Dared to Fight. Liverpool Labour council was determined to lead a fight-back on behalf of a city whose people had been brought to their knees by poverty, unemployment and bad housing. From the outset of the struggle, Kinnock was implacably opposed to the strategy of Liverpool Labour council, even when it won what most saw as a major victory over Thatcher in 1984. One year later, when the determination of the Liverpool labour movement led Thatcher to consider more concessions, Kinnock blew the prospects of a settlement out of the water with his disgraceful speech to Labour Party conference (see box). In this he broke an elementary rule that anyone describing themselves as a socialist should abide by: he attacked workers in struggle.
The following day the gutter press praised him for his ‘brave speech’. Ordinary party members, particularly in Liverpool, were stunned by his breathtaking hypocrisy. He failed to mention a single one of the huge achievements of the council that had succeeded against all the odds in dramatically improving housing and employment in the city. Despite his lies, not a single worker lost his or her job as a result of council policy, in contrast to the many Labour-run councils that responded to Thatcherism with massive redundancies.
 
Labour’s purge trials
THIS SPEECH WAS the green light for a mass purge of Marxists from the party. Quietly the word went out: where witch-hunters were in the majority, expel; where not, as in Liverpool, Labour’s National Executive Committee (NEC) would do the dirty work. The Liverpool socialists were referred to the NEC which, in 1986, after ten meetings and at an incredible cost of £250,000, expelled nine party leaders with a combined party membership of 141 years.
In November 1985, Cardiff South and Penarth CLP began proceedings to expel myself and two others, Dave Bartlett and Diane Mitchell. As I attempted to address the CLP executive committee against my proposed expulsion, I appealed to the chair to stop being howled down by Callaghan supporters. The chair responded by joining in himself. Faced with such hooligan behaviour, I had no option but to walk out of the meeting, learning later from the South Wales Echo that the executive had recommended ending my almost 20-year membership of the Labour Party.
Throughout the country, Militant supporters were being subjected to such treatment, and this led many of us to initiate legal action. In every case this was taken with great reluctance, as many workers had understandable reservations about taking the Labour Party to court, and was never a substitute for a political campaign.
The experience in Cardiff, after the establishment of a defence fund endorsed by a former mayor of the city, was that money flowed in for our legal costs. One donation was from a South Wales miner who had fought in the Spanish civil war with the international brigade. With the help of a good barrister, we showed that the Cardiff South and Penarth witch-hunters had systematically broken Labour Party rules in our treatment. Within weeks our party membership was restored.
Similar debacles took place in many other CLPs. This later led the Labour Party to establish the National Constitutional Committee (NCC), to streamline expulsions. Having had my party membership returned, by 1988 I was referred to the NCC. Following a very serious illness, when time was ever more urgent, I decided to concentrate my political efforts on Militant and trade union work in the lecturers’ union, NATFHE. I resigned my Labour Party membership with few regrets, after more than 22 years membership. Meanwhile, Kinnock was showing how correct our perspectives had been. He had turned from purging Militant to purging party policy. Every one of the gains made by the left was removed.
 
Paving the way for Blair
THE MAJOR PROBLEM with Kinnock’s plan to make the Labour Party more electable was that it failed to impress the voters. In 1987, after a very presidential election campaign, in which the 1985 speech attacking Liverpool council was used in an election broadcast, Thatcher was returned with a majority only slightly less than the Tories had in 1983. In the dying years of her premiership, however, Thatcher scored a spectacular own goal with the introduction of the poll tax. Throughout Britain millions of working people could not, or refused to pay this iniquitous tax. On the ground, Militant supporters responded by organising anti-poll tax unions, giving support to non-payers. A Sun editorial referred to the advocates of non-payment as ‘Toy Town Trots’. Following their lead, as ever, Kinnock employed the same term in a speech attacking non-payment with far more force than the poll tax itself. At the height of the non-payment campaign, the Tories dropped Thatcher as leader. Militant – certainly not Kinnock and the Labour Party – deserves the credit for her downfall.
Kinnock’s eventual replacement, John Smith, elected after the 1992 election defeat, was another moderniser. After his death in 1994, he was replaced by the moderniser of all modernisers, Tony Blair and, in 1995, Blair persuaded the Labour Party to drop Clause IV, a truly defining moment in the party’s history. The party with a working-class base and capitalist leadership had now become a bourgeois political party. In this sense, the war on Marxism unleashed by Kinnock had been won, but at the terrible price of destroying the Labour Party.
Looking back on all this, it is still difficult not to get angry. During their heroic strike, I met miners who with their families had been to hell and back. Their communities today are still ravaged, and their youth have turned to drugs. What contempt do these brave men and women have for the multi-millionaire Kinnock ensconced in the House of Lords? Our crime was to devote ourselves tirelessly to fighting the Tories, the employers and advocating socialism. Our departure paved the way for upper-middle-class upstarts like Blair, Mandelson and the Milibands to take the party over. They were the real infiltrators, helped on their way by Kinnock and others.
 




The estimates that the Cardiff City Council published a few
months back provide an insight into the grip that money lenders can
have on one relatively small local authority.
In 1979 in Cardiff, for example, 24,314 house-holders paid
£5,473,215 worth of rent into the funds of the City Council.
Yet £7,533,746 was paid back in debt charges; i.e. the
interest paid back on the money borrowed to build the houses in the
first place.
Furthermore the city treasurer estimates that in 1981 the total
rents collected will be just over £7.5 million, but interest
repayments will have shot up to over £11.5 million. So much for the
subsidised council tenant.
In 1979 all of the rents paid in Cardiff and almost all of the
government subsidy (which of course comes from taxes levied on
working people) were swallowed up in interest repayments to the
financial parasites.
Of course the exploitation does not end with housing. The same
report shows that rate-payers in Cardiff are still paying interest on
the money borrowed to build the Guildford Crescent Baths, first
erected during the reign of Queen Victoria!
In the Wales Empire poll built to cater for the holding of the
Empire Games in Cardiff in the 1950s, interest repayments were almost
as high as the wages paid to the workers who run the biggest swimming
pool in Wales.
After years of fighting by local Labour councillors, Ely, the
second largest council estate in the city was recently granted a
leisure centre, which has proved to be a very well supported amenity.
Again the city treasurer reports that interest repayments were
£10,000 greater than the takings in the centre in 1979.
The terrible bus service in Cardiff with its astronomical fares
lost £96,000 in 1979. Hardly surprising when £350,571 was paid back
to the money lenders. Just as a parting shot the money lenders took
over £15,000 in 1979 on the money borrowed for the disposal of the
dead in Cardiff.
Readers of the Militant will need little reminding of the
events of the last year’s ‘Winter of Discontent’. Right wing
Labour ministers like Owen and Ennals then took time off from
praising the virtues of crossing picket lines to explain to low paid
council workers that there was no money in the kitty to pay them a
living wage.
Little wonder that this is the case when money lenders are robbing
council left, right and centre.
And it is Labour councils and working class areas that face the
greatest burden in this place of exploitation. It is precisely run
down working class areas where the lowest amount of money can be
raised on rates, and the greatest amount of money needs to be spent.
So Labour councils have no alternative under the present system
than to go cap in hand to the financiers who bleed them white.
Instead of bowing to the dictates of Heseltine and his well oiled
Tory pals and cutting services on increasing rates and rents, the
labour movement should boldly declare that the next Labour government
will say enough is enough and cancel all local authority debts to the money-lenders.
Finally it should be spelt out what socialist policies would mean
in practice. The nationalisation of financial institutions with
direct government finances to local authorities would remove once and
for all the crippling burden of interest repayments.
This in turn would lead to a big reduction in rents and rates,
better schools, free public transport and leisure amenities at a
price people could afford. So much for the right wing argument that
socialist policies would lose Labour votes.
 




The Tories’ first year in office has been a continuous onslaught
on our education services. This is the stark challenge facing the
annual conference of the National Association of Teachers in Further
and Higher Education.
As the NEC report points out, the cuts already imposed on the
Manpower Services Commission have had a serious effect on further
education courses and the cuts the MSC will make in 1980 will have a
more drastic effect in the academic year 1980–1. The swingeing
increases in overseas students’ fees will have a similar effect in
jeopardising a number of valuable courses.
In the field of higher education, the government limit on the
financial pool for advanced courses will, as the NEC rightly points
out, have “disastrous consequences for public sector higher education.”
On the pay front, contrary to the exaggerated claims of the Tory
press, most teachers in further and higher education gained very
little from the Clegg settlement. In fact NATFHE members will have to
wait until September 1981 before they have had a year’s salary as
agreed by Clegg. This is from an agreement on our 1979 salaries!
Clegg has failed to restore the salaries as outlined by the
Houghton settlement in 1975, except for a small number of badly-paid
teachers, and has enormously increased pay differentials.
Last week the final insult came when Clegg reported that he had
“miscalculated by 4 per cent”. It is doubtful whether management
will try to claw this back; almost certainly they will try to take it
from the 1980–1 claim.
Conference should draw up a balance sheet from this particular
experience and the union must resolve never again to be caught in the
trap of comparability deals.
All this reinforces the urgency of the pay settlement of 1980–1.
With the present high rates of inflation, the NEC has estimated that
any settlement below 20% will represent a devaluation of Clegg before
the members have received it.
The support for a half-day strike in the recent branch ballot on
further sanctions should negotiations break down, is a positive
indication of the discontent on pay. Members now expect action to
secure a 20% settlement.
As the struggle against Thatcher’s policies become more intense,
NATFHE members have been forced to recognise the need for political
action. As the ATTI, NATFHE was the first teachers’ union to
affiliate to the TUC. It should now set the lead amongst teachers by
affiliating to the Labour Party.
The Socialist Education Association will be holding a fringe
meeting as the start of a campaign for NATFHE affiliation, a campaign
which should be fully supported by the membership as a whole. Only by
posing the socialist alternative to the free market madness of
Thatcher and Joseph, can we secure a decent education system for our
members and the youth of Britain.
 




The Labour Party Young Socialists have swung into action to
counter racialists and have won a tremendous response from immigrant
workers and wide sections of the labour movement. They have set an
example for the labour movement nationally how to defeat racialist
propaganda and build support for the movement.
The last two weeks had seen the development of activities by
anti-immigrant groups in the city. On Friday June 19th the
Anti-Immigration League organised a meeting in Cardiff to be
addressed by Lady Birdwood and Sadie Relph.
A picket of the meeting was organised which was supported by the
Cardiff Trades Council. Given the shortage of time the picket was a
great success. Two hundred pickets lined the street outside the hall,
and only 15 turned up for the racialist meeting which was switched to
the home of the organiser!
Unfortunately the efforts of the labour movement in the city to
fight racialism have been hindered by a very negative attitude by
certain officials in the movement. Emrys Jones, the Welsh Regional
Organiser for the Labour Party, appealed twice through the press to
Labour Party members in the area to stay away from the picket!
On Saturday June 20th Cardiff North West, Cardiff South and
Cardiff North LPYS branches organised a meeting against racialism. On
learning about this meeting Jones circulated the 3 Constituency
Labour Parties, claiming that such a meeting was likely to worsen
race relations in the city and that in his opinion the CLPs should
not give permission for the LYPS branches to hold this meeting!
On Friday June 19th the 3 CLPs met and discussed Jones’ letter.
To their great credit Cardiff North and Cardiff North West CLPs
ignored Jones’ advice and gave support to the meeting.
Unfortunately due to a strong appeal from James Callaghan
(the local MP) and a very obstructive attitude from the chair in
refusing to allow a full discussion on the issue Cardiff South East
GMC vote not to support the meeting.
On Sunday June 20th the immigrant community gave the best possible
reply to Emrys Jones. Around 100 people crowded into the meeting,
literally squashed into every corner of the room. Over half the
meeting was composed of immigrant workers, with practically every
immigrant group represented.
The first speaker was Henry Newbury, himself an Asian and a member
of Cardiff West CLP and the AUEW, described the life of an Asian
immigrant in Britain. In a fighting contribution Henry produced
statistics which utterly refuted the poisonous propaganda of the
racialists. He pointed the way forward for the movement in calling
for unity between black and white workers on a socialist programme.
Paul Copping (Cardiff North LPYS and LPYS Welsh Regional
Committee) in an excellent speech showed how racialism was a tool of
the ruling class to create divisions amongst the working class. Paul
echoed Henry’s arguments that in no sense could immigrants be held
responsible for the shortages of jobs, low wages, lack of housing
etc. Paul called for a campaign against racialism aimed at striking
at the very root of the disease.
The lively discussion that followed was led by the immigrant
comrades. Practically every immigrant speaker supported the arguments
of the platform.
More significantly they all pledged full support and full
involvement of their groups in the co-ordinating committee set up by
the LPYS against racialism in the city.
This fantastic response showed the willingness of the immigrant
workers to struggle alongside their white brothers against injustice
and to involve themselves in a real socialist campaign.
 




On the same day as the official unemployment figures for Wales showed 84,750 on the dole, a prospect of a massive increase in these figures is proposed as a result of the water shortage in Britain. South East Wales is the worst affected part of Britain with most households in the area at the moment having supplies cut off from 2 p.m. to 8 a.m. In order to prevent the appalling prospect of the water supplies running out completely by October, it has been proposed that industry in the Heads of the Valley area (Ebbw Vale, Tredegar, Rhymney) will have water supplies cut by half from September 1st.
According to John Collins, Assistant Secretary of the Welsh CBI, this move could lead to a two day week for workers in the area. Collins also warned ominously that if some firms were to close down as a result of the drought, they might remain permanently closed. In short, the working class of the South East Wales area face a massive reduction in take-home pay, increased unemployment and gross inconvenience for their children as many schools are threatened with closure.
 
Reserves
Although it is obviously true to point out that the drought is the worst Britain has experienced for centuries, the responsibility for the crisis faced in areas like ours must rest fairly and squarely with the owners of industry and the water authorities for not having organised sufficient permanent reserves for such an occurrence. It must surely be the ultimate condemnation of British capitalism that it cannot even plan for continued supplies of water, and that industry should be grinding to a halt now. Although nobody is justified in using water irresponsibly the appeals by both Len Murray and Dennis Howell, the newly appointed ‘Minister For Drought’, to domestic customers to save, really miss the point. It is part and parcel of the failure of big business to invest and plan properly that this situation has arisen. Even at the final hour more and more evidence is coming out on this.
Emlyn Jenkins, EC member of the South Wales NUM, pointed out on August 24th that a disused iron ore plant at Llanuarry can provide 4½ million gallons of water per day. This water is being pumped into a reservoir and is fit for consumption. Incredibly the contract between the Water Authority and the British Steel Corporation (who own the mine) runs out on November 5th. The excuse for this, and the fact that none of this or the 38 million gallons available in a nearby reservoir are to be used, according to the authority, is that it is “too costly”. Obviously the water authorities and the CBI would prefer to see workers and their families suffer than foot the bill to supply this water.
In reality this one example provided by a local trade unionists could be multiplied throughout the area, without even considering the plentiful supply of sea water on the South Wales coast that could be purified for both consumption and industrial use. Instead of placing the responsibility on consumers the labour leaders should draw up their own plans for maintaining existing and producing new forms of water supplies. If industry refuses to produce the funds for such projects then a cast iron case for public ownership without compensation exists.
 
Planning
Unless such a plan is produced workers and their families in many parts of Britain will face misery over the next period. As always the bosses will expect the workers to shoulder the burden of this crisis. Firstly unemployment followed quickly by exorbitant price rises as big business uses the drought as an excuse to jack up prices.
In the day to day struggles that result from this policy, the labour movement should throw the ball back firmly in the bosses’ court and demand work or full pay in industries threatened with shut down, and for the books of the food monopolies to be opened for inspection to trade unionists and housewives to see exactly how much of these increases is due to the drought and how much due to profiteering.
Above all else the crisis has shown that the planning of an essential commodity like water cannot be left to the likes of Lord Nugent and the unelected, unanswerable bureaucrats of the National Water Authority. Nobody can cause rain, but the chaos caused by this drought has yet again demonstrated the burning need for workers’ management of the economy and socialist planning.
 







A WELL-attended meeting, mainly of trade union activists and
largely drawn from South Wales, met in Cardiff on 29 June to
launch the Campaign for a New Workers Party (CNWP) in Wales.




From the platform Rob Williams (T&GWU), convenor of the Visteon
Car plant in Swansea,described the current struggle to protect jobs
in the works given New Labour’s total failure to stem the loss of
jobs in manufacturing throughout the country.
Alex Gounelas (USDAW) explained how very few youth in Britain had
any political memories before the rise of New Labour, and how they’d
suffered as a result of the government’s policy in spheres such as
low pay and education. Young people could be enthused by the prospect
of a new workers’ party in the same way that they were enthused by
the struggle against the war with Iraq.
John McInally (PCS NEC) condemned the huge Civil Service job
losses caused by this government’s policies, and the massive
privatisation brought about by New Labour in the same area. The call
for a new workers’ party is in tune with the aspirations of many
public sector trade unionists today.
On the same day that Blaenau Gwent voters delivered a damning
verdict on New Labour, this meeting showed what the campaign can and
will do throughout Wales in the next period.
 







NATFHE MEETS this weekend for its final conference. This
follows the decision of members of both NATFHE and the AUT to
merge into what will be the largest post-school education union in
the world – UCU, the University and College Union. We all welcome
the merger, but size alone will not guarantee victory for our
members in key battles with the employers and government.




Whichever sector we are in, all minds are on the current dispute
in the university sector over pay. There has been a clear attempt by
the media, the employers and New Labour to misrepresent this dispute.
The relative pay position of all university lecturers has declined
enormously. The union side has submitted a claim for 23.9% over three
years. The employers’ offer of 12% over the same period was rightly
rejected by the union side. It is the union side that should decide
when an offer is put to members, not the employers or Alan Johnson,
the New Labour secretary of state for education.
Some of the industrial hooliganism we have had to put up with for
years in Further Education is now coming to the university sector.
In the University of Northumbria, where our members are operating
the exam boycott, the employers have responded by withholding pay
completely.
On the 80th anniversary of the British General Strike, few would
have predicted that the lockout originating in the coal mines would
be deployed in a university!
To their great credit, our Northumbrian members have voted in a
ballot for indefinite strike action. They must not stand alone.
Conference must decide to pay them the maximum possible amount in
strike pay and, as soon as possible, all the university sector must
be brought out in indefinite action.
On the fringe, plans will be laid for the founding conference on
24 June of the proposed new left organisation in UCU – a conference
that has the potential to build big support for a left programme.
Elsewhere on the fringe there will be a meeting of the Campaign
for a New Workers’ Party. The creation of such a party is long
overdue for all who work in post-school education where the system of
free market capitalism, beloved of both the Tories and New Labour,
has done so much damage not just to our pay and conditions but to the
service we offer our communities.


Andrew Price was a NATFHE NEC member representing Further
Education Wales
 




NOVEMBER 22 marked the centenary of the birth of A.J. Cook. The
occasion was remembered by miners throughout Britain and the world
because of the enormously important role he played in the struggle to
establish trade unionism amongst miners.
The battles Cook led and fought in the 1920s contain important
lessons for trade unionists today and that is why we should carefully
study his life and work.
The main influence on Cook’s thinking was that of syndicalism.
As a philosophy syndicalism is characterised by both strengths and
weaknesses. It argues, and this is its fatal weakness, that the
struggle for socialism is essentially an industrial struggle,
which begins and ends on the shop floor. Marxism, on the other
hand accepts the importance of industrial struggle, but also argues
that on their own industrial struggles are insufficient to
bring about socialism. Shop floor battles need to be generalised into
political struggles linked to the perspective of achieving power for
the working class.
Syndicalism’s strength in the early twentieth century lay in its
progressive role in breaking down parochial attitudes amongst workers
and in fighting to organise strong industrial unions, particularly
among semi-skilled and unskilled workers.
This was true of one of the very early organisations in which Cook
played a part. The South Wales Miners’ Unofficial Reform Committee
was formed out of the experiences of the 1912 miners’ strike and
the Cambrian lock out. Cook and Noah Ablett established themselves as
dedicated fighters for the main demands of the committee, contained
in The Miners’ Next Step:

One union for all miners, with a string and centralised leadership.
A minimum wage of 8/– a day
A seven-hour day.
Control of the industry to be taken out of the hands of the
coal owners and run by the miners.

Cook’s struggles in South Wales to win support for the demands
of The Miners’ Next Step were a mere foretaste of the
titanic battles he was to lead in the 1920s. In this period the whip
of the bosses, determined to make the workers pay for capitalism’s
crisis, and the inspiration of the Bolshevik Revolution, spurred the
working class to colossal battles.
The first major battle came in 1921 when Lloyd George suddenly
announced the ending of war-time control over the coal industry and
the owners, proposing massive wage cuts, posted lock-out notices at
every pit.
The determination of the ruling class to break the unions and in
particular the miners was observed by Julian Symons, not a writer
noted for his revolutionary fervour:
“A state of emergency was declared, reservists were called to
the colours, machine guns were posted at pit heads and troops
in battle order were sent to many working class areas.” Symons –
The General Strike! (our emphasis)
The working class were betrayed by their own leaders. Last minute
hesitancy by miners’ leader Hodges let the ultra-reactionary leader
of the railwaymen, Jimmy Thomas, seize the opportunity he had been
looking for [to call – ID] off the strike of Triple Alliance
unions. The entire working class, not just the miners, had been
betrayed in a most abject manner. The miners would now have to fight
on their own, and Friday 15 April, 1921 was to be bitterly remembered
as Black Friday.
During the 1921 lock-out Cook achieved national status as a
miners’ leader. Correctly he tried to make the best of a very bad
situation and worked tirelessly for the miners’ cause. A parallel
can be drawn here with the overwhelmingly successful struggle of the
miners in 1972 when a little known Yorkshire organiser, Arthur
Scargill, rose to national prominence.
 
Cook’s high point
Given the betrayal of the leaders of what was subsequently
referred to as the Cripple Alliance the defeat of the miners was
inevitable. The betrayal wrought a terrible price not just on the
miners who returned to work on the coal owners’ terms of massive
wage cuts, but within a year of the 1921 lock-out wage cuts had
successfully been imposed on engineering workers, shipyard workers
and cotton operatives. Drunk with success the coal owners and the
government decided where ever possible to victimise militants. Cook
was arrested, charged with unlawful assembly and sentenced to four
months imprisonment.
One of the conclusions drawn by rank and file militants from the
defeat of 1921 was the need to organise more effectively and to build
a fighting leadership in the TUC. To this end Cook played an
important role in the establishment of the National Minority
Movement. In 1924 its founding conference was attended by 270
delegates representing a quarter of a million workers. At its peak
the NMM had one million trade unionists affiliated to it, which
represented only a fraction of its true support and influence.
The newly formed Communist Party placed itself at the head of the
Minority Movement and, because of this, the movement was never able
to realise its true potential. Hindered by early bouts of
ultra-leftism and fatally misled by Stalin during the general strike,
the influence of the CP was another factor in the defeat of 1926.
In 1924 the solid support enjoyed by the Minority Movement among
miners was reflected in Cook’s election to the General Secretary’s
position of the MFGB.
Shortly after his election Cook led the miners into what appeared
to be a great victory. The appalling mismanagement of the industry by
the coal owners had delivered it to almost complete financial ruin.
The coal owners, determined to shift the responsibility for the
crisis onto the shoulders of the miners, served notice that the
miners would have to accept less money for working longer
hours. In June 1925 the owners served one month’s notice on the
miners to terminate the existing wages agreement, cut wages and
enforce longer hours.
During this crisis Cook adamantly refused to even to speak to the
coal owners until the notices were withdrawn. When the government,
obviously stalling, set up a court of inquiry into the coal industry,
which Cook correctly refused to appear before, so overwhelming was
the case in support of the miners that the court of inquiry,
eventually ruled in their favour! At rank and file level the miners
enjoyed massive support from fellow trade unionists and this was
sufficient to force the TUC General Council, frightened of losing its
authority, to declare in favour of the miners and threaten widespread
sympathy action in their support. In the face of such solid
opposition Tory Prime Minister Baldwin capitulated and on 31 July
announced a subsidy of £23 million to the coal industry to prevent
wage cuts.
The miners had won a great victory largely as a result of Cook’s
determined leadership. 31 July went into the annals of labour history
as Red Friday.
 
Battle lines
The tragedy of Red Friday was that many trade union leaders, even
some on the left, believed that Red Friday was the end and not the
beginning of the struggle. Baldwin’s subsidy was to last nine
months, until 1 May 1926. The ruling class was to use this nine
months to prepare thoroughly for a major confrontation with the trade unions.
“Whatever it may cost in blood and treasure we shall find that
the trade unions will be smashed from top to bottom” – declared
Lord Londonderry speaking not just on behalf of his fellow coal
owners, but on behalf of the whole ruling class.
“I mean all workers in this country have got to take
reductions”, said Baldwin.
The ruling class’ meticulous preparations for civil war were
spearheaded by Winston Churchill who never missed an opportunity to
express his almost pathological hatred of trade unionism and
socialism. The TUC General Council did nothing.
When the general strike began the right-wing leadership of the TUC
were absolutely terrified of the force that they had unleashed. Again
Thomas personified the sheer rottenness of their position.
“What I dreaded more than anything else was ... if by
chance it should have got out of the hands of those who could be able
to exercise some control, every sane man then knows what would have
happened.”
Cook declared a radically different, but nevertheless dangerously
misguided, point of view. “A strike of the miners would mean the
end of capitalism” he declared on the eve of the strike.
Throughout the nine heroic days of May 1926, whilst the right wing
consciously sold out their members, Cook fought might and main for a
miners’ victory. But in this situation honesty and dedication were
not enough. Cook did not, and as a syndicalist could not, understand
the situation. The only way the general strike could have led to the
end of capitalism was to link the struggle to the perspective of
workers’ power. This meant a leadership prepared to broaden the
struggle to link the Councils of Action to the perspective of a
democratic workers’ state.
Unfortunately the Communist Party was totally misled by Stalin.
They persuaded the Minority Movement to place their faith in the
‘left’ members of the TUC General Council. Two of these leaders,
Powell and Hicks, were to play a key role in the betrayal of the
strike whilst the CP tail-ended the movement with the totally
abstract slogan “All power to the TUC General Council”!
During the 1926 general strike the question of power was posed in
the starkest possible terms in British society. Syndicalism was put
to the test and failed. The main responsibility for the defeat of
1926 will always lie with the treacherous policy of the right wing
leaders of the TUC General Council. Compared with Cook they will
forever stand as pygmies in the gallery of working class leaders in
British history. Having said this it would be foolish to deny that
Cook’s politics bore no responsibility for the defeat of the
general strike.
The position of Marxism and the brilliant predictions made by
Trotsky in Where is Britain Going? were borne out entirely by
the events of May 1926. No situation could be of greater class
polarisation than that of a general strike.
Despite Cook’s total commitment to the miners’ cause his
confused position left him with no credible alternative to that of
the right wing. In fact Cook withdrew from sale his pamphlet Nine
Days in which he criticised the right wing’s role in the
strike. He refused to support the demand for the reconvening of the
conference of trade union executives until after the miners’
lock out. Scandalously in the first TUC Congress after the strike
Cook added his enormous authority to the demand of the right wing
that the strike should not even be discussed!
The defeat of the general strike, the long lock-out of the miners,
and their return to work on the coal owners’ terms shattered Cook.
The general strike constituted the greatest ever defeat of the
British working class. The unbelievable indignities the Tories
inflicted on the miners, and the sheer desperation of the situation
were summed up in a letter which Cook wrote in April 1929 to Arthur Horner:
“Practically every day young men, stranded, call for
food, clothing and shelter at my office. Every day the post brings
terrible epistles of agony and despair. I have helped all I can,
begged all I can till I have been almost demented with despair.”
Shortly after this Cook died of cancer. Every ounce of his energy
had been devoted to the cause of socialism, and every penny he owned
was given to the Miners’ Federation. Hodges, his predecessor, was
appointed by the Tories a member of the National Electricity Board.
He later became a director of several colliery and steel companies
and died in 1947 leaving an estate of over £100,000. He represents
the traditions of the right wing. Cook represents a tradition the
right wing cannot begin to understand.
After 1926 the trade unions were broken. Company unionism spread
like a cancer throughout the coalfields. Today the unions are
infinitely stringer and in the coming battles we can learn from
Cook’s weaknesses, but more importantly draw inspiration from his
strengths.
 




It was with great sadness that Socialist Party members and trade
unionists across South Wales received the news that Andrew Price had
passed away following a serious chest infection.
Our heartfelt condolences go out to his wife Enid, children
Rachel, Philip and Michael, and grandchildren Josh, Sam, Jack and Liam.
Andrew was an inspirational figure who overcame chronic ill health
to continue to play a leading role as one of the most militant
leaders of the South Wales labour movement.
He was a great orator, a tenacious fighter and a stalwart of the
Socialist Party and its predecessors the Militant Tendency and
Militant Labour.
As such he was hated by the right wing of the labour movement who
responded with relentless and often spiteful attacks (the right wing
vetoed a vote in Splott ward Labour Party to send Andrew a get well
card following his stroke).
But Andrew rose above those attacks, reinforced by an unwavering
conviction in the correctness of Marxist ideas and the eventual
victory of the working class.
 
Early life
Andrew was born in Pontypridd, one of four sons, before his family
moved to Cardiff while he was still a young boy.
Andrew grew up a real Cardiffian before returning to Pontypridd
and going to Aberystwyth university in 1967.
In Pontypridd Andrew joined the Labour Party Young Socialists, the
beginning of nearly 50 years of labour movement activity.
In 1968 he was convinced of Marxist ideas and joined Militant, at
that time a small tendency within the Labour Party.
In 1969 he was one of the first Militant supporters to be
elected onto the National Committee (NC) of the Labour Party Young
Socialists (LPYS) and contributed in no small measure to the success
in 1970 of Militant gaining a majority on the LPYS NC, a
majority never relinquished until the right wing under Neil Kinnock
effectively closed the LPYS in 1989, after all attempts at
engineering a political defeat of Militant had failed.
It was at an LPYS meeting in Cardiff in 1968 that Andrew met Enid
Phillips. At that meeting Andrew and Enid were in different political
trends – Enid was a supporter of Tribune, the left reformist
paper of the Labour Party – but they still fell for each other.
It was the beginning of a life-long partnership of deep mutual
love and dedication. In later years the Price household, the most
political in Tremorfa, appeared from the outside to be the least
politicised as Andrew and Enid agreed to display neither Labour nor
Socialist Party posters in their window!
In 1971 Rachel their daughter was born, followed three years later
by twins Michael and Philip. Andrew was a devoted father, and later
grandfather, combining his dedication to his family with his
commitment to the struggle to change society.
The 1970s was a period of heightened class struggle against the
Tory Heath government which Andrew participated in.
Militant’s ideas were gaining an increasing echo and he
played a prominent role in the Cardiff Trades Union Council which he
continued until the end.
The election of a Labour government was viewed with great
expectation by the working class, but it was led by the right wing
who attempted to balance support from the trade union movement with
carrying out the dictates of big business.
Andrew clashed in the Cardiff South East CLP (constituency Labour
Party) with a leader of the government, Jim Callaghan, who was first
foreign secretary, then prime minister.
 
Labour Party witch hunt
Led by the Tory press, the right wing began a campaign against
“Trotskyist infiltration” in Cardiff South East Labour Party.
For 13 years Andrew, together with other Militant
supporters, especially Dave Bartlett, fought tooth and nail repeated
attempts to expel him from the Labour Party, all of which failed
until Andrew was struck down with a stroke in 1988.
Reminding anyone who would listen that it was Marxists who helped
form the Labour Party, Andrew fought every attempt to get him out of
Cardiff South East Labour Party and off Callaghan’s CLP General
Management Committee (GMC).
After the right wing mobilised at Splott ward’s AGM to vote
Andrew off the GMC, Andrew remembered that the Socialist Education
Association (SEA), of which he was a member, was affiliated to
Cardiff South East Labour Party and so got delegated from the SEA.
His right wing opponents were seething as Andrew took his seat at
the next GMC meeting. When the right wing responded by mobilising
dozens of right wingers from all across Cardiff to join the SEA in an
attempt to unseat him, Andrew and Dave Bartlett responded by signing
up dozens of left wingers.
The normally sleepy SEA was surprised to see its Cardiff branch
mushroom into the biggest in the country! Under Andrew’s leadership
the Cardiff SEA became not just a battleground with the right wing
but one of the best venues in Cardiff for socialist discussion and
debate with many outside speakers invited to speak on educational and
socialist issues.
The campaign against Militant supporters in Cardiff South
East was very personal and occasionally violent, but he never once
faltered, maintaining a principled support for Militant and
Marxist ideas and refusing to stoop to the personal and petty levels
of his opponents.
The attacks from the right wing did not prevent Andrew from
winning wide support from the labour movement in South Wales.
In 1980 he even managed to be elected as the delegate from Cardiff
South East CLP to Labour Party national conference and took great
delight in reporting back how he voted in the conference to the right
wing at the GMC.
He was short-listed as Labour parliamentary candidate in
Caerphilly, Torfaen and Cardiff Central constituencies, only missing
out in Cardiff Central by a handful of votes to another left winger
in1982.
In 1985 eventually the right wing in Cardiff South Labour Party
voted to expel Andrew along with Dave Bartlett and Diane Mitchell.
Andrew used the attack as a platform to campaign against the witch
hunt and for the ideas of Marxism in the labour movement, travelling
all over the country speaking at Labour Party meetings and raising
funds for the Cardiff South Defence Fund.
The Cardiff South three successfully won an injunction against the
right wing for unconstitutionally railroading the expulsions through.
 
Dedication to labour movement
Andrew played a prominent role in the South Wales labour movement
in the struggles against the reactionary Thatcher government.
During the miners’ strike of 1984–5 Andrew was seen on many
picket lines in support of the miners, and when the picket lines were
attacked by the police he was often seen where the fighting was at
its thickest.
Andrew was also a staunch defender of Militant-led
Liverpool council, organising support meetings in Cardiff.
In 1988 Andrew suffered a serious stroke that partially paralysed
his left side. His disability made movement very difficult, but aided
by Enid, he insisted on returning to work and continuing his
political activity.
For the rest of his life Andrew refused to allow his disability to
prevent him playing a full role in the labour movement and as a
teacher. This would not have been possible without the huge day to
day and moral support he received from Enid for the remaining 26
years of his life.
He had already come to the conclusion that the undemocratic
changes to the Labour Party had made it increasingly difficult to
change it and that it was better to build support for Marxism outside
the Labour Party and for him to concentrate on the wider struggle.
In 1989 Margaret Thatcher gave him a golden opportunity with the
poll tax. Andrew threw himself into the struggle and soon clashed
again with the right wing Labour councillors who decided to implement
Thatcher’s poll tax.
He helped set up Splott anti-poll tax union and when summoned to
court for non-payment Andrew stood his ground and defied the
magistrates.
Andrew’s deep personal loyalty was sorely tested when the
Militant leadership split in 1991 mainly over the issue of
staying in the Labour Party.
But despite being telephoned a number of times by leaders of the
small minority faction who wished to remain in the Labour Party,
Andrew supported the position of the majority who realised that
Labour was becoming a party wedded to capitalism in which the voice
of the working class was silenced.
 
Teacher and trade unionist
Andrew had begun teaching sociology at Rumney Tech in 1971 and for
the next 38 years was an inspiring teacher to thousands of further
education students.
Many times he would be sought out on street stalls by former
students who were grateful for his dedication and patience.
And Andrew was also a great union organiser in the college
lecturers’ union, NATFHE (now part of UCU), serving for many years
on its Wales and UK executive committees.
Over the years he was an uncompromising negotiator on behalf of
union members at his college and as a Wales negotiator with the Welsh
college employers.
With Andrew as one of the FE leaders, Wales was one of the most
combative parts of NATFHE and Welsh FE lecturers led by Andrew
secured the best pay and employment deals in Britain, including pay
parity with teachers that served as an aim for lecturers in England.
Even after retiring Andrew continued to play an important role at
the Cardiff Trades Union Council, UCU Wales Retired Members branch
and at the Wales TUC conference, at this year’s conference
powerfully condemning the bedroom tax.
Andrew was a tremendous orator, always speaking clearly and was
able to speak colourfully but also directly, telling it like it is.
 
Later years
Despite being one of the oldest members of the Socialist Party in
Wales Andrew had a special relationship with the youngest members.
One recalls:
“A fountain of knowledge in the local Socialist Party
branch he would answer every question and take time to speak to an
annoying teenager (me) at every meeting and activity.”
Another recalls:
“Andrew became my comrade and friend but he never
stopped being my teacher. He was an inspiration to all around him.
The struggles he endured, the respect he had amongst his peers and
younger generations. Always willing to patiently explain – many
times too patiently to the annoyance of other comrades. Always
entertaining to sit down and have a pint with.”
One young member insisted in remaining in Andrew’s party branch
even though she didn’t live in the area, so that she could hear his
contributions in the political discussions.
After leaving the Labour Party Andrew dedicated himself to arguing
the need for a new mass workers’ party.
He understood that this was the main political task for the trade
union movement. Labour Party supporters in the trade unions sometimes
tired of his interventions, but Andrew understood that this issue was
central for the working class to defend itself against the capitalist onslaught.
Andrew also understood that building support for socialist ideas
was crucial as well. He never missed a Socialist Party branch meeting
except for illness or holiday, even though he had more reason than anyone.
He understood that finance was vital to our success and was an
inspiring and determined finance organiser. He was the best district
treasurer Wales Socialist Party ever had. In 1987 he and Chris Peace
organised a sponsored bike ride to raise money for the fighting fund.
In later years he did not allow his disability to prevent him from
repeating the feat, this time on an adapted bike.
For three years anyone who attended an anti-cuts meeting or a
trades council meeting was gently “persuaded” to sponsor Andrew.
In two years he raised over £1,000, which was paid into the
financial appeals at Socialism 2012 and 2013.
This year Andrew will not be here to repeat his ride, but some
sponsor money has already been collected.
Socialist Party Wales is setting up an Andrew Price memorial fund
with a target of £2,000 to ensure Andrew’s 2014 efforts are not wasted.
For decades Andrew inspired enormous respect and affection, even
from opponents, because he had absolute integrity.
He was dedicated to changing society and convinced that the
working class, the ideas of Marxism and the methods of the Socialist
Party and CWI are the only means by which we can achieve that.
His example is an inspiration to generations of socialists and
although he has passed away, his memory lives on in the minds of
generations of socialists, who are proud to have known Andrew and
shared in his battles. He will be sorely missed and never forgotten.
 




Socialist Party member Andrew Price is retiring from work next
February, so he is standing down from his position as the UCU
national executive member for Welsh Further Education.
The UCU executive have voted to confer life membership of the
union on Andrew, in recognition of his many years of involvement in
the union and one of its predecessors, NATFHE.
He has been a branch officer of NATFHE/UCU for more than 25 years
and he served on the executive of the two unions for 13 years, twice
defeating right-wing candidates.
For the past five years he has been a lay negotiator for Welsh FE
pay and conditions, being one of the leaders of the recent strike
against the employer’s attempts to break the national agreement on pay.
Andrew told The Socialist:
“Coming in the same week as the 40th anniversary of my
membership of the Socialist Party, I am delighted that the brothers
and sisters of my trade union have conferred this honour on me.
“But this is not the main prize. That came on 16 April
this year when members walking out on strike and joining picket lines
reached an all time high in Wales, with over 250 strikers
demonstrating outside the Welsh Assembly.”
 




Reg Deacon [Chairman Cardiff No. 18 branch GMWU] and Doug
Toutt on the picket line spoke to Militant:
Cardiff’s dustmen initially voted to work during the low pay
dispute, and about two-thirds of the refuse would have been
collected. But management [i.e. Cardiff Tory council] told them they
would work as normal or not at all. This deliberate provocation has
led to an all-out dustmen’s strike in Cardiff.
Doug’s wage slip showed a take-home pay of Â£43 after being paid
a bonus. This was for a driver – assistants get less and many have
to claim FIS to make ends meet.
Because the employers’ offer does not cover bonuses it would
mean only 70p a week for most of the men!
Picketing has been very successful. If Jim Callaghan tried to
cross the picket line, said Dave, they would persuade him not to. But
if he did, it would show him up in his true colours.
All the pickets felt angry that they had been forced to take this
action under a Labour government. They felt the government’s
attitude was bound to disillusion Labour voters. One thing was
certain, however: the last person they wanted was Margaret Thatcher.
“We want Â£60 a week – I’m fed up of collecting
rubbish and getting paid rubbish for it.”
 







TOWARDS THE end of 2006, the University and College Union
(UCU) rejected a pay offer from the Welsh employers’ organisation
Fforwm, declared a dispute and began to ballot for strike action.




A little later Bernice Waugh, one of the union’s three lay
negotiators was declared compulsorily redundant from her post in the
Welsh College of Horticulture.
Shortly after this in Deeside College another lay negotiator,
Craig Lewis, saw his remission time from teaching to be a negotiator
removed. In January, as the third lay negotiator, I was threatened
with redundancy and the loss of my remission time.
In my own case a negotiated settlement protecting both my job and
my remission time in Coleg Glan Hafren Cardiff was reached last week.
In Deeside the principal compounded his victimisation of Craig
Lewis by sacking Pete Jones, a candidate in the recent UCU general
secretary election in the middle of the campaign!
When Deeside branch produced a newsletter condemning
victimisation, the principal was mortally offended and demanded its
withdrawal and an apology.
When the branch told him exactly what to do with those requests he
took steps amounting to the virtual derecognition of the union in the
college.
Following the refusal of the branch officers to sign a document
retracting perfectly true statements accepted as such by UCU members
in the college, Deeside branch is now balloting for a programme of
strike action and action short of a strike.
The actions of the principal of Deeside College are a total
disgrace, typical of the management thuggery introduced into FE by
arrangements initiated by the Tories but preserved by New Labour.
They threaten every UCU member, whether employed in an FE College
or a university. Our members in Deeside must win this dispute. Theirs
would not just be a victory for all workers in post-school education,
but for workers everywhere.
Post script. On Saturday 21 April, UCU Wales conference
unanimously passed a motion condemning Deeside management and
supporting our members.
The conference also unanimously re-elected Craig Lewis, Andrew
Price and Bernice Waugh as lay negotiators.


Andrew Price was a lay negotiator representing UCU Further Education Wales.
 







LAST YEAR saw the merger of the two main post-school
education trade unions, the AUT and NATFHE into the University and
College Union (UCU). Currently members are voting for a general
secretary and a national executive (NEC).




Three candidates are up for general secretary – Sally Hunt
(currently joint general secretary of UCU), Roger Kline (an official
heading the union’s Equality and Employment unit) and Pete Jones, a
lay activist from the Further Education (FE) sector.
Nearly 14 years after the passing of the infamous Tory Further
and Higher Education Act the dire effects of the introduction of
market forces into the provision of post-school education are plain
to see.
University top up fees, New Labour’s policies will soon mean
£10,000 annually with increased problems for working-class students
and university funding.
University lecturers today are among the worst paid of all
teachers in both school and post-school education.
Only in Wales (where the union is left-led) has pay parity between
FE lecturers and school teachers been achieved. In England it is
still a long way off. In Northern Ireland our members have recently
taken strike action to achieve this goal.
New Labour has actually increased the Tory pressure of
privatisation and cuts. Currently our FE members are fighting some
appalling attacks on English as a Second Language (ESOL) provision.
Against this background UCU needs a left general secretary who can
give the lead all our members need.
Nobody claims that Sally Hunt is a left candidate, and her victory
may be welcomed by the employers and by government ministers. Many
activists see her hand in the unsatisfactory settlement of the
university pay dispute last summer.
Her unprincipled position of “members first and politics second”
helps nobody and threatens the work of the union in opposing both the
occupation of Iraq and racism and fascism.
Roger Kline and Pete Jones are both left candidates with much to
offer. But in this two-horse race between Roger and Sally Hunt a vote
for Kline is the best way to avoid a Hunt victory.
For this and other reasons Socialist Party members in UCU call
upon all members to vote for Roger Kline. But more importantly we
must build a strong union from below that will campaign for a
publicly owned and accountable post-school education system, where
all workers are properly rewarded.

Andrew Price was member for FE in Wales of the UCU Transitional
NEC.
 




Marxism in Today’s World
by Peter Taaffe
This Christmas, one of my presents was the book Marxism in
Today’s World by Peter Taaffe. This is an extended interview
originally given in 2003 to an Italian Marxist, on the politics of
the Socialist Party, the Committee for a Workers’ International
(CWI) and The Socialist’s forerunner, Militant, with
additional comments from Bob Labi of the CWI.
Peter Taaffe, Bob Labi and I all became Trotskyists in the 1960s;
I first joined Militant in 1968. In fact, a decisive factor in my
joining was Peter’s capacity to explain some of the complex ideas
of Marxism in a way working class men and women could understand.
In 1969, I was elected as Welsh representative on the National
Committee of the Labour Party Young Socialists, and later, when
Marxists became a majority of the Committee, I became National
Vice-chairperson of the organisation while Bob Labi (the London
representative) became editor of the LPYS newspaper (then known as Left).
Marxism in Today’s World is divided into the following
sections: 9/11 and after; the world situation; the Middle East;
Ireland and the National Question; the Permanent Revolution today;
Russia, Eastern Europe and State Capitalism; China; the history of
the Militant and the CWI.
I am unable to make detailed comments on most of these sections
except to say that there is important commentary on a difficult
period from roughly 1985 to 1995, a period that saw the defeat of the
miners’ strike of 1984–85, the collapse of Stalinism across
Eastern Europe, and the Labour Party’s shift to the right.
Some chose to deny social reality and remained within the Labour
Party, deluding themselves and a few others that things had not
fundamentally changed.
Some of these went on to pursue parliamentary ambitions that some
of them probably had when they described themselves as Marxists.
Some, including Peter, me and many others, were expelled from the
Labour Party, helped to establish Militant Labour and remain today as
members of the Socialist Party and the CWI.
I hope every member of the Socialist Party and the CWI reads
Marxism in Today’s World, including young comrades not even
born when many of the events analysed took place.
To work properly as a party member in today’s world you need to
understand how we have cherished and defended at each stage our most
important legacy: the ideas of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky.
Buy this book, read it, organise branch meetings around it and
help develop your own political understanding to the point where you
can play a decisive role in ridding the world of the scourge of capitalism.
 







LAST NOVEMBER the Welsh Assembly, through its education
minister Jane Davidson, intervened in the long-running dispute
over Further Education (FE) college lecturers’ pay. They
promised the injection of £9 million, paving the way for parity
of pay between FE lecturers and schoolteachers in April 2004.




For NATFHE, the main trade union organising teaching staff in FE
colleges, acceptance of these proposals meant a switch from national
(England and Wales) pay bargaining to Wales-level bargaining.
Wales also withdrew from national industrial action, notably the
one-day strike called jointly with UNISON on 5 November 2002.
Acceptance of the proposals meant a tacit recognition that the
only way the union could achieve justice on pay was through a
partnership with the employers and New Labour in the Welsh Assembly.
For this reason, prominent left-wingers in the union in Wales like
myself and Craig Lewis, the chair of the FE sector committee, opposed
the Davidson proposals.
We pointed out the college employers’ poor record on pay and
conditions since the incorporation (privatisation) of FE Colleges by
the Tories in 1993.
NATFHE members in Wales voted narrowly to accept the Davidson
proposals. From then, every left-wing activist in the union in Wales
strove to achieve the best possible deal in line with member’s wishes.
Initially negotiations with the Welsh employers organisation
Fforwm went relatively smoothly, with agreement being reached on the
allocation of the £9 million from the Assembly, giving most to the
lowest-paid workers – the support staff and the hourly paid
teaching staff and least to the management grades.
However, talks on parity with schoolteachers quickly floundered.
Currently schoolteachers are employed on a six-point scale, following
which a teacher may progress through a five-point upper scale after
successful completion of development reviews.
Given the clear similarity between the job of a schoolteacher and
a FE college lecturer, NATFHE argues that all main-grade college
lecturers should have the same opportunities as schoolteachers to progress.
This position was opposed by the employers, who proposed a new
grade – Advanced Practitioners, meaning that only a small minority
of main-grade lecturers would progress to parity with schoolteachers.
NATFHE made a number of concessions to achieve agreement but the
employers refused to compromise. They didn’t use the funding
argument, stating that not all of us deserve pay parity with schoolteachers.
NATFHE in Wales has already adopted an action programme, should
pay talks break down, involving a three-day strike in September to be
escalated if necessary to indefinite strike action. The strategy was
endorsed by the union’s national conference, which also voted
overwhelmingly despite opposition from the right-wing, to support
members on strike at £50 per day from day one.
A victory for NATFHE members in Wales would pave the way for a
similar victory in England, a victory for all trade unionists.

Andrew Price was NATFHE NEC member for FE Wales and a Wales pay
negotiator.
 




NATFHE, THE trade union organising lecturing staff in further
education (FE) colleges and new universities in England and Wales has
its conference this weekend.

The war with Iraq has had a huge impact on consciousness and
social relationships. From the outset the union played an important
and very principled role, affiliating to the Stop the War Coalition,
with union members prominent in the mass anti-war demonstrations.
Prior to the outbreak of war, general secretary Paul Mackney,
along with Mick Rix of ASLEF, argued on the TUC general council that
the TUC should co-ordinate strike action against war. The day after
war broke out, the Equality Committee of the NEC accepted my proposal
calling for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Iraq;
supporting NATFHE members and other trade unionists for walking out
of their workplaces in protest and congratulating all students who
had walked out of schools and colleges.
Contrary to the arguments of sections of NATFHE’s right wing,
the issue of war is a crucial question for all trade unionists. The
general secretary and the NEC’s position accurately reflected
members’ views, particularly the active membership.
Conference must ensure that there is no doubt on this question by
passing the emergency motion from Wales, which endorses the above
position and condemns the TUC for failing to mobilise strike action.
On members’ pay and conditions, big issues will be debated. In
higher education our members struggle in a severely underfunded
sector. The university sector has been badly let down by New Labour.
Tuition fees and top-up fees obstruct working-class students’
entry to university. But they also fail abysmally to provide the
funding for decentpay and working conditions for our members and to
provide quality education.
Charles Clarke, Margaret Hodge and the rest are being outflanked
by the Tories, with the hypocritical call by Duncan-Smith to abolish
tuition fees.
The problem will not be resolved, as the Tories claim, by reducing
the number of students going to university. Nor will it be resolved
within a tax system defended by capitalist parties such as the Tories
and New Labour, which treats the very rich more leniently than almost
anywhere in the capitalist world.
In further education, for the first time pay negotiations are
being conducted separately in England and Wales. Despite a pay deal
rewarding lower-paid members more than others in Wales, members in
both England and Wales are off target for pay parity with school
teachers by next year.
The employers are evidently opposed to this moderate demand. If we
are to achieve parity it will not be through ‘partnership’ with
either the employers or New Labour. Past experience shows that strike
action is the only language that such people understand.
This conference must be prepared to put this to our members,
accepting that if we go up this road NATFHE must give adequate
financial support to our members on strike.


Andrew Price was a national executive council (NEC) member of
NATFHE, representing FE Wales
 




Around the country the great ‘democrats’ of Labour’s right wing are determined to destroy the spirit of conference decisions on mandatory re-selection.
Predictably, nowhere is this more true than in the now notorious Cardiff South East Labour Party. In their determination to secure a ‘short list of one’, namely James Callaghan, the right-wing dominated General Management Committee (GMC) voted to accept a time-table of just five weeks, including Easter and the local election period.
What is more, delegations have been ruled ‘out of order’ by the Regional Officer of the Labour Party, Hubert Morgan. The most scandalous example is that of the Cardiff branch of the Socialist Education Association (SEA) which has had delegates to the constituency since 1976.
In January, the branch paid the level of affiliation fees which it was asked to pay in writing by Cardiff City Labour Party. After the delegations had been frozen for re-selection, Hubert Morgan disqualified the SEA’s three delegates because the City Party had asked for the wrong affiliation fees.
It will come as no surprise to readers of this paper that these three delegates are Militant supporters! With the backing of Cardiff City Labour Party and the SEA General Secretary, Graham Lane, the Cardiff SEA branch are appealing to Labour’s National Executive about the decision.
Just remember this story when you hear the right wing tell stories about ‘left-wing manoeuvres’.
 




Dear Comrade,
John Goleman’s letter concerning the heckling of Neil Kinnock at
this year’s South Wales gala (issue 563) completely misses the
point made by Merion Evans (560).
The election of the deputy leader of the Labour Party offers Party
members a clear choice between the policies of diluted Thatcherism
represented by Healey, and the socialist policies endorsed by
successive conferences, represented by Tony Benn.
To his shame Kinnock has refused to support Benn. I can understand
right-wing Labour MPs supporting Healey (everyone should have a
chance of one death wish), but for the life of me I cannot understand
why a so-called ‘left’ MP should take the position Kinnock does.
That is the real issue behind Merion’s original letter, which
Comrade Goleman avoids in his letter.
As Comrade Goleman seems interested in evoking the memory of
previous speakers at South Wales miners galas, may I quote from Nye
Bevan who regularly spoke at the gala and was never heckled. Bevan’s
advice to Richard Crossman in 1955 is most relevant to Kinnock and
other ‘left’ MPs today who choose to backslide on the deputy
leadership issue:
“In moments of crisis when the knives are out,
equivocation is tantamount to treachery.”



 


Yours fraternally
Andrew Price
Cardiff SE CLP



 




At a recent meeting Cardiff South East CLP nominated Denis
Healey for the position of deputy leader of the Party.
Nothing surprising about that you might say coming from one of the
most right-wing CLPs in Britain. But the way in which this decision
was reached should be of concern to every activist in the Party.
When GMC members received their notice of the meeting, they also
received without any explanation at all a piece of paper on which
they had to write the name of the candidate they supported for Party
leader, deputy leader, and treasurer. At the meeting Lord Brooks, the
CLP secretary and national organiser for ‘Solidarity’ explained
that this ‘democratic’ procedure would allow everybody to have
their say. Yes indeed! At least one ballot paper went to somebody
living outside the constituency!
Brooks refused to give any explanation as to how many ballot
papers had been sent out, how many had been sent back, and after the
count no figures were given on the votes cast for each candidate. In
addition Brooks was quite prepared to dish out ballot papers at the
GMC meeting on request, so as far as the GMC knew nothing could have
prevented a delegate posting his ballot paper in and then claiming
another one at the meeting.
During the protests that were going on about this appalling
travesty of the basic principles of electoral procedure one delegate
asked Brooks if he would read out the letters that had been sent to
each CLP from Tony Benn and John Silkin. Brooks replied that he had
read the letters and they were rubbish so he had left them at home.
Any active trade unionist would literally cringe at the idea of a
secretary having the right to arbitrarily decide which correspondence
should be reported to a meeting. There have already been disputes
over correspondence. Brooks left a YS resolution off the GMC agenda,
claiming he had not received it, yet two YS members said they had
taken the trouble of personally delivering it to Brooks.
The way in which Cardiff South East CLP is run has important
lessons for the movement. Having been an active member of this party
for over 10 years, I cannot recall many GMCs in the last few years
where the sort of attacks one reads in the Daily Express about
the Militant and the left in general are not made.
Practically always these attacks are spearheaded by Brooks and
local MP Jim Callaghan. They are supported by a small vociferous
clique of right-wingers who resort to terrible personal abuse when
their position is challenged. When you next hear Denis Healey
attacking the ‘intolerance’ of the left, remember that it is
people like these who desperately want him to win.
 







Following the magnificent 26 March TUC demonstration workers
and anti-cuts campaigners want to know how to build the movement
to defeat the cuts. Unfortunately trade unionists, looking to
their leaders for a way forward, have so far, in the main, been
disappointed.
However, a number of unions are looking at how to coordinate
strike action over the next few months, particularly over attacks
on pay and pensions.
In preparing this struggle history can provide useful
lessons. In 1921, 90 years ago, in a tragic event that became
known as Black Friday, right-wing trade union leaders betrayed the
miners.
As a result, the bosses were able to launch attacks on
almost the entire British working class. By the end of 1921 six
million workers had suffered wage cuts.
ANDREW PRICE explains why it is important for socialists
today to study Black Friday, but also the period of incredible
working class struggle in the 1920s.




For four years, from 1914 to 1918, working class men and women
made enormous sacrifices in World War One. During this time they were
lied to by pro-big business politicians such as Tory Winston
Churchill and Liberal David Lloyd George, who said that the war would
lead to a land “fit for heroes to live in”.
But post-war Britain was a society scarred by massive poverty and
huge social injustice, where the bosses were determined to maintain
the upper hand. Following the war the miners, in particular, felt
cheated.
Their industry was at the heart of British capitalism, employing
10% of the entire workforce, roughly 550,000 men. The war had
graphically demonstrated the lies of the supporters of capitalism.
The free market was not enough to provide adequate supplies to
fight in a world war. In the hands of the profiteer mine owners, coal
production was unreliable.
The ruling class was forced to accept the coal industry being
taken into public ownership. This had the full support of the miners
and their trade union, the Miners Federation of Great Britain (MFGB),
who hoped it would be a permanent measure.
 
Private ownership
But as the war drew to a conclusion the coal owners began to
agitate for the return of ‘their’ industry to private ownership,
confident of the support of the Liberal-Tory coalition headed by
Lloyd George.
This was fiercely opposed by the MFGB who feared the return of the
industry to private ownership would lead to an attack on their wages.
They threatened strike action.
Lloyd George saw no possibility of compromise in the situation and
tried to kick the ball into touch with the establishment of a Royal
Commission into the coal industry headed by Sir John Sankey.
Expecting one of their own to do what they wanted, the ruling
class and their Liberal-Tory allies were horrified when the final
report of the Commission expressed a lot of sympathy with the miners’
position and recommended that the industry remain in public ownership.
But that was the last anybody heard of Sankey and his Commission
as the government contemptuously rejected his recommendations. Then
the miners learned exactly whose side the Liberals and Tories were on.
However, the working class at this time was anything but docile.
The 1917 Russian Revolution saw workers, led by the socialist
Bolshevik party, take power. This inspired a wave of movements across
the world as workers, coming out of the hell of World War One, sought
an end to the anarchy and inequality of the war-ridden capitalist
system.
In Britain workers scaled heights of industrial militancy
previously thought impossible.
A short-lived post-war industrial boom meant that unemployment was
relatively low. This, combined with rising living costs, provided the
backdrop to the increased struggle.
On average, for every day in 1919, 100,000 workers were on strike.
The ruling class was rocked by this wave of workers’ action, which
even involved soldiers returning from the war and the police.
In 1915 an important alliance had been forged between the miners,
railway workers and transport workers. This Triple Alliance, of one
and a quarter million workers, was potentially a powerful weapon
against the bosses.
During that immediate post-war period of struggle the importance
of the Triple Alliance rose again. Lloyd George understood the
potential strength of the Alliance and in 1919 summoned the leaders
to a meeting.
Robert Smillie, the miners’ leader gave an account of the
meeting with Lloyd George to left Labour leader Aneurin Bevan, quoted
in his book In Place of Fear.
Lloyd George told them:

“Gentlemen you have fashioned in the Triple Alliance of
unions represented by you a most powerful instrument. I feel bound to
tell you that in our opinion we are at your mercy.
“The Army is disaffected and cannot be relied upon.
Trouble has already occurred in a number of camps.
“We have just emerged from a great war and the people
are eager for the reward of their sacrifices and we are in no
position to satisfy them. In these circumstances if you carry out
your threatened strike you will defeat us.
“But if you do so, have you weighed up the
consequences? The strike will be in defiance of the government of the
country and by its success will precipitate a constitutional crisis
of the first importance.
“For, if a force arises in the state that is stronger
than the state itself, it must be ready to take on the functions of
the state or withdraw and accept the authority of the state.
“Gentlemen,” asked the Prime Minister quietly, “have
you considered and if you have are you ready?”
“From that moment on”, said Bob Smillie, “we were
beaten and we knew we were.”

In spite of defeatism among the workers’ leaders, the movement
did not go to sleep. Far from it.
This was demonstrated in 1920, when the British government
threatened to support Polish capitalists in the conflict against the
Russian workers’ state.
In the ranks of the labour movement there was a determination to
prevent the ruling class wiping out the gains of the 1917 revolution.
Councils of Action developed rapidly, where rank and file trade
unionists committed to strike action in the event of British
imperialism declaring war on Russia.
In 1920, London dockers heroically refused to load arms on to The
Jolly George, a ship destined for Poland. But in early 1921 the
post-war growth was well and truly over and industrial slump had set in.
The mines were handed back to the coal owners who declared that
the miners would pay the price of the industry’s crisis. They
proposed cuts in miners’ pay ranging from 10% to 49%.
Any miner refusing to accept these draconian cuts would be refused
entry to work. From 1 April that year the owners began a lock-out.
Immediately transport and rail workers rallied to the miners’
side. The leadership of the Triple Alliance was forced by the members
to call a strike in support of the miners from 15 April 1921.
But the coal owners were determined to crush the miners and
destroy the MFGB. Lloyd George’s Liberal-Tory coalition had no
problem in placing all state resources against the miners.
Following a declaration of a state of emergency the government
established a special Defence Corps to confront striking workers,
posted machine guns at most pit heads and despatched large numbers of
troops to the main working class areas.
However, faced with the brutal class politics of the employers and
their political representatives, the leaders of the Triple Alliance
never went beyond cowardice.
On the eve of the strike Frank Hodges, the right-wing president of
the MFGB, proposed local negotiations on wage cuts, instead of a
national agreement, which was one of the miners’ main demands.
This appalling position was immediately repudiated by the MFGB
executive but was music to the ears of the coal owners and to James
Thomas, the notorious right-wing leader of the railway workers.
On Black Friday, 15 April 1921, the leaders of the Triple Alliance
called off the proposed strike in support of the miners. Thomas
played a particularly pernicious role.
This left the miners in a very dangerous situation. In certain
areas, notably South Wales, individual trade union activists like
A.J. Cook did all that they could in a hopeless position.
After two months of fighting in isolation the miners returned to
work on the mine owners’ terms. Emboldened by the coal owners’
victory, other sections of the ruling class followed suit.
Engineers, builders, seafarers and cotton operatives were all
forced to accept big wage cuts.
In March 1922 the employers locked out members of the Amalgamated
Engineering Union (AEU), the largest engineering union, demanding big
wage cuts. Scandalously the AEU leadership agreed to most of the
employers’ demands.
In the immediate aftermath of Black Friday trade union membership
in Britain slumped dramatically from 8.3 million in 1920 to 5.6
million in 1922. Such a decline prompts comparisons with a similar
decline in Tory Britain in the 1980s.
Then, as in the 1920s, rising unemployment took its toll on
membership. But in the 1920s tens of thousands of trade unionists
left the movement in protest at the weak policies of the right wing,
cynically describing the Triple Alliance as the ‘Cripple Alliance’.
 
Support for the left
However, as Peter Taaffe points out in his 2006 book, 1926
General Strike: Workers Taste Power, “one of the consequences
of Black Friday was a deepening of the hatred, particularly by the
miners, of the ‘traitor Thomas’ and increased support for the
left”.
Eventually rank and file militants began to organise independently
through the National Minority Movement (NMM). This brought together
some of the leading left wingers of the time such as Tom Mann, Ted
Lismer and George Peat – all AEU – and A.J. Cook of the miners
and Robert Williams of the transport workers.
The NMM campaigned against the class collaborationist policies of
the right wing and attempted to stop the haemorrhaging of trade union
membership with the slogan ‘back to the unions’.
In 1925 the NMM scored a considerable victory when one of its
members A.J. Cook was elected general secretary of the MFGB,
replacing Frank Hodges. Cook was an honest and decent socialist,
arguably one of the most principled trade union leaders ever in
Britain.
He worked tirelessly on behalf of his members and he stood out
like a beacon among right-wing and ‘left’-wing trade unionists by
his opposition to World War One.
Sadly, however, he was from the syndicalist school of socialism,
which does not understand the need for workers to have their own
party, as well as trade unions through which to fight.
These ideas were put to the test in the 1926 general strike and
found wanting. The NMM itself was deflected from the task of
transforming British trade unions by the false policies of the
British Communist Party (CP).
As Peter points out, the CP was “misled by the mistaken policies
of the Communist International, then under the direction of Stalin”.
Meanwhile the ruling class continued its preparations for civil war
against working people.
But they could not get away with every attack. In May 1925 the
bosses agreed to postpone for a year yet another proposed cut in
miners’ pay.
This became known as ‘Red Friday’, and was hailed as a
victory.
The whole of the decade of the 1920s is rich in lessons for the
British trade union movement today. The following year saw the
momentous 1926 general strike, the most important event in the
history of the British working class.
An unlimited general strike ushers in a revolutionary situation
and poses directly the question of power in society.
Which class will run society, the capitalists, retaining all the
bad features of existing society, or the working class, with the
power to transform capitalism into socialism?
Today a great opportunity exists for joint strike action by public
sector trade unionists on both jobs and pensions. Socialist Party
members in individual public sector unions are calling for these
ballots to be coordinated to produce generalised public sector strike
action.
Even if this were partial at first, and given the absence of
general strike action, even for one day since 1926, such action would
scare this weak and divided government, lifting the confidence of the
working class, and preparing the ground for later escalation.
In preparation the working class must try to build a leadership
that, unlike its mainly miserable counterpart in the 1920s, is
prepared to see the struggle through to its logical conclusion.
This May will see the 85th anniversary of the 1926 general strike,
rich in lessons for the battles of today.
 




September unemployment figures showed 6.2% officially unemployed
in Britain as a whole. In Cardiff 8.9% are unemployed; 14% in the
Ebbw Vale area.
Faced with this situation, the local labour movement has come out
with a fighting lead. Cardiff Trades Council’s campaign against
unemployment has involved mass distribution of an excellent leaflet
calling for:




A 35-hour week without loss of pay;
£70 minimum wage;
a programme of public works;
a planned publicly-owned economy under workers’ control and management.




A very good working relationship has been established between the
Trades Council and the local YCAU. The Trades Council has agreed to
send seven delegates to the YCAU industrial conference in Bridgend on
November 25th.
Support has also come from NUPE, EETPU, Bakers’ Union, AUEW,
POEU, ASLEF branches, Rover shop stewards and numerous Labour Parties
and LPYS branches so far. There is still a lot of potential support
to be tapped.
The South East Wales YCAU urges all sections of the local Labour
movement to support the Trades Council Conference.
 




The Annual Conference on the Welsh TUC takes place at a time of
sharp crisis for the Welsh economy. The seriousness of the crisis is
spelt out in the report of the General Council for the Conference.
This report shows the appalling levels of unemployment in Wales,
and the sharp increase in the level of unemployment since the last
conference. In keeping the British economy as a whole it is working
class youth who have suffered most in relation to unemployment. As
the General Council report shows between July 1975 and July 1976
youth unemployment increased by over 50% for males and 107% for
females. Despite enormous handouts of £100 million in financial
inducements to firms between 1964 and 1970 and the offer of £22
million selective assistance, since July 1975, unemployment has
spiralled to over 83,000 or 8% of the working population.
Equally the report shows just how hollow the promises for planned
new jobs were. In Ebbw Vale government spokesmen promised an extra
2,118 jobs to compensate for the 1,394 redundancies in the steel
industry. To date 480 jobs have been provided!
This scandalous situation is reflected in the resolutions
submitted to this year’s conference. Not one attempt to rally
support for the continuance of the government’s present economic strategy.
The beginning of a fighting programme to defeat unemployment is
spelt out in certain resolutions. The AUEW Engineering Section for
example calls for earlier retirement, a shorter working week and a
reduction in overtime. The important qualification to add here is the
need to provide much more than the miserable £23 a week offered to
workers to retire early, and to qualify the demands on working hours
with the demand for no loss in pay. Otherwise it would be asking
workers to accept a further cut in living standards.
In keeping with the mood of their brothers and sisters in the rest
of the movement, only two resolutions calls for the continuation of
the Social Contract. NUPE couples the demand here with a demand for
better treatment of the low paid. The experience of the last two
years should have shown them, that the worse sufferers from pay
restraint have been precisely the low paid.
A once and for all remedy for these workers should be a £60 a
week minimum wage tied to a genuine cost of living index drawn up by
the trade union movement. In place of the demand for yet more wage
restraint, conference should unconditionally support the clear
demands of the NUM and the South Glamorgan Trades Council to reject
the swindle of wage restraint once and for all.
A number of resolutions call for selective import controls as a
solution to the problems facing Welsh workers. Conference should
oppose this parochial solution. The protected firms would be given a
blank cheque to jack-up prices, while the loss of markets by foreign
firms would cause loss of jobs, with the subsequent decline in
purchasing power of foreign workers and the trade recession would
deepen and ultimately produce greater unemployment on a world scale.
Equally the demand for more money to be injected into the economy
misses the point. Despite millions of pounds swallowed up by big
business, industrial production in Wales is still below that of the 3
day week of 1974, and only slightly caught up on 1970 figures. As Jim
Callaghan put it ”you can take a horse to water but you cannot
force him to drink”.
In the struggle for many of the worthwhile reforms called for on
this Conference agenda, Welsh trade unionists will have to draw the
conclusion that only an extension of public ownership to the 200 or
so firms that dominate the British economy and the drawing up of a
socialist plan of production controlled by working people can solve
the problems of workers in Wales or elsewhere in Britain.
The Welsh TUC should take up the demand of Swansea Trades Council
for industrial action against unemployment, but use such action as
the beginning of a socialist campaign to end the misery of
unemployment and inflation for ever.
 




On Saturday February 5th over 200 people crowded into the Miners
Welfare Hall in Pontillan Fraith for a meeting called by Bedwellty
Labour Party to celebrate Tribune’s 40th Anniversary.
The first speaker Richard Clements (Editor of Tribune)
spoke vaguely about the need for ‘a socialist press’ without
really spelling out how this was to be achieved or what policies such
a press should advance.
Arianwen Norris (Aneurin Bevan’s sister) spoke of the campaign
to obtain regular sales of Tribune in Tredegar in 1937.
Describing the impoverished social conditions of working class people
at the time, she explained how the newspaper was well received.
Arianwen recently gave support to a resolution passed
unanimously by Ebbw Vale CLP opposing the witch hunt against Militant
supporters. To her credit she has not abandoned the socialist
traditions of the early pioneers of Tribune.
Fred Evans MP for Caerphilly drew strong applause from the
audience when he attacked ‘the conspiracy of the right wing of the
party, and the Tory press to deny that Marxism is a legitimate part
of the traditions of the Labour Party.’
The final speaker Ian Mikardo began by describing the swelling
opposition to the right wing policies of the Labour government from
the movement.
He said that every month the NEC receives around 100
resolutions critical of government policy, some sharply so.
Unfortunately Comrade Mikardo spent most of his speech explaining
that however bad this government was, it was better than any Tory
government. It is extremely doubtful whether one single member of the
audience needed this explanation.
Although references were made by various speakers to “the
alternative strategy” of Tribune not once was an attempt
made to justify or explain this programme. Despite the good
intentions of the organisers, such meetings can in the final analysis
only serve to frustrate the attempts of the movement to formulate
alternative policies to the present disastrous policies of the
government. In particular the absence of questions and discussion
from the floor was a poor example to the movement.
Because of Callaghan’s links with South Wales, the Militant
supporters in the area, particularly within his own constituency have
been singled out for attack by the press. This seems to have
rebounded as 120 people from the meeting signed a petition
condemning the witch hunt, and those party members who use the Tory
press to attack other party members. Over 60 copies of Militant
were sold.
 







THIS YEAR'S Annual Conference of lecturers' union NATFHE
took place at a time of the greatest offensive by the employers
and the government against pay and conditions since the
Incorporation (privatisation) of Further Education Colleges (FE)
and Universities (HE).




Conference acclaimed the struggles of our members against
management bullying in Newcastle and Southampton FE colleges and in
London Metropolitan University. Conference condemned the failure of
around 75% of English FE colleges to implement a national pay deal
nearly two years after its agreement. We also passed a motion that
refused to absolve the leadership of NATFHE of some of the
responsibility for this appalling situation.
Conference enthusiastically endorsed general secretary Paul
Mackney's call for a national strike in the autumn in support of the
English FE pay claim. In an excellent debate on pensions, conference
unanimously passed a motion from Wales arguing that New Labour will
return to the offensive against public-sector workers' pensions, but
this time around must be met by strike action by the relevant unions
on the same day.
Most of the second day of the conference was taken up with the
debate over the proposed merger with the Association of University
Teachers (AUT). Sensibly the leadership dropped its previous policy
of forbidding any debate on the proposed sixth draft of the
constitution of the new union and backed Emergency Resolution 15.1
from Wales calling for a full discussion and vote on proposals to
amend the constitution.
After the passing of the motion conference engaged in a
constructive debate. But proposals to include all aspects of current
democracy in the new constitution were defeated, despite attracting
substantial minority votes.
NATFHE and AUT members will now be balloted in the Autumn, opening
up the prospect of a larger more powerful union. If properly led,
this could confront and defeat all who wish to extend market forces
to post-school education.


Andrew Price was a member of the NATFHE national executive.
 







THIS YEAR’S conference of the lecturers’ union NATFHE
takes place at the same time as the continuing employers’
offensive in both further and higher education (FE and HE).




In Wales talks between the employers and trade unions in FE
recently broke down as a result of the employers walking from the
negotiating table. NATFHE in Wales is a left-led union and the
employers were angered at the union’s position on its proposals on
part-time teaching staff and the union’s opposition to employer
proposals on progression on the new pay scales.
In England, a full two years after a national pay agreement on
pay, only 25% of FE colleges have implemented it in full.
In Southampton College the management response is to produce a new
contract based on performance-related pay, and threaten members with
the sack if they do not sign up to it! In HE similar bullying has
been employed in London Metropolitan University.
In Wales NATFHE has given the employers a deadline of 1 August to
return to the negotiating table and implement the part-timers’
agreement, otherwise members will be balloted for industrial action
from September.
In both FE and HE when our members strike, employers usually
deduct pay at more than one day for each day out, with the ridiculous
outcome of a NATFHE member being on strike for three weeks actually
owing the employer money! Conference motions and emergency motions
committing the union to sustentation (strike pay) of £50 per day
must be supported.
More than this, Conference must unequivocally support any section
of our membership that takes strike action to confront the employers’
offensive. For far too long NATFHE has allowed its members to be
picked off college by college and university by university.
Conference must find a way around the obstacles placed by the
incorporation (privatisation) of colleges and universities and the
anti-union laws to ensure a united struggle against the employers.
Conference will, however, be dominated by an internal issue, the
proposed merger with the Association of University Teachers. In
principle, nobody can actually oppose the merger or the prospect of
one union representing all who teach in post-school education.
However, it would seem that some supporters are so intent on merger,
at the expense of a proper discussion on the proposed constitution
and safeguarding democracy and accountability, that they are not even
prepared to have the issue properly aired at this Conference.
Conference must oppose this and support the emergency motions on
these matters from Wales, Yorkshire and Humberside and Northern
Regions.

Andrew Price was a national executive (NEC) member for FE Wales
and a Welsh lay pay negotiator.
 

