

Toronto, Canada – The Left Opposition was the last contingent in the big anti-Fascist parade on Tuesday, July 12, and followed directly behind the “official” Left wing and Communist organizations.
Over 150 workers ... members, sympathizers and friends rallied behind our big masthead “The International Left Opposition of Canada.” This banner, in the centre of which was a big hammer and sickle, was carried by two young girl comrades, one of the Spartacus Youth Club and the other of the Y.C.L.
 
L.O. Slogans in Parade
As our contingent swung off, our comrades boomed out the International. Then followed a flow of revolutionary songs, The Red Flag, Solidarity Forever, The Red Army March etc. As we came up Spadina to Queen St., the “workers lining the streets applauded and cheered. As the march proceeded, the enthusiasm and spirit of our comrades rose still higher, and soon were shouting out the slogans of our banners, all of which breathed the spirit of International Solidarity and class struggle. “Free the Scottsboro Boys”, “Long Live the International Solidarity of the Working class”, “Free all the Class War Prisoners”, “Down with Section 98”, “Freedom for Chen Du Siu and Andres Nin”, “Forward to Victory Under the Banner of Lenin and Trotsky”, etc., etc.
We swung into Queen Park to the enthusiastic tune of the International. As our contingent proceeded to their station, they again shouted out the slogans of our prominent banners. When the Stalinists as if to reply to us, shouted “Long Live the C P. of Canada,” we joined in the loud unison. Then in order to reveal our identity our comrades immediately pealed out, “Long Live the Left Opposition”, “Forward to Victory under the Banner of Lenin and Trotsky.”
The speakers representing every tendency in the labor movement addressed the big crowd from 3 platforms. As comrade Spector took the platform we again shouted out the slogans of our banners amidst the general applause of the crowd. The same was repeated when comrade MacDonald stood up on a second platform.
The Left Opposition were active participants and organizers of the greatest and most militant labor demonstration since 1919, were able to show the workers the strength of its ideas, the enthusiasm and idealism of its banner-bearers, and the general growth of our movement. The militant character of our participation and banners, has already brought incitements and threats against us as well as the other revolutionary groups. We quote from The Toronto Telegram, July 13: “Nothing is more calculated to persuade Torontoans that Hitler was right than the presence in the Toronto demonstration of banners carrying such slogans as, ‘Victory under the Banner of Trotsky’, ‘We demand the abolition of Section 98’, and ‘Hands off the Young Communist League’, ... Unless ‘Victory under the Banner of Lenin and Trotsky’ and ‘Hands off the Young Communist League’ do not mean the advocacy of revolution, the English language has lost its meaning.” The editorial calls upon the police to take action.
What do the Stalinists say to the above? Is this another united front between Trotsky and the bourgeois press?
 



Toronto. – The great interest of the workers in the position of the Left Opposition in the German crisis was shown in the meeting held in Toronto.
Although no leaflet was issued and only the meagerest form of advertisement appeared less than two days before the meeting due to the difficult conditions that exist about 300 workers packed literally every inch of sitting and standing accommodation; workers stood outside in the hallway to listen while many had to be turned away, so great was the attraction and interest of the workers in the German situation.
A real international spirit pervaded the meeting despite the silly interruptions from a small number of Y.C.L.ers who insisted on making a public exhibition of their political bankruptcy. Most of the Y.C.L.ers responded sympathetically to our viewpoint by listening attentively to the speakers and after the meeting purchased the Militant and fraternized with our comrades.
Comrades J. MacDonald and M. Spector were the principal speakers. Comrade MacDonald gave the workers an opportunity to compare the position taken by the Comintern in the German revolution when Lenin was alive with the position of the present International under the Stalin leadership. Comrade Spector traced the German events and the revolutionary possibilities which had opened up after the collapse of the monarchy to the present day.
Both speakers pointed out the significance of the present German events for the world revolutionary movement and for the Soviet Union. Although Fascism is in power it has not consolidated its position yet; the German proletariat is not yet defeated and the adoption by the Comintern and its German section of the Leninist united front tactics will smash Fascism to smithereens. Rounds of applause greeted the remarks of the speakers. A resolution was then presented from the meeting demanding the repeal of Section 98 and the unconditional release of the eight Communist leaders and all other political prisoners. At this point the aforementioned small group began making interjections. Amidst the applause of the crowd the chairman announced all those in favor of the resolution stand up and the whole audience stood up on their feet.
The question period further exposed the shameful political education of the new Y.C.L. cadres. Every question under the sun except those that dealt with the most significant events in the International today was asked by this “group.” When comrade Spector, in replying to the questions, asked why Stalin is silent on the German situation, the Stalinist “spokesman” replied amidst protest and laughter that “he (Stalin) was too busy building socialism in Russia”.
In the discussion only one YCLer took the floor to reiterate the old demagogy of the Stalinists. In the course of his ten minute speech he mentioned that the Left Opposition was afraid to give them the opportunity to reply to our arguments. The comrades of the Spartacus Youth Club immediately challenged the Y.C.L. “spokesman” to a public debate. This he promptly declined with the worn-out excuse that the question of “Trotskyism” had been liquidated and Y.C.L. was not a discussion circle. The fact of the matter is that at this very moment, under pressure of the Left Opposition, the question of “Trotskyism” has been re-opened in all the Stalinist groups throughout greater Toronto.
 



Toronto. – The voice of international proletarian solidarity with the German toilers, again rang out in Toronto as Jewish and German workers jammed to capacity two halls, in a stirring protest demonstration against Fascism and Jewish pogroms in Germany; hundreds of other worker’s again had to be turned away for lack of accommodation. Such was the response to the leaflet issued just one day previous, calling for international proletarian action against Fascism.
The “United Front Conference” which called this mass demonstration is doubly significant; first because it is the first real united front organized by the workers in Canada against Fascism, and secondly because it marks the first united front of Communist and reformist organizations held in Toronto for a number of years. While as yet the conference has been limited to Jewish proletarian bodies it was announced at the sitting by the sponsor, the “Left Poale Zion”, that the Labor Party (reformist) has made plans to call a similar conference of all the English trade unions and labor organizations shortly to which they would become a part.
The call of the Comintern for united front action of the Communist and the reformist organizations, even at this late date has already had its response. Significant is the fact that the Left Poale Zion and not the Stalinists sponsored this conference. The Stalinist press even at late as two weeks ago in an editorial reply to the Militant denied that a change of policy had taken place and that united front action of Communist and reformist organizations was permissible.
The Left Opposition was represented at the Conference by the Unser Kamf Club and Spartacus Youth organizations. Let us now refer back to the mass demonstration itself.
The first speaker was our comrade M. Spector. The response from the gathering at his appearance must have nettled the Stalinist leaders, as it showed that their campaign of slander against him was a flop.
Comrade Spector in a true Internationalist speech pointed out that Fascism was not just a Jewish question but one of the international working class. That the Jewish problem would only be solved with the victory of the proletariat over capitalism. The success of Fascism meant war against the USSR which we must defend with our last drop of blood. Organized united front action of whole international proletariat would defeat Fascism. The L.O. welcomes a real united front action of Communist and reformist organizations against their common enemy. For two years we have fought for its realization.
I will pass over the speeches of the Left Poale Zion the German worker and the Right wing representative and come to that of com. Ehrlick, the Stalinist spokesman. Comrade Ehrlick also made a very able speech on behalf of his grouping. Comrade Ehrlick did not lack the gall to stand up and say, “we always stood for united front action of Communist and reformist organizations, and that it was the reformist leadership who alone were against this”. “The united front from below only”, “social-Fascism” – where, oh where, lie ye buried!
* * * *
After writing the above, the latest issue of the Kamf, the Stalinist organ, in the Jewish language came off the press with a report of the conference, in which they say ... “The struggle against Fascism cannot be widely developed if the Conference will base itself on representatives of organizations which don’t exist and have no following amongst the masses”, (i.e., the Spartacus Youth Club, Unser Kamf. If this is true then we ask the editors of the Kamf, why the continual venomous attacks against us in your press. Is it logical for a paper to write editorials against people “who don’t exist” and “have no following”? The editors of the Kamf are not so illogical; they are only trying to cover up the truth, which is the growth of the Left Opposition and the crisis inside their own ranks. Workers Unity also devotes more than a whole page of the last issue to refuting the ideas of the “handful of Trotskyists” who don’t exist. Even the C.L.D.L (I.L.D.) must also condemn the “half dozen Trotskyists who have no following”.
Further on in this “report” we learn that “Spector voted against all the proposals of the Left wing and supported the Left Poale Zion.” Do the editors of the Kamf believe this also? No! We know their reply, “What are a few lies more or less when it is all in the interests of the revolution?’” Unfortunately for the political position of the Stalinist leaders, the number of lies seem to be growing more and not less, and the interests of the revolution have not obtained any gains by such methods.
 



An open-air mass meeting of the International Left Opposition of Toronto took place Friday, August 18 in Earlscourt Park before an interested crowd of about 1,500 workers. The meeting was organized, as the chairman comrade Chris Dorrow announced, in the interests of the fight of the workers for free speech and assembly.
The first speaker was comrade M. Spector who pointed out that the reasons for the growing repressions in Canada and throughout the world was because capitalism was decaying and its further existence was possible only through the introduction of Fascism, the restriction of the workers rights and the forcing down of the workers living standards. The capitalists were now only way out for the workers into a new imperialist war and the only way out for the workers was through organization for the Socialist revolution. He further pointed out what was behind the present Swastika movement in Toronto and finally the fallacy of the Commonwealth Co-operative Federation as a party to free the workers from capitalism.
The Bolsheviks under Lenin and Trotsky in 1917 showed the workers the way to emancipate themselves and the International Left Opposition holds to this same program. The speaker concluded with the demand for the repeal of section 98 and the freeing of all class war prisoners. Comrade T. Mill added a few words and the meeting was thrown open for questions and discussion.
 
A Reformist Has His Day
As Buckley of the Toronto Trades and Labor Council and one of the leading spokesmen of the C.C.F. was invited to take the platform. Buckley spoke for fifteen minutes in which he attempted to justify the C.C.F. and explain why the class struggle in Canada could be resolved through the use of parliamentary methods only. Buckley was against all dictatorships whether it be socialistic or capitalistic.
Comrade Spector when he took the platform to reply asked the assembled workers whether they would rather be under a dictatorship of the workers over the capitalist or a dictatorship of the capitalists over the workers because there was no in-between. The workers dictatorship would in the end do away with all dictatorship and class repression, the capitalist dictatorship must today in its present period of decline, increase the repression and sufferings of the workers in order to maintain its class rule.
In a masterful way, comrade Spector tore all of Buckley’s arguments to shreds and tatters and exposed the C.C.F. as a party to save capitalism despite all its “socialistic” phrases.
The meeting was a huge success and a decided gain for Communism and the Left Opposition.
 
Successful Meeting
On August 23, another big open-air mass meeting was held in Earlscourt Park, with comrades J. MacDonald and M. Spector as the principle speakers, and comrade Chris. Morrow as chairman.
Comrade J. MacDonald dwelt on the capitalist crisis, the bankruptcy of the old political parties and the present belated attempt of reformism, which has shown its bankruptcy and worthlessness on a world scale to resurrect itself anew in Canada, by exploiting the radical trend to the Left of the Canadian workers, farmers and sections of the city petty-bourgeois. He warned the workers that the C.C.F. will only be able to repeat the failure of reformism in Europe.
When comrade Spector took the platform the C.C.F. supporters made a futile attempt to disrupt the meeting, which met the significant resistance of the workers The speaker was able to handle the situation quite easily and continued with more fire his short talk, which was a reply to several questions asked of him by C.C.F. supporters.
This meeting like the previous one was very successful. The criticism of reformism in this C.C.F. stronghold was very sympathetically received by a big section of the assembled workers and definite progress could be noted in winning these workers to Communism.
 
We Are Active in Strikes
The Left Opposition of Toronto is able to record progress in the economic as well as the political sphere of the class struggle. In the strike of the Hallan and Sable fur dyers, members and sympathizers of the Left Opposition assisted in the organization of the strike and actively participated in the picket demonstrations. Likewise we have given assistance to the strike of the Durable Leather Goods and Cloak workers. Our members have been invited to attend the strike meetings and have daily appeared on the picket lines. Comrade MacDonald has addressed meetings of the railroad workers and valuable contacts exists in the Boot and Shoe Trade.
 
Bureaucratic Expulsion Rebuked
A short time ago the Stalinists organized a “united front” on the election issue. The presence of delegates from the Left Opposition, Unser Kamf and Spartacus Clubs was the cause of the Stalinist bureaucrats bringing in a motion for our exclusion on the same grounds that the Right wing bureaucrats demand the expulsion of Left wins organizations from their conferences.
Several years ago when we were excluded from a Stalinist packed election conference we had only 3 votes registered against the motion. This year over 30 delegates voted against the Stalinist split policy and bureaucratic ultimatism. Amongst those who voted and spoke against the motion were the Workers Ex-Servicemen’s League, who voted in a bloc. This organization is the most militant of the Left wing on the English field. The delegation of the Furriers Union representing 800 workers also appealed to the delegates to reject the introduction of the Amalgamated methods in a Left wing conference. A leaflet on this question was issued in English and Jewish languages, and for the first time in Toronto, protest against Stalinist opportunism and bureaucracy is being heard amongst the Ukrainian Left wing masses.
 



TORONTO ONTARIO – An anti-war conference initiated by the Friends of the Soviet Union has been organized in Toronto.
The first meeting saw the usual gathering of our old “stand-byes”, but the leaders of the conference, in light of the new united front policy, made no attempt to delude themselves on the delegates.
The second meeting brought several new faces and plans to go directly to the reformist trade unions.
Our comrades were elected on the credential, organization and executive committees.
Our motion that the speech of Litvinov in view of its pacifism and incompleteness be referred first to affiliated organizations for discussion and recommendation before printing, was rejected. Likewise, our amendment that Tchicherin’s and Lenin’s speeches at the Genoa conference be considered in its stead. One of the leaders of the F.S.U., who spoke against, said if we accepted Lenin’s and Tchicherin’s speeches we would be injecting politics. Another delegate said Litvinov was more up-to-date.
In the discussion on the anti-war resolution we pointed out the tremendous significance victorious Fascism in Germany would have both for the war against the U.S.S.R. and the new imperialist blood path.
The conference is very timely and can do some very good work.
* * * *
Labor Fakers Have Hot Time
The Toronto police are not going to be accused of making concessions. After allowing a previous anti-war gathering, the second meeting called by the anti-war youth conference was smashed up.
The crowd together with those from the rationalist meeting which had also been broken up went up to the Labor Party gathering.
To listen to the Labor Party brand of fakers requires more than a conscience and good stomach and before long the Left wing workers began heckling the speakers. “Back to Russia”, answered fakers. “Call the police”, mocked the workers.
As matters became hotter, the labor fakers began to appeal to the crowd on the basis of the fight they had carried on for free speech. What this fight was they didn’t explain.
Police and detectives by this time had arrived and encircled the radical section of the crowd but nevertheless when Connors declared the meeting over the crowd shouted for “questions”.
To the surprise of everybody, police included, the fakers, consented to allow questions. The questions were brief and likewise their exposure of the half-dozen question asked. The fakirs couldn’t answer one and his floundering around must have embarrassed the “Dicks”.
More of these meetings and the Toronto Labor Party will feel no more use in “educating” the masses.
 



TORONTO, ONT. Before beginning the discussion on the new turn in the Industrial union policy it is worth while going back to spend a few minutes on its preceding history. While I am limiting my remarks to the Dressmaker local of the Toronto Needle Trades, it was this Union that was first organized and upon which the greatest hopes and possibilities were placed.
The organization of the Industrial Union closely approximated the defeat of the Left wing in the Amalgamated where for over a year the Lefts were in control. The formation of the Dressmaker local, met with good response. Several hundred workers immediately joined. Due mainly to lack of decision and leadership, the union soon began disintegrating.
A year or so later the union was again reorganized on a very much smaller basis. About this time or soon after third period trade union policies were introduced. Unions under reformist leadership became “company unions”, strikes called by the reformists were branded as “fake stoppages in the interests of the bosses” – unity of the workers was limited in the slogan of join our union – boring from within the reformist unions was discarded for fear of activizing them.
Disintegration and isolation continued and a year later the third period trade union policies were intensified with the addition of the slogan of unity with the workers in their shops, boycott of their organizations.
The strike called by the union had all the earmarks of adventure and failed. True to their colors, the reformists did their part, by sending their members to replace the strikers. The strike called by the International Union which the Industrial Union sabotaged also landed on the rocks.
The net profit of both strikes, was that the workers are disgusted and disillusioned, and ignored both unions despite the very had conditions prevailing in the trade. Mass meetings called by the Industrial Union have dwindled down to hardly more than local meetings, while the attendance at local meetings is very small. The standing of the International is no better.
The delegates to the last congress of the R.I.L.U. returned with the crepe for the third period policies. Unions under reformist leadership are no longer company unions. Strikes called by the reformists are recognized as strikes that can be developed into real struggles over the heads of the leadership. Boring from within is again accepted. Even the united front from below now includes unity proposals made directly to the reformist unions.
Thus far the new turn would seem to indicate a partial return in the direction of real Communist policies. A real Communist turn on the part of the leadership demands open admission before the whole working class and the union of their previous false policies and premises on which they were built. The broadest discussion and lessons are to be drawn. Finally, the placing of the responsibility on the responsible parties, it is needless to remark that the centrists won’t do this. For them it suffices to throw the blame vaguely on “certain local leaders.”
What lies underneath this new turn?
I have no information to show that it is pressure from below. Certainly not from the Canadian Communists and Left wing forces. One might almost draw the conclusion that the leadership themselves have recognized the depth of the failure of their policies and isolation from the masses, have become frightened of the tomorrow when they will be called to account and are attempting to return to the only policy left open to them in the hope of forestalling their complete expose.
To sum up. The beginning of a return by the centrists in the direction of a Leninist trade union policy will strengthen the position of the Left wing Communists in particular and the Left wing forces in general. Two indications point out also to the liquidation of third period tactics in the political field as well. The question is, will not the new turn have the tendency to disclose more fully the opportunism underlying the theory of “socialism in one country” and the false policies that flow from it in all fields of work? I think it will. Will not the Centrists bureaucracy become weaker and the Left Oppositionists stronger? I again reply in the affirmative.
 



TORONTO. – A most important opportunity is opening up for the Left wing in Canada, in the present growing national movement at revolt of the trade unionists against the corrupt, degenerated A.F. of L. unions. Amongst the miners, clothing workers, cloakmakers, furriers, building trade workers, etc., etc., the cry is for united struggles against the worsening conditions and for new militant unions that will fight.
For us of the Left wing one of the outstanding features of the present revolt movement is the growing contradictions between the Stalinist policies and the requirements of the arising situations. The official Left wing under the leadership of the Workers Unity League is paying a very heavy price for the 3rd period policies of adventure and sectarianism of the past few years, in the lack of confidence of the workers in their Industrial Unions.
Was it an accident that the revolt of over 3,000 Montreal tailors should break out as a spontaneous movement and not under the leadership of the official Left wing? Had the W.U. Industrial Unions carried their analysis and policies to logical conclusions they should have condemned and fought the revolt movement which had refused to hand over hegemony to them. This they tried at first to do but the resentment of the Montreal tailors in general and particularly the Left wing was so great that the mass meeting called by the W.U. industrial union was cancelled.
The obvious contradictions and falseness of the policies of the Workers Unity League have not passed without sharp fermentation and dissatisfaction in the Toronto and Montreal industrial unions and Worker Unity Leagues. The organizer of the industrial Union in Montreal had to be recalled. In order to pacify the disquiet amongst the Industrial Union members in Toronto it was found necessary to send a delegation of the Left wing tailors to investigate the struggle of the Montreal tailors and report back. Further and more important, there took place in Toronto and for the first time in Canada a grouping of Industrial Union and Worker Unity League members for Leninist policies in the trade unions.
Vacillations, more vacillations and still more vacillations, have marked the policies of the Workers Unity League. It has become common talk “that the W.U.L. leaders no longer believe in their own policies but have to stick by the false decisions of the last R.I.L.U. Congresses.”
Needless to say the Toronto Left Opposition has come in support of that group of members of the Workers Unity League and Industrial Unions who have opened up the struggle for the Leninist program. The birth of the progressive Left wing fraction was marked by sharp clashes with the Industrial Union leaders. The various attempts to disrupt the meeting of the Progressive Left wing fraction despite temporary success will finally fall to the ground. The members are determined to carry on to victory.
Shop meetings of Left wing workers called by the W.U. Industrial Unions have failed to record support to the present policies. At the ———— shop where the Progressive L.W.F. had called a meeting of the Left wing workers, the Industrial Union leader who had come down and distributed copies of the Kamf which contained the attack against the Left Opposition and the “former Left wing workers” was sharply criticized by the workers. In other shops the Left wing workers have asked the Progressive left wing fraction to call them to meetings.
It is necessary that this new movement in the Workers Unity League for Leninist trade union policies should not be localized. Contacts have been established in other parts of the country. There exists today the basis for a national movement.
 



When the first attack wss made against the Communist party in Toronto two years ago the reformist leaders were able to delude many workers by explaining that the rights of free speech were being taken away from the Communists only, and not from the workers.
In less than a year the right of free speech had been banned even for the “pinkest of the pink.”
Today the Communist party is again attacked, not locally but nationally. The Attorney-General of Ontario has openly stated that the purpose of this attack is to drive the Communist party into illegality.
History has already taught us that political tendencies of the day are determined by the basic economic conditions and in order to understand why the political rights are being taken away from the Communists it is necessary to go beneath the surface.
In Canada, agriculture still plays a dominant role in the economic and political life of the country. The present depression coupled with the big drop in the price of agricultural products below the cost of production; the record-breaking accumulation of tremendous stocks of raw materials; the falling off of the internal and external trade – have left in their wake mass starvation and destitution. Thousands upon thousands of small and middle-class farmers are ruined and bankrupt, while mass unemployment leaves its bitter trail from one end of the country to the other.
Again, in Canada, workers have demonstrated behind the Red Flag. Troops being called out to cow down the workers has become a common occurrence. Militant demonstrations of the unemployed, while yet still limited to the West are growing. The hungry workers in the cities want bread. The ruined farmers want the bankers’ noose taken off their necks.
This present crisis is quite different structurally from that of previous crisis and will not be overcome in a hurry. Even the capitalist bankers themselves openly say that much. This winter, the bourgeoisie openly state, is going to be the hardest Winter yet experienced by all classes. Mr. Meighan, former Prime Minister of Canada, in a speech at Toronto stated “that Canada is facing its greatest trial in history.” “Unless something is done to meet the growing competition from Russia, the existence of thousands of producers will be ruined.’’ He calls for a war against Russia to save capitalism but that is another question which we will discuss in future. The fact, though, is the growing competition Canadian capitalism is meeting on the world market is coming not only from Russia but from Australia, Argentina, etc., added to which is the reduction of the demand itself, and there lies the crux of the matter.
Canadian capital is preparing to fight for a greater share of the markets of the world by the lowering of the standards of living for the workers and farmers. The question before capital is not only of this Winter as many bourgeois politicians wish us to believe, but the Winters and the Summers of the future. What are the principal factors behind the present assault of capital against the workers and farmers? The power of the bourgeoisie in Canada has been built up on a strongly organized and centralized industrial and banking system. The small and middle-class farmers, in the vain hope of achieving security and independence, organized themselves in a “Wheat Tool’’, financed by the banks with the purpose in view of keeping up prices. But this worked to the contrary. Today they are worse off than over before, and their land and possessions are mortgaged to the banks who are also extracting their pound of flesh for the huge accumulated stocks in the “Wheat Pool”.
The workers – except for a small minority of the higher skilled labor – are completely unorganized and at the merry of the bosses. The majority of industries are concentrated in Ontario and Quebec. In the latter Province the workers are almost completely under the influence of the Roman Catholic Church and the company and Catholic Unions. In Ontario, it is the Orangemen and conservative trade unions. Only in the West have the workers demonstrated with the spirit of militancy.
The leader of the workers and poor farmers is a weak Communist party. The false policies and perspectives the Stalinist Comintern has foisted on the Canadian party in the last lew years, is one of the principle factors responsible for the failure of the party to penetrate the masses. The isolation of the party finds its reflection in the fact that in the West where the workers are more militant, the party is organizationally weaker than in the East, where the workers are more conservative. The adventurous 3rd period policies were forced on the party during the peak of the capitalist prosperity. When the slogan should have been for partial demands, the party was “fighting for the streets”. What saved the party from committing complete suicide in those days, was the fact that the membership of the party is made up of foreign language federations, whose activity is mostly cultural and social.
The growing terror against the Communists raises to the forefront more sharply than ever before the necessity of the rehabilitation of the party. In the present crisis, the party is faced with problems that raise again the following demands, if the party is to measure up to its tasks.

Unification and reinstatement of all expelled Oppositionists.
 
Inner-party democracy and ideological clarity: that, is absolutely essential if the membership is to develop as the real leaders of the working class.
 
Policies based not “on the building of socialism in a single country”, which cannot become a reality surrounded by a bourgeois globe, but on international revolution.

We warn all Left wing workers, whatever may be the differences that they may have with the Communist party leadership, that this must not be made the cover for the failure to take a definite position in the defence of the party. The workers of Canada, if they allow the bourgeoisie to smash the party, will find that tomorrow they too will be disarmed. We warn the workers and farmers of Canada, that the capitalists are preparing a general attack against your living standards. The successful suppression of the party will follow in the suppression of all militant labor organizations and progressive bodies.
In the fight for legality, the Left Opposition calls upon all workers to actively support the party.
 

