

Will those socialists who most fervently wished for the end of
Stalinism also be its last victims? The East European revolutions of
1989 were welcomed by most socialists, particularly those who argued
that Stalinism was not the rightful heir of the 1917 October
revolution but its perverter and destroyer. Nevertheless, the impact
of 1989 has not been to strengthen the general socialist tradition.
The very opposite has been the case.
The collapse of the Stalinist regimes has given renewed force to
an old argument: that the seeds of destruction were sown in the very
first days of the Bolshevik revolution. Predictably, right wingers
have seized on the ‘collapse of socialism’ as a stick with which
to beat the revolutionary tradition – from former Times
editor William Rees-Mogg’s bizarre invocation of chaos theory to
show that Lenin’s struggle to gain control of Iskra in 1903
led directly to the gulag, to former US National Security Council
member Richard Pipes’s widely praised and intensely ideological
tome The Russian Revolution, the message is the same: Lenin
led to Stalin. [1]
In Russia itself a similar but even more profound ideological
shift is under way. Once both the Stalinist bureaucracy and the
Western ruling classes insisted that Stalinism was socialism. The
Stalinists needed the mantle of the revolution to justify their
barbarity and the Western capitalists needed to show that revolution
could only lead to barbarity. Then they united in arguing that the
revolution led to disaster. The Stalinist bureaucracy needed the
world market and the Western ruling classes wanted a Russia that was
open to the world market. In all cases and at all times these two
massive social forces united to exclude the voice of the genuine
socialist tradition, the voice which rejected both Stalinism and
Western capitalism.
So, just as Pipes was celebrating the White Russian interpretation
of the revolution in the West, Moscow News devoted its middle
pages to accounts of the revolution and civil war taken from archives
compiled by Josif Gessen of the Cadets, the bourgeois party in 1917,
including pieces written by the mother of White general Baron Wrangel
and by Tsarist officers. [2] Meanwhile at
the Central Committee printing plant in Moscow in 1992 volumes of
Marx and Lenin gave way to biographies of Wrangel, his fellow White
leader Admiral Kolchak and Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago.
[3] It is hardly surprising then that
socialists in Russia are confronted again and again with arguments
which first saw the light of day in White publications from the
1920s, like S.P. Melgounov’s The Red Terror in Russia. [4]
But what is new in the wake of the East European revolutions is
that many on the left have joined this already substantial chorus.
Immediately after the East European revolutions Marxism Today
editor Martin Jacques said, ‘It’s the end of the road for
Stalinism and most of Leninism. The people have rejected
authoritarianism.’ Nina Temple, the general secretary of the
Communist Party, added, ‘If you look at Russia since the
revolution, things went wrong from the start’. [5]
Historian Eric Hobsbawm believes that, ‘For about half a century,
from 1914 to the aftermath of the Second World War, the world passed
through a period of cataclysm, producing all manner of freak results,
of which the Russian Revolution is probably the most long-lasting.’
Hobsbawm argues that Lenin shouldn’t have made the October revolution:
There were indeed Marxists – the Mensheviks, Plekhanov,
other people – even in Russia who took this view. Old Plekhanov,
who was the father of Russian Marxism, suggested to Lenin that all
you could produce that way was some kind of socialist version of the
Chinese empire. [6]
In Has Socialism Failed? and other recent writings Joe
Slovo, general secretary of the South African Communist Party, added
his criticisms of the October revolution to the general hubbub, using
them as a lever to propel the South African CP along the reformist
road that its European sister organisations travelled long ago. In
The African Communist Slovo wrote, ‘Quite a few outstanding
leaders of the Bolshevik revolution (including Trotsky, Bukharin,
Kamenev and Radek) who came to be “oppositionists” to Stalinism,
not only played a significant role in erecting part of its
theoretical edifice, but also encouraged some of its practices before
Stalin was in the saddle and long before the emergence of an
economically privileged strata’. [7]
Thus Slovo, who spent every hour of his political career defending
Stalinism, accused Trotsky of being responsible for ... Stalinism!
Rarely can a blacker pot have upbraided a cleaner kettle.
With the Stalinists the umbilical cord that links socialists with
the struggle of the working class has been severed for so long that
it is unlikely that many of them will find their way back towards the
classical Marxist tradition. State worship, the craven bending of the
knee before the established fact of a strong state which called
itself socialist, was always an important part of Stalinism. Little
surprise, then, that once those states collapsed so too did the
Stalinists’ faith in socialism.
More surprising than the reaction of yesterday’s Stalinists is
that of the anti-Stalinist socialists who have written about the
October revolution in a similar vein. Robin Blackburn, the editor of
New Left Review, has written that ‘Marxism cannot escape
implication in the fate of the Russian Revolution’. Lenin cannot
‘escape the charge’ of having laid the ground for Stalin, in part
because Lenin was not, mind you, ‘a systematic thinker’. [8]
And one time Marxist Paul Hirst has written that Lenin’s
determination to found a better society was a Utopian vision which
inevitably led to ‘the Bolshevik Party’s monopoly of power, to
the system of secret police control and to the inherently
authoritarian practice of democratic centralism’. [9]
In Before Stalinism US socialist Sam Farber argues that
Lenin’s views and actions ‘inevitably and necessarily led
to an elitist form of government’ and that the ‘Bolsheviks firmly
adopted policies that moved them a considerable distance towards what
later became the Stalinist totalitarian model’. [10]
Farber is a member of the US socialist organisation Solidarity and an
editor of its magazine Against the Current in which a fierce
debate over these and related issues has broken out. At least one
contribution is virtually indistinguishable from right wing attitudes
to the October revolution. [11]
The same sort of argument has surfaced among oppositionists in
Eastern Europe. Adam Michnik criticised ‘the “totalitarian
temptation” of those activists in Polish Solidarity who wanted the
movement to ... struggle for state power’. [12]
And Moscow socialist Boris Kagarlitsky, in an account generally more
sympathetic than many in the West, still claims that ‘Lenin’s
party was to a greater degree the party of Peter I than the party of
Karl Marx, since it strove first and foremost to ensure that Russia
imitated contemporary forms of Western organisation’. He goes on to
argue that the Bolsheviks’ ‘dictatorial methods scared off the
Western proletariat from revolution’. The fact that ‘the
Bolsheviks did not take into account the indivisibility of democratic
principles’ was one element in making the rise of Stalin the ‘more
or less logical’ result. [13]
There is clearly a case for revolutionaries to answer. Such an
answer must move beyond the general accusation that ‘Lenin led to
Stalin’ and examine in detail the arguments of the Bolsheviks’
critics. This involves looking at some of the key questions about the
Russian Revolution: Was it a ‘premature’ revolution? Was the
October revolution a coup? Were the Bolsheviks a monolithic party?
Were the Bolsheviks right to disperse the Constituent Assembly? What
about the Red Terror, the Cheka and Kronstadt?
Such questions are of more than historical interest. The October
revolution is the touchstone of 20th century politics. To know an
individual’s attitude to October is to know whether they stand for
capitalism, Stalinism or the genuine socialism of the classical
Marxist tradition. As Stalinism collapses the question is posed point
blank: is ‘reformed’ capitalism now the only path the working
class can take? To those, like Martin Jacques, who can see only the
precursor of Stalinism in the October revolution, the answer is an
enthusiastic yes. Those who rot on the dole queues of the Western
world, those threatened by slump and war, racism and oppression may
not be so quick to agree. They may wish to know why today many
socialists rush to join in declaring that Lenin led to Stalin with
those who are in every other respect their bitterest enemies.
 
A ‘premature’ revolution?
It has once again become fashionable to appeal to the Mensheviks
and to Kautsky and Plekhanov, to show that the Russian revolution was
‘premature’, that the economic conditions in backward Russia
could not support the attempt to build a socialist society. This is
the gist of Hobsbawm and Kagarlitsky’s comments cited above. It is
also an important part of Robin Blackburn’s case:
In The Communist Manifesto and in other writings, Marx and
Engels famously insisted that a genuine socialism could only be built
on the basis already laid by capitalism; in The German Ideology
they observed that socialism would require social overturns in at
least several of the most developed countries. From this classic
Marxist conviction it followed that it was a complete delusion to
attempt to ‘build socialism’ in one large and backward country.
[14]
This argument is, of course, the ABC of Marxism. Its logic is
faultless so long as it is confined to the borders of one country.
But already in 1906, in Results and Prospects, Trotsky had
dealt with this objection in detail. He examined the maturity of
Western industry and the Western working class in the section on ‘The
prerequisites for socialism’ and then went on to address precisely
the question that Robin Blackburn, using Kautsky as his authority,
raises. Trotsky’s conclusion was:
Without the direct state support of the European
proletariat the working class of Russia cannot remain in power and
convert its temporary domination into a lasting socialistic
dictatorship. Of this there cannot for one moment be any doubt.
But on the other hand there cannot be any doubt that a socialist
revolution in the West will enable us to directly convert the
temporary domination of the working class into a socialist
dictatorship. [15]
In the course of 1917 Lenin and the Bolsheviks adopted this
perspective wholeheartedly. Even Stalin could summarise the
differences between Lenin, on the one hand, and Zinoviev and Kamenev,
on the other, over whether to make the October revolution in these
terms: There are two lines: one sets the course for the victory of
the revolution and relies on Europe, the second does not believe in
the revolution and counts only on being an opposition’. [16]
In the very midst of the revolution Trotsky, now speaking for the
Bolshevik government, repeated his prognosis of 1906:
If the peoples of Europe do not arise and crush
imperialism, we shall be crushed – that is beyond doubt. Either the
Russian revolution will raise the whirlwind of struggle in the West,
or the capitalists of all countries will stifle our struggle. [17]
And Lenin, in an oft repeated argument, said:
It is not open to the slightest doubt that the final
victory of our revolution, if it were to remain alone, if there were
no revolutionary movement in other countries, would be hopeless ...
Our salvation from all these difficulties, I repeat, is an
all-European revolution. [18]
These were not, as Robin Blackburn claims, Lenin and Trotsky’s
‘later justifications of the original Bolshevik seizure of power’.
[19] They were the avowed perspective
of the Bolsheviks before, during and after the October revolution. It
was, concludes E.H. Carr, ‘the European revolution, on which the
confident calculations, not merely of a few optimists but of every
Bolshevik of any account, had been based’. [20]
And the Bolsheviks were not alone in looking to a European
revolution. Even Kautsky, in a passage from 1904 which somehow seems
to escape the notice of his modern admirers, acknowledged the
possibility of a revolution in Germany which:
must lead to the political domination of the proletariat
in Western Europe and create for the Eastern European proletariat the
possibility of contracting the stages of their development and,
copying the example of the Germans, artificially setting up socialist
institutions. Society as a whole cannot skip any stages in its
development, but it is possible for the constituent parts of society
to hasten their retarded development by imitating the more advanced
countries and, thanks to this, even to take their stand in the
forefront of development ... [21]
Kautsky’s post–1917 critique of the Bolsheviks depended on
casting off this creaking premonition of the theory of permanent
revolution. By then Kautsky was all too keen to avoid looking at
European capitalist society ‘as a whole’ and to condemn a
revolution in one of its ‘constituent parts’. Yet even after the
October revolution, in the midst of his tirade against the
Bolsheviks, Kautsky could not quite shake off the power of the
Bolsheviks’ analysis:
The Bolsheviks must not be too much blamed for expecting
a European revolution. Other socialists did the same, and we are
certainly approaching conditions which will sharply accentuate the
class struggle, and which may have many surprises in store. And if
the Bolsheviks have till now been in error in expecting a revolution,
have not Bebel, Marx and Engels cherished a like delusion? This is
not to be denied. [22]
This perspective was never the baseless optimism of which it is
accused by its latter day critics. It was founded on a detailed
examination of the way in which the world market, and with it
imperialism, had welded the capitalist world into a single organism.
It was an organism whose parts were simultaneously shaken by economic
crises and racked by war, and in which the great labour unrest of the
pre-First World War period had assumed similar intensity in a number
of major countries. Lenin and the Bolsheviks were alone in developing
a theory of imperialism which could explain the nature of modern
capitalism and the international scope of the class struggle which it
produced. No other socialists, including left Mensheviks like Martov,
even attempted such an analysis.
In the post-war years the Bolsheviks’ prognosis was proved
absolutely correct. There was a European wide revolutionary
upheaval. The Easter Rising in Ireland pre-dated the October
revolution. The fall of the German Kaiser, precipitated by a naval
mutiny and a general strike, followed the revolution in November
1918. More revolutionary crises ensued. As Victor Serge recalls:
Revolution descended on the streets of Vienna and
Budapest ... From the Scheldt to the Volga the councils of workers’
and soldiers’ deputies – the soviets – are the real masters of
the hour. Germany’s legal government is a Council of People’s
Commissars made up of six socialists. [23]
In March 1919 a soviet government took power in Hungary and in the
same year massive labour unrest shook the British state to its
foundations. For ‘the two red years’ Italy was convulsed by
massive class struggles, only brought to an end by what Serge
describes as ‘a preventative counter-revolution’ [24]
which brought Mussolini to power. Elsewhere Serge remembers:
The newspapers of the period are astonishing ... riots in
Paris, riots in Lyon, revolution in Belgium, revolution in
Constantinople, victory of the soviets in Bulgaria, rioting in
Copenhagen. In fact the whole of Europe is in movement, clandestine
or open soviets are appearing everywhere, even in the Allied armies;
everything is possible, everything. [25]
At the other end of the political spectrum, Lloyd George wrote:
The whole of Europe is filled with the spirit of
revolution. There is a deep sense not only of discontent but of anger
and revolt amongst the workmen against the pre-war conditions. The
whole existing order in its political, social and economic aspects is
questioned by the masses of the population from one end of Europe to
the other. [26]
It was on the basis of these class struggles, unprecedented in
scale and intensity, that the Third International was able to rally
to its banner mass Communist Parties numbering hundreds of thousands
of members in most European countries. By 1920 the Third
International could count on the following organisations: the Italian
Socialist Party, 300,000 strong; the Czechoslovak CP, with 400,000
members; the 140,000 of the French Socialist Party; the 35,478
comrades of the Bulgarian Socialists; the 17,000 members of the
Swedish Socialist Party; a mass German Communist Party, Norwegian
Labour Party and Yugoslav Socialist Party. [27]
What was lacking in these revolutionary upheavals was not the
objective European-wide crisis. Neither was it the willingness of
workers to struggle for power. What was lacking was a leadership of
sufficient clarity and an organisation with a core of sufficiently
experienced members to successfully lead these movements to power.
This was the decisive difference between the German and Russian
revolutions. It was a weakness which the Bolsheviks laboured
heroically to overcome in the Third International. It was certainly
not a struggle that was doomed to failure in advance.
The Bolsheviks correctly predicted a European revolution and they
strained might and main to provide that revolution with a leadership
which could bring it to a successful conclusion. They were right to
try. As Marx once observed, ‘world history would indeed be very
easy to make, if the struggle were taken up only on condition of
infallibly favourable chances.’ [28]
What was Kautsky’s attitude to the German revolution? Surely
here, in the second most advanced industrial country of the day, none
of the arguments about the impermissibility of socialism in backward
countries need apply. While Kautsky opposed socialist
revolution in backward Russia, he would, surely, support it in
advanced Germany? Nothing of the sort. Kautsky opposed a socialist
revolution in the name of capitalist democracy every bit as
vehemently in Germany as he did in Russia. He declared Rosa Luxemburg
to be every bit as dangerous as Lenin. In debate with Luxemburg a
leader of Kautsky’s party, Hugo Haase, seemingly oblivious of the
contradiction, said:
We cannot slavishly imitate the Bolshevik revolution
here, because the objective conditions are completely different.
Russia is a peasant country ... Only 10 percent of the population are
industrial workers. Germany, on the other hand, is a developed,
industrialised state which needs food supplies. The majority of its
population are proletarians. [29]
Robin Blackburn is, of course, in the same bind. If the Russian
revolution was mistaken because it took place in a backward country,
then today, in Britain, the same injunction cannot apply. Yet Robin
Blackburn objects just as forcibly to a revolutionary strategy in
Britain today as he does to the Bolsheviks’ strategy in 1917. The
unavoidable conclusion is that all the talk about ‘premature’
revolution, in Robin Blackburn and Kautsky’s cases, is an excuse
born of expediency, not a serious argument against revolutionary socialism.
 
October: coup or revolution?
The contrast between the spontaneous mass uprising of February
1917 and the ‘Bolshevik coup’ of October 1917 is one of the
staples of right wing interpretation of the revolution. It is a view
which is gaining renewed force from events in Eastern Europe. As one
historian has recently observed:
[The] portrayal of the Bolshevik victory as the product
of the organisational skill of a ruthless, conspiratorial minority
has informed conventional wisdom in the West for so long that it has
made an all but indelible impression on popular assumptions about the
revolution. Although recent specialist work has cast doubt upon many
of its propositions, studies adhering to it continue to appear and it
still provides the common currency of Western media commentary.
Moreover, the spectacle of perestroika, of Communism repentant,
promises to lend it a new lease of life. The graver the travails of
the Soviet Union, the bolder the adherents of [this] view seem likely
to become. [30]
Thus for Pipes the revolution was ‘a model of a modern coup
d’etat’. [31] Few socialists,
anarchists apart, have been willing to swallow much of the right wing
story. But while they accept that October was a genuine mass rising,
they tend to understate the degree to which the Bolsheviks had to
fight against all other socialist parties to make the
revolution possible in the first place. They also tend to
underestimate the intense polarisation that the revolution involved,
playing down the threat of counterrevolution. Both these arguments
are then used to buttress criticisms of the Bolsheviks’
post-October actions: their dispersal of the Constituent Assembly and
their conduct of the civil war.
But what had brought the Bolsheviks to power? Clearly their
programme and tactical flexibility were essential. But that is only
part of the story. The remainder is explained by how the other
parties responded to the growing crisis. The path from February to
October is not the royal road of the Bolsheviks’ rise to power, it
is also the story of the other parties’ steep descent in the
estimation of the mass of workers and peasants as they failed to give
adequate answers to the most pressing questions posed by the revolution.
The February revolution raised three key issues: the war, the land
and the factories. And there were three key political forces:
firstly, the old order whose most powerful remnants were the officer
corps of the Tsarist army supported, sometimes with reservations, by
the bourgeois Constitutional Democrats (Cadets). Secondly, there were
the parties of the working class the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks.
Finally there were the Socialist Revolutionaries (SRs), oriented on
and thinking of themselves as the representatives of the peasants,
though often led by intellectuals, lawyers and other sections of the
urban middle classes.
The regime which issued from the February revolution, headed by
the Provisional Government, was dominated by the Cadets. It refused
to distribute the land to the peasants, vowed to continue the war and
offered little to the workers. The Provisional Government had the
support of the Mensheviks and SRs who commanded a majority in the
soviets which mushroomed during and after the February revolution.
The economic and political paralysis of the regime drove a wedge
between the Provisional Government and the mass of workers, peasants
and soldiers. The first crisis of the Provisional Government came in
April. The issue was the war. The Cadet leader Miliukov provoked the
crisis by declaring that ‘Russia would fight to the last drop of
her blood’. It was an announcement which met with a bitter response
on the battlefields where Russian soldiers were ‘churned into
gruel’, according to General Sir Alfred Knox, ‘until casualties
in the firing line should make rifles available’. [32]
Meetings, protests, street fights between pro-war and anti-war
demonstrators and, eventually, riots drove Miliukov from the
government. Indeed it brought an end to the purely bourgeois
government. The leaders of the moderate socialists joined a new
coalition government. As the Cadet Prince Trubetskoy wrote, ‘There
was apparently a wall between ourselves and the left, but it fell
down’. [33] As the Provisional
Government became progressively more unpopular it increasingly relied
on the SRs and other moderate socialists to lend it credibility,
ending with one such figure, Kerensky, as its leader.
The Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries were willing
co-optees. They were happy to participate in the Provisional
Government because they believed the revolution must limit itself to
bourgeois horizons. As Trotsky notes, ‘From the time of the first
revolution, the Mensheviks had inferred the necessity of a union with
the liberals from the bourgeois character of the revolution.’ [34]
The leader of the Cadets agreed:
The socialist parties of the present time have a much
more intelligent view ... the revolution at the present time cannot
go further than the political victory of the bourgeoisie ... The
socialists have even managed to break with their own traditions and
doctrines and have entered the government. This represents a great
step forward ... [35]
This ‘intelligent view’, which ‘systematic thinkers’ like
Robin Blackburn and Hobsbawm now laud as showing the October
revolution to be ‘premature’, was at the time the very theory
which earned its authors the contempt of the vast majority of workers
and peasants.
The moderate socialists earned this contempt by continuing
policies which mirrored those of the Cadet-only government. Kerensky
continued the insanity of the war effort by telling troops that ‘the
inevitability and necessity of sacrifice must rule the hearts of
Russian soldiers’ and that ‘I summon you not to a feast but to
death’. To which one peasant replied, ‘What’s the use of the
peasants getting land if I’m killed and get no land?’ It was an
argument whose elemental power launched tens of thousands of soldiers
on the long trek back to their villages. They simply walked away from
the front in the summer of 1917.
At the army headquarters the supposed representatives of ‘the
peasants in uniform’ led a rather different life from those in the
barracks and trenches. Victor Serge records:
The supreme revolutionary authority was the committee of
the armies ... controlled by the Socialist Revolutionary party. This
committee hobnobbed amicably with the General Staff, denounced
Bolshevik plots and affirmed the indefatigable loyalty of the army to
the fatherland and Allies ... [36]
It was no different on the home front. The Mensheviks and the
Socialist Revolutionaries temporised endlessly about declaring that
the land should betaken over by the peasants, despite the fact that
the peasants were already acting for themselves. The Mensheviks,
including Martov, were adamant in their opposition to workers’
control of the factories, again in spite of the fact that this was a
reality even before it became a Bolshevik slogan. But they could do
nothing to stop the crisis which was driving the workers to occupy
the factories and the peasants to seize the land: prices rose 2,300
percent between February and October and real wages fell by almost a
half. [37] The rate of bankruptcies and
closures rocketed. Strikes alone were not enough to combat this level
of social disintegration.
A second crisis erupted in July as Kerensky’s military offensive
failed and as the Provisional Government used Czech mercenaries to
drive recalled veterans to the front. The anger of the workers and
soldiers spontaneously boiled over into a near uprising – ‘more
than a demonstration and less than a revolution’, in Lenin’s
words. [38] At one point an angry mob
burst into the soviet and, white with anger, a worker jumped onto the
platform, shook his fist at the SR leader Chernov and shouted, Take
power, you son of a bitch, when it’s given you. ‘But the SRs and
Mensheviks had no intention of proclaiming, ‘All Power to the
Soviets.’ As one historian generally unsympathetic to Bolshevism writes:
Too long used to debating the complexities of
revolutionary theory while they remained unschooled in revolutionary
practice, the men who stepped forward to lead the Petrograd Soviet
... proved to be timid advocates for Russia’s proletarians ...
these halting theorists preached that the revolution neither had ‘the
practical strength to bring about the rapid socialistic
transformation of Russia, nor were conditions ripe’ for doing so.
Political power, they insisted, must be delivered first to those
sober politicians who represented Russia’s men and women of
property ... Petrograd’s workers and soldiers proved much less
willing to surrender their newly won revolutionary victories. [39]
The immediate consequence of the July Days was not to increase the
support for the Bolsheviks. The wave of the revolution had broken
around the walls of the Provisional Government without yet being
powerful enough to breach them. As the movement temporarily ebbed,
reaction, confident that the moderate socialists were as fearful of
the masses as it was, seized its chance. [40]
Just as polarisation was taking place within the soviet camp an
equal but opposite polarisation was taking place in the camp of the
bourgeoisie. Just as the soldiers, workers and peasants were
impatient for the Provisional Government and the moderate majority in
the soviets to resolve the situation decisively in their favour, so
the generals, the factory owners and the landlords were losing
patience with the Provisional Government’s inability to resolve the
situation once and for all in their favour. Inside the bourgeois camp
the mood began to swing in favour of a military dictatorship.
Kerensky ordered the formation of a special squad to hunt down Lenin
and shoot him on sight. [41]
Trotsky and other leading Bolsheviks were imprisoned, Bolshevik
sympathisers were murdered and the organisation’s printing presses
smashed. ‘A common parlour topic became the need for an “exemplary”
German victory, to chasten the working class’. [42]
Marc Ferro has described what he calls this ‘terror in an minor key’:
A model of anti-Bolshevism was being assembled, and it
was reconstituted during the civil war. It was shaped between
February and October, and there was some similarity between it and
the Fascist model that came later in Italy and then Germany: it began
with resistance to social revolution, the primary role of leading
financiers and industrialists, with action by the army and the
church, denial of the class struggle, and an appeal to servicemen’s
masculine solidarity; it was followed by the use of ‘special action
groups’, the denunciation of governmental weakness, the emergence
of new men (often former revolutionaries who had supported the war),
with a leadership cult, anti-Semitism, attacks on democratic
organisations, and finally, the sympathy and armed intervention by
allied governments. [43]
The appearance of General Kornilov in Moscow for the state
conference in August 1917, born aloft from his train by officers, was
the turning point. From that moment on the Provisional Government
became a fiction. Behind its façade the Bolsheviks prepared to
defend the revolution by ending dual power in favour of the soviets.
The right prepared to crush the revolution, the soviets and the
Provisional Government beneath the heel of the army. The choice was
either revolution or counter-revolution. Trotsky argued:
Just as out of the eagerness of the Petrograd masses
arose the semi-insurrection of July, so out of the impatience of the
property owners arose the Kornilov insurrection of August. And just
as the Bolsheviks found themselves obliged to take the side of an
armed insurrection, in order if possible to guarantee its success and
in any case to prevent its extermination, so the Cadets found
themselves obliged, for like purposes, to take part in the Kornilov
insurrection. Within these limits, there is an astonishing symmetry
in the two situations. But inside this symmetrical framework there is
a complete contrast of goals, methods and results. [44]
Kornilov was clear that he and his fellow officers ‘would not
hesitate to hang all the soviet members if need be’, but he hoped
to operate under the wing of Kerensky’s government. Then a
Constituent Assembly could be summoned, quickly dispersed and
‘Kerensky and Co will make way for me’. [45]
‘The Kornilovshchina was to begin, under the Kerenshchina’s
cover’. [46] Kerensky belatedly
realised that Kornilov’s plans would end in his own demise and
turned to the soviets to defeat the Kornilov coup. The soviets, in
turn, were now disillusioned with Kerensky and increasingly looked to
the Bolsheviks for leadership.
So the same process which was draining popular support from the
Provisional Government towards the soviets also began, within the
soviets, to drain support away from the moderate socialists toward
the Bolsheviks. In August 1917 the president of the Mensheviks
declared that the organisation was in ‘total confusion. No one knew
what to do or how to proceed ... The Mensheviks and the SRs were
equally isolated from the people and from the soldiers.’
Plekhanov’s paper surveyed the work wrought by his theory that the
revolution was ‘premature’ and concluded, ‘The Menshevik
faction is suffering one defeat after another, and one does not have
to be a prophet to foretell rapid demise’. [47]
In these circumstances the moderate socialists lost all purchase
on political reality. Continually declining in influence they were
tossed back and forth between wanting to prevent a second revolution
and realising that if they did not go forward they would be thrown
back into the arms of counter-revolution Kerensky’s increasingly
hysterical vacillations were the personification of this attitude.
The Bolsheviks’ vital role in organising the defeat of the
Kornilov coup gave them the support of the majority in the soviets.
The Kornilov coup was defeated at the end of August and on 9
September the Bolsheviks won the majority in the Petrograd soviet,
Trotsky becoming its president. Between the defeat of Kornilov and
the October insurrection the task of the party was to organise its
supporters in the soviets, and indeed to convince some of the party’s
own leaders, so that the broken hulk of the Provisional Government
could be successfully deprived of the last vestiges of power.
Lenin insisted that the insurrection could only be the crowning
act of the mass revolution, not a party coup. Nikolai Podvoisky, the
Bolshevik head of the Petrograd soviet’s Military Revolutionary
Committee, recalled this conversation with Lenin on the eve of the
October revolution:
Comrade Lenin asked me what I thought of the work of the
Military Revolutionary Committee.
‘The Military Revolutionary Committee’, I answered,
‘is actually an extended bureau of the Military Organisations of
the Central Committee of our party.’
‘And that is wrong!’ said Vladimir llyich. ‘It
should not be a bureau, but a non-party insurrectionary body which
has full power and is connected with all sections of the workers and
soldiers. The committee must ensure that an unlimited number of
workers and soldiers are armed and participate in the insurrection.
The greater the initiative and activity of each member of the
Military Revolutionary Committee, the stronger and more effective
will be the influence of the entire committee on the masses. There
must not be the slightest hint of the dictatorship by the Military
Organisation over the Military Revolutionary Committee.’ [48]
This was, of course, not the first time Lenin had had to argue the
difference between a revolution and a coup. Both the Mensheviks and
some of his own supporters, notably Zinoviev and Kamenev, had
objected that Lenin was planning a coup when he demanded practical
military preparations for the revolution. Lenin was variously accused
of Jacobinism, or of being a follower of the anarchist Bakunin or the
conspirator Blanqui. Lenin’s answer is worth quoting at length
since it shows both that he had no intention of mounting a coup and
precisely the preconditions for revolution which had been achieved by
October. These same arguments were contained in his pamphlet Marxism
and Insurrection, circulated in thousands of copies before the
October revolution:
Military conspiracy is Blanquism, if it is
organised not by a party of a definite class, if its organisers have
not analysed the political moment in general and the international
situation in particular, if the party has not on its side the
sympathy of the majority of the people, as proved by objective facts,
if the development of revolutionary events has not brought
about a practical refutation of the conciliatory illusion of the
petty bourgeoisie, if the majority of the soviet-type organs
of revolutionary struggle that have been recognised as authoritative
or have shown themselves to be such in practice have not been won
over, if there has not matured a sentiment in the army (if in
wartime) against the government that protracts the unjust war against
the will of the whole people, if the slogans of the uprising
(like ‘All Power to the Soviets’,’land to the peasants’, or
immediate offer of a democratic peace to all the belligerent nations’
... ) have not become widely popular, if the advanced workers are not
sure of the desperate situation of the masses and of the support of
the countryside, a support proved serious by a peasant movement or by
an uprising against the landowners and the government that defends
the landowners, if the country’s economic situation inspires
earnest hopes for a favourable solution of the crisis by peaceable
and parliamentary means. That is probably enough. [49]
When Lenin believed that these conditions were not present,
during the July Days, he bent his every effort to prevent a
premature rising. Many other revolutionaries in Europe, as the German
revolution would show, were to pay with their lives for not being
able to make a similar assessment. But by October even Lenin’s
political enemies were forced to admit that he was no Jacobin. The
Menshevik N.N. Sukhanov writes:
To talk about military conspiracy instead of national
insurrection, when the party was followed by the overwhelming
majority of the people, when the party had already de facto
conquered all real power and authority was clearly an absurdity. On
the part of the enemies of Bolshevism it was a malicious
absurdity, but on the part of the ‘cronies’ [Zinoviev,
Kamenev] an aberration based on panic. Here Lenin was right ... [50]
Or as Robert Service simply expresses it:
What really counted was that the Bolshevik political
programme proved steadily more appealing to the mass of workers,
soldiers and peasants as social turmoil and economic ruin reached a
climax in late autumn. But for that there could have been no October
revolution. [51]
Martov wrote, ‘Understand, please, that before us after all is a
victorious uprising of the proletariat almost the entire proletariat
supports Lenin and expects its social liberation from the uprising’.
[52]
Ultimately October was not a great contest between Menshevism and
Bolshevism, not between bourgeois democracy and soviet power but
between bourgeois reaction and military dictatorship,
on the one hand, and soviet power, on the other. The Mensheviks did
not understand this at the time of the revolution, they did not
understand it at the time of the dissolution of the Constituent
Assembly and they did not understand it during the civil war. The
Bolsheviks’ ability to prevail lay in the fact that they did
understand this.
Those who dream today that there could have been a ‘third way’
which would have prevented the ‘premature’ revolution of October
1917 need to think on two issues. Firstly, such a course was offered
to the workers of Russia in1917 and they rejected it and, secondly,
they rejected it in part because they saw behind the vacillations of
Kerensky the bayonet of Kornilov. Trotsky was right when he insisted
that fascism is the price paid by those who toy with revolution.
 
The Bolsheviks: a monolithic party?
The root of Stalinism is often said to lie in the Bolsheviks’
tyrannical and undemocratic party structure. This was the mantra
repeated by a generation of Cold War historians, now echoed in the
Russian media. Their central argument has been summarised with only a
hint of irony by liberal historian Stephen Cohen:
In October 1917, the Bolsheviks (Communists), a small,
unrepresentative, and already or embryonically totalitarian party,
usurped power and thus betrayed the Russian Revolution. From that
moment on, as in 1917, Soviet history was determined by the
totalitarian dynamics of the Communist Party, as personified by its
original leader, Lenin monopolistic politics, ruthless tactics,
ideological orthodoxy, programmatic dogmatism, disciplined
leadership, and centralised bureaucratic organisation. [53]
The left used to set its face firmly against what Cohen calls this
‘malignant and inevitable straight line’ theory. Now, however,
things have changed. Sam Farber connects Lenin’s attitude to
legality in the early Soviet state, which he defines as one of
‘expediency at best and of contempt at worst’, with ‘Lenin’s
chronic distaste for codified rules, legal or otherwise’. This
attitude, Farber claims, ‘had sometimes played an important role in
his political practice concerning internal party organisation’.
[54] This lack of respect for ‘rules’
and ‘legality’ helped pave the way for Stalin. For Robin
Blackburn, ‘Lenin’s Bolshevik current came to represent a species
of political voluntarism’. Lenin’s’ cult of party organisation
and discipline’ was a ‘double-edged discovery’ which helped ‘to
fashion a political force that could be used for purposes he did not
approve’, a fact which he only recognised at the end of his life.
And although Lenin ‘does not carry full responsibility’ he and
Trotsky ‘cannot escape the charge of having themselves prepared the
ground for Stalin’. [55]
These are remarkable sentiments to hear from socialists,
especially since much research done by liberal historians over the
last 30 years has demonstrated beyond all doubt that the Bolsheviks
were, until shortly before Stalin’s rise to power in 1928, an
organisation who were fanatical in only one sense: their devotion to
internal debate and argument.
Lenin’s early insistence on discipline and organisation in What
is to be Done? (1902) was a product of the chaos and anarchy that
reigned in the revolutionary movement at that time. Local groups
proliferated without contact with one another. Primitive and
amateurish, prey to police agents, they were often arrested before
they produced their first leaflet. The upsurge of strike activity
from which they had emerged had marked them with a healthy desire to
participate in the struggle but with a marked unwillingness to relate
this struggle to the wider issues of socialist change within society.
The famous themes of What is to be Done? addressed
themselves to these weaknesses. Where there were only leaflets, Lenin
demanded a party press. Where there was amateurishness, Lenin
demanded professionalism. Where there was syndicalism and economism,
Lenin demanded socialist politics. Where there was localism, Lenin
demanded coordination and centralisation. And all this itself
demanded an active, not passive, membership. Illegal conditions
required a high level of commitment from ‘professional’
revolutionaries. All these formulations from What is to be Done?
were at the time supported by Trotsky and by Martov.
On occasions Lenin’s arguments overstated the case – a
necessary evil given the chaos above which he was trying to rise. It
was untrue that socialism could only come to the workers ‘from the
outside’ and it was untrue that workers could spontaneously reach
only trade union consciousness – faults which Lenin was only too
pleased to acknowledge three years later when he announced that
workers were ‘spontaneously’ socialist during the 1905 revolution
and that the party should open its gates wide to admit as many of
them as possible. [56] Even when
illegality and repression obliged the Bolsheviks to adopt tighter
organisation they were far from the totalitarian organisation of
legend. As one liberal historian notes:
The image of a tightly knit bunch of inveterate
conspirators, so sedulously cultivated by their enemies, was ... a
cruel mockery of their real condition. Indeed so much of their public
reputation was wide of the mark. They did not look upon Lenin, even
when he succeeded in keeping in contact with underground committees,
as the only acceptable source of plans and policies. They did not
regard What is to be Done? as an organisational blueprint ...
they in fact wanted to found a mass socialist party as soon as it was
practicable. [57]
The Bolsheviks were so far from being a monolithic party that
Lenin had enormous difficulty in getting many committees to separate
from the Mensheviks at all. Even in 1917 there were still joint
committees in some parts of Russia. At all points from 1905 to 1917
the Bolsheviks were a party in which heated discussion was the norm.
They divided over boycotting and later participating in the Duma,
over participation in the police inspired trade unions, over the
philosophical dispute between Lenin and Bogdanov and over a host of
lesser issues.
In 1917 itself ‘controversy was the lifeblood of Central
Committee activity’. [58] They were
of course famously divided over the very nature of the revolution,
over if and when to call for a second revolution. After the
revolution they divided over whether there should be a coalition with
other socialists, over whether the elections to the Constituent
Assembly should be rerun and about whether there should be a peace
with German imperialism. This last had for a time ... brought the
party to the edge of the abyss of total disintegration’. [59]
Yet it did not prevent further arguments over military policy during
the civil war, the role of trade unions under socialism and,
repeatedly, over economic issues. In his study of the internal
organisation of the Bolsheviks, Robert Service notes that even though
the devastating experience of the civil war had sapped the inner life
of the party:
This is not to say that the Bolshevik party of the mid–1920s was
yet the regimented grotesquerie it was to appear in the 1930s ...
with all these controversies raging throughout the 1920s it would be
ludicrous to maintain that the stuffing had been completely knocked
out of Bolshevik life not long after the civil war. [60]
These arguments often split the Bolsheviks from top to bottom, as
any serious argument in a revolutionary party is likely to do. At all
times, but especially in 1917, ‘insubordination was the rule of the
day whenever lower party bodies thought questions of importance were
at stake’. [61] During 1917 the
Vyborg committee of the party sent out its own agitators to tour the
Baltic arguing against the Petrograd committee’s tolerant attitude
towards the Provisional Government:
Nor was there a well established system of subordination and
discipline along the hierarchical chain stretching from the Central
Committee at the apex to the primary ‘cells’ at the base. Tension
and conflict were the rule, not the exception. If anything committees
tended to be called into account from below rather than above. Rank
and file members and lower activists could not only make their views
known at general open meetings but also re-elect their
representatives at frequent intervals ... few leaders succeeded in
acting in opposition to the viewpoint of their committee colleagues
over a lengthy period. [62]
It was frequently the local party committees which inundated the
Central Committee secretariat with demands for more precise
guidelines about what they should do. Often Sverdlov, in charge of
the secretariat, could only tell them to look at Pravda for
guidance. As October approached he was unable to do more than tell
one inquirer, ‘You understand, comrade, that it is difficult to
give you instructions any more concrete than “All Power to the
Soviets” ... except to add that it is of supreme importance to take
charge of the post and telegraph offices and also the railway’.
[63] This minimal guidance, even in
Petrograd, was not always followed: both the comrades charged with
leading the detachment which seized the general telegraph office
forgot to bring the revolvers.
So what is left of the importance of organisation and the
operation of democratic centralism if this is a true picture of how
the Bolsheviks worked? Actually, a great deal. A revolutionary party
operates precisely by being in a relationship of ‘tension and
conflict’ both with the mass of the working class and with the
ordinary members of the party who are subject to the pressure of the
mass of workers.
Without such pressure, without the tumultuous democracy and debate
which is the ordinary functioning of a revolutionary organisation, it
is impossible for the party to learn what is going on in the class,
to discuss and debate its own experience and to formulate policy. But
without the constant attempt to rationalise and systematise its work
and its arguments the party cannot act as the organ which attempts to
lead the class – that is why a party must try to discipline the
debate and discussion, even while it welcomes it. The only means that
the leadership of the party has to achieve this is the power of
argument and the record of its previous decisions. The stronger this
record, the more frequently the party and its leadership have been
proved right in struggle, the more weight it carries in the class and
with its own rank and file. And, in the last resort, the power of the
leadership’s arguments will depend on how quickly and effectively
it learns from workers in struggle, the only real source of theory.
The Bolsheviks could tolerate a high level of internal debate
because they had, over many years, created a high level of agreement
on general politics and a wide knowledge of the Marxist tradition.
Equally importantly they had sought at every available opportunity to
root themselves in the working class, training their members never to
stand aloof from the struggle and to express the party’s ideas in
terms which fitted the experience of those in struggle. In contrast,
Rosa Luxemburg’s Spartacus League had neither a common theoretical
framework nor well established links with at least an advanced
minority of workers. This is why it could neither act in a concerted
manner during key turning points in the struggle, nor could it
withstand fierce debate without running the risk of immobilising the
organisation. [64]
Once this dialectical relationship between the Bolsheviks and the
working class was broken, shattered because the working class itself
was broken backed after the civil war, freedom of debate gradually
and inevitably became first a monologue of the party with itself and
then merely a dispute among the leaders of the party.
 
The Constituent Assembly
The dissolution of the Constituent Assembly by the Bolsheviks in
January 1918 is one of their most contentious acts. It outraged
Kautsky and became one of the key accusations in The Dictatorship
of the Proletariat, his polemic against the October revolution.
Robin Blackburn is obviously sympathetic to Martov’s view that the
‘bourgeois democratic revolution should be championed by Marxists’.
Blackburn goes on to argue that ‘consistent with this position,
Martov opposed dissolution of the Constituent Assembly in 1918 while
still favouring an independent role for the soviets and trade
unions.’ Martov, says Blackburn, ‘attacked the Bolsheviks for a
sort of lumpen anarchism which failed to see the importance of
establishing a lawful and democratic polity based on an authoritative
state’. [65] Robin Blackburn isn’t
above bracketing Kautsky and Rosa Luxemburg together as ‘notable
Marxists of the day’ who ‘repudiated the practice of party
dictatorship from the very beginning’. [66]
In an earlier issue of New Left Review Tim Wohlforth puts
the same kind of argument in more general terms. ‘It is hard to
view the young Soviet state as structurally superior to the
systems of parliamentary, “bourgeois” democracy excoriated in
Leninist doctrine’, argues Wohlforth. He goes on to say that
soviets should be supplemented by ‘the direct election by universal
suffrage and secret ballot, through free competition of parties, of
the highest decision-making body of government’. [67]
Sam Farber is half willing to defend the Bolsheviks, but ‘only
if we assume that their arguments in defence of the soviet system
... represented a genuine long-term commitment to that alternative
form of democratic government’. [68]
Yet this is precisely what Farber is not willing to assume
since his whole book is supposed to demonstrate that the Bolsheviks
failed to show any such commitment. Sam Farber too quotes Rosa
Luxemburg, whose criticism of the Bolsheviks’ dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly is cited by right wingers who would never dream
of endorsing any other word that she wrote. In particular, they
forget her accolade to Lenin and Trotsky who, she said, had been ‘the
salvation of the honour of international socialism’. [69]
The essential problem with all these criticisms is that they ask
the question: if we were the founding fathers of the workers’
constitution, what democratic blueprint would we propose? The
question they do not ask is: in the struggle for power which
institutions represent the interests of the workers and which the
interests of the ruling class? Around which institutions are the
opposing classes rallying? These questions need careful analysis in a
revolutionary period because the role of the different institutions
alters dramatically depending on the balance of class forces.
Before the October revolution all the socialist parties, including
the Bolsheviks, had been in favour of calling the Constituent
Assembly. Yet the Provisional Government, both before and after the
socialists joined it, had delayed calling the Assembly. This delay
had a social root. If the elections had been held the Mensheviks and
SRs would have had a majority. This would have forced them to address
the land question, the ending of the war and the occupations of the
factories. This would have meant that they would either have had to
agree to the Bolsheviks’ programme ‘Land, Bread and Peace’ or
they would have had to try and claw back the already half established
gains of the revolution. That would have meant siding with the
counter-revolution against the mass of workers and peasants.
So the Provisional Government did what it was best at: it
temporised and made excuses. On the one hand it said that it could
not decide the key questions of the day because it was only a
provisional government. On the other hand it delayed calling
the one body which it maintained did have such power, the Constituent
Assembly. In these circumstances the Bolsheviks called all the more
vociferously for the Constituent Assembly as a way of showing that
the bourgeois democrats had no intention of even carrying through the
tasks of the bourgeois revolution. Meanwhile, they continued to
insist that the tasks of the revolution could only be met by
transferring all power to the soviets.
Even before the October revolution the mass of workers understood
clearly that the soviets were their organisations, responsive to
their needs, and that the Assembly was a chimera of which they knew
little and from which they expected less. Boris Sokolov, one of the
leaders of the SRs, explains this graphically:
Of all the political parties the Socialist Revolutionary
Party was linked with the idea of the Constituent Assembly by
extremely close, might even say organic, ties ... It seemed to them,
and not only to them, that the crucial thing was to ‘bring the
country to the Constituent Assembly’. Theoretically perhaps, and
probably in fact, there was a very great truth in this, but
practically this peculiar idealism was fraught with the most
exasperating consequences and complications.
This was especially because the people were far from
being fully imbued with faith in the saving power of the Constituent
Assembly ... In the beginning, during the first few months after the
revolution, the Constituent Assembly was something absolutely unknown
and unclear to the mass of front line soldiers ... their sympathies
leaned completely, openly, and frankly to the soviets. These were
institutions that were near and dear to them, reminding them of
village assemblies ... From the very first days, the meetings of the
soviets influenced their decisions. Both the army committee, which
the soldiers called ‘our soviet’, and the soviets in the capital
cities seemed close to them, and their activities comprehensible.
During the first few months I more than once had occasion to hear
objections to the Constituent Assembly from soldiers, and not from
the least intelligent ones at that. To most of them the Assembly was
associated with the State Duma, an institution that was remote to
them. ‘What do we need some Constituent Assembly for when we have
our soviets, where our deputies meet and which can decide everything
and know how to go about everything?’ [70]
After the October revolution had transferred power to the soviets,
the SRs and the Mensheviks no longer wished to delay calling the
Constituent Assembly for now it had been transformed from a looming
embarrassment into a potential base from which they might be able to
regain all that they had just lost. Again the mood was very different
among the rank and file. Sokolov reports from a congress of soldiers
held on the south western front, where, it should be noted, Bolshevik
influence was much less than on the north western front:
A majority of the congress belonged to the SR Party,
which had approximately two thirds of the delegates. The remaining
third adhered to the Bolsheviks or a small number to the Ukrainians.
However, some of the SRs, primarily those sent by rearguard units in
the front line zone, took an ambiguous position, which could best be
summed up as follows: since the Provisional Government no longer
exists and since the Constitutional Assembly has not yet been
convened, all the power in the country ought to go to the soviets ...
The disputes that developed on this question showed how
contradictory the mood was even among the delegates ... They
discussed the advantages of the soviet system over parliamentarianism
and emphasised the fact, which seemed indisputable to most, that the
soviets were better than the Provisional Government since the
‘soviets, you know, are ours’. Even the arrival of the former
Provisional Government minister Avksentiev at this congress and his
many speeches in defence of the slogan ‘All Power to the
Constituent Assembly’, did not convince the majority ... The front
line congress, though not by a very large majority, expressed itself
in favour of the formulation proposed by the Bolsheviks. It spoke out
for power to the soviets – essentially for Bolshevik power. [71]
Thus these soldiers understood through experience what had become,
since Marx’s writings on the Paris Commune, a cornerstone of
revolutionary theory: that the soviet is a superior form of democracy
because it unifies political and economic power – unlike parliament
which leaves the most important power of the bourgeoisie, its
economic strength, untouched; because it brings under democratic
control the administrative and legislative functions of government –
unlike parliament which leaves the civil service, army and police in
unelected hands; and, most of all, because the soviet is an organ of
struggle responsive to the will of the workers and capable of
directly organising strikes, protests and so on.
A parliament could be a rallying point for the bourgeoisie during
their revolution precisely because they aimed only at political
power. In general they were already masters, or near masters, of the
economy. The Long Parliament of 1640 in England and the Constituent
Assembly of 1789 in France therefore restricted themselves to
conquering state power on behalf of an already economically powerful
class. Even in these cases parliamentary institutions had to be
propelled forward by, respectively, the arms of the New Model Army
and the force of the great popular mobilisations led by the Jacobin
clubs. In both the English and the French revolutions the most
radical sections of the bourgeoisie even had to purge their own
parliamentary institutions in order for the revolution to succeed.
But the socialist revolution must counterpose the soviet to
parliament, just as the bourgeoisie counterposed parliament to the
court, precisely because it needs an organ which combines economic
power – the power to strike and take control of the workplaces –
with an insurrectionary bid for political power, breaking the old
state and replacing it with a more democratic workers’ state.
The bourgeoisie and the SRs clearly understood this and were keen
to restore all the old separations inherent in a bourgeois state as
the first step on the road to counter-revolution. The Constituent
Assembly was a rallying point for the right. The SRs planned what was
effectively a counter-revolution to coincide with the opening of the
Constituent Assembly:
Everything was ready to transform the event into an
insurrection. Thirty armoured cars were to advance against the Smolny
[the Bolshevik headquarters]; SR regiments would have supported the
coup. [72]
‘For weeks all preparations had been made with this end in view.
But by the new year it was evident that a strictly military coup
could not succeed,’ comments Radkey, the historian of the SRs. [73]
At the last moment the SR leadership called off the rising.
Nevertheless the SR terrorist fraction still made plans to kidnap
Lenin and Trotsky and on 2 January 1918, three days before the
Assembly was due to open, two shots were fired at Lenin’s car. And
in southern Russia the first White ‘volunteer army’ under General
Kaledin was already fighting soviet power under the banner of the
Constituent Assembly. Under these circumstances it would have been
absurd for the Bolsheviks to allow this invitation to
counter-revolution to remain open, even if the elections to it had
been scrupulously fair according to the lights of parliamentary democracy.
In fact they were not fair even according to those limited
criteria. Firstly, the elections only achieved a 50 percent turnout
and in some parts of Russia no poll was held at all. On some sections
of the front, officers hid the fact that the Provisional Government
had fallen. Secondly, the SRs had split after their election lists
had been drawn up. This meant that the Right SRs (RSRs) who were
little different to the ‘left’ Cadets, dominated. The Left SRs
(LSRs), who were close to the Bolsheviks, only got their lists out to
some of the central Russian regions.
Thus the three weeks of polling which gave a massive majority to
the RSRs and about 25 percent of the votes to the Bolsheviks were
highly unrepresentative of the real situation. A brief look at three
of the areas where the LSRs did manage to stand candidates reveals
how much the result would have altered had they been allowed to stand
everywhere. In Petrograd the LSRs received 16.2percent of the vote
and the RSRs 0.5 percent; in Kazan the LSRs got 18.9 percent and the
RSRs 2.1 percent; in the Baltic Fleet 26.9 percent voted for the
LSRs, while just 11.9 percent voted for the RSRs. [74]
Even allowing for the fact that these were favourable areas for the
LSRs it is clear that the election results were a mockery of the real
situation in Russia in 1917. [75] The
elections to the all-Russian congresses of the soviets give a much
more accurate picture of the Bolsheviks’ support [76];



Congresses


   


No. of
Delegates


   


No. of
Bolsheviks


   


%




1 June 1917


  790


103


13




12 Oct 1917


  675


343


51




3 Jan 1918


  710


434


61




4 Mar 1918


1232


795


64




5 July 1918


1164


773


66



The real weakness of the bourgeoisie was symbolically represented
by the scene at the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly. ‘Meeting
in this atmosphere of botched insurrection, the Constituent Assembly
felt itself doomed’, records Victor Serge. [77]
Certainly when the anarchist commander of the Red Guard, to chants
of ‘That’s enough! That’s enough!’ from a packed gallery,
approached the chairman and told him that the Assembly would have to
disperse because ‘the guard is tired’, the delegates went meekly enough.
The only outcry was a small demonstration, dispersed with a few
casualties by the sailors, which even Sokolov described as ‘absurd,
ridiculous’. Victor Serge states that, ‘The dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly made a great sensation abroad. In Russia, it
passed almost unnoticed’. [78] And
that doyen of Cold Warriors Leonard Shapiro comments, ‘It was the
end of the Constituent Assembly. Its dispersal caused little stir in
the country and was reported to have been treated with indifference
in the army’. [79] W.H. Chamberlin,
the Christian Science Monitor’s Moscow correspondent in the
1920s, records in his valuable, though anti-Bolshevik, The Russian
Revolution that the dismissal of the Constituent Assembly ‘evoked
scarcely a ripple of interest and protest, so far as the masses were
concerned.’ Even Pipes is forced to admit that ‘the dissolution
of the Assembly met with surprising indifference’. [80]
There can be little doubt that if the situation had been reversed,
that is if a Bolshevik-dominated Constituent Assembly had been
elected while the right-wing still commanded sufficient armed force,
they would have dismissed the Assembly.
Once again the German revolution provides a negative proof of the
correctness of the Bolsheviks’ attitude to the Constituent
Assembly. The revolution of 9 November 1918 had been won on the basis
of strike action, mutiny and the rise of workers’ councils. But the
German soviets, like their Russian counterparts after the February
revolution, were dominated by reformists. The government of People’s
Commissars, drawn from the reformist SPD and the centrist USPD,
immediately began to argue that the soviets had done a marvellous job
in getting rid of the Kaiser, but that they should now prepare to
hand over power to a Constituent, or National, Assembly. This was
Kautsky’s repeated theme during these months. [81]
Confronted with the practical question, ‘National Assembly or
soviets?’ Rosa Luxemburg, less than a year after she first made her
criticisms of the Bolsheviks’ attitude to the Constituent Assembly,
immediately abandoned them. Sam Farber mentions this change of heart
in a fleeting phrase, but then hurries on like a rich man avoiding a
beggar. Let’s halt this guilty conscience in its tracks and see
what Luxemburg said. She pilloried ‘the National Assembly as an
attempt to assassinate both the revolution and the workers’ and
soldiers’ councils’. [82] And her
paper, Rote Fahne, declared:
The National Assembly is a device with which to cheat the
proletariat out of its power, paralyse its class energy, and make its
final goals vanish into thin air. The alternative is to put all power
into the hands of the proletariat, develop this incipient revolution
into a mighty class struggle for a socialist order, and to this end
establish the political supremacy of the working masses, the
dictatorship of the workers’ and soldiers’ councils. For or
against socialism, for or against the National Assembly. There is no
third choice! [83]
These were prophetic phrases. In the end the reformist led
counter-revolution felt strong enough to strike without waiting for
the National Assembly to be convened. But the propaganda for the
Assembly had done its work in demoralising and demobilising the
workers’ councils. In Germany the contest of dual power was
resolved in favour of the bourgeoisie, with the help of propaganda
about the National Assembly.
The right exacted a terrible price. Armed bands of right wing
troops, the Freikorps, the swastika on their arms and the Constituent
Assembly as their slogan [84],
inaugurated a reign of terror. Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht, Leo
Jogiches and Eugene Levine, the outstanding leaders of the German
revolution, were murdered. In Berlin alone 3,000 workers were
slaughtered in pitched battles with the Freikorps. It was a
counter-revolution planned and led by the reformist SPD. Its
figurehead was SPD deputy Gustav Noske. In Noske’s own words:
Nobody made any objection when I expressed the view that
order would have to be restored by force of arms. The Minister of
War, Colonel Reinhardt, drafted an order appointing as
commander-in-chief General Hoffmann ... It was objected that this
general would be too unpopular with the workers ... I insisted that a
decision must be taken. Somebody said: ‘Perhaps you’ll do the job
yourself?’ To this I replied, briefly and resolutely: ‘I don’t
mind, somebody’s got to be the bloodhound. I’m not afraid of the
responsibility!’ It was decided forthwith that the government would
grant me extraordinary powers for the purpose of re-establishing
order in Berlin. In his draft, Reinhardt struck out the name of
Hoffmann and replaced it by mine. That is how I was appointed to the
post of commander-in-chief. [85]
Four days after the murder of Luxemburg and Liebknecht the
elections for the National Assembly took place. When it met, the SPD
formed a coalition with the two bourgeois parties. In Russia the
Bolsheviks’ ability to win the majority in the soviets to take
power meant the crushing of the Constituent Assembly as a centre for
counter-revolution, at least in the heart of Russia. Henceforth
counter-revolutionary assemblies were expelled into the south and to
the east of the Urals. In Germany the Spartacus League’s weakness
and in experience allowed a reformist leadership of the workers’
councils to crush the revolution and hand power to a bourgeois assembly.
The scale of that tragedy spread all the way from Berlin to
Petrograd and Moscow. Without a successful German revolution the
Bolsheviks were thrown back into a bloody civil war with only limited
resources. The revolution was under siege.
 
The civil war and the White Terror
The civil war was a bloody and brutal era. On many occasions the
life of the Soviet regime hung by a thread. To survive at all the
regime underwent a severe change which dramatically altered the
elementary freedoms which the Bolsheviks, like everyone else, took
for granted in the first period of Soviet power.
For many writers it was in this period of War Communism that the
first seeds of Stalinism were sown. Joe Slovo argues, ‘the
foundation for the institutionalised separation of socialism and
democracy, both in the party and in society, was laid in ideological
practices which preceded the emergence of an economically privileged
strata.’ He cites Trotsky’s writings from the period of War
Communism as containing ‘quite a few ideological positions which
also degrade the ideas of communism’. [86]
For Robin Blackburn:
’War Communism’, with its far-reaching attempt to
replace all exchange by requisitioning ... cast a blight on
small-scale production in this backward country. It was also
associated with an intensified and hardened Bolshevik sense of
destiny that would brook no opposition. [87]
Sam Farber is happy to repeat Robert C. Tucker’s designation of
this period as ‘Stalinist Leninism’ and goes on to argue:
The governmental euphoria with War Communism also
implicitly revealed the political and ideological priorities of
mainstream Bolshevism. Thus, while this set of policies greatly
expanded the powers of the central state and vigorously attempted to
reduce the role of the market, at the same time it not only
consolidated the Red Terror but for all intents and purposes
eliminated workers’ control of industry and democracy in the
soviets. Again there is no evidence indicating that Lenin or any
mainstream Bolshevik leaders lamented the loss of workers’ control
or of democracy in the soviets ... [88]
Slovo, Sam Farber and, to a lesser extent, Robin Blackburn all
have a similar methodological refrain to back up this attitude. It
runs like this: yes, objective conditions were bad during the civil
war, but this can’t explain everything. This simplified form of
economic determinism has its limits’, says Slovo. [89]
There must, therefore, have been some weakness in Bolshevik theory.
For Sam Farber ‘ideological inebriation’ among the Bolsheviks’
negates the claim that War Communism ... was simply imposed on the
government by objective necessity’. [90]
This sounds like sophisticated Marxism: rejecting crude economic
determinism in the name of taking ‘political factors’ into
account. But, properly used, Marxism does not suggest that in every
circumstance political will or ideology can play a key role. The
degree to which workers can ‘make their own history’ depends on
the weight of objective factors bearing down on them. At the height
of the revolutionary wave such freedom can be considerable. In the
concentration camp it can be reduced to virtually zero.
Of course there was a point on the revolutionary front where
consciousness, theory and organisation were decisive for the
Bolshevik revolution at this time: that point was the European,
particularly the German, revolution. But in Russia the limits of
action were reduced to withstanding a siege, under ever narrowing
constrictions. Every ounce of will power and political consciousness
was necessary to keep the workers’ state from being overcome. The
‘subjective factor’ was reduced to a choice between capitulation
to the Whites or defending the revolution with whatever means were at
hand. Within these limits Bolshevik policy was decisive. But it could
not wish away the limits and start with a clean sheet. It is a
tribute to the power of the Bolsheviks’ politics and organisation
that they took the measures necessary and withstood the siege for so long.
To decide in any given circumstance the weight of the subjective
and objective factors demands a concrete analysis of the balance of
forces. This is precisely what is missing in most accounts. Sam
Farber cheerfully brandishes his desire to concentrate on the
political, and criticises others who see ‘the question of democracy
as if it was in some way derivative of economics’. Presumably, in
this schema, ‘democracy’ is equally possible under starving,
plague ridden feudalism as it is under 20th century capitalism. In
Sam Farber’s analysis of the civil war we are blankly told that
‘the atrocities carried out by the White Terror are assumed to be
given’. [91] Yet this is what cannot
be assumed to be given. If we do not give a full account of the
economic crisis, the international situation and the depth of the
White Terror how can we be expected to judge how far the Bolsheviks
acted from necessity? How can we assess the force of circumstance?
So what were the conditions facing the Bolsheviks? The civil war
broke over a country already decimated by the First World War. By
1918 Russia was producing just 12 percent of the steel it had
produced in 1913. More or less the same story emerged from every
industry: iron ore had slumped to 12.3 percent of its 1913 figure;
tobacco to 19 percent; sugar to 24 percent; coal to 42 percent; linen
to 75 percent. The country was producing just one fortieth of the
railway track it had manufactured in 1913. [92]
And by January 1918 some 48 percent of the locomotives in the country
were out of action. [93] Factories
closed, leaving Petrograd with just a third of its former workforce
by autumn 1918. Hyperinflation raged at levels only later matched in
the Weimar Republic. The amount of workers’ income that came from
sources other than wages rose from 3.5 percent in 1913 to 38 percent
in 1918 – in many cases desperation drove workers to simple theft.
The workers’ state was as destitute as the workers: the state
budget for 1918 showed income at less than half of expenditure. [94]
Starvation came hard on the heels of economic devastation. In the
spring of 1918 the food ration in Moscow and Petrograd sank to just
10 percent of that needed to sustain a manual worker. [95]
Now it was Chicherin, the People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs,
who ironically repeated the threat first made by the millionaire
Ryabushynski: ‘The bony hand of hunger may throttle the Russian
Revolution’. [96] Disease necessarily
walked hand in hand with starvation, claiming perhaps 7 million lives
during the civil war, the same number of deaths as that suffered by
Russians in the First World War. The tone of this cry from Lenin
testifies to the seriousness of the crisis in 1918:
For God’s sake, use the most energetic and
revolutionary measures to send grain, grain and
more grain!!! Otherwise, Piter [Petrograd] may perish. [97]
It was against this backcloth of economic devastation that the
civil war took place. October had been a decisive turning point in
the revolution, but it was far from the end of the struggle. As
Chamberlin observes, ‘the alternative to Bolshevism, had it failed
to survive the ordeal of civil war ... would not have been Chernov,
opening a Constituent Assembly ... but a military dictator, a Kolchak
or a Denikin, riding into Moscow on a white horse’. [98]
Most historians treat the revolution and the civil war as separate
processes. In reality they were one. The attempted suppression of the
Bolsheviks in July 1917 and the Kornilov revolt the following month
had been the precursors of civil war before the revolution. Just
three days after the revolution, while the revolution itself still
hung in the balance in Moscow, the workers of Petrograd were out
digging trenches before the city to defend it from General Krasnov’s
Cossacks who, with Kerensky, had already captured Tsarskoye Selo a
few miles from the capital.
The following day Colonel Polkovnikov led an insurrection of the
junkers of the military school in Petrograd. They captured the
central telegraph office and Commissar Antonov before they were
defeated. Antonov kept his promise to ensure their safety. But the
junkers did not keep their promise not to bear arms against the
soviets and, as soon as they were released, threaded their way
through Red territory toward the centres of White resistance in the
Don and Kuban territories and in the Ukraine where White armies were
already forming.
The day after the junker rising Krasnov’s forces, joined by
leaders of the Socialist Revolutionaries, did battle with the Reds on
the Pulkovo Heights outside Petrograd. Krasnov was beaten and the
Whites made their way to the south and east. Soviet power still did
not exist in much of the country and the civil war never entirely
died down. Fighting continued throughout the following months,
especially in the Ukraine. Trotsky left his post as Commissar for
Foreign Affairs to become War Commissar in March 1918. This catalogue
of armed resistance to the revolution makes a nonsense of Pipes’s
claim that ‘the Bolshevik terror’ began long ‘before any
organised opposition to the Bolsheviks had had a chance to emerge’.
[99]
Indeed, as most historians admit, the Red Terror did not begin in
earnest until the late summer of 1918. But three months earlier the
Bolsheviks had received a terrible lesson in terror from the Whites
in Finland. Until the October revolution Finland was part of the
Russian Empire, albeit with its own democratic constitution granted
as result of the 1905 revolution. In 1917 Kerensky dissolved the
Finnish parliament when the Social Democratic majority voted for
independence. New elections gave the Social Democrats 92 out of 200
seats, but by now a revolutionary situation was developing. Russia’s
October revolution was greeted with a general strike in Finland. By
January 1918 a Council of People’s Delegates had been formed and
red flags flew over the major towns. But White Guards had prepared to
meet this threat and they got the support of German troops. In the
brief civil war that followed the Reds were beaten, but the mass
killings were revenge, committed after the event.
In Helsinki the Whites made workers’ wives and children walk in
front of their troops as they recaptured the city street by street.
One hundred of the women and children died. In all, some 300 corpses
were found in the streets. Later 40 women were laid out on the ice
and shot. In Tavastehus 10,000 prisoners were interned and many died
in the massacre which followed during which ‘murder of the wounded
was the norm.’ In Kuumen 500 were shot after the battle and in
Rauma another 500 were shot’. [100]
In Sveaborg there were public executions and in Lahti ‘in one day
some 200 women were shot with explosive bullets: lumps of flesh were
spattered out in all directions.’ In Viipuri 600 Red Guards were
lined up in three rows and machine gunned to death.’ [101]
... from 28 April to 1 June the number of illegal
killings was 4,745, just over half of all such killings, and the peak
period from 5–11 May saw executions average 200 a day. In total the
illegal killings of captured Reds, or those taken to be such,
totalled 8,380, which included 58 victims under 16, and 364 women.
[102]
In addition there were another 265 ‘legal executions’, but the
‘formal investigations were perfunctory’ and ‘the basis on
which the charges were brought illegal’. [103]
Nor was this the end of the White Terror. Some 80,000 were taken
prisoner during May:
they were herded into improvised prisons, often grossly
overcrowded, unsanitary and lacking the most basic facilities ...
nobody on the winning side felt that the food shortages of the
prisoners merited special consideration. [104]
In four months 11,783 prisoners died of this deliberate neglect.
[105] In all, the Finnish White
Terror claimed the lives of 23,000 Reds. [106]
It was a fate which must have burnt itself into the minds of the
Bolsheviks and steeled their hearts during the civil war. Yet neither
Pipes nor Sam Farber can spare as much as a sentence for the White
Terror in Finland.
Imperialist intervention in Russia began to gather pace just as
the White Terror was taking its vengeance on the Finnish workers. It
was designed to exacerbate the economic and political crisis in
Russia to the point where the Bolshevik regime cracked into pieces.
The German occupation of the Ukraine meant that 80 percent of
Russia’s pre-war grain was now beyond the Bolsheviks’ control.
After the Bolsheviks signed the peace of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918,
a peace which sanctioned the German occupation, they remained in
control of only one seventh of Imperial Russia’s sugar beet fields
and only one quarter of its coal mines, iron foundries and steel
mills. [107] And in 1918 the Allied
blockade of Russia began. By the start of the following year ‘not one
letter, not one food parcel, not one package of goods, not one
foreign newspaper could enter Red Russia’. [108]
In April 1918 the British and the Japanese seized Vladivostok in
the east. By the end of the year there were 73,000 Japanese troops,
60,000 Czech troops, 8,000 US troops, 2,500 British troops, 1,500
Italian troops and 1,000 French troops fighting the Reds in
Siberia alone. [109] During the
course of the civil war the Bolsheviks would face armies from 14
different countries, including all the imperialist powers. From the
east these would support the White forces of Kolchak as they streamed
over the Urals toward Moscow. From the north the British and US
forces supported the Whites as they attempted to thrust south toward
Petrograd. From the south the French and others would support General
Denikin and the Don and Kuban Cossacks as they drove north toward
Moscow. Later the Polish would invade from the east and General
Iudenich would come within a rifle shot of Petrograd. By 1919 more
than 200,000 Allied troops were supporting the Whites. [110]
Trotsky describes the front in August 1918 as:
a noose that seemed to be closing tighter and tighter
around Moscow ... The soil itself seemed infected with panic ...
everything was crumbling. There was nothing left to hang onto. The
situation seemed hopeless.
Not for the last time, the Bolsheviks were only in
control of an area ‘now reduced to the size of the ancient Moscow
principality. It hardly had an army; it was surrounded by enemies on
all sides’. [111]
It is often said that war imposes a terrible symmetry on its
opposing sides. This is particularly true of civil war. Trotsky
learnt cavalry tactics from the White Cossacks, just as Cromwell
learnt them from Prince Rupert. And Trotsky, like Cromwell, surpassed
his master. The Russian Civil War, fought in desperate economic
conditions, imposed a particular ferocity on each side. Brutality was
countered by brutality, White Terror by Red Terror. Yet inside the
symmetry of war there was also a vital difference which the war
highlighted: the difference in the class basis of the opposing
armies. White General Krasnov described his own army’s composition:
Not more than half were fit for combat. The remainder
were priests, nurses, miscellaneous females, officers of the
counter-intelligence services, policemen, aged colonels who had
signed up as commanders of non-existent regiments and, finally,
various ‘personalities’, all of them with a more or less
colourful past, who were in search of positions as governors,
vice-governors, and mayors. [112]
As General Iudenich’s troops advanced on Petrograd from the
north ‘old officials, old landlords, old policemen were apt to
follow in their wake’, one observer noted. [113]
And in the early stages of the civil war when General Denikin
captured Ekaterinodar one Cadet exclaimed, ‘There are our
gendarmes, yes, indeed our old, pre-revolutionary gendarmes’. [114]
After his retreat from Ekaterinodar, General Denikin found himself in
charge of a force approaching 4,000 of whom 2,368 had been officers,
including 36 generals and 200 colonels. Another 1,036 had been
sergeants or corporals. [115]
The US ambassador to Japan reported that ‘the Kolchak government
has failed to command the confidence of anybody in Siberia except a
small discredited group of reactionaries, monarchists and former
military officials’. This is unsurprising given the Siberian
government’s view that ‘it is impossible to abolish capitalist
forms of industry ... Capitalist forms of industry must exist, and
capitalists as a class must be allowed to direct them’. [116]And
of course everywhere and always the arrival of the Whites meant that
the old landlords tried to regain their land and to return to the
age-old rule of the knout.
Given the social composition of the Whites’ leading circles and
the frankly counter-revolutionary programme on which they acted it is
no surprise to find that although terror was used by both sides it
was used most completely, with far greater barbarity, bloodshed and
loss of life by the Whites. This was an absolute necessity for the
Whites since they were unable to win the support of the population
with anything like the success that the Bolsheviks achieved. In those
areas controlled by the Whites the pretence of democratic government,
where it existed in the first place, was quickly abandoned. Both in
the Ukraine and in Siberia the short lived Constituent Assemblies
quickly handed power to military dictatorships. Serge observed:
Point for point, the experience of the Ukraine, where
democratic parties of the middle class could do nothing except open
the path for black reaction, is repeated in Siberia. Such, indeed, is
the inevitable function of these parties in civil wars, since the
peculiarity of the bourgeoisie is to have no politics of its own. It
is always situated between two dictatorships, that of the
proletariat, or that of reaction; its destiny is to prepare the
latter, up to a certain point, and then to submit to it. [117]
Soon, everywhere that the Whites ruled, dictatorships of a kind
only later rivalled by the Nazis held sway. ‘The greater the
terror, the greater our victories,’ declared Kornilov. ‘We must
save Russia,’ he argued, ‘even if we have to set fire to half of
it and shed the blood of three fourths of all the Russians!’ [118]
It was clear to the Bolsheviks what such declarations meant from the
time, early in the civil war, when the Whites loaded three freight
cars with corpses and marked them: ‘Fresh meat, destination
Petrograd’. [119]
When the Whites retook Kiev in August 1919, ‘anti-Semitic venom
fairly dripped from some of the public pronouncements of Denikin’s
generals.’ One of these vowed that ‘the diabolical force that
lives in the heart of the Jew-Communists will be destroyed’. [120]
W. Bruce Lincoln, not a pro-Bolshevik historian, writes that Denikin:
imposed a regime marked by ... a vicious hatred for all
Jews. As the pogroms of 1919 burst upon the Jews of the Ukraine with
an incredible ferocity, the enemies of Bolshevism committed some of
the most brutal acts of persecution in the modern history of the
Western world. [121]
In these pogroms the ‘identification of the Jews with the
Bolsheviks played a central part’. No longer spontaneous outpourings
of racial and religious hatred, pogroms now became coldly calculated
incidents of wholesale rape, extreme brutality and unprecedented
destruction. In a single day at the end of August in the Jewish
settlement of Kremenchug, the Whites raped 350 women, including
pregnant women, women who had just given birth and even women who
were dying. [122]
In Kiev, the anti-semitic Cadet Shulgin remembers, ‘gigantic
five and six storey buildings began to shriek from top to bottom’.
[123] In the town of Felshin a third
of the Jewish population perished. In 1919 alone, just in the
Ukraine, the Whites killed 150,000 Jews, a rate only exceeded by the
Nazi Holocaust. One in 13 of the Jewish population of the Ukraine had
been slaughtered. [124]
In Kolchak’s Siberia the same methods held sway. Even the Cadet
Nikolai Ustrialov described it as ‘the darkest, most mindless sort
of military reaction ... the rearguard of a past that is slipping
into eternity’. [125] Under
Kolchak’s jurisdiction was Ataman Semyenov: ‘Innocent men
and women dangled by the scores from telegraph poles in the vicinity
of his capital, and his men machine-gunned freight cars full
of victims at execution fields along the railway’. [126]
Also fighting alongside Kolchak was Ivan Kalmykov, who Baron Budberg,
one of Kolchak’s own officials, described as ‘a sadistic bandit’
and ‘a fully qualified war criminal’. By the orders of another
White leader, Baron Urgan-Sternberg, ‘men and women suffered death
by beating, hanging, beheading, disembowelling and countless other
tortures which transformed them from living human beings into what
one witness called a “formless bloody mass”.’ Even his own
staff physician described one of the Baron’s written orders as ‘the
product of the diseased brain of a pervert and a megalomaniac
affected with a thirst for human blood’. [127]
Admiral Kolchak himself, when some members of the executive of his
government suggested there should be some reforms, ‘pounded the
table with his fists, flung everything on the floor, seized a
penknife, and angrily slashed the arms of the chair’ before replying:
Leave me in peace. I forbid you to bring up such
questions. Today I am going to the council of ministers and will
order that ... there will be absolutely no reforms. [128]
For the troops of Kuban Cossack General Shkuro, a conservative
historian has written, ‘the chief inducement offered them was loot,
for Shkuro was not particular where he looted or how ... if he had to
kill people he preferred that they should be Bolsheviks’. [129]
Meanwhile, also in the Kuban:
Cadets ... looked on while reactionary General Dragomirov
began the persecution of Jews that would turn into full-fledged
pogroms ... and the sadistic General Pokrovski hanged socialists en
masse in the courtyard outside his window ‘to improve the
appetite’. [130]
General Mai-Maevsky, a veteran of Denikin’s army, ‘was capable
of the greatest cruelty, and had a penchant for orgies’. [131]
Denikin’s successor, Wrangel, describes one of his own senior
officers, General Slaschev, as ‘thoroughly addicted to narcotics
and alcohol’. On visiting Slaschev’s quarters Wrangel found him
sprawled in a jumble of liquor bottles wearing a fantastical uniform
made from a long white Turkish robe trimmed with gold and fur. There
was’, Wrangel says:
a crane and a raven, a swallow and also a starling ...
fluttering here and there and perching on their master’s head and
shoulders ... I was dealing with a man completely overcome with
mental illness. [132]
The whole existence of the White camp – its social composition,
its policies, its methods and the character of its leading figures –
is utterly at odds with the social profile of the Reds. Unless these
vital differences are understood it becomes impossible to explain how
the Bolsheviks won the civil war. Again and again we find that even
the Whites themselves admit the vital difference between their regime
and the Reds. An official report to Kolchak’s War Ministry,
detailing the state of one of its armies in 1919, says:
Ataman Krasilnikov is completely inactive, devotes
himself exclusively to drinking and disorderly conduct; his officers
act in the same way: the soldiers carry out arbitrary searches with
the purpose of robbery and violate women. The whole population is
eager for Bolshevism. The situation is critical. [133]
In Siberia, reported US General Graves, ‘the word Bolshevik
meant a human being who did not ... give encouragement to the
restoration to power ... of autocracy in Russia.’ He went on to
assert that ‘outside the office holding and military class, the
Omsk [Kolchak] government had less than 1 percent of followers’.
[134] The Cadet Ustrialov reported
that in Omsk the ‘poor openly rejoice and wait for the Bolsheviks
to arrive’. [135]
It was more or less the same story in other White areas. In the
Northern territory, the SR Boris Sokolov records, ‘the sentiment of
the population of Archangel and of the villages have convinced me
that the majority of the population is in sympathy with the
Bolsheviki’. [136] Another
supporter of the northern White government admitted that ‘the mass
of the people is turning back to Bolshevism’. [137]
And of Denikin’s regime in the south, Chamberlin says:
With all its shortcomings, the Soviet regime was popular
with the masses of the inogorodni [outlanders, non-Cossack
peasants with limited rights], who feared, with good reason, that the
return to power of the Cossack Rada [parliament] would mean not only
the end of their dreams of confiscating some of the more abundant
possessions of the Cossacks, but also a period of very sanguinary
revenge and repression. [138]
Denikin himself describes his own governors:
In psychology, world outlook and habits they were so
alien to the upheaval that had taken place that they could neither
understand it nor deal with it. For them everything was in the past
and they attempted to resurrect this past inform and spirit. After
them followed the minor agents of the old regime, some of them
terrified by the Revolution, others embittered and revengeful. [139]
Chamberlin acknowledges that in the last instance it was Denikin’s
lack of popular support ‘which was the fundamental cause of the
defeat of the Whites’. [140]
Besides the different attitude of the Bolsheviks to the workers
and the peasants there was another vital difference with the social
policy of the Whites which helped ensure a Red victory: the attitude
to the rights of nations to self-determination. The Whites of course
were unremittingly hostile to any such right. Their constantly
proclaimed slogan was, ‘Russia shall be Great, United and
Undivided.’ The great Russian chauvinism of the Whites made it
inevitable that they should take such a position, despite the fact
that it was to prove fatal to their cause.
In the north west ‘the stubborn unwillingness of the Whites,
obsessed with the idea of a “great undivided Russia”, to
recognise the independence of Finland and Estonia, the cooperation of
which would have been very desirable in operations against Petrograd,
was a not inconsiderable cause of their defeat’. [141]
The White army of western Russia, headed by General Count Rudiger
von der Goltz, was:
notorious for its brutal treatment of Latvians, Estonians
and Bolsheviks. Called by some the ‘vanguard of Nazism’ the
Freikorps units ... instituted what one British diplomat called a
‘veritable reign of terror’ that claimed the lives of some 3,000
Latvians in Riga alone. [142]
In the south:
It was Denikin’s misfortune that much of the population
in the territory under his control was non-Russian and that his
prospects of military victory depended very much on his ability to
conciliate Ukrainians and Poles, Georgians and Caucasian tribesmen; a
task for which he was completely unfitted ... [143]
In fact Denikin forbade teaching of the Ukrainian language. With
such disaffection among the population of the White areas it is
little surprise to find that a similar attitude often developed among
the rank and file of the White armies, whether they were indigenous
Russians or foreign interventionists. Of course there were many cases
of desertion and passing over to the Whites in the Red Army. But the
scale was greater among the White troops. In north Russia in 1919
nearly half of the White troops, some 6,000 men, went over to the
Reds in two weeks when their commander gave them the choice. Whole
regiments went over en masse. At about the same time British and
French units in the area mutinied and one US sergeant recorded in his diary:
The majority of people here are in sympathy with the Bolo
[i.e. Bolsheviks]. I don’t blame them, in fact I am nine tenths
Bolo myself. [144]
One Red officer, risking his life, deserted to Kolchak. But he was
so disgusted at the all pervasive indiscipline and debauchery that he
drew a sharp comparison with the Red Army where, he said, an
intoxicated officer would have been shot by the first commissar who
met him. Chamberlin concludes:
Not all the Communists, certainly, were saints or
puritans. But their general behaviour and morale seem to have been
better than those of their opponents. [145]
Towards the end of the Kolchak regime, even the dictator’s
personal bodyguards drew the same conclusion: when Kolchak gave them
a free choice about whether they should continue to follow him or
join the Bolsheviks, ‘almost to a man, the men in whose loyalty he
had believed absolutely repaid his trust by joining the Bolsheviks’.
[146] Such was the decomposition of
the White camp at the end of the civil war. But in order to achieve
this victory the Bolsheviks had to make, and had to demand that the
mass of peasants and workers make, the most costly of sacrifices.
 
War Communism and the Red Terror
In 1918 the economic wreckage in the country, the constant
pressure of foreign intervention and blockade and the terrifying
ferocity of the White Terror meant that the sacrifices necessary to
win the civil war would not be made, or could not be made in time,
simply through the normal methods of political debate.
When SRs assassinated leading Bolsheviks simply to rely on
political re-education to convince them of their error was an act of
suicide. While the Whites held a gun to the peasant’s head and a
bayonet to his child’s throat no amount of political propaganda
alone would convince the peasant to defy the Whites. When the
imperialist armies pressed towards Moscow conscription was a
necessity since there simply was not the time for a disciplined,
extensive, fully politically conscious, armed population to have been
organised to meet them. Ten years breathing space could have created
such an armed population, but the Bolsheviks’ time scale was
measured in weeks. When the cities starved it would have been better
to bring the peasant to give grain to the regime in return for the
far greater gift of machinery but for that revolution in Germany, or
at least the revival of industry, was necessary. In the absence of
both all that stood between the workers’ state and its destruction
at the hands of Kolchak and Denikin was grain requisitioning.
This dialectic of consent and coercion is, of course, an aspect of
any workers’ revolution. More than 30 years ago Tony Cliff put it
like this:
Under capitalism discipline confronts that worker as an
external coercive power, which capital has over him. Under socialism
discipline will be the result of consciousness, it will become the
habit of free people. In the transition period it will be the outcome
of the two elements consciousness and coercion. Collective ownership
of the means of production by the workers, i.e. the ownership by the
workers’ state of the means of production, will be the basis for
the conscious element in labour discipline. At the same time the
working class as a collective, through its institutions – soviets,
trade unions, etc – will appear as a coercive power as regards the
disciplining of the individual workers in production.
This conflict between the individual and the collective,
the necessity of uniting conviction with its ugly opposite, coercion,
the compulsion on the working class to use barbaric methods remaining
from capitalism to fight capitalist barbarism, is but another
affirmation that the workers are not liberated spiritually under
capitalism, and would take a whole historical period to grow to full
human stature. [147]
In a country where the working class was a minority of the
population, where industry had been battered by years of war and in
conditions of White and imperialist encirclement, the balance
gradually tilted towards greater coercion. Each step of the way was
forced on the Bolsheviks by dire and pressing necessities. Every
element of coercion was an emergency measure adopted for the simple
reason that the only other alternative was the triumph of
counter-revolution. It was the realisation of this fact which ensured
that even while many workers and peasants bridled under the regime of
War Communism they fought to the death to defend it from the Whites.
It is also why the most draconian forms of coercion intertwined with
the most conspicuous acts of heroism in every aspect of the War
Communist regime.
In the economic field the Bolsheviks’ immediate steps after the
October revolution were modest. They did not want wholesale
nationalisation and were content to gradually try and regularise a
situation where the workers’ control in the factory coerced and
cajoled the existing owners. As S.A. Smith writes in Red
Petrograd, his detailed study of workers’ control in the factories:
This awkward fact makes a nonsense of the claim in
Western historiography that, once power was in his grasp, Lenin, the
stop-at-nothing centraliser, proceeded to crush the ‘syndicalist’
factory committees. [148]
Of course the fact that workers now controlled the state machine
meant that they had a powerful tool with which to circumscribe the
limits within which the jostling development of mixed companies would
take place. The local factory committees were the first to call for
the power of the workers’ state to be used to structure industry.
They above all realised that workers’ control in the factory must
be complemented by workers’ control over the whole economy.
Indeed immediately after the revolution the All Russian Council of
Factory Committees passed a decree which demanded a central apparatus
to regulate the economy – it was Lenin’s decree on workers’
control which toned down this demand. [149]
A similar urge to put an end to the anarchy which prevailed as a
result of competition between different labour organisations can be
seen in the debate on the role of trade unions. The absorption of the
factory committees by the trade unions is often portrayed as a
Bolshevik plot to undermine the committees. In fact it was a part of
the desire of rank and file militants to rationalise the mass of
organisations that had sprouted during the revolution and to overcome
the inherent localism of the committees. At the First All Russian
Congress of Trade Unions there were only six votes against merging
the committees with the unions. Both the Bolsheviks and the
Mensheviks vote for merger. [150] And the
Petrograd factory committees, at their sixth and final conference in
January 1918, agreed to merger. Their incorporation into the unions
helped to broaden the functions of the unions, giving them a role in
supervising production as part of a committee in each factory. [151]
All these are perfectly healthy debates about how a workers’
state is to organise its economy. At this point the economic
structure is still a long way from the wholesale state control which
was rapidly to be forced on the regime. The need for a breathing
space, for the revolution to gather its forces, was at the heart of
this strategy of state regulated capitalism which Lenin advocated
immediately after the revolution. Two overwhelmingly powerful forces
obliged the Bolsheviks to abandon this ‘reformist’ course.
One was the fact that the capitalists used their remaining power
to make the system unworkable. At the end of 1917 the All Russian
Congress of Employers declared that those ‘factories in which the
control is exercised by means of active interference in the
administration will be closed’. [152]
The workers’ natural response to the wave of lockouts which
followed was to demand that their state nationalise the factories. So
it was that, of all the individual firms nationalised by July 1918,
only one fifth had been nationalised on the initiative of the state
while four fifths had been nationalised on the initiative of local
committees. [153] But the power of
the Russian capitalists alone would not have been sufficient to blow
the regime off course if it had not been for a second factor: the
start of the civil war and the allied intervention. One economic
historian explains the impact of the armed threat:
In the atmosphere of the kindling civil war every joint
effort of capital and the proletarian dictatorship (workers’
control, mixed joint stock companies etc.) is seen to be a quickly
evaporating Utopia. The intervention of world capital, which fanned
the expiring counter-revolutionary resistance within Russia into a
new blaze, forced its consequences onto the proletariat the
inexorable expropriation of large scale capital and capital
generally, the confiscation of the property of the ruling classes,
the suppression of the market and the construction of an
all-embracing proletarian organisation of political economy, which
depended on overcoming the market, and its exploitation. [154]
So, far from being an example of inherently undemocratic Bolshevik
politics, as Sam Farber and others maintain, the nationalisations of
War Communism were an ad hoc measure which sharply departed
from the far slower, more measured path that the Bolsheviks would
have preferred to tread. In fact the nationalisation of all heavy
industry and joint stock companies in June 1918 was a hastily
prepared measure designed to circumvent the condition of the
Brest-Litovsk treaty which required compensation to be paid to German
investors whose firms were not nationalised by 1 July. [155]
Bruce Lincoln summarises the work of the Bolsheviks’ Supreme
Council of National Economy as ‘reflecting little coherent
planning’. Its decisions were only internally generated in a
minority of cases:
far more often the Supreme Council worked to prevent
factories being shut down by anti-Bolshevik managers or to offset
crudely conceived local seizures ... At best the Supreme Council’s
first attempts to nationalise Russia’s industries reflected the
Bolsheviks’ overwhelming concern for self-defence and survival.
[156]
The Bolshevik leader Milyutin wrote, ‘The process of
nationalisation went on from below, and the soviet leaders could not
keep up with it, could not take things in hand, in spite of the fact
that many orders were issued which forbade local organisations to
enact nationalisations by themselves’. [157]
Lenin recognised the enormous strain that the nationalisation policy
was placing on the workers’ state. In April 1918 he declared, ‘If
we go on expropriating capital at this rate, we shall infallibly be
beaten’. [158]
Yet the harder the Whites and the imperialists pressed on the
regime, the more unavoidable a siege economy became. With the civil
war came the need for stricter labour discipline and for the
committees which ran the factories to be replaced by ‘one man
management’. Both these processes developed in lock step with the
war. In 1919 only 10.8 percent of firms in Russia were under one man
management. This figure rose swiftly during the following year. But
even so, in Petrograd in 1920, only 31 percent of factories employing
more than 200 were under one man management. [159]
Labour discipline also tightened during the civil war, but as S.A.
Smith records:
During 1918 the desire to transform relations of
authority within the enterprise gave way to the drive for greater
productivity ... Yet one cannot see in this a triumph of the
Bolshevik Party over the factory committees. From the first, the
committees had been committed both to maintaining production and to
democratising factory life, but the condition of industry was such
that these two objectives now conflicted with one another. The
factory committees, in general, consented to the prioritisation of
productivity: they acquiesced in, and even initiated, impulses toward
stricter labour discipline. [160]
In the towns and cities workers accepted, albeit not happily, the
rigours of War Communism as necessary to defend the revolution. But
beyond the towns the peasants were a different problem. In the
country food requisitioning – the taking of the peasants’ grain,
often by force – became essential to ward off the spectre of
starvation. Food requisitioning was an act of desperation not, as Sam
Farber argues, a dogmatic attempt to ‘suppress the market’. The
Bolsheviks would far rather have avoided it, if for no other reason
than it threatened to split the alliance between the workers and the
peasants on which the whole edifice of the state rested. As Tsiurupa,
the People’s Commissar of Food Supplies, put it:
There are only two possibilities, either we perish from
hunger, or we weaken the [peasant economy] to some extent, but
[manage to] get out of our temporary difficulties. [161]
The Bolsheviks would have preferred the solution to the peasant
question opened up by the perspective of permanent revolution: to use
the industrial strength of the cities to improve the productivity of
the peasants and wed them to the rule of the working class. This was
also the plea from the peasants, encapsulated by peasant delegates at
the Eighth Congress of Soviets in 1920:
‘If you want us to sow all the land ... just give us
salt and iron. I shall not say anything more.’ We need horses,
wheels, harrows, other voices chimed in. Give us metal to mend our
tools and sheds. [162]
It was a simple request, but under the conditions of civil war and
without revolution in Europe it was a request which the Bolsheviks
could not satisfy.The only other alternative was to take grain by
sending out requisitioning and roadblock units from the towns. The
cry for grain came from the towns and cities, as the desperate
telegrams flooding into the People’s Commissariat for Food Supply
in 1918 testify:
WE HAVE NO BREAD. THE SITUATION IS HOPELESS. HUNGER
REIGNS. – 19 May, from the village of Pokrov.
IAROSLAV PROVINCE IS IN AN ABSOLUTELY UNPRECEDENTED
IMPOVERISHED AND CATASTROPHIC CONDITION SO FAR AS FOOD SUPPLIES ARE
CONCERNED. ABSOLUTELY NO SHIPMENTS OF GRAIN HAVE ARRIVED FOR TWO
WEEKS. – 24 May, from the provincial capital of Iaroslav.
STARVING WORKERS ARE COLLAPSING AT THEIR MACHINES ... WE
BEG YOU TO SEND US BREAD ... THIS IS NOT A THREAT BUT A FINAL CRY OF
DESPAIR. – 25 May, from the town of Vyksa. [163]
There can be no better testimony to the desperation that lay
behind this policy than Lenin’s call of July 1918 when he urged the
workers of Petrograd to go ‘in their tens of thousands to the
Urals, the Volga and the south’, insisting that it was ‘criminal’
and ‘stupid’ to sit and starve in empty factories. It was a
galling necessity that the very class base of the revolution had to
be consciously dispersed in order to avoid death by starvation. By
September 1918 the Petrograd labour force had fallen to just below 30
percent of its 1917 figure. [164] It
was a high risk policy. The countryside was aflame with peasant
revolts and the food detachments were likely to be ambushed and
killed. But as one official of the Food Commissariat exclaimed:
What do you think, the People’s Commissariat of Food
Supply does this for its own satisfaction? No, we do it because there
is not enough food. [165]
The grain was certainly there: ‘Kulak [rich peasant] storehouses
in the Bolsheviks’ shrunken domains at midsummer [1918] still
contained three quarters of a million tons of grain from the 1917
harvest plus a great deal more from earlier years’. [166]
To make the requisitioning policy work it was also necessary to
highlight the difference between the village poor and the richer
peasants. The former were more likely to stand by the workers than
were the latter. In the short run the Committees of Poor Peasants
organised by the Bolsheviks split the united front of the village
into two hostile camps and therefore aided the food detachments. But
ultimately they fell victim to the success of the Bolsheviks’
redistribution of the land. This reduced the number of very wealthy
peasants and the number of poor peasants, thus recomposing the
united front of the peasantry. By the end of the civil war the policy
of requisitioning was worn threadbare: the New Economic Policy was a
recognition that the relations between the peasantry and the workers’
state had to find a new footing.
Both wholesale nationalisation and requisitioning were retreats
forced on the Bolsheviks by circumstance. It is part of the
Bolsheviks’ achievement that they recognised the necessity and met
it face to face. Occasionally, however, they were inclined to make a
virtue of necessity, to claim that the harsh measures of the civil
war were the epitome of socialism. This is in part understandable;
any policy must have a rhetorical power if its necessity is to be
understood by millions. But what is required of historians,
particularly Marxists, is to separate phrase from substance. Yet this
is precisely what Sam Farber and Robin Blackburn fail to do. Instead
they take Lenin or Trotsky’s shouts of command in the midst of
battle and portray them as considered analyses of events.
The Red Army, more than any other institution of the civil war
years, embodied the contradiction between the political consciousness
and circumstantial coercion. On the one hand the creation of the Red
Army was a retreat: it was a conscripted, not a voluntary, army;
officers were appointed not elected; old Tsarist officers were
appointed by the thousand; there was severe military discipline,
including execution; there was desertion and atrocities, sometimes
committed by whole units. But the Red Army was also filled with a
magnificent socialist consciousness. Conscription may have been
necessary to build a mass army in a peasant country, but it was the
most active and class conscious workers (above all the Bolsheviks)
who volunteered again and again for the most dangerous tasks. In 1919
thousands deserted the party rather than fight Denikin, but thousands
more joined during ‘party weeks’ when, as the Central Committee
bulletin put it, ‘to get out a party card in such conditions,
signified, to a certain extent, becoming a candidate for Denikin’s
gallows. ‘In the 1920 dash towards Warsaw the Red Army lost 33
percent of its force in casualties – but some 90 percent of the
army’s ‘hardened Bolsheviks’ lost their lives. [167]
Red Army discipline was harsh, but it was harshest of all for the
officers and commissars. Ordinary soldiers who returned to the Red
Army after desertion would often be sworn back in; the commissars of
units that deserted were frequently shot. For the White Cossack
cavalry looting, rape and murder were a way of life. Looting was
forbidden in the Red Army. Anti-Semitism and pogroms were rife in the
White armies; anti-Semitic publications were banned in the Red Army.
Pogromists were shot. In the Ukraine whole Jewish communities lived
behind the Red Army lines, advancing when it advanced, retreating
when it retreated. Who can imagine the White Army reproducing the
literacy and educational groups of the Red Army? Who can see the
White Cossacks putting letter boards on the backs of the first rank
of cavalry so that those behind could learn to read as they were on
the march? And who can see the White Army producing anything like
this Red Army marching song:



Two days of study, then a week in battle,
Two days with pencils, a week with bayonets. [168]



The differences between the two armies were not lost on the
peasants. In the south they nicknamed the White Army the
‘Grabarmiia’, the looting army. In both the south and east the
population came to prefer the regular exactions of the Reds to the
riotous pillaging of the Whites. The difference in the class
programme of the Whites and Reds decisively affected both the support
which the population gave to each side and the morale of the Red and
White armies. Many peasants certainly resented the grain
requisitioning policies of the Bolsheviks and they often rose in
revolt against them – but they did not hate requisitioning as
deeply as they hated the idea that the land itself would be
repossessed by the old landlords. Red troops certainly carried out
atrocities, but they were not the policy of the Red commanders
as they were of the Whites. The Bolsheviks’ social policy gave
other grounds for winning the trust of workers and peasants whereas
the Whites had to rely on force alone. The Red Terror was certainly
brutal, but unlike the White Terror it was not directed against the
mass of workers and peasants in the name of a tiny and discredited
old order. In the cities the Reds enjoyed the fierce and virtually
undivided loyalty of the masses throughout the civil war period.
If the Red Army typified the contradictions of the civil war, the
Red Terror pushed those contradictions to extremes. Of course any
workers’ revolution would need force to subdue
counter-revolutionary risings and sabotage carried out by the old
capitalist class and the remnants of its state. It was against these
people that the Red Terror was directed in the first instance. As
Chamberlin observes:
White Russia also had its terror, its all-pervading
espionage, its frequent executions, its crowded prisons. The chief
difference was in the types of people whom one would have found in
the prisons of Moscow and Petrograd, on the one side, and of Omsk and
Rostov on the other. The Cheka directed its raids mainly against the
wealthy and the middle classes. The White police rounded up more
workers and people of the poorer classes. [169]
One immediate cause of the Red Terror was the various
counter-revolutionary plots mounted by Russian Whites and supported
by the imperialist powers. R.H. Bruce Lockhart, the British
diplomatic representative in Moscow, for instance, had been
instrumental in ensuring that Kerensky escaped from Russia after his
unsuccessful military attempt to unseat the Bolsheviks. Bruce
Lockhart was also, by his own admission, passing money to
anti-Bolshevik groups. Sidney Reilly, a British intelligence agent, was
trying, unsuccessfully, to convince Lockhart that he ‘might be able
to stage a counter-revolution in Moscow’. [170]
But, according to Reilly, one part of his plan was prematurely put
into effect in August 1918: Socialist Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan shot
Lenin twice at point blank range, bringing him close to death.
Earlier Reilly had managed to establish himself as a Soviet official
with access to documents from Trotsky’s Foreign Ministry. And
another British agent, George Hill, became a military adviser to
Trotsky. [171] Overall, the British
secret service:
devoted the largest single part of its budget to Russia
... It sent its best agents fluent Russian speakers with a long
experience of the country and its people to Moscow and Petrograd with
a virtually free hand to establish networks, finance
counter-revolutionaries, and to do all in their power to crush the
Bolshevik menace in its infancy. [172]
But the Red Terror also ran beyond these groups. The ultimate
cause of the extent of Red Terror lies, once again, in the
isolation of the Russian working class. The sea of peasants were the
element in which the counter-revolution swam. The SRs, who claimed to
represent the peasantry, were the foremost promoters of
counter-revolution behind Red lines. And it was the poverty of the
revolution which obliged it to use force rather than finance against
the peasants who hoarded grain in the countryside.
The Bolsheviks were faced with attempts at assassination and
counter-revolution such as those mounted by the (SR supported)
military cadets, two days after they had been released on parole
following their capture in the Winter Palace, and by the SRs at the
time of the dispersion of the Constituent Assembly. Lenin never tried
to hide or disguise the fact that the revolution would have to use
terror, up to and including shooting people. In the struggle between
revolution and counter-revolution people on both sides were willing
to die for their cause: prison, let alone parole, would not deter
many counter-revolutionaries:
How can one make a revolution without firing squads? Do
you think you will be able to deal with your enemies by laying down
your arms? What other means of repression do you have? Imprisonment?
No one attaches any importance to this during a civil war when each
side hopes to win. [173]
In this Lenin was following the example of the French Revolution
which, also under the impact of foreign invasion and
counter-revolutionary pressure from the peasantry, used terror to
ensure its existence during its darkest hour. And in 1848 Marx, in
reaction to ‘the cannibalism of the counter-revolution’, argued
that there was ‘only one means to curtail, simplify and localise
the bloody agony of the old society and the birth pangs of the new,
only one means the – revolutionary terror’. [174]
In December 1917 the Soviet formed the All-Russian Extraordinary
Commission to fight Counter-Revolution and Sabotage, known by its
Russian acronym as the Cheka or Vecheka. The Cheka was only one
element in the Red Terror, and not necessarily the most important
part. The Red Army, the grain requisitioning and road block
detachments were more important. Neither was the Cheka a specifically
Bolshevik proposal. It grew out of a number of investigative
commissions of the Soviet and out of the Military Revolutionary
Committee of the Soviet which had carried out the insurrection.
George Leggett, the intensely right wing historian of the Cheka, records:
There is no direct evidence that the Bolshevik Party ...
played any part in the creation of the Vecheka; perhaps this is
indicative of the relative lack of importance attached at that moment
to the hasty improvisation of yet another investigative commission. [175]
It was a common understanding among all those in the revolutionary
camp that the revolutionary terror was necessary, although they might
argue about specific measures. The formation of the Cheka was quite
open: it was announced in the Soviet’s newspaper, Izvestia,
along with its office address, its opening hours and an appeal to the
public to help combat counter-revolution. For a period it produced
the Vecheka Weekly Bulletin in which the commission’s
activities, including the names of those it shot, were publicly
discussed. Bruce Lockhart was taken on the Cheka’s first raid as a
public witness. [176] In its early
days the Cheka had a small staff and its head, the Bolshevik Felix
Dzerzhinsky, could carry all its files around in his briefcase. [177]
The Left Socialist Revolutionaries played a prominent role in the
Cheka both during and after their time as part of the Soviet
government they left the government in March 1918 in protest at the
Brest-Litovsk treaty. But it was the actions of the LSRs, alongside
the worsening civil war and the mounting imperialist intervention,
that precipitated a sharpening of the Red Terror.
The spring and summer of 1918 was a time of crisis for the
workers’ state. In April, as we have seen, the White Terror began
in Finland. The Germans occupied the Ukraine following the
Brest-Litovsk treaty. Some 200 Kulak revolts flared through the
countryside. In June People’s Commissar Volodarsky was murdered. In
August Uritsky, the head of the Petrograd Cheka, was killed by a
Socialist Revolutionary. In the midst of this crisis, in July 1918,
the Fifth All-Russian Congress of Soviets met. The LSRs chose this
moment to announce that their opposition to the Brest-Litovsk treaty
was now going to take the form of armed conflict with the Bolsheviks.
Their leader, Maria Spiridonova, appeared at the Congress and
announced the party’s return to its terrorist traditions with the
instruction to ‘take up the revolver and the hand grenade’. The
next day she followed her own advice and appeared at the Congress
brandishing a Browning and crying ‘Long live the revolt!’. [178]
The LSR revolt took place simultaneously in Iaroslav and other
towns. It coincided with the revolt of the commander of the eastern
front at Simbirsk. In Moscow the LSRs used their base in the Cheka to
execute their plans. Iakov Bliumkin, the LSR head of Cheka
counter-espionage, forged Dzerzhinsky’s signature on a pass, gained
access to the German diplomatic representative in Moscow and shot
him, hoping to smash the Brest-Litovsk treaty and provoke a new war
with Germany. Bliumkin then fled to the barracks of the Cheka Combat
Detachment, who were sympathetic to the LSRs. When Dzerzhinsky, with
great heroism but not much tactical sense, arrived and demanded that
Bliumkin be handed over, the commander arrested Dzerzhinsky. Another
Bolshevik Cheka leader, Latsis, was arrested by the LSRs inside
the Cheka head office.
The day after Uritsky was murdered, Lenin was shot by Socialist
Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan. Although he was seriously wounded he
couldn’t be taken to hospital for fear that the surgeon would have
LSR sympathies. Lenin recovered and the LSR revolt was suppressed,
but the siege atmosphere in the revolutionary camp was heightened.
Spiridonova, who claimed full responsibility for the revolt, was
given a one year jail sentence and an immediate amnesty because of
her previous ‘services to the revolution’. Elsewhere the Red
Terror reached a peak of ferocity. In Kronstadt the sailors and the
Cheka killed 400 in a single night. In Iaroslavl, one of the seats of
revolt, 200 were killed. On a single day, 3 October, 200 killings
were reported in various parts of the country. Although Lenin was
wholeheartedly in favour of the terror, he tried to limit the
ferocity which resulted from the anger over the LSR revolt and the
attempt on his life. Bruce Lockhart himself records that:
The whole situation seemed hopeless until Lenin was able
to take a hand in affairs. After he recovered consciousness, his
first remark, it was said, was ‘Stop the Terror’. [179]
Certainly the terror rarely assumed the popular, nationwide
intensity that it reached in the period after the attempt on Lenin’s
life. Yet it is from this period that many right wing historians draw
their most lurid stories of Cheka atrocities. Let us examine three
which frequently recur. The first concerns the question of torture. A
letter from a provincial branch of the Cheka, published in the Cheka
paper in October 1918, demands to know, ‘Why are you so soft?’
Referring to the arrest of Bruce Lockhart it demands that he should
be subject to ‘the most refined tortures’ and then sent to ‘the
other world’. [180] We are less
frequently told that the Bolshevik Central Committee
immediately upbraided the editorial board and closed the bulletin and
that the Soviet, while defending the terror, renewed its condemnation
of torture. [181]
The point is not that units of the Cheka never used torture,
although the most extreme examples (scalping of victims, driving rats
down a heated pipe held against the victim’s stomach until the rat
gnawed its way through the flesh) come almost exclusively from White
literature – Denikin’s Commission on the Cheka and RSR leader
Chernov’s materials as even Leggett admits. [182]
The point is that the leadership of the Bolshevik Party, the Soviet
and the Cheka itself tried to stamp it out whenever it became known.
Soviet law forbade torture. Lenin defended the terror and the Cheka,
but he was ruthless in punishing any abuse of its power:
He was concerned to establish, in each case that came to
his attention, whether the arrest had been necessary on purely
pragmatic security grounds. Why had the Kotelnichi Cheka arrested the
teacher Lubnin? Why had the Vecheka not released Kiril Semenovich
Ginsburg, despite assurances given by two party members? Why had the
Samara Provincial Cheka arrested the members of an expedition of
irrigation experts to Turkestan? Had the food confiscation
detachments and the Cavrilovo-Posadnaia Cheka acted correctly in
confiscating grain? Could not Viktor Ivanovich Dobrovolskii, under
arrest in Petrograd, be released? He was said to be ill, apolitical,
and his family’s only breadwinner ... On 20 May 1919 Lenin
telegraphed to the Novgorod Soviet, with a copy to the local Cheka:
It appears that Bulatov was arrested for putting a complaint to me. I
warn you that for this I shall arrest the chairman of the Cheka and
the chairman and members of executive committee, and I shall press
for their execution. Why did you not reply at the time to my enquiry?
[183]
The second issue is the prison regime under the Red Terror. It is
a standard claim of the right wing, perhaps most famously made in
Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago, that the prisons and
concentration camps of War Communism led directly to the gulag of
Stalin’s day. The first and most obvious objection to this is the
question of numbers: under Stalin millions disappeared into
the camps, but even at the height of the civil war there were less
than 100,000, including ordinary criminals, in the prison system. The
Cheka itself had 56 camps with a holding capacity of just 24,750 in
1922. The following year the number of camps had been halved. [184]
Solzhenitsyn suggests that the low numbers are a result of mass
executions. Certainly there were some such executions of prisoners,
although they were not Cheka policy and the most serious were in
direct contravention of Cheka orders. [185]
In the White areas there were few camps for the simple reason that
mass execution was the policy, contrary to Pipes’s ridiculous claim
that ‘the White armies ... never elevated terror to the status of
policy’. [186] In the White
controlled Don of Krasnov and Kaledin, for instance, Order No. 2428 read:
It is forbidden to arrest workers. The orders are to hang
or shoot them.
Order No. 2431 elaborated:
The orders are to hang all arrested workers in the
street. The bodies are to be exhibited for three days. [187]
Not only was the extent of the prison system utterly
different under War Communism from how it was under Stalin, so was
its nature. The systematic degradation and torture of
prisoners, so powerfully recounted by Solzhenitsyn, was not, as he
maintains, a feature of the pre-Stalin period. The 1924 Corrective
Labour Code stated:
The regimen should be devoid of any trace of cruel or
abusive treatment, the following by no means permitted: handcuffs,
punishment cells, solitary confinement, denial of food, keeping
prisoners behind bars during conversations with visitors. [188]
Medvedev argues that ‘in most cases this code was observed at
the time’ and that although ‘in the early 1920s there were quite
a few instances that could be classified as insulting treatment of
prisoners ... this was the exception, not the rule’. [189]
Indeed the Bolsheviks insisted that prisoners received the same food
as those outside, poor though it was. Prisoners were allowed freedom
of speech and of the press. They often produced their own journals
which expressed views hostile to the government. In Irkutsk prisoners
produced Thought Behind Bars, in Vitebsk, Omsk and elsewhere
Prisoners Thought appeared and in Kharkov, Penza and other
places The Prisoners Voice was published. [190]
Needless to say not a trace of this regime was to survive into the
Stalin years. In any case, the Bolsheviks were clear that the prison
regime was a product of the civil war. A Cheka decree of January 1921 read:
The prisons are filled to overflowing, not with bourgeois
but for the most part with workers and peasants [involved in theft or
speculation]. This legacy [of the civil war] must be done away with;
the prisons must be emptied and we must carefully see to it that only
those who are really dangerous to the Soviet regime should be put
there. [191]
The third example often used by right-wing historians is based on
Cheka leader Latsis’s 1918 claim that whether a suspect was a
capitalist or a worker was enough to determine their guilt or
innocence. He went on to urge, ‘Don’t search the records for
whether someone’s revolt against the Soviet was an armed or only a
verbal one’. [192] Sam Farber
quotes Latsis, but does not bother to quote Lenin’s angry rebuttal
in which he said that ‘one need not go to the same absurd lengths
as Comrade Latsis.’ Lenin went on to insist that Latsis ‘wanted
to say that Red Terror meant the forcible suppression of exploiters
who attempted to restore their rule, but instead he put it this way
... “Don’t search (!!?) the records for evidence of whether his
revolt against the Soviet was an armed or only a verbal one”.’ [193]
Nor was this attitude peculiar to Lenin. Dzerzhinsky himself
personified the high ideals at which the Cheka aimed. He had spent a
third of his life in prison for his political beliefs and he
ruthlessly punished Chekists who were guilty of abuses. He insisted
that Chekists must have ‘a cool head, a warm heart and clean
hands’. [194] Dzerzhinsky’s
integrity was irreproachable: he angrily turned away a fellow worker
who tried to give him bacon and potatoes during the terrible days of
Russia’s famine. The burden of his work weighed heavily on his
shoulders. On the eve of 1919, during the worst days of the terror,
he turned to his fellow Bolsheviks saying:
I have spilt so much blood that I no longer have any
right to live. You must shoot me now. [195]
The same mood seized many other Chekists. Bukharin once said:
Do not let us forget how many of them who remain are
nervous wrecks, and sometimes hopelessly ill. For their work was such
torture, demanding such enormous concentration, it was so hellish,
that it called for a truly iron character. [196]
Of course not all Chekists possessed this ‘iron character’.
Some abused their power. Some tortured, imprisoned and executed
unjustly. Latsis, his outburst noted above notwithstanding, could,
like Dzerzhinsky, show understanding of the complexity of the Cheka’s
task. He insisted that to stop the power of the Cheka corrupting its
members they should meet three criteria: they should be a party
member, they should have a high degree of personal integrity and they
should not stay long in the service of the Cheka. [197]
Rotation of staff was partially implemented and many Bolsheviks spent
at least some time in the Cheka.
Are these mere anecdotal or biographical details? No, they speak
of the very nature of the regime. Among the Whites corruption and
utterly indiscriminate terror ran from top to bottom of the regime;
indeed, as we have seen, in many cases the senior commanders were
personally responsible for some of the worst atrocities. With the
Bolsheviks the atrocities ran against the nature of the regime and
once the necessity of the Red Terror could be dispensed with the
Bolsheviks moved swiftly to curtail it. Even while the civil war
raged the role of the Cheka was restricted once the periods of
immediate danger were past. Leggett notes:
In the inevitable clash between the arbitrary violence of
the Cheka and the system of Soviet law evolved by the People’s
Commissariat for Justice, the Cheka gained the upper hand whenever
the regime came under threat; when the crises receded, the [People’s
Commissariat) won the advantage. [198]
And Latsis himself argued that the Cheka:
has no place in our constitutional system. The time of
civil war, the time of extraordinary conditions of existence of
Soviet power, will pass, and the Cheka will become superfluous. [199]
But the longer the civil war lasted, the more declassed the
proletariat became, the more relations with the peasantry worsened,
the more the Cheka grew and the worse the quality of its members
became. Latsis noted that ‘unworthy elements, sometimes even
counter-revolutionaries, attached themselves to the Vecheka, some for
motives of personal gain’. [200]
Serge observed the ‘rapid effects’ of ‘professional
degeneration’ among the Chekists and recorded that ‘Dzerzhinsky
himself judged them to be “half rotten”, and saw no solution to
the evil except in shooting the worst Chekists and abolishing the
death penalty as soon as possible’. [201]
The Bolsheviks moved to dismantle the Cheka as soon as the civil
war was over. In 1921 Dzerzhinsky made his own proposals for the
reform of the Cheka. Kamenev believed they did not go far enough and
wrote to Lenin with his own proposal:
1.Relieve the Cheka of everything except political
crimes, espionage, banditry, security of railroads and stores.
Nothing more. The rest to go to the NKlu [People’s Commissariat of Justice].
2.The Cheka’s investigative apparatus to be merged with
the NKlu ... [202]
Lenin replied:
Comrade Kamenev! My position is closer to yours than to
Dzerzhinsky’s. I advise you not to give way, and to raise [the
issue] in the Politburo. Then we shall make a stand for the very
maximum. In addition we shall make the NKlu responsible for any
failure to report to the Politburo ... on the Vecheka’s defects and
errors. [203]
In February 1922 the Soviet government abolished the Cheka and
replaced it with a new force, the GPU. The Cheka’s extraordinary
powers were not transferred to the GPU. It could only deal with
political cases, it had no power to sentence and it had no power to
execute. Even its powers of search and arrest were more tightly
defined than those of modern Britain’s Special Branch. Any arrested
person had to be told of the charge against him within 14 days and
sent to trial or released within eight weeks. [204]
Of course, even when these reforms worked fully they left intact
institutions which had been brutalised by the experience of civil
war. Yet it was only later in the 1920s, as Stalin’s hand closed
around the throat of the revolution, that the GPU became the
terrorist organ of a new bureaucratic ruling class:
The reconstruction of the Cheka-GPU went on for some
years in the first half of the 1920s. But it slowed down after the
deaths of Lenin and Dzerzhinsky; indeed things started moving in an
entirely different direction. The GPU gradually began to resume the
functions that were appropriate only for a period of civil war. Under
pressure from Stalin, a punitive organisation reappeared, with the
right to put people in jail and camps, to exile them to remote
places, and later even to shoot them without any judicial procedure,
simply as an administrative act. [205]
When, in 1930, one of Stalin’s victims told his interrogator
that his methods would have been impossible in Dzerzhinsky’s day,
the interrogator laughed, ‘You’ve found someone to remember!
Dzerzhinsky – that’s a bygone stage in our revolution’. [206]
And Bukharin, shortly before his own execution in 1938, observed:
Dzerzhinsky is gone; the remarkable traditions of the
Cheka have gradually faded into the past, when the revolutionary idea
guided all its actions. [207]
 
Peasant rebellion, Kronstadt and the crisis of War Communism
The Bolsheviks won the civil war, but only at enormous cost. After
the First World War the country was battered and bloodied, large
sections of its industry were ruined and agriculture was severely
disorganised. After the civil war the situation was far worse.
Travelling in Russia in 1920 H.G. Wells saw only ‘a vast
irreparable breakdown’. [208] The
Central Committee for Labour Conscription reported:
The workers of the towns and some of the villages choke
in the throes of hunger. The railroads barely crawl. The houses are
crumbling. The towns are full of refuse. Epidemics spread and death
strikes to the right and left. Industry is ruined. [209]
None of this was an exaggeration. Pravda reported that
there were 17 cartloads of rubbish piled up in every house in
Petrograd because it had not been collected during the civil war. In
the depopulated streets of the revolution’s first city grass and
flowers broke through the paving stones. In 1921 Pravda
reported that 25 million were suffering from famine. In the country
people dug up buried horses and ate the flesh. In some areas
cannibalism was the only alternative to death. ‘Everyday life was
prehistoric,’ said Ilia Ehrenburg, ‘the everyday life of the cave
age.’ [210] One Russian economist
of the 1920s wrote: ‘Such a decline in the productive forces ... of
an enormous society of a hundred million is unprecedented in human
history.’ [211] Perhaps nothing
conveys the poverty of Russia more vividly than the fact that average
income in Russia was nearly 20 percent less than that of
Britain in 1688. And that was in 1913; after the civil war the
proportion must have been much lower. [212]
The White and imperialist armies had of course directly caused
much of the damage. The workers’ state was cut off from cotton
until 1920, from Baltic flax and Baku oil until late 1919, and from
iron and coal from the Ukraine until 1920. The economic blockade by
the imperialist powers was only lifted in 1920. And the war effort
had eaten up much of what remained of industry. The Bolsheviks, said
the critic Viktor Shklovski, ‘ruined whole factories to make boots
out of [machine] fan belts’. [213]
In Russia as a whole the size of the working class was more than
halved. In the major cities the proportion of workers fell even more
dramatically. In February 1921 Pravda announced a ‘severe
defeat on the labour front’. Sixty four of the largest factories in
Petrograd were forced to close for lack of fuel. Among them was the
Putilov works, the cradle of the revolution. [214]
In mid–1920 the Polish army invaded Russia from the west and the
last White army in European Russia, headed by General Wrangel, drove
north from the Crimea. In the midst of this crisis rebellion swept
the countryside once again. Requisitioning was still in force,
despite the poor harvest of 1920. Two of the peasant revolts from
1920 and 1921 have acquired political significance: Antonov’s
‘Green’ revolt in the province of Tambov, and Makhno’s revolt
in the Ukraine. For Sam Farber the Reds’ response to these
rebellions ‘which were socially and politically quite different
from the White rebellions’ was based in part ‘on a monstrous and
schematic mockery of Marxist class analysis’ which affected the
revolution’s ‘internal strength and ability to resist the logic
of Stalinist politics’. [215]
In fact the Tambov and Ukrainian risings gained popular support
for precisely the same reason as the White rebellions: the
peasantry’s opposition to grain requisitioning. Of course the White
rebellions were headed by the personnel of the Tsarist old order
while the Tambov and Ukrainian risings were not. Yet the only
possible beneficiaries of any success that the peasant rebellions
might have had against the Reds would be the Whites: there is no
question that either Antonov or Makhno had either support outside
limited geographical areas or an articulated political programme of
their own. Indeed Antonov had backed Wrangel, as his fellow SRs had
backed the Whites throughout the civil war (although they distanced
themselves from Antonov’s revolt). The SR influenced Union of
Working Peasantry in the densely wooded, intensely rural Tambov
region had vowed to ‘fight the Bolsheviks to the end’. [216]
And the methods used by Makhno and Antonov in their fight against
the Red Army often mirrored those used by the Whites. Bolsheviks
caught by the Tambov Greens were nailed to trees, a single railroad
spike driven through their left hand and foot lifting them a few feet
above the ground. Bruce Lincoln writes:
The Greens maimed and mutilated their victims, flaying
some, quartering others, and disembowelling still others ... [they]
gouged out eyes, chopped off limbs, mutilated sexual organs, slashed
tendons ... unravelled intestines ... often buried captured enemies
alive, but took care to leave their victims’ heads above ground so
that peasant women could urinate on them before the village dogs
closed in to gnaw the still living flesh from their faces and skulls.
[217]
In response, the Red Army ‘at first alternated between wholesale
cruelty, in which they burned whole villages ... and extreme leniency
in which they pardoned prisoners en masse’. [218]
Later mass shootings became more widespread as the Red Army became
bogged down in a guerrilla battle with an enemy little different from
the mass of peasants who sheltered them. Characteristically, Sam
Farber mentions the shootings but not the pardons, the Red Terror but
not the Green Terror.
Makhno’s smaller rebellion in the Ukraine is distinguished from
the Tambov rising only by the muddled anarchism of its leader.
Makhno’s relations with the Bolsheviks were chequered, reflecting
the fast changing military situation in the Ukraine throughout the
civil war. The revolution released Makhno from prison and, with Lenin
and Sverdlov’s help, he returned to the Ukraine in July 1918 while
it was still under German puppet ruler Hetman Skoropadsky. Makhno
organised a partisan Insurgent Army to fight Skoropadsky and sided
with the Red Army when it marched against the Whites in December
1918. Cooperation continued until June 1919 when the Insurgent Army
broke from the Red Army: ‘as soon as Makhno left the front he and
his associates began to organise new partisan detachments in the
Bolsheviks’ rear, which subsequently attacked strongholds, troops,
police, trains and food collectors’. [219]
Denikin’s advance against Makhno’s territory in autumn 1919
quickly forced a renewal of the treaty with the Bolsheviks. Makhno
harassed Denikin’s troops from the rear, making their advance more
difficult. But by the end of 1919 the immediate White threat was
removed. Makhno refused to move his troops to the Polish front to
meet the imminent invasion and hostilities with the Red Army began
again on an even more widespread scale. The entries in the diary of
Makhno’s wife betray the nature of the movement in this period:
February 23,1920 – Our men seized Bolshevik agents, who
were shot.
February 25, 1920 – Moved to Maiorovo. Caught three
agents for the collection of grain there. Shot them.
March 14, 1920 – Today we moved into Velikaya
Mikhailovka, killed here one Communist. [220]
Reports from the Soviet Ukrainian Front give the same picture:
June 18 – Makhno carried out a raid on the station at
Grishno, held out there three hours, shot fourteen captured officials
of the Soviet and workers’ organisations, destroyed the telegraph
communication and robbed the food warehouse of the railroad workers.
July 26 – Bursting into Konstantinograd County, Makhno
in the course of two days cut down 84 Red Army soldiers.
August 16 – having seized Mirgorod for a day and a half
Makhno’s followers robbed all the warehouses of the county food
committee, destroyed the buildings of theSoviet and workers’
organisations, smashed 15 telegraph machines, killed 21 workers and
Red soldiers. [221]
These actions were consistent with an earlier resolution of the
Insurgent Army which declared that it was ‘the actions of the
Bolshevik regime which cause a real danger to the worker-peasant
revolution’. In fact it was Makhno’s actions against the Red Army
which made ‘a brief return of the Whites possible’. [222]
General Wrangel attacked while Makhno’s forces were fighting the
Red Army: ‘As Wrangel advanced ... Makhno retreated north ...
leaving behind small partisan units in the villages and towns to
carry out covert destruction of the Bolshevik administrative
apparatus and supply bases’. [223]
These activities were so effective that White Colonel Noga reported
to headquarters that Makhno was crucial to Wrangel’s advance. [224]
Indeed Wrangel approached Makhno for a formal alliance and although
this was turned down Makhno did not fight with the Reds again until
October 1920 when Wrangel advanced on Makhno’s base. It was,
unsurprisingly, a treaty of convenience on the part of both sides and
as soon as Wrangel was defeated at the end of the year the Red Army
fought Makhno until he gave up the struggle and crossed the Dniester
river into Romania in August 1921.
Could Makhno have provided a libertarian alternative to the
Bolsheviks? The answer lies in the nature of the Makhno movement.
Firstly, the movement never had any real support from the working
class. Neither was it particularly interested in developing a
programme which would appeal to workers. Paul Avrich, the sympathetic
historian of the anarchists, writes that Makhno:
failed to win over more than a minority of workers, for
unlike the farmers and artisans of the village, who were independent
producers accustomed to managing their own affairs, factory hands and
miners operated as interdependent parts of a complicated industrial
machine ... He never understood the complexities of the urban
economy, nor did he care to understand them. [225]
Makhno’s advice to workers aimed at reproducing the
petit-bourgeois patterns of the countryside – he told railway workers
in Aleksandrovsk who had not been paid for many weeks that they
should simply charge passengers a fair price and so generate their
own wages. [226] In the countryside
of course such politics could have greater appeal. But even here any
attempt to go beyond the traditional peasant economy was doomed.
Makhno’s memoirs admit that ‘the mass of the people did not go
over’ to his peasant communes, which only involved a few hundred
families. [227] The real basis of
Makhno’s support was not his anarchism, but his opposition to grain
requisitioning and his determination not to disturb the peasant economy:
Makhno had not put an end to the agricultural
inequalities. His aim was to avoid conflicts with the villages and to
maintain a sort of united front of the entire peasantry. [228]
In 1919 the local Bolshevik authorities made mistakes which played
into Makhno’s hands: despite Lenin’s advice they were dismissive
of Ukrainian nationalism and they tried to carry through
socialisation of the land, rather than handing it over to the
peasants. But by spring 1920 they had reversed the policy towards the
peasants and instituted Committees of Poor Peasants. These ‘hurt
Makhno ... his heart became hardened and he sometimes ordered
executions’. [229] This policy
helped the Bolshevik ascendancy.
It is hardly surprising, given this social base, that much of
Makhno’s libertarianism amounted to little more than paper decrees.
On paper the officers of the Insurgent Army were elected – in
practice the most senior commanders were appointed by Makhno. [230]
One resolution adopted at a meeting of the partisans gives the
flavour of the movement: ‘to obey the orders of the commanders if the
commanders are sober enough to give them’. [231]
In theory Makhno’s was a volunteer army. In reality ‘he was
compelled to inaugurate a form of conscription in order to replenish
his forces’. [232] Makhno held
elections, but no parties were allowed to participate in them. Papers
could be published, but the Bolshevik and Left Socialist
Revolutionary press were not allowed to call for revolution. [233]
Makhno was quick to denounce the Soviet ‘institutions of violence,
such as your Commissariats and Chekas’, but ‘Makhno’s private
Cheka ... quickly disposed of anyone who was suspected of plotting
against his life’. [234] Makhno’s
army actually had two security forces, the Cheka-like Razvedka and
the Punitive Commission, which ‘appears to have been headed by
Makhno’s wife’. [235] Their
activities were far from negligible:
Makhno’s later campaigns are among the most bloody and
vindictive in history, and in the circumstances we can safely assume
that these [security] services were responsible for frequent
injustices and atrocities. Volin [Makhno’s close associate] is
witness to the fact that they were under no effective control. [236]
When a Bolshevik cell, which included a divisional commander, was
discovered in the Insurgent Army, the Bolsheviks were denied an open
trial and summarily shot by Makhno’s Razvedka. [237]
Neither Makhno’s social programme nor his political regime could
provide an alternative to the Bolsheviks. Even his military tactics
could only be effective in limited circumstances and only then so
long as they did not disturb the age old class structure of the
countryside. Ultimately his anarchism was a thin veneer on peasant rebellion.
The rising in Kronstadt in March 1921 had essentially the same
root as the peasant rebellions. Although it was preceded by a wave of
serious but quickly resolved strikes, the motivation of the Kronstadt
rebellion was much closer to that of the peasantry than it was to
dissatisfaction among what remained of the urban working class.
Kronstadt had, of course, been a stronghold of the revolution in 1917
but in 1921 it was strongly influenced by the mood of the peasantry.
There are several interlocking reasons why it became prey to the mood
sweeping the countryside.
Firstly, the composition of the garrison had changed. In September
and October 1920 the writer and Bolshevik Party lecturer Ieronymus
Yasinsky went to Kronstadt to lecture to 400 naval recruits. They
were ‘straight from the plough’. And he was shocked to find that
many, ‘including a few party members, were politically illiterate,
worlds removed from the highly politicised veteran Kronstadt sailors
who had deeply impressed him’. Yasinsky worried that those ‘steeled
in the revolutionary fire’ would be replaced by ‘inexperienced,
freshly mobilised young sailors’. [238]
By December 1920 only 1,313 recruits of the type interviewed by
Yasinsky had arrived in the Baltic Fleet (out of a planned total of
10,384). We do not know how many more new recruits arrived in the
three months before Kronstadt erupted in March 1921. But we do know
about the composition of some other units based at Kronstadt, like
the 2,500 Ukrainians of the 160th Rifle Regiment, recruited from
areas particularly friendly to the Makhno guerrillas and with less
than 2 percent of Bolsheviks in its ranks. [239]
Further evidence of the changing class composition of the garrison
can be gleaned from the breakdown of the social background of the
Bolsheviks at the base. In September 1920, six months before the
revolt, the Bolsheviks had 4,435 members at Kronstadt. Some 50
percent of these were peasants, 40 percent were workers and 10
percent were intellectuals. [240] The
same figures for the Bolshevik Party as a whole in 1921 are: 28.7
percent peasants, 41 percent workers and 30.8 percent white collar
workers and others. [241] Thus the
percentage of peasants in the party in Kronstadt was considerably
higher than nationally. It was also higher than the already unusually
high percentage of peasants among the members who had joined the
party in 1921. [242] If we assume
that the Bolshevik Party was more working class in composition than
the Kronstadt base as a whole, then it seems likely that the peasants
had increased their weight in Kronstadt, as Trotsky suggested.
Sam Farber argues that the new peasant recruits would not have
been enough to alter the mood of the other sailors. He criticises the
Trotskyist tradition in general, and Chris Harman’s How the
Revolution was Lost in particular, for arguing that ‘Kronstadt
in 1920 was not Kronstadt of 1917. The class composition of its
sailors had changed.’ [243] But
even if, for the sake of argument, we accept Sam Farber’s
interpretation of the evidence (and he does not look at the figures
for the composition of the Bolsheviks) his point only has any
validity if we take the statistics in isolation. But in reality this
change in composition acted on a fleet whose ties with the peasantry
had recently been strengthened in other ways. In particular, the
Kronstadt sailors had recently been granted leave for the first time
since the civil war. Many returned to their villages and came face to
face with the condition of the countryside and the trials of the
peasantry faced with food detachments. Stepan Petrichenko, the leader
of the Kronstadt rising, returned to his native Ukraine between April
and the autumn of 1920. He found that:
When we returned home our parents asked us why we fought
for the oppressors. That set us thinking. [244]
In fact Petrichenko became so embittered that he tried to join the
Whites, and was only turned away because of his previous brief
membership of the Communist Party. [245]
Many other sailors had similar experiences to Petrichenko when they
returned to the villages, as the hundreds of letters to the
Complaints Bureau of the Baltic Fleet testify. Here is part of just
one from a sailor of the Petropavlovsk, the battleship at the heart
of the rebellion:
Ours is an ordinary peasant farm, neither Kulak nor
parasitical; yet when I and my brother return from serving the Soviet
republic people will sneer at our wrecked farm and say: ‘What did
you serve for? What has the Soviet republic given you?’ [246]
Desertions began to spiral and leave was cancelled. ‘By 1921 the
fleet was falling apart as an organised military force.’ [247]
It was the fleet’s links with the peasantry which provided the
bedrock for the rebellion, but other factors exacerbated the
situation. The ideology of the Kronstadt garrison was one factor.
Even in its heroic days the garrison had an ultra-left air. Many
Kronstadters had sided with the left communists at the time of
Brest-Litovsk, a number of them had joined the LSRs uprising in the
summer of 1918. They had opposed food requisitioning in 1918 and were
fierce opponents of Red Army type discipline. [248]
Another factor in the rebellion was the decline of the Bolsheviks’
influence in Kronstadt. Many of the best Bolshevik militants of 1917
had fallen during the civil war and in the six months before the
rising the party lost half its members at the garrison.When the
revolt broke the sailors took over the battleships and garrison.
It was clear from the start that the accumulated pressure would
allow no easy solutions. Indeed, in Petrograd Zinoviev had already
essentially withdrawn the most detested aspects of War Communism in
response to the strikes. The Kronstadt sailors’ response was
contained in their What We Are Fighting For:
There is no middle ground in the struggle against the
Communists ... They give the appearance of making concessions: in
Petrograd province roadblock detachments have been removed and 10
million gold roubles have been allotted for the purchase of
foodstuffs ... But one must not be deceived ... No, there can be no
middle ground. Victory or death! [249]
The Kronstadters’ insistence that they were fighting for a
‘third revolution’, freedom of expression and for ‘soviets
without parties’ has convinced many historians that this revolt was
fundamentally distinct from the White rebellions. But one must be
careful to analyse exactly the difference between the conscious aims
of the rebels and the possible outcome of their actions. The
Bolshevik regime still rested on the shattered remnants of the
working class. The Kronstadt sailors’ appeals to the Petrograd
workers had met with little or no response. The sailors represented
the exasperation of the peasantry with the War Communist regime, but
Kronstadt had no nationwide organisation and no other peasant
insurrection reproduced the Kronstadters’ demands.
Had the Kronstadters’ demands for ‘soviets without parties’
been realised they would have expressed the ferocious, elemental
hostility of the peasants to the Bolsheviks in particular and to the
cities in general. Yet in the wake of the fall of the Bolsheviks it
would not have been the moderate socialists who took power. They were
in any case weaker than the Bolsheviks and where they had tried to
govern in the non-Bolshevik areas they had, time and again, succumbed
to (and often aided) military dictatorships. The Whites, even though
their armies had been beaten in the field, were still not finished –
as the emigre response to the Kronstadt rising shows. In the vacuum
which would have followed the fall of the Bolsheviks, the Whites were
the only remaining political force which could have profited. This
may not have been the aim of the Kronstadt rebellion but, given its
utopian programme and its class root, this would have been its outcome.
The Whites sensed this immediately. They had predicted a rising in
Kronstadt and the White National Centre abroad strained might and
main to provide food for the Kronstadters, raising a total of nearly
1 million French francs, 2 million Finnish marks, £5,000, $25,000
and 900 tons of flour in just two weeks. Indeed the National Centre
was already making plans for the forces of the French navy and those
of General Wrangel, who still commanded 70,000 men in Turkey, to land
in Kronstadt if the revolt were to succeed. [250]
As it became clear that the revolt was isolated Petrichenko was
forced to come to terms with the reality of the balance of class
forces. On 13 March Petrichenko wired David Grimm, the chief agent of
the National Centre and General Wrangel’s official representative
in Finland, for help in gaining food. On 16 March Petrichenko
accepted an offer of help from Baron P.V. Vilkin, an associate of
Grimm’s whom ‘the Bolsheviks rightly called a White agent’.
[251] None of the aid reached the
garrison before it was crushed, but the tide of events was pushing
the sailors into the arms of the Whites, just as the latter had
always suspected it would.
After the revolt was crushed, the link between the leaders of the
rebellion and the Whites became even more marked. Paul Avrich, the
historian sympathetic to the Kronstadt rising, says there is
‘undeniable evidence’ that the leadership of the rebellion came
to an agreement with the Whites after they had been crushed and that
‘one cannot rule out the possibility that this was the continuation
of a long-standing relationship’. [252]
Petrichenko himself got in touch with Wrangel, once more using Grimm
as an intermediary. He joined forces with Wrangel, recruiting sailors
to join an underground counter-revolutionary fighting organisation in
Petrograd. Petrichenko further suggested to Wrangel that he make use
of the slogan, ‘Soviets without parties’, but only as a
‘convenient political manoeuvre’. Once the Bolsheviks were beaten
‘the slogan would be shelved and a temporary military dictatorship
installed.’ The balance of class forces had finally brought
ideology and reality into alignment. [253]
The Bolsheviks had no choice but to crush the revolt. Had they
waited, the ice in the Gulf of Finland would have melted, allowing
the battleships to attack Petrograd. The battle to take the garrison
was bloody, especially for the Bolsheviks. As they made their way
across the ice, the guns of the battleships and the island fortresses
cut them down in interlocking fields of fire. Hundreds of Red Army
soldiers disappeared through holes in the ice. The death toll was 600
Kronstadt sailors, including those shot after the base was captured,
and at least 10,000 Reds, including 15 of the 320 delegates from the
Bolshevik Party’s Tenth Congress who had joined the assault. It
was, as Trotsky said, a tragic necessity.
The end of War Communism would have come whether or not Kronstadt
had revolted. But the revolt made it absolutely clear the era was
over. The Kronstadt events were like a flash of lightning which threw
more glare upon reality than anything else’, said Lenin. [254] The
Tenth Party Congress adopted the New Economic Policy (NEP) which
ended grain requisitioning. Lenin told the Congress: ‘Only an
agreement with the peasantry can save the socialist revolution until
the revolution has occurred in other countries’. [255]
The NEP was a retreat from War Communism which itself had been a
retreat from the policies adopted immediately after the October
revolution. The longer the revolution remained isolated and the more
desperate the economic conditions in Russia, the more the retreat
would necessarily become severe and dangerous.
 
The rise of Stalinism
The civil war had reduced industry to rubble. The working class
base of the workers’ state, mobilised time and again to defeat the
Whites, the rock on which Bolshevik power stood, had disintegrated.
The Bolsheviks survived three years of civil war and wars of
intervention, but only at the cost of reducing the working class to
an atomised, individualised mass, a fraction of its former size, and
no longer able to exercise the collective power that it had done
in1917. Lenin wrote:
The industrial proletariat ... owing to the war and to
the desperate poverty and ruin, has become declassed ... dislodged
from its class groove, and has ceased to exist as a proletariat ...
It has sometimes figured in statistics, but it has not held together
economically. [256]
The bureaucracy of the workers’ state was left suspended in
mid-air, its class base eroded and demoralised. Such conditions could
not help but have an effect on the machinery of the state and
organisation of the Bolshevik Party.
The Bolsheviks’ monopoly of political power had been established
by virtue of the simple fact that, one by one, the parties who
opposed them passed over to the camp of armed counter-revolution. The
Cadets had, of course, been hand in glove with Kornilov even before
the October revolution and were the mainstay of every White
dictatorship which surfaced during the civil war. The Right Socialist
Revolutionaries had planned armed counter-revolution at the time of
the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly and had become
indistinguishable from the Cadets during the course of the civil war.
The Left Socialist Revolutionaries had been part of the Soviet
government in 1918 and remained a legal opposition until, in the
summer of that year, they attempted to overthrow the government in an
armed coup.
The Mensheviks were different. They vacillated. Some Mensheviks,
and some LSRs, split and joined the Bolsheviks. Some joined the
Whites. The rest alternated between accepting the legitimacy of the
government and agitating for its overthrow. The Bolsheviks treated
them accordingly. The Mensheviks were legalised or extended greater
freedom during those periods when they accepted the October
revolution and suppressed during those periods when they vowed to
return to a pre-October regime. As E.H. Carr notes:
If it was true that the Bolshevik regime was not prepared
after the first few months to tolerate an organised opposition, it
was equally true that no opposition was prepared to remain within
legal limits. The premise of the dictatorship was common to both
sides of the argument. [257]
The vice-like pressure of the civil war had transformed the state
in other ways. The weight of the bureaucracy, of the army, of the
Cheka, had grown enormously during the civil war. Without these
institutions the October regime would have been swept away in a
bloody, reactionary counter-revolution. With them the October
revolution had become sclerotic and authoritarian. There were so many
‘horrifying facts about drunkenness, debauchery, corruption,
robbery and irresponsible behaviour of many party members that one’s
hair simply stands on end’, one Central Committee member told the
Eighth Party Congress. [258] The
power of the bureaucracy, and within the bureaucracy the power of its
top layers, grew.
The Bolshevik Party itself had undergone dramatic changes. By the
end of the civil war only one party member in every ten actually
worked in a factory [259], six out of
every ten were employed in the government or party machine and a
quarter of party members served in the Red Army, often in positions
of political or military authority. The military often returned home
and ‘assumed leading posts in the local soviets, in the economy, in
education and they persistently introduced everywhere that regime
which ensured success in the civil war’, argued Trotsky in The
Revolution Betrayed. [260]
The need for discipline during the civil war, for centralisation,
was not something simply foisted on the party by the leadership. It
was a pressing need felt by the rank and file members every bit as
much as by the leadership:
There were times between 1918 and 1921, indeed, when
Lenin and his associates lagged somewhat behind a vociferous body of
local opinion which urged an extension and reinforcement of the
centralising and disciplinary trends ... [261]
... |I]t was the civil war which did the trick. Almost
overnight it was witnessed that nearly all those dyed-in-the-wool
defenders of local rights in 1917 were now ready, however
reluctantly, to recognise that the military crisis called for the
introduction of stem internal discipline. [262]
The Tenth Party Congress was a traumatic experience. The crisis of
War Communism produced a massive wave of debate and opposition among
the Bolsheviks. There were no fewer than eight different platforms
put forward by different groups and individuals. The Workers’
Opposition presented an extensive critique of the direction the
regime was heading. The Workers’ Opposition wanted to reform the
system by handing power to the trade unions and workers in the
factories. The difficulty was that the working class, as we have
seen, had been decimated. The Workers’ Opposition’s plans could
only have led to a disintegration of the regime.
Lenin had a different two-fold solution. Firstly, he wanted to
stop the party – which he described as ‘sick, feverish’ –
from tearing itself apart under the pressure of events. He declared:
There should not be the slightest trace of factionalism –
whatever its manifestations in the past. That we must not have on any
account [when there is a] tremendous preponderance of peasants in the
country, when their dissatisfaction with the proletarian dictatorship
is mounting, and when the demobilisation of the peasant army is
setting loose hundreds and thousands of broken men who have nothing
to do, whose only accustomed occupation is war and who breed
banditry. The atmosphere of the controversy is becoming extremely
dangerous and constitutes a direct threat to the dictatorship of the
proletariat. [263]
The Congress voted to ban factions. Again it was not simply a
leadership diktat. Radek spoke for many when he told the Congress:
In voting for this resolution, I feel that it can well be
turned against us, nevertheless I support it. Let the Central
Committee in a moment of danger take the severest measures against
the best party comrades, if it finds this necessary. Let the Central
Committee even be mistaken! That is less dangerous than the wavering
which is now observable. [264]
Neither was the ban considered total or permanent. When one senior
Bolshevik tried to get the Congress to agree a ban on separate
platforms in Central Committee elections, Lenin replied:
We cannot deprive the party and the members of the
Central Committee of the right to appeal to the party in the event of
disagreement on fundamental issues. Supposing we are faced with a
question like, say, the conclusion of the Brest peace? Can you
guarantee that no such question will arise? No, you cannot. In the
circumstances, the elections may have to be based on platforms. [265]
Secondly, Lenin fought, in the last battle of his life, to reform
the bureaucracy from within. He said:
You can throw out the Tsar, throw out the landowners,
throw out the capitalists but you cannot ‘throw out’ the
bureaucracy in a peasant country ... You can only reduce it by
slow and stubborn effort ... for many years to come. [266]
Lenin sought Trotsky’s aid in undermining Stalin’s growing
power, he fought to strengthen the Workers’ and Peasants’
Inspectorate which was meant to counter bureaucratic abuse and he
tried to combat the growing Russian chauvinism in the state machine.
But Lenin’s worsening health hampered him. He first became ill in
mid-1921, suffered a stroke in May 1922, returned to work but fell
ill again in December 1922. In March 1923 he was again stricken by a
stroke which left him partially paralysed and virtually unable to
speak until his death in January 1924. His last notes were insistent
that Stalin should be removed from the post of General Secretary.
But Lenin’s last battle, like Trotsky’s opposition to Stalin
which began in 1923, suffered from a fundamental weakness. After the
war the regime was left stranded. The well head of renewal and
thorough reform – the activity of the workers – had dried to a
trickle. Bureaucratic abuse and corruption were the inevitable
result. To appeal outside the machine, as the Workers’ Opposition
had wanted, was impossible. This is the tragedy of Lenin’s last
fight and of the Left Opposition. They knew the problem but the means
at their disposal was not equal to the task. Hence the paucity of the
measures they advocated: self reform of the bureaucracy. Here is the
root of Trotsky’s defeat. To fight within the bureaucracy was to
fight on terms more favourable to Stalin than to Trotsky. Trotsky’s
strength, like Lenin’s, had always been his link with the workers.
From them he drew inspiration. On them he placed all his hopes for a
socialist society. Against their experience he judged the correctness
of his strategy. And, most of all, it was on the consciousness and
organisation of the workers that he relied in every major struggle.
Stalin, by contrast, relied on the machine – on the committee,
the threat, the order and the bribe. He was determined to ‘bury
Trotskyism’, insisting that the Trotskyist ‘cadres can be removed
only by civil war’. And civil war there was. It began with
Opposition speakers being heckled and assaulted. Then the whole vast
propaganda machine of the bureaucracy was turned against them. Later,
they were exiled, imprisoned and shot.
The Trotskyist Opposition fought courageously. It sometimes saw
its arguments gaining considerable ground among party members. Many
party members, especially the experienced party members who had lived
and fought through 1917, were supporters of the Opposition.
But ultimately, without a revival of struggle in Russia or
successful revolution elsewhere, the Opposition was doomed to
failure. That, however, could not be known in advance. Trotsky fought
on, even though the ground on which he stood was being consumed by
fire, in the hope that a revival of domestic or international
struggle would come to his aid. The only other choice was capitulation.
The Trotskyists’ struggle delayed Stalin’s rise to power, a
rise which was only complete after the Left Opposition was broken in
1928, not before. This is why the majority of historians note the
difference between the ‘revolution’ from above which came after
1928 and the period before 1928. The struggle of the Left Opposition
also made it obvious that Stalin was the betrayer of the revolution
and that his regime was the counter-revolutionary antithesis of the
October revolution. Stalin’s regime not only reversed every
remaining gain of October but had to annihilate the entire leadership
and many of the ordinary Bolsheviks who had made the October
revolution. The fact that he could do so by administrative terror,
not by the more normal means of an armed counter-revolutionary
seizure of power, was a result of the atomisation of the working
class. No wider use of force was necessary, no martial law, no curfew
or street battles, because the condition of the working class had
reduced the battle between revolution and counter-revolution to a
struggle concerning, albeit not exclusively, different sections of
the Bolshevik party. This should not blind us to the scale of the
counter-revolution which did take place, to the essential difference
between the Stalin regime and even the regime of the mid–1920s.
Stephen Cohen argues:
Stalin’s new policies of 1929–33, the ‘great
change’ as they became known, were a radical departure from
Bolshevik programmatic thinking. No Bolshevik leader or faction had
ever advocated anything akin to imposed collectivisation, the
‘liquidation’ of allegedly prosperous peasants (kulaks),
breakneck heavy industrialisation, the destruction of the entire
market sector, and a ‘plan’ that was in reality no plan at all,
only hyper-centralised control of the economy plus exhortations.
These years of ‘revolution from above’ were, historically and
programmatically, the birth period of Stalinism. [267]
Michael Reiman’s invaluable The Birth of Stalinism
arrives at similar conclusions by tracing in impressive detail the
completeness of this rupture. [268]
Cohen also argues:
Official ideology changed radically under Stalin. Several
of those changes have been noted by Western and Soviet scholars: the
revival of nationalism, statism, anti-Semitism, and conservative, or
reactionary, cultural and behavioural norms; the repeal of ideas and
legislation favouring workers, women, school children, minority
cultures, and egalitarianism, as well as a host of revolutionary and
Bolshevik symbols; and a switch in emphasis from ordinary people to
leaders and official bosses as the creators of history. They were not
simply amendments but a new ideology that was ‘changed in essence’
and that did ‘not represent the same movement as that which took
power in 1917’. [269]
The point is not to idealise the Bolshevik regime of the early
1920s. Of course they had arrived at a point far distant from the
goals of 1917. This analysis is merely meant to demonstrate two
points. Firstly, it was overwhelmingly the force of circumstance
which obliged the Bolsheviks to retreat so far from their goals. They
travelled this route in opposition to their own theory, not because
of it – no matter what rhetorical justifications were given at the
time. And secondly, the alternatives available at the time were worse
than the Bolsheviks. Even those movements which, on paper, appeared
to have a more democratic programme (Workers’ Opposition,
Kronstadt, Makhno) were either frauds (Makhno) or utopians. They were
utopians because they looked back to the institutions of 1917 when
the class which made such institutions possible no longer had the
collective capability to direct political life. This is the tragedy
of the early 1920s: the Bolsheviks had beaten their opponents by
destroying the base on which they stood – literally destroyed it by
death incurred at the front or by depopulating the cities as a result
of starvation, disease and flight to the country. The lack of
democracy was a result of this, not a first cause. The secret of the
Stalinist bureaucracy’s success lay in the devastation and
isolation of the workers’ state.
 
The October revolution and politics today
In many major industrialised countries the 1980s were mostly a
period of retreat for the workers’ movement and the left,
irrespective of whether right-wing governments (Reagan, Thatcher,
Kohl) or right wing social democratic governments (Mitterrand, Hawke,
Gonzales) were in power. Under these conditions very considerable
sections of the left began to evolve, first, in the direction of left
reformism. This was the era of infatuation with the Labour left in
Britain, the Socialist Party in France, PASOK in Greece, the collapse
of the Italian revolutionary left and the rise of movementism
internationally. Latterly, faced with the failure of these projects
and very much under the influence of events in Eastern Europe and the
consequent collapse of the Western Communist Parties, this evolution
tended toward outright and almost unqualified identification with
bourgeois democracy, at least in intellectual circles.
This process was accelerated by the second Gulf War, during which
a number of socialists (Norman Geras and Fred Halliday in Britain,
for instance) decided to back US and British imperialism. Significant
numbers of others, notably the editorial board of New Left Review,
were, at best, careful to couch their partial opposition in terms
circumscribed by bourgeois democracy (support for sanctions, advocacy
of the UN). The result is that much of what now passes for socialist
thought is indistinguishable from run of the mill liberalism. The
swelling literature on citizenship, democratic and constitutional
reform, the virtues of civil society and so on are the unmistakable
symbols of this process. In this world the superiority of the market
is taken as axiomatic.
In these developments the history of the October revolution has a
key place. Once the argument that Lenin led to Stalin is established,
any alternative to the market and bourgeois democracy becomes that
much more difficult to make. To stray from the straight and narrow
road walked by J.S. Mill and Adam Smith is to court the gulag. We
live in the best of all possible worlds, runs the argument, and the
fate of the October revolution demonstrates the foolhardiness of
trying to change it. Paul Hirst, now a leading figure in the civil
rights group Charter 88, has latterly become so convinced that the
market and the rule of law are the only viable forms of society that
any vision of an alternative – whether Lenin’s or the eco-social
democracy of Vaclav Havel – are treated as dangerous utopian
dreams. [270]
Robin Blackburn’s attempt to try and find the non-existent
thread that is supposed to connect those high priests of the free
market, von Mises and von Hayek, with Trotsky is another response to
these developments. Blackburn’s point seems to be that, as Trotsky
argued that some form of market mechanism would be used in the
transition to a communist society, the leader of the Russian
Revolution must have something in common with today’s descendants
of von Hayek and von Mises. The small question of which class is in
power, the capitalist class or the working class, does not impinge on
this analysis. Or at least it only impinges to the extent that the
market is assumed to be a strategy for gaining power, rather than a
mechanism that may be used, under greatly altered conditions, once a
revolution has succeeded. It is, then, merely the difference between
reform and revolution.
So many of these arguments depend on a revival, in whole or in
part, of an essentially Cold War interpretation of the Russian
Revolution. Yet if the history of the October revolution is not as
one-time socialists would have us believe, then the workers’
movement of today still has a powerful weapon in its armoury. Mass
unemployment, war and imperialism, third world starvation and first
world poverty, homelessness and economic exploitation, racism and
sexism, anti-union laws and, at best, castrated political rights are
not all that the world has to offer. Then the unprecedented political
freedom, the cultural and artistic explosion, the unique economic
liberation, the sexual and national risings that were the hallmark of
the early days of the October revolution, and which this essay on the
dark hours of the revolution has had little time to consider, are
still within our reach. The October revolution is our past. It is
also our future. We should not relinquish it so easily.


Acknowledgements
My thanks to the following for their comments on the first draft:
Tony Cliff, Nikolai Genchev, Lindsey German, Chris Harman, Mike
Haynes, John Molyneux, Pete Morgan and, especially, to Nikolai
Preobrazhensky.


Notes
1. W. Rees-Mogg, Independent,
14 October 1989. R. Pipes, The Russian Revolution (London 1990).
2. Moscow News, Weekly, No. 2, 1991.
3. See Jonathan Steele, Solzhenitsyn
Off The Press, Trotsky Under Wraps, Guardian, 6 May 1991.
4. Private communication from a Moscow
based socialist.
5. See Shade Less Red, Daily
Mail, 8 February 1990.
6. Waking From History’s Great
Dream, Independent On Sunday, 4 February 1990.
7. See J. Slovo, Socialist
Aspirations and Socialist Realities, The African Communist,
No. 124, (Johannesburg 1991), p. 9. Similar but more coded
formulations appear in J. Slovo, Has Socialism Failed? (London 1990)
8. R. Blackburn, Fin de Siecle:
Socialism after the Crash, New Left Review 185,
January/February 1991, p. 21.
9. P. Hirst, The State, Civil
Society and the Collapse of Soviet Communism, Economy and
Society, Vol. 20 No. 2, May 1991, p. 219.
10. S. Farber, Before Stalinism,
(Polity Press, 1991), pp. 99 and 109.
11. See Against the Current,
Nos. 29 and 32 (Detroit). The particularly right wing,
anti-Leninist account is T. Shanin, The Ethics of Socialist
Praxis, Against the Current, No. 32, pp. 43–5.
12. See S. Farber, op. cit., p. 2.
13. B. Kagarlitsky, The Thinking
Reed (London 1988), pp. 41 and 65, although the general
tenor of Kagarlitsky’s account is less critical of the Bolsheviks
in this work than in his later The Dialectic of Change.
Possibly this is because The Thinking Reed was written when
the opposition movement barely existed and when the decay of the
regime was not so advanced.
14. R. Blackburn, op. cit., p. 8.
15. L. Trotsky, Results and Prospects, in The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects (New York 1969), p. 5.
16. Quoted in E.H. Carr, The
Bolshevik Revolution 1917–1923, Vol. III (London 1966), p. 9.
17. Ibid., pp. 17–18.
18. Ibid., p. 53.
19. R. Blackburn, op. cit., p. 24.
20. E.H. Carr, op. cit., p. 59.
21. Quoted in L. Trotsky, op.
cit., p. 105.
22. K. Kautsky, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat (University of Michigan, 1964), p. 64.
23. V. Serge, Year One of the Russian Revolution (London 1972), pp. 314–315.
24. V. Serge, Destiny of a
Revolution, (London 1937) p. 144.
25. V. Serge, Year One ... ,
op. cit., p. 325.
26. Quoted in T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 4, The Bolsheviks and the World Revolution (London
1979), p. 8.
27. See T. Cliff, Trotsky, Vol. 2, 1917–1923, The Sword of the Revolution (Bookmarks, 1990), p. 211
28. Marx, Selected Correspondence
(Moscow 1956), p. 320.
29. See The Berlin USPD debate on
the National Assembly, in The Third International in Lenin’s
Time: The German Revolution and the Debate on Soviet Power,
documents: 1918–1919 (New York 1986), p. 128.
30. E. Acton, Rethinking the
Russian Revolution (London 1990), p. 2.
31. R. Pipes, op. cit., p. 491.
32. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln, Red
Victory (New York 1989), pp. 28, 39–40.
33. Quoted in M. Ferro, October
1917, A Social History of the Russian Revolution (London 1980), p. 14.
34. L. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution (London 1977), p. 240.
35. Quoted in R. Medvedev, The
October Revolution (New York 1979) p. 69.
36. V. Serge, Year One ... ,
op. cit., p. 109.
37. M. Jones, Year of Two
Revolutions, in M. Jones (ed.), Storming the Heavens,
Voices Of October (London 1987) p. xliii.
38. Quoted in ibid., p. xlv.
39. W. Bruce Lincoln, op. cit., p. 35.
40. The Bolsheviks withdrew the
slogan, ‘All power to the soviets’, after the defeat of the July
Days since they worried that the leadership of the soviets had
irretrievably fallen into the hands of the moderate socialists.
Instead they briefly based their strategy on the more responsive
local factory committees. When the popular mood turned decisively
against the Provisional Government and the moderates in the soviets
the Bolsheviks returned to their original formulation. None of this
alters the essence of the Bolsheviks’ strategy which was to take
power from the Provisional Government and put it in the hands of
popular organs of working class power a point later made explicit by
Trotsky in his The Lessons of October (Bookmarks, 1987).
41. M. Jones, op. cit., p. xlv.
42. Ibid.
43. M. Ferro, op. cit., p. 37.
44. L. Trotsky, History ...,op.
cit., p. 668.
45. See M. Ferro, op. cit., p. 51.
46. Ibid., p. 46.
47. Quoted in R. Medvedev, op.
cit., pp. 70–1.
48. N. Podvoisky, LeninâOrganiser
of the Victorious October Uprising, in M. Jones (ed.),
Storming the Heavens ..., op. cit., p. 116.
49. Lenin, Collected Works,
Vol. 26, p. 212. For Marxism and Insurrection, see
Collected Works, Vol. 26, pp. 22–7. Also see N.
Harding, Lenin’s Political Thought, Vol. 2, Theory and
Practise in the Socialist Revolution (London 1983), p. 154.
50. N.N. Sukhanov, The Russian
Revolution 1917, A Personal Record (Princeton UniversityPress,
1984), p. 576.
51. R. Service, The Bolshevik
Party in Revolution: A Study in Organisational Change 1917–23
(London 1979), p. 62.
52. Quoted in T. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 3, The Revolution Besieged (London 1978), p. 2.
53. S. Cohen, Rethinking the
Soviet experience (Oxford 1985), p. 5. Probably the best
known of the Cold War historians is Leonard Shapiro. Cohen provides
an impressive list of quotes about the ‘straight line’ from Lenin
to Stalin on pp. 42–43.
54. S. Farber, op. cit., pp. 149–150.
55. R. Blackburn, op. cit., pp. 20–2.
56. See Lenin, Collected Works,
Vol. 8, p. 117. See also p. 141: ‘Social democracy ... was still weak, weak in comparison with the overwhelming demand
of the active proletarian masses for social democratic leadership.’
57. R. Service, op. cit., p. 36.
58. Ibid., p. 58.
59. Ibid., p. 84.
60. Ibid., pp. 210–211.
61. Ibid., p. 52.
62. Ibid., p. 3.
63. Quoted in ibid., p. 61.
64. For a full treatment of these
issues see C. Harman, The Lost Revolution, Germany 1918 to 1923
(Bookmarks, 1997), particularly chapter 5.
65. R. Blackburn, op. cit., p. 23.
66. Ibid., p. 10.
67. T. Wohlforth, Transition to
the Transition, New Left Review 130, November/December
1981, p. 79.
68. S. Farber, op. cit., p. 56.
69. R. Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution, in Mary-Alice Waters (ed.), Rosa Luxemburg Speaks (New York 1970), p. 375.
70. Quoted in R. Medvedev, op.
cit., pp. 103–104.
71. Ibid., p. 108.
72. V. Serge, Year One ..., p. 30.
73. Quoted in M. Liebman, Leninism
under Lenin (London 1975), p. 245.
74. R. Medvedev, op. cit.,
pp. 110–11. Since the elections were conducted on the basis of
proportional representation the LSR results are even more impressive
than they seem at first sight.
75. See R. Medvedev, op. cit., pp. 110–12.
76. Figures from Lenin, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, in The Third International in Lenin’s Time ..., op. cit., p. 357.
77. V. Serge, Year One ... ,
op. cit., p. 131.
78. Ibid., pp. 130–31.
79. L. Shapiro, 1917: The Russian
Revolutions and the Origins of Present-Day Communism (London
1984), p. 149.
80. W.H. Chamberlin, The Russian
Revolution, Vol. I, 1917–1918, from the overthrow of
the Tsar to the assumption of power by the Bolsheviks (Princeton
University Press, 1987), p. 370. W.H. Chamberlin’s history is
important since his account is based on material available to him
during his stay in Moscow (1922–1934), but unavailable to many
historians during the Stalin and Cold War periods. R. Pipes, op.
cit., p. 555, lacks any such qualification.
81. See, for instance, K. Kautsky,
National Assembly and Council Assembly, in The Third
International in Lenin’s Time ..., op. cit., pp. 94–105
82. Ibid., p. 38.
83. Ibid., p. 94.
84. M. Liebman, op. cit., p. 236.
85. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., pp. 342–43.
86. J. Slovo, Socialist
Aspirations ..., op. cit., p. 9. This is the literary
equivalent of the tactic now being pursued by museum curators in
Moscow: Trotsky’s portrait has been restored to the galleries, but
it is always placed alongside Stalin’s. The meaning is unspoken but
clear: ‘Stalin was bad, but so was Trotsky so there is no point in
looking to him for an alternative.’ Slovo makes the point explicit:
‘I believe we should exercise some caution before we accept Pallo
Jordan’s rather sweeping judgement that we must turn to the works
of “oppositionists” (including Trotsky) to discover the true
meaning of the communist vision.’
87. R. Blackburn, op. cit., p. 21.
88. S. Farber, op. cit., p. 44.
89. J. Slovo, op. cit., p. 8.
90. S. Farber, op. cit., p. 47.
91. Ibid., p. 117.
92. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., p. 350.
93. T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 3 (London 1978), p. 68.
94. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., p. 350–52.
95. W. Bruce Lincoln, op. cit., p. 50.
96. Quoted in W.H. Chamberlin, The
Russian Revolution, Vol. II, 1918–1921 (Princeton
University Press, 1987), p. 78.
97. Ibid., p. 59.
98. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. I,
op. cit., p. 371.
99. R. Pipes, op. cit., p. 790.
100. V. Serge, Year One ...
, op. cit., pp. 187–188.
101. Ibid., p. 189.
102. A.F. Upton, The
Finnish Revolution (University of Minnesota Press, 1980), p. 519.
103. Ibid., p. 521.
104. Ibid.
105. Ibid.
106. Ibid., p. 522.
107. Ibid., pp. 89–90.
108. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., p. 349
109. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 99.
110. Ibid., p. 98.
111. L. Trotsky, My Life (New York 1960), pp. 396–97.
112. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 204.
113. Ibid., p. 225.
114. Ibid., p. 226.
115. Ibid., pp. 88–9.
116. Ibid., p. 100.
117. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., p. 333.
118. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 86.
119. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., pp. 48–9.
120. Ibid., p. 321.
121. Ibid., p. 317.
122. Ibid., pp. 322–3.
123. Ibid.
124. Ibid., pp. 319–20.
It is worth noting that, even if the most exaggerated claims for the
killings of the Cheka were true, 140,000 over the whole of the civil
war (see Pipes, op. cit., p. 838), this figure is still
lower than the number of Jews murdered by the Whites in just one
area, in just one year: the Ukraine in 1919.
125. Quoted ibid., p. 259.
126. Ibid., p. 256.
127. See ibid., pp. 256–57.
128. Quoted ibid., p. 259.
129. R. Luckett, The White
Generals (London 1971), p. 184.
130. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 210
131. R. Luckett, op. cit., p. 255
132. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., pp. 436–37.
133. Quoted in W.H. Chamberlin,
op. cit., Vol. II (Princeton University Press, 1987), p. 197
134. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 247 and p. 263
135. Quoted ibid., p. 263.
136. Quoted in W.H. Chamberlin,
Vol. II, op. cit., p. 403.
137. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 283.
138. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 138.
139. Quoted in ibid.,
p. 261.
140. Ibid., p. 283.
141. Ibid., p. 169.
142. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 294.
143. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 258
144. See W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., pp. 280–82.
145. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 461.
146. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 266.
147. T. Cliff, Trotsky on Substitutionism, International Socialism (first series), No. 2, Autumn 1960.
148. S.A. Smith, Red Petrograd
(Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 210. Indeed one of
Lenin’s first articles on the economy after the revolution was
entitled ‘How to organise competition?’ and insisted: ‘Now that
a socialist government is in power our task is to organise
competition.’ Collected Works, Vol. 26, p. 404.
149. S.A. Smith, ibid., p. 209.
150. Ibid., pp. 220–21.
151. Ibid., pp. 222–23.
152. See T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 3, op. cit., p. 81.
153. Ibid., p. 81.
S.A. Smith, op. cit., also charts this process in some detail,
see, for instance, pp. 238–39. He also points out that some
workers’ takeovers were meant to push the government into taking
some share in management because ‘workers’ management proved
incapable of dealing with the immense problems affecting production’,
especially in the big factories.
154. Kritzman quoted in T. Cliff,
Lenin, Vol. 3, op. cit., p. 83.
155. See W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 116.
156. Ibid., pp. 115–16.
157. Quoted in S.A. Smith, op.
cit., p. 239.
158. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., p. 353.
159. S.A. Smith, op. cit.,
p. 242.
160. S.A. Smith, op. cit.,
pp. 250–51.
161. Quoted in L.T. Lih,
Bolshevik, Razvertsha and War Communism, Slavic Review,
Vol. 48 No. 4, 1986, p. 679.
162. P. Avrich, Kronstadt 1921
(Princeton University Press, 1991), p. 19.
163. Cited in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 63.
164. See S. Farber, op. cit., p. 70.
165. Quoted in L.T. Lih, op.
cit., p. 678–79.
166. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 65.
167. Quoted ibid., p. 345.
168. Ibid., p. 480 and p. 416
169. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 347.
170. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. I,
op. cit., p. 332, and Vol. II, pp. 68–9.
171. P. Knightley, The Second
Oldest Profession (London 1986), pp. 57–72.
172. Ibid., pp. 57–8.
173. Quoted in T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 4, op. cit., p. 18.
174. See T. Cliff, Trotsky,
Vol. 2, op. cit., pp. 32–3.
175. G. Leggett, The Checka:
Lenin’s Political Police (Oxford, 1981), p. 21.
176. Ibid., pp. 30, 35–7, 177
177. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 138.
178. Ibid., p. 127.
179. Quoted in Knightley, op.
cit., p. 75.
180. See, for instance, W.H.
Chamberlin, Vol. II, op. cit., pp. 70–1.
181. G. Leggett, op. cit., pp. 130–31
182. Ibid., p. 197.
Leggett also cites S.P. Melgounov’s, The Red Terror in Russia.
But Leggett is quite wrong to describe Melgounov as a ‘respected
socialist politician’ (p. 185). Melgounov’s account is
partial and filled with unbalanced judgements. For example, ‘Not
for nothing do the three letters which stand for the title of the
All-Russian Extraordinary Commission of the Cheka stand also for the
three Russian words which denote “Death to every man”.’ (!), p. 41,
183. G. Leggett, op. cit., pp. 168–69
184. See G. Leggett, op. cit., pp. 176–82.
185. For instance the Cheka
executed prisoners the night before the death penalty was abolished
in 1920. See Mary McAuley, Bread and Authority: State and Society
in Petrograd 1917–1922 (Oxford, 1991), p. 391. The Cheka
also carried out executions by transferring prisoners to front line
areas when the death penalty was abolished in the rear during the
civil war. Further evidence that, unlike the White Terror, the Red
Terror was more severe the further it was from the leadership is
contained in McAuley, p. 386: ‘As in the French revolution ...
terror was worse in provincial towns ... than in capital cities. It
was the terrible provincial blood letting that caused the concern in
the party press of October–December 1918 ... the terror of September
and October provoked a reaction within the party and was tacitly
abandoned within a few weeks.
186. R. Pipes, op. cit., p. 792.
187. V. Serge, Year One ...,
op. cit., pp. 326–27.
188. Quoted in R. Medvedev, Let
History Judge (Oxford, 1989), p. 502.
189. Ibid.
190. See B. Kagarlitsky, op.
cit., p. 53.
191. Quoted in R. Medvedev, Let
History Judge, op. cit., p. 655.
192. Ibid., p. 654.
193. Lenin, Collected Works,
Vol. 28, p. 389.
194. G. Leggett, op. cit., p. 187.
195. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 139.
196. Quoted in G. Leggett, op.
cit., p. 162.
197. Ibid., p. 161
198. Ibid., p. 171.
199. Quoted ibid., p. 357.
200. Ibid., p. 188.
201. Quoted ibid., p. 189.
202. Ibid., p. 342.
203. Ibid.,p. 345.
204. R. Medvedev, Let
History Judge, op. cit., p. 656.
205. Ibid., p. 657.
206. Ibid.,p. 345.
207. Quoted in G. Leggett, op.
cit., p. 163.
208. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 364.
209. Ibid., p. 371.
210. Ibid., p. 364.
211. Ibid., pp. 372–73.
212. See T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 3, op. cit., p. 95.
213. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 358.
214. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 432.
215. S. Farber, op. cit., pp. 122–124.
216. W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., pp 468–70.
217. Ibid., p. 471.
218. Ibid.
219. M. Palij, The Anarchism of
Nestor Makhno (University of Washington Press, 1976), p. 177.
220. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 237.
221. Ibid., pp. 237–238.
222. See W. Bruce Lincoln, op.
cit., p. 327.
223. M. Palij, op. cit., p. 219.
224. Ibid., p. 214.
225. P. Avrich, Anarchist
Portraits (Princeton University Press, 1988), pp. 120–121.
226. Ibid., p. 120.
227. M. Armstrong, Nestor
Makhno: the failure of anarchism, in Socialist Review
(Australia), Summer 1990, No. 3, p. 114.
228. M. Palij, op. cit., p. 214.
229. Ibid., pp. 213–14.
230. P. Avrich, Anarchist
...,op. cit., p. 114.
231. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
op. cit., p. 236.
232. P. Avrich, Anarchist ...
,op. cit., p. 121.
233. See M. Palij, op. cit., p. 152.
234. W.H. Chamberlin, Vol. II,
pp. 234 and 232.
235. See F. Sysyn, Nestor
Makhno and the Ukrainian Revolution, in T. Hunczak (ed.),
The Ukraine 1917–1921, A Study in Revolution (Harvard
University Press, 1977), p. 290 n49. Makhno seems to have had
two ‘wives’. The one who headed the Punitive Commission is not
the one who kept the diary quoted earlier in the text.
236. D. Footman, Civil War in
Russia (London1961), p. 288.
237. Ibid., p. 282.
238. I. Getzler, Kronstadt
1917–1921 (London 1983), pp. 206–07.
239. See D. Fedotoff White, The
Growth of the Red Army (Princeton University Press, 1944), p. 154.
240. Ibid., p. 140.
241. Ibid., p. 142.
242. Ibid., p. 143.
243. S. Farber, op. cit., pp. 192–93.
244. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
opÃ. cit., p. 495.
245. P. Avrich, Kronstadt ..., p. 94–5.
246. Quoted in I. Getzler, op.
cit., pp. 209–10.
247. P. Avrich, Kronstadt ...,
op. cit., p. 68.
248. Ibid., pp. 63–6.
249. What We Are Fighting For,
in P. Avrich, ibid., pp. 242–43.
250. See P. Avrich,
Kronstadt ..., op. cit., p. 240.
251. Ibid., pp. 107, 121–22.
252. Ibid., pp. 110–11.
253. Ibid., pp. 127–28.
254. Quoted in T. Cliff, Lenin,
Vol. 4, op. cit., p. 134.
255. See P. Avrich, Kronstadt
..., op. cit., p. 222.
256. Quoted in T. Cliff, Trotsky,
Vol. 2, op. cit., p. 188.
257. Quoted ibid., p. 193.
258. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 479.
259. Indeed the situation was even
worse than this: of those who worked in factories most were in
administration, not ‘at the bench’.
260. Quoted in M. von Hagen,
Soldiers in the Proletarian Dictatorship (Cornell University
Press, 1990), p. 5.
261. R. Service, op. cit., p. 8.
262.Ibid., p. 208.
263. Ibid., pp. 127–28.
Quoted in T. Cliff, Trotsky, Vol. 2, op. cit., p. 136.
264. Ibid., p. 138.
265. Ibid., p. 137.
266. Quoted in W. Bruce Lincoln,
op. cit., p. 380.
267. S. Cohen, op. cit., p. 62.
268. M. Reiman, The Birth of
Stalinism (London 1987).
269. S. Cohen, op. cit., p. 52.
270. P. Hirst, op. cit., pp. 224–25.
 



A review of Christopher Hill, A Nation of Change and Novelty, Radical Politics, Religion and Literature in Seventeenth Century England (London, 1990), £30, and John Morrill (ed.), Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution (London, 1990), £8.95
We have waited some considerable time for Christopher Hill to enter the lists against the revisionist historians of the English Revolution. Of course Hill has taken the occasional potshot at the revisionists in articles and lectures, some of which form the basis for this book. But generally he seems to have stayed a little aloof, cultivating a disdain which still lingers in this book’s introduction where he claims, ‘we should not take these fashions too seriously: they go in cycles, and it is no doubt my age that makes me a little sceptical of latter-day “revisionist” historians who try to convince us that there was no revolution in 17th century England, or that if there was it had no long-term causes or consequences.’ [1]
But such dismissiveness is purely formal in a book whose whose object is to demolish the revisionist case in every area from economics to semantics. Such a coherent aim raises the book above the level of most collections of essays, including some of Hill’s own collections which his publishers have recently pushed at us with great frequency. This book has an impact much greater than the sum of its parts.
Hill begins with a robust defence of The place of the 17th century Revolution in English history, forcefully restating its longer term causes and consequences. Hill analyses how ‘Henry VII and Henry VIII reduced the power of the nobility; the gangs of retainers who used to terrorise the countryside added to the surplus agricultural labour created by the population explosion of the 16th century. There was no lack of personnel who could be employed in the merchant marine’ just at the time when, ‘as Bacon observed, the mariner’s compass opened up the world to European trade.’ [2]
But the monarchy was not the prime beneficiary of this weakening of the aristocracy, ‘Henry VIII’s ruinous French wars ... were paid for by the nationalisation and immediate privatisation of church property which might have financed ... the establishment of absolute monarchy.’ [3] The class which did gain from the Reformation were the gentry and yeoman farmers whose production was increasingly geared to the market: ‘The gentry whose forebears had plundered the monasteries were as reluctant to envisage the restoration of Catholicism as were more disinterestedly pious Protestants’. [4] Indeed, in spite of his revisionism John Morrill makes clear in the first essay of Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution that Cromwell was actually pushed down from the gentry into the yeoman farmer layer for a significant period before the revolution.
Despite his connection with ancient riches, Cromwell’s economic status was much closer to that of the ‘middling sort’ and urban merchants than to the county gentry and governors. He always lived in towns, not in a country manor house; and he worked for a living. [5]
It was the class from which Cromwell came, and especially their representatives in the Commons, who were growing rich through trade. ‘In the early 17th century parliaments a third of the members of the House of Commons held investments in overseas trading companies.’ [6] Cromwell was linked to these interests by a number of family ties.
A weak aristocracy, a weakened crown and a middling layer who were enriching themselves came into conflict over two questions. Taxation was one. The crown needed money and in the Reformation it had lost the one source which might have made it independent, the land. Consequently it taxed the new middle classes – and taxed them harder than its aristocratic kinsmen. It was, of course, one such tax, Ship Money, that became an immediate cause of the revolution. After the revolution it would be different. Then ‘taxes fell more heavily on the landed class and the poor than on the middling sort which had hitherto borne the main financial burden ‘ [7]
The second point of conflict was the state’s ability to protect key sources of the middling sort’s wealth, agrarian capitalist production at home and trade abroad. Catholic restoration threatened the first – a threat that seemed real enough while Europe was embroiled in the Thirty Years War. Foreign navies and privateers threatened the second. The state’s financial weakness meant that it was unable to counter either threat convincingly, a fact publicly proclaimed when ‘in the 1630s Charles I ordered English merchants to stay out of the Mediterranean because he could not protect them there. The road out of the depression of the thirties for the English clothing industry seemed to be blocked by the government’s weakness.’ [8]
Thus the state would not protect the emerging bourgeoisie unless it could tax them and the bourgeoisie would not be taxed unless it controlled the state. It was on this rock that attempts at compromise between Charles I and parliament consistently foundered. Once again, it was different after the revolution:
The Long Parliament declared taxation levied without the consent of Parliament illegal. Taxes particularly obnoxious to the monied men were abolished-monopolies, forced loans, arbitrary fines, impositions – and were replaced by taxes imposed by Parliament ... In 1651 the Navigation Act was passed, declaring the whole British empire a closed trading area, in which only English merchants were to trade, and to take the profits of trade ... [this] would depend on sea power. The Dutch were virtually monopolising trade with English colonies, and they had a powerful navy; their republic was run by and for merchants. Before 1640 no English government would have been capable of taking them on. Between 1652 and 1673 the Dutch were forced in three wars to accept the exclusion of their merchants from the British empire. [9]
The same kind of transformation that swept the state and foreign policy also affected the economy:
Abolition of feudal tenures had the effect of freeing big landowners from frequent but irregular death duties, heavy enough to disrupt long term agricultural investment. Production could now be planned; this is the basis of English agricultural prosperity in the late 17th and 18th centuries ... Agriculture became what Edward Thompson called England’s greatest capitalist industry: aristocratic and court privileges, landlords’ rights over rivers and so on, which were to delay capitalist advance in pre-revolutionary France and elsewhere, were minimal in England. [10]
Hill is at his best here, moving backwards and forwards between the period before and the period after the revolution to demonstrate its enormous impact. His touch has always been less sure when dealing with the. role played by ideology and consciousness in making the revolution. This may seem an odd claim to make against a historian who is famous for rescuing the ideas of the radical revolutionaries of the 1640s from the dismissive sneers of establishment historians. Yet although Hill remains wedded to ‘history from below’, and is clear on how the ideas of the revolutionaries sprang from the world around them he is less clear on how they in turn shaped that world. He says:
The revolution was not planned, not willed. Some historians think there can have been no revolution if it was not planned, just as all strikes are made by wicked agitators. But parliament did not make the Revolution; no one advocated it ... For that matter, neither the French nor the Russian Revolutions were willed in advance by anyone. By 1917 the Bolsheviks building on English and French experience, were able to take advantage of a revolutionary situation; but they did not make the Revolution. A revolutionary situation developed when the Tsarist state collapsed, just as the English state collapsed in 1640; and the Bolsheviks were prepared to take advantage of it. Great revolutions are not made by conspiratorial minorities. [11]
This starts from a correct premise, that revolutions are great class uprisings whose initial outburst cannot be consciously planned, but then seems to draw a number of false conclusions. These are: i) that the Bolsheviks were a ‘conspiratorial minority’ who simply ‘took advantage of’ an existing revolutionary situation, ii) the suggestion that it is possible to draw direct comparisons between bourgeois and workers’ revolutions, and iii) that no organised, conscious force of any description was present in the 1640s.
Firstly, the Bolsheviks were not a conspiratorial minority in October 1917. They commanded a majority in the Soviets and organised openly. Without such organisation it is highly unlikely that the revolution would have been successful. In this sense they did not simply ‘take advantage of the revolution’, they were an essential component in making it. They could only play such a role because they had predicted a revolution and built their party when they were a minority.
Secondly, because the working class is formed in a society which has far greater control over nature and over its own working than feudal society, because the working class is a collective class (unlike the bourgeoisie) and because the working class is an exploited class (again unlike the bourgeoisie), it has the capacity to form a clear, independent class consciousness in a way that was impossible for the bourgeoisie hence its capacity to create a scientific critique of society and a conscious revolutionary party.
Thirdly, does this then mean that there was no revolutionary leadership and no revolutionary ideology in the bourgeois revolution? Did Cromwell and the Independents simply react to events? Clearly this is wrong. Cromwell, the Independents, the Levellers and the army agitators did develop in the course of the revolution a clearer conception of their goals – a bourgeois republic. They did develop the organisation to achieve that end, the New Model Army. They did begin to theorise, or others who supported them, like Milton, did theorise about what they were doing.
In fact Johann Sommerville’s contribution to Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution is the book’s best essay precisely because it shows just how strongly the ideas of representative, democratic government had developed before the revolution and how quickly they came to dominate the thinking of the parliamentarians once the revolution was under way. He argues:
It is sometimes mistakenly suggested that the civil war lacked an ideological dimension, or that if it possessed such a dimension it was overridingly religious and not political or constitutional in character. In fact royalists generally claimed that the king ‘s power derived from God alone, while parliamentarians usually sought its origins in an act of transference by the people. [12]
These goals, organisation and theories were part of the parliamentarians’ ability to make a revolution. They necessarily expressed themselves in a pre-scientific language, often religiously but also (and this has been too little investigated) simply and pragmatically, as befits an already partly established business class. Nevertheless, they did, insofar as historical conditions would allow, make a revolution and made it to some degree consciously. At the very least they knew what they fought for far more clearly than the class which opposed them.
Hill is less sharp than he should be on these questions precisely because the popular frontism of his Communist Party days seems to have left him methodologically confused, unable to properly distinguish the defining characteristics of bourgeois and proletarian revolutions. This is a weakness which is embarrassingly obvious in his Lenin and the Russian Revolution.
Part of the difficulty in piecing together the ideology of the revolutionaries is that so much of what people thought about the state was driven underground. Hill is back on safer ground when he rounds on those historians who take state papers and official accounts at face value. As he says about the opposition to Ship Money, ‘Silence in public about the legality of the tax is no more evidence of approval than silence about the desirability of communism in Romania before 1989 was evidence that all Romanians were enthusiastic communists.’ [13]
Hill does much in his chapter on Political Discourse in Early 17th Century England to show that, although there was no pre-formed revolutionary ideology in England before 1640, there were emerging themes of resistance and opposition to the Stuart state that were common to many of the middling sort. Hobbes, for instance, recorded the lesson which London citizens took from the successful revolt of the Dutch: that ‘the like change of government would to them produce the like prosperity’. So some, perhaps, did look forward to revolutionary changes. What is more, they were apt to use the word ‘revolution’ to describe what they wanted.
Hill has done every historian of the revolution a service by establishing this fact in his chapter The word Revolution. Anyone reading about the English Revolution will very quickly come across the argument that there couldn’t have been a revolution since the 17th century knew no word to describe such an event. In the 17th century, the argument runs, revolution meant to turn full circle, not a dramatic change of government or a social transformation. Hill’s encyclopedic knowledge of the 17th century makes short work of this idea, citing authors in 1648-9 referring to ‘the revolutions and changes in government’. [14] In fact one feature of Hill’s style, irritating in other circumstances, is put to devastating polemical use here: he simply piles quotation upon quotation to show that the word revolution was used to mean sudden political change.
The same method also serves him well in his Abolishing the Ranters. This is a direct reply to J.C. Davis’s book, Fear, Myth and History: the Ranters and the Historians. Davis argues that the Ranters are a double myth. Firstly they were invented in the 17th century by royalists and other enemies of the radical sects as a kind of ‘red menace’, a stick with which to beat opponents. Secondly the Ranters were reinvented in the 20th century by left wing historians with a case to prove. Once again Hill piles up the quotations from those who were the Ranters’ friends and enemies (and from those who were neither) to prove their existence. Just for good measure he adds two postscripts on new proofs of the Ranters’ existence which have come to light since he wrote the original article.
If there were any justice Davis would be ashamed to appear in print again. Unfortunately he has contributed a chapter on Cromwell’s religion to Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution. Even more unfortunately Davis is no more enlightening about Cromwell than he was about the Ranters. By focusing narrowly on Cromwell’s personal religious experience and theological ideas, about which relatively little is recorded anyway, he gives himself plenty of room to speculate on issues of little importance. Luckily the really interesting questions about Cromwell’s religion, how it fitted in with the political tasks he was set to perform, are covered in the following chapter by Anthony Fletcher.
Fletcher is certainly no Marxist, but he is at least a good enough academic historian to provide some interesting insights. He shows how Cromwell saw the elect, God’s chosen people, as an embattled but enlightened minority on whose side God fought and to whom God’s providence would grant victory. And he goes on to show how this could be an effective source of revolutionary fortitude. He is surely right to conclude that Cromwell:
believed that, just as God had delivered the Israelites from slavery in Egypt and Babylon, so now God had chosen him to lead a new chosen people towards a new Jerusalem. In this sense his regime. from first to last, was bound to be intensely ideological. Yet Cromwell’s providentialism was always tempered by a sense of circumstances. It enabled him to pursue long-term goals but adapt to short-term exigencies. The dynamic of his regime was provided by the constantly shifting relationship between his personal spiritual ponderings and the unfolding of the political process. [15]
Strangely, this is a more dialectical approach than Hill is sometimes able to produce, even if its materialist moorings are less secure.
Overall, however, Morrill’s book does not bear close comparison with A Nation of Change and Novelty or indeed with Hill’s own splendid biography of Cromwell, God’s Englishman. Collectively the eight historians who write in Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution may provide the occasional insight which Hill has missed or a detail which he has overlooked – but to say that is to demonstrate Hill’s success, even in purely academic terms. And there is so much else in Hill which his competitors do not even attempt to match. There is his commitment to history from below, his efforts in two good chapters to integrate literary study with history, his refusal to be restricted by narrow academic specialism and his determination that history must speak to the present. In his final chapter, History and the Present, Hill politely (perhaps too politely) takes the Thatcher years to task – for censorship, for jingoistic history teaching, for ignoring the oppressed and exploited and devaluing their traditions of struggle. He concludes:
I have no big generalisations to offer about what history is or should be, and that is a properly sceptical conclusion. Let me try one from Nietzsche. He said that ‘history keeps alive ... the memory of the great fighters against history – the blind power of the actual.’ The past is going to have power over us anyway, but we need not be totally blind. Within limits we can co-operate with or oppose what seem to be the dominant trends. But that requires an understanding of history as a process, not just a bran-tub of anecdotes. [16]
He goes on to say it would be ‘nicer still if knowledge led to action’. Whatever Hill’s faults, those are better conclusions than many others have drawn at the end of the Thatcher era.

Notes
1. C. Hill, A Nation of Novelty and Change, London 1990, p. 1.
2. Ibid., p. 7.
3. Ibid., p. 8.
4. Ibid., p. 9.
5. J. Morrill, The making of Oliver Cromwell, in Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, London 1990, p. 22.
6. C. Hill, op. cit., p. 7.
7. Ibid., p. 10.
8. Ibid., p. 9.
9. Ibid., pp. 10–11.
10. Ibid., pp. 14–15.
11. Ibid., pp. 18–19.
12. J. Sommerville, Oliver Cromwell and English Political Thought, in Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, op. cit., p. 240.
13. C. Hill, op. cit., p. 43.
14. Ibid., p. 89.
15. A. Fletcher, Oliver Cromwell and the Godly Nation, in Oliver Cromwell and the English Revolution, op. cit., p. 212.
16. Hill, op. cit., p. 257.
 



Suddenly, after years where the only words used about Marx in the mainstream media insisted on his irrelevance to contemporary events, there is a revival of interest in Marxism. Recently the Independent on Sunday devoted the three page cover story of its review section to an article titled Was He Right All Along? touting Marx as ‘the next big thinker’ and insisting on the importance of his analysis of capitalism before concluding that ‘despite his errors, he was a man for whom our economic system held few surprises. His books will be worth reading as long as capitalism endures’. [1] The Financial Times paid tribute to ‘Marx’s extraordinary impact on the last century and a half’ and reminded its readers that ‘Marx was not only the harbinger of revolutionary hatred, but a shrewd, subtle analyst of capitalist society’. [2] This was the second time in a week that the Financial Times praised Marx. A few days earlier columnist Edward Mortimer quoted The Communist Manifesto to prove that ‘Marx and Engels described a world economy more like that of 1998 than 1848’. [3]
The 150th anniversary of The Communist Manifesto has been the occasion for many of these reappraisals of Marx. The Guardian ran a full page feature, half of which was an extract from Eric Hobsbawm’s introduction to the new Verso edition of the Manifesto. The other half was an account of the 1848 revolutions. [4] BBC2’s Newsnight chose to run the longest section of one evening’s programme on an assessment of the Manifesto [5] and even Marx’s daughter Eleanor gained some recognition in The Independent with an article commemorating the anniversary of her death. [6] This list, and it is not exhaustive, certainly testifies to a flurry of journalistic interest in Marx. [7] But is there anything more substantial to the revival of Marx than a passing fad among editors short of sensationalist copy?
In fact the rediscovery of Marx in the press was preceded for some years by a softening of attitudes towards Marx among some left academics. Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s postmodernism commanded an almost unqualified allegiance among left leaning academics. Marxism was rarely mentioned in anything but disparaging terms. Marx was said to be reductionist, determinist, authoritarian and worse. Any attempts at what Jean François Lyotard described as historical ‘grand narratives’ were said to be simply an attempt to project the subjective desires of the particular theorist onto a necessarily fragmented and atomised reality. The result of any attempt to act on such reductive theories could only be an authoritarian forcing of others to share in ‘discourses’ which were not their own. Such coercion would lead, ultimately, to the gulag.
A significant break in this theoretical anti-Marxist front came with the publication of postmodernist Jacques Derrida’s Specters of Marx in 1994. The book itself, based on earlier lectures, is a rambling, discursive stream of consciousness from which little of substantive interest can be rescued. Its significance lay in the simple fact that, beneath the verbiage, it seemed to transmit a message that a prodigal was returning:
… the Marxist inheritance was – and still remains, and so it will remain – absolutely and thoroughly determinate. One need not be a Marxist or a communist in order to accept this obvious fact. We all live in a world, some would say a culture, that still bears, at an incalculable depth, the mark of this inheritance ... [8]
And Derrida is not alone. In a recently published series of interviews conducted by Eva Corredor a number of prominent intellectuals reassess the influence of Marxism, particularly the Marxism of George Lukács, at the end of the 20th century. [9] Some are figures, like Terry Eagleton and Lukács’s biographer Michael Lowy, who have never sought to distance themselves from the Marxist tradition. Others, like Etienne Balibar, co-author with Louis Althusser of Reading Capital, were among those whose critique of Marxism paved the way for the triumph of postmodernism in the 1980s. Balibar now seems not only to be rekindling his interest in Marxism, but also to have developed a partial critique of his own earlier work. Balibar remembers that ‘in the sixties I would not read Lukács very much, mainly because of the influence of Althusser’. [10] He adds that:
… we were very opposed to any form of what we called a Hegelian interpretation of history, and we would see [Lukács’s work] as a form of return of Hegelianism into Marxism itself. Our idea, right or wrong, was that we should develop a critique or a new foundation of Marxism, not in that direction, but almost exactly in the opposite direction. So our great names were not Lukács and Korsch but Brecht, Levi-Strauss to some extent, and Freud above all. [11]
But Balibar, ‘at the other end of my career’, now records a significant shift in focus:
I am now and have for some time been in a process of re-evaluating the importance of Lukács in the intellectual history of the 20th century. To my own surprise, possibly because I was too ignorant, too naive, or too sectarian, I have now become aware of the fact that he is a very central figure, to say the least. [12]
Balibar’s reappraisal does not run to embracing the crucial notion of the working class as the subject of history, but it nevertheless marks a shift in emphasis back towards the central concerns of the classical Marxist tradition, founded by Marx and Engels and developed by Lenin, Luxemburg, Gramsci, Lukács and Trotsky. Other writers much further from this tradition than Balibar are also finding the 1990s to be a time in which it is useful to recall Marx. Writer Cornel West describes himself both as ‘a black Christian’ and as ‘deeply indebted to the Marxist tradition’. George Steiner, the model of an establishment intellectual, concludes an interview full of admiration for Lukács, with these sentiments:
If one has not read [Hegel’s] The Phenomenology of the Spirit, one is not of our time. And really read it, not just little post-deconstructivist idiocies about it ... The same is true of others. Not to have read The Eighteenth Brumaire, The Condition of the Working Class in England by Engels – very, very important – not to have read part of the Grundrisse, not to have read about the French Revolution, would be to deprive one of the masters of epic narrative and invectives, which is to have missed the turning point of modern history even while disagreeing totally. [13]
All this comes after a steady stream of books with titles like Marx at the Millennium, The Future of Socialism and Reinventing Socialism. [14] The Communist Manifesto anniversary has added to this current. Two of the more interesting and substantial pieces are Eric Hobsbawm’s introduction to the Verso edition and Colin Leys and Leo Panitch’s contribution to the special edition of the Socialist Register devoted to the Manifesto. [15]
The first sense in which these contributions are interesting is that they forcibly state one of the main reasons for the revival of interest in Marxism – the continued economic and political chaos of the global capitalist system in the late 20th century. Behind the ephemeral journalistic enthusiasms, the waning of postmodernist fashion and the convenient dual anniversaries of 1848 and 1968, lies the brute and inescapable fact of a world caught in the coils of instability first described in the Manifesto. This is the constantly repeated refrain in both media and academic commentary. The Guardian’s economics correspondent, Larry Elliott, even imagined, in an article called How the Next Depression Began, the possible effects of the next worldwide slump: ‘Did anybody emerge with any credit from this debacle? Well ... Karl Marx ... won hundreds of millions of new followers among the huddled masses ...’ [16] But mostly commentators reserve their praise for Marx’s ability to foresee the shape of the global economic crisis in advanced capitalism. Eric Hobsbawm expresses the common position:
… what will undoubtedly ... strike the contemporary reader is the Manifesto’s remarkable diagnosis of the revolutionary character and impact of ‘bourgeois society’. The point is not simply that Marx recognised and proclaimed the extraordinary achievements and dynamism of a society he detested – to the surprise of more than one later defender of capitalism against the red menace. It is that the world transformed by capitalism which he described in 1848, in passages of dark, laconic eloquence, is recognisably the world in which we live 150 years later. [17]
Leys and Panitch make the same point more directly:
Journalists can no longer speak, as they did in the 1980s, of ‘the business community’, as if it were some benign college whose interests were more or less identical to those of the nation as a whole; simply to stay credible they must now talk about ‘the corporate agenda’ and the threat capitalism (no longer a taboo word) poses to the environment, and about the problems of poverty and homelessness it is creating, the erosion of social security and the negative impact of the standards of health and education. [18]
And so they argue:
The tide of reaction is still flowing, but with diminishing confidence and force, while the counterflow of progressive feeling and ideas gathers strength but has yet to find effective political expression. As the contradictions of unbridled neoliberalism become increasingly plain, fewer and fewer people any longer mistake its real character. ‘Stubborn historical facts’ are breaking through the illusions fostered by neoliberal rhetoric – and equally through the pseudo-left illusions of ‘new times’, ‘radicalism of the centre’ and all similar dreams of a capitalist world miraculously freed from alienation, immiseration and crises. [19]
This turn of the tide has been gathering force during the 1990s, fuelled by the failure of the New World Order in the Gulf War and subsequently everywhere from the Middle East through the Balkans to Somalia and Rwanda. The failure of the Asian Tiger economies and the revolution in Indonesia are merely the latest, if also some of the greatest, chapters in the unravelling story of capitalism’s failure to live up to the bright future painted for it by its apologists in the wake of the collapse of the Stalinist states. The most important popular expression of this mood has been a series of mass strikes in many European countries, most importantly in France. Another has been the return, especially in Britain, of social democratic governments after many years of conservative dominance which has further raised hopes of a socialist revival.
The current ‘return to Marx’ is a product of these interlinked events. But, welcome as it is, this revival contains a number of crucial weaknesses which, if it is to be sustained and built upon, must be overcome. Firstly, the return to Marx is partial and selective. Marx’s analysis of capitalism is praised, but his belief in the revolutionary potential of the working class is denigrated nearly everywhere. Hobsbawm again provides a summary of the common argument:
… if at the end of the millennium we must be struck by the acuteness of the manifesto’s vision of the then remote future of massively globalised capitalism, the failure of another of its forecasts is equally striking. It is now evident that the bourgeoisie has not produced ‘above all ... its own gravediggers’ in the proletariat. [20]
It is not that Hobsbawm dismisses the working class as a political force altogether. He is willing to admit that the Manifesto was right in its ‘prediction of the central role of the political movements based on the working class’ and points out that ‘descendants of the social-democratic parties of the Second International, sometimes under their original names, are parties of government in all except two European states (Spain and Germany), in both of which they have provided the government in the past, and are likely to do so again’. [21] Such optimism about the prospects for reformism is an unacknowledged change in Hobsbawm’s analysis. He famously predicted in the 1980s, in the essay The Forward March of Labour Halted, that the erosion of the traditional working class would undermine the possibility of reformist parties repeating the electoral success they enjoyed before the Thatcher-Reagan era. That particular form of impressionism seems to have been dispelled by the electoral success of reformism in the 1990s.
Hobsbawm’s criticism of Marx is now specifically directed at the claim that the working class is a potentially revolutionary class. [22] Both Derrida’s rediscovery of Marx and Balibar’s rediscovery of Lukács founder on the same rock. Indeed the only interviewee in the Corredor collection who will defend the proposition that the working class is the agent of social change is Terry Eagleton. The incredulity with which this idea is received by his interviewer speaks volumes for how academically unfashionable this notion remains. [23]
Yet the revolutionary potential of the working class is an indispensable central tenet of Marxism. Indeed it was the theoretical recognition of this fact which was the founding moment of Marx’s distinctive analysis of capitalism. Many before Marx had pointed to the destructive nature of the capitalist system, not least the Utopian Socialists. And any number of social critics, radical sociologists and assorted reformers have done so since. What was and remains unique about Marx’s approach was that it insisted that working class self emancipation could provide an alternative to the barbarity of capitalism. Almost alone among recent commentators Leys and Panitch have some sense that the working class movement is still, in the words of the Manifesto, ‘the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interests of the immense majority’:
By the mid-1990s strikes in France, the USA and Canada once more occupied the front pages alongside reports of strikes in South Korea and ‘IMF riots’ throughout much of the Third World from Zimbabwe to Mexico. There was also a sharp rise in class awareness. Even the Economist noted, ‘Many commentators think that class is dying, but ordinary people are not convinced. In fact class antagonisms may even be worsening – the proportion believing that there is a ‘class struggle’ in Britain rose from around 60 percent in the early 1960s to 81 percent in the mid-1990s, according to Gallup ... [24]
The evidence for the vitality of the class struggle is, in fact, a good deal more substantial than this quotation suggests. There have, after all, been general strikes in Greece, Italy, Spain and Denmark in the mid-1990s. Moreover, there have been, on one calculation, mass political strikes in some 20 countries between 1994 and 1997. [25] Without a recognition of this fundamental revival in working class combativity and consciousness in recent years – notwithstanding all its continuing problems, weaknesses and limitations – it is difficult to see how those who are sympathetic to the revival of Marx can make any theoretical headway, let alone play any useful role in the development of the class struggle.
Secondly, the return to Marx is not a return to Marxism – that is, to the revolutionary Marxist tradition. Nothing exemplifies this more clearly than the very different fashions now affecting, on the one hand, Marx himself, and, on the other hand, the history of the Russian Revolution. The renewed interest in Marx may be a minority current even now. It may have important weaknesses. But it is, as we have seen, real enough. There is no such current, however shallow, willing to grant the same credence to the experience of the Russian Revolution or the work of Lenin. It is only sufficient to note that two of the most popular and widely praised historians of the Russian Revolution, both equally and violently anti-Bolshevik, are a former member of Ronald Reagan’s National Security Council, Richard Pipes, and a former colonel in the propaganda department of the Russian army, Dmitri Volkogonov. There is virtually no counter-current on the left. [26]
But without the recognition that Marxism is a tradition, those who wish to see its revival will be hamstrung. However far-seeing Marx and Engels were, they could not foresee the series of problems which the further development of capitalism placed in the path of the working class movement. The development of imperialism, mass reformism, Third World nationalism and Stalinism, to mention only the most obvious issues, pose problems which are almost impossible for modern Marxists to resolve unless they regard the work of Lenin, Luxemburg, Trotsky and Gramsci as part of a live, coherent and, for all the differences between its various representatives, unitary tradition.
Finally, the revival of interest in Marx is hampered by its proponents’ lack of any direct contact with the radicalised mood among the mass of workers. The renewed interest in Marx is still largely a phenomenon restricted to an older generation of intellectuals, often those first radicalised by 1968 and its aftermath. Although there are some signs of a younger generation keen to rediscover the Marxist tradition, they have yet to make a mark and often remain mired in the obscure modes of expression typical of an academic milieu much more cramped by ideological conservatism and funding restrictions than their predecessors. Previous generations of radicalised theorists mostly found their home in the various Communist Parties internationally or in one brand or other of left reformism. Both forces are much weaker now than they were 30, 20 or even ten years ago. Yet some organised connection will have to be remade with the working class struggle if the revival of Marxism is not to wither on the vine as a mere literary episode with no serious social consequences.
Yet it is on this issue that even the best of the current commentators on Marx are least certain. Socialist Register has always insisted that some sort of organised political link to the working class struggle is desirable, but has long argued that this could not take the form of a Leninist party. Leys and Panitch continue this tradition by paying tribute to the ‘brilliantly argued’ case of Sheila Rowbotham, Lynne Segal and Hillary Wainwright who, in the 1970s pamphlet Beyond the Fragments, criticised ‘the defects of the old parties and their sectarian offshoots’. [27] In fact Beyond the Fragments was a conspicuous failure: it did not lead to any new socialist grouping but it did provide an intellectual justification for a layer of former revolutionaries to either rejoin the Labour Party, initially its Bennite wing but later currents further right, or to drop out of politics altogether. And the current issue of Socialist Register leads with an essay by Rowbotham which resurrects many of the old canards, principle among them being that Marx was insufficiently feminist.
But Leys and Panitch, despite their praise of old allies, seem to sense that something more is now required by the revival of the workers’ movement. While claiming that the ‘original new left’s critique’ of Bolshevism ‘pointed in the right direction’, they explicitly cite ‘the failure of the new left either to transform the existing Social Democratic and Communist parties or to found viable new ones’. Furthermore they acknowledge that this led ‘a strong current of left wing opinion to give up on both socialism and the working class, in favour of a more diffuse, “decentred” conception of “radical democracy”’ and this ‘swept under the carpet the irreconcilability of democracy with private property’. [28] In response to this failure, Leys and Panitch call for a different form of socialist organisation:
What has always been missing – and this is now strongly felt by many social movement leaders themselves – is something that would be more than the sum of the parts, something which the Social Democratic and Communist parties did partly provide in their heyday ... These include providing activists with a strategic, ideological and educational vehicle; a political home which is open to individuals to enter (rather than restricted, as today’s social movement networking is, to representatives of groups); a political community which explicitly seeks to transcend particularistic identities while supporting and building on the struggles they generate. [29]
The problem with this description of socialist organisation, at least for people who reject Leninism, is that it could have been written by Lenin himself. Lenin’s model of the party was precisely designed to give a strategic and educational direction to the militants who joined it; it was specifically built with the intention of providing solidarity with the struggles of the exploited and oppressed and at the same time overcoming their particularistic character. And, if the revival of Marx is to have any practical effect on the working class struggle which he was the first to properly comprehend, such a party is necessary to fuse the movement of the day with the prospect of transforming society.

Notes
1. J. Cassidy, The Next Big Thinker, Independent on Sunday, 7 December 1997. This itself was a reprint of an article which originally appeared in The New Yorker.
2. P. Aspden, The Place Where All Workers are United, Financial Times, 28–29 March 1998.
3. E. Mortimer, Global Gloom, Financial Times, 25 March 1998.
4. 23 Pages that Shook the World, The Guardian, 28 February 1998. Verso claim some 125 newspaper stories in the US concerned with their edition of the Manifesto alone.
5. Newsnight, BBC2, 2 April 1998.
6. F. Evans, The Daughter of Modern Socialism, The Independent, 1 April 1998 – although the article itself was largely ill informed gossip about the domestic life of the Marx family.
7. Other pieces, for instance, by Charlotte Raven appeared in the Modern Review, and, by Barrie Clement in The Independent, 8 March 1998. The same paper returned to the theme a few weeks later insisting that it had never been more fashionable to be ‘red’ and that ‘now, more than ever, revolution is the ecstasy of history.’ Noting the waning of the postmodern fashion, Howard Byrom wrote, ‘The very instant you get a grip on Barthes, the chattering classes have switched to discussions of dialectical materialism’. H. Byrom, Commie des Garcons, Independent on Sunday, 29 March 1998.
8. J. Derrida, Specters of Marx (Routledge 1994), p. 14.
9. E.L. Corredor, Lukács After Communism, interviews with contemporary intellectuals (Duke University Press 1997).
10. Balibar, ibid., p. 116.
11. Ibid., p. 114.
12. Ibid., p. 117.
13. G. Steiner, ibid., p. 74.
14. C. Smith, Marx at the Millennium (Pluto Press 1996), W.K. Tabb (ed.), The Future of Socialism, Perspectives from the Left (Monthly Review Press 1990), H.J. Sherman, Reinventing Socialism (The Johns Hopkins University Press 1995).
15. C. Leys and L. Panitch, The Political Legacy of the Manifesto, in L. Panitch and C. Leys (eds.), Socialist Register 1998 (Merlin Press 1998).
16. L. Elliott, How the Next Depression Began, The Guardian, 30 March 1998.
17. E. Hobsbawm, Introduction to The Communist Manifesto (Verso 1998), pp. 15–16.
18. C. Leys and L. Panitch, op. cit., p. 19.
19. Ibid., p. 18.
20. E. Hobsbawm, op. cit., p. 18.
21. Ibid., p. 21.
22. Ibid.
23. E.L. Corredor, op. cit., 142.
24. C Leys and L Panitch, op. cit., p. 20.
25. K. Moody, Workers in a Lean World (Verso 1997), p. 10.
26. For an account, and refutation, of the left’s capitulation to the right wing historiography of the Russian Revolution see J. Rees et al., In Defence of October (Bookmarks 1997). See also M. Haynes, Social History and the Russian Revolution, in J. Rees (ed.), Essays on Historical Materialism (Bookmarks 1998).
27. C. Leys and L. Panitch, op. cit., p. 22.
28. Ibid., p. 40.
29. Ibid., pp. 22–23.
 



Revolutionary mass movements have challenged the existing order on three crucial occasions in the last decade. In 1989 the Stalinist regimes of Eastern Europe were demolished, in part by mass movements from below. At about the same time South African apartheid was destroyed by a mass movement, at the core of which stood the organised working class, led by the African National Congress. Most recently the 32 year old dictatorship of General Suharto was overthrown in Indonesia by a mass uprising spearheaded by a highly politicised student movement. But none of these revolutionary upheavals have been led by socialists and none have led to a challenge to capitalist social relations. Why? Is it because, as US State Department official Francis Fukuyama claimed after the revolutions of 1989, liberal democracy and capitalist economic relations are now the natural boundaries of historical change? Or are subjective factors, the strength and ideology of the left, the principal reasons why these movements failed to meet their potential?
This essay looks first at the period when the revolutionary challenge of the bourgeois revolution did indeed find its limit in the achievement of capitalist economic relations and a parliamentary republic. This is the era which runs from the English Revolution of 1649, through the American Revolution of 1776, to the French Revolution of 1789. Examination then turns to the great era when the organised working class made its appearance on the stage, raising the spectre of revolutionary change which could run beyond these boundaries and establish a socialist society. From Marx and Engels’ experience in the revolutions of 1848 to Lenin and Trotsky’s actions in 1917, an analysis is made of the way in which the unfinished business of the democratic revolution became fused in theory and in practice with the project of working class self emancipation.
But for all the great value that can be extracted from those occasions when workers became the principal directors of their own destiny, there have also been many occasions when they were not able to act in this way. Defeat has often robbed workers of this capacity, but so have political leaders within the working class who did not possess a strategy capable of releasing the potential for self liberation which working class struggle generates. Under these circumstances the dynamic of capital accumulation still produces great social crises which result in profound social transformations. The unification of Italy and Germany in the second half of the 19th century and the great wave of anti-colonial revolutions in the second half of the 20th century are examples. The role of a key layer of the middle classes in these latter transformations is examined in order to shed light on the conflict between the competing strategies of the socialist revolution and the democratic revolution, and their differing relationships to the wider class formations and conditions of capital accumulation in the revolutions of the last ten years.
The events of 1989 marked the end of an era in which Communist parties internationally carried the notion that working class movements in important parts of the world were excluded from the possibility of socialist revolution until after they had completed the tasks of the democratic revolution. But similar arguments continue to be advanced even without this agency promoting them, just as they arose in 1848 and 1917, long before the rise of Stalinism. Nevertheless, the absence of powerful Stalinist organisations reinforcing this ideological trend gives the socialist alternative a greater possibility of winning adherents than at any time since the early 1920s.
 
The classical bourgeois revolutions: England, America and France
The history of the great bourgeois revolutions can illuminate two crucial aspects of the modern relationship between the democratic revolution and the socialist revolution. Firstly, it can show with great force the radicalising dynamic which works at the heart of all revolutions. In all these revolutions those who made the revolution entered the conflict with a consciousness far removed from the notion of forcibly overthrowing the existing order. Only repeated internal crises in the revolutionary process eventually brought them face to face with this necessity. During this process of polarisation many individuals, indeed whole political organisations, moved dramatically from the left of the revolution to the right, or even from the revolutionary camp to the camp of counter-revolution.
This dynamic of radicalisation is as marked in the great proletarian revolutions as it is in the bourgeois revolutions. It is in this aspect that the similarities between the two are the most striking. But in the second comparison between the two sorts of revolution it is the contrasts which are most obvious. This concerns the differences between the socio-economic conditions under which the two sorts of revolutions take place: the bourgeois revolutions against a pre-capitalist social structure, the proletarian against a developed industrial capitalism. This framework ultimately governs the limits of the revolutionary process, providing the practical barrier in which the most radical programmes of the revolutionary movement find their limit. Both aspects of this process are clearly expressed in the history of the first of the great bourgeois revolutions, the English Revolution.
The English Revolution 1640-1688: Alexis de Tocqueville once said that ‘the most dangerous moment for a bad government is generally that in which it sets about reform’. [1] But the fate of Charles I shows that resistance to reform can be just as dangerous. It was Charles’s determination to retain, indeed to strengthen, the absolutist cast of his regime in the face of social and economic change which was the immediate cause of the revolution. Marx, referring to John Hampden’s refusal to pay the Ship Money with which Charles attempted to overcome the financial crisis of the state, put the point like this:
It was not John Hampden ... who brought Charles I to the scaffold, but only the latter’s own obstinacy, his dependence on the feudal estates, and his presumptuous attempt to use force to suppress the urgent demands of the emerging society. The refusal to pay taxes is merely a sign of the dissidence that exists between the Crown and the people, merely evidence that the conflict between the government and the people has reached a menacing degree of intensity. [2]
In the initial phase of the revolution, from the summoning of the Long Parliament by Charles I in 1640 to the outbreak of civil war in 1642, the broad parliamentary opposition polarised into those willing to take their resistance to the king to the point of armed conflict and those who would rather side with the king than countenance the threat to the existing order which civil war represented. But even in this first stage the beginnings of further polarisation are evident. For it was the London crowd, composed of the lowest levels of the ‘middling sort’ of small craftsmen and traders bolstered by servants and labourers, which drove the parliamentary resistance forward. And, by repulsion, they also obliged the king and his supporters to define themselves clearly as a reactionary political force. [3] This tripartite division is characteristic of bourgeois revolutions. The revolution is fundamentally a conflict between ‘the “rising” bourgeoisie and the established feudal or aristocratic class that it was seeking to displace from the levers of social and political control’. But, as George Rudé explains:
there is more to it than that: in each of these revolutions...there was also an additional popular element that was also struggling for a place in the sun... In the English Revolution of the 17th century, there were not only the leaders of Parliament and the New Model Army, the Presbyterians and the Independents (all broadly representative of the ‘bourgeois’ challenge), but also the Levellers, Diggers and lower class sectaries, who offered some sort of challenge in the name of other, ‘lower’, social groups. [4]
The divisions between the king’s supporters, the parliamentary leaders and the London crowd in the opening years of the revolution were the beginning of this process.
When civil war became a reality between 1642 and 1645 a further polarisation in the parliamentary ranks took place. This time it was between those who were willing to prosecute the war to the point of destroying the king and possibly the monarchy – the Independents grouped around Cromwell and Ireton – and, on the other side, the Presbyterians who only fought in order to weaken the king to the point where compromise once again became possible. Indeed, the Presbyterians claimed they were fighting for ‘king and parliament’. To these moderates Cromwell replied, ‘I will not cozen you with perplexed expressions in my commission about fighting for king and parliament. If the king happened to be in the body of the enemy, I would as soon discharge my pistol upon him as upon any private man’. [5] In this phase of the revolution the decisive act was Cromwell’s creation of the New Model Army, based on the experience of creating his own regiment of Ironsides. This was only possible by mobilising the lower orders of society. ‘I had rather have a plain russet coated captain that knows what he fights for and loves what he knows, than that which you call a gentleman and is nothing else’, as Cromwell put it. [6] But, having raised such forces, Cromwell was less content when they developed a political programme and an organisation of their own.
The third and final phase of radicalisation involved a further division in the parliamentarian ranks – indeed in the New Model Army, which emerged victorious from the civil war. The army itself became the key political body in the country after it defeated Charles at Naseby in 1645. London, the bank and armoury of the army, was the other key focus of political development. In both elements from amongst the very lowest of the bourgeoisie, the artisans, shopkeepers and small businessmen, and the ordinary soldiers, now formed organisations which mounted a political challenge to the strategy of the Grandees, the leading, and previously most radical, elements on the parliamentary side. The Levellers in London and the agents, or ‘agitators’ to use the contemporary term, elected by the mutinous regiments of the New Model Army increasingly operated as one. They developed in The Agreement of the People the most democratic programme seen during the English Revolution. In the debates held in Putney Church in 1647 these forces directly confronted their military commanders and social superiors in the original of all such great revolutionary exchanges. The Levellers and the agitators won the ideological argument, but lost the power play. This was in part because the king’s escape from captivity reunited the Grandees, the Levellers and the agitators in the second civil war.
Shortly before Charles’s execution, Leveller John Lilburne was summoned before Cromwell and his Council of State to account for the Levellers’ continued agitation in favour of their radical version of The Agreement of the People. Lilburne was, as ever, unyielding. He was told to retire, but from the next room he heard Cromwell say, ‘I tell you, sir, you have no other way of dealing with these men but to break them, or they will break you...and so render you to all rational men in the world as the most contemptible generation of silly, low spirited men in the earth, to be broken and routed by such a despicable, contemptible generation of men as they are, and therefore, sir, I tell you again, you are necessitated to break them’. [7] Cromwell proceeded to do just as he promised, and a few months later the Leveller mutiny in the army was crushed by Cromwell at Burford churchyard in Oxfordshire.
Nevertheless, these same developments and the remaining challenge from the left also forced the Grandees to abandon compromise with the king and embark on the road which led through regicide to the establishment of a republic. And at this time there was one last attempt to radicalise the revolution further: the Diggers’ dozen or so attempts, most famously at St George’s Hill in Surrey, to found ‘communist’ communities. As expounded by their best known spokesman, Gerrard Winstanley, the Diggers’ programme ran well beyond the democracy expounded by John Lilburne and the Levellers and raised the issue of social and economic equality. But if the social basis for the Levellers was shallow, the social basis for the Diggers was insufficient to sustain them as a movement, let alone underpin their programme and make it a viable project for the wider society. Certainly the moment was inauspicious: in 1649 the Levellers and agitators had been routed. But there was more to their rapid eviction by troopers and local gentry than bad timing. Even at the height of popular radicalisation there was no social class, because no underlying economic development had created such a class, which could provide a political actor capable of implementing the Diggers’ radical dream. Their bequest to radicals who came after them, down to our own times, is the dream of political, social and economic freedom, even though they lacked the means to realise it in their own time.
History is full of such intimations of the future by social movements and individuals alike. Leonardo da Vinci’s drawing of a ‘helicopter’ is one such magnificent presentiment of things to come, but hundreds of years of economic development were necessary before Leonardo’s drawing could become a practical proposition. So it was with the Diggers. Nevertheless, we do not turn our back on the genius of Winstanley any more than we would on the genius of Leonardo. We look to combine their image of the future with what we now know to be the material means of making the image real.
The American Revolution 1776-1786: In the American Revolution of 1776 we see the same process of radicalisation taking hold during the course of the revolution, but the colonial relationship with Britain gave the forces and phases of revolutionary development a significantly different character. To begin with, the underlying economic causes of the American Revolution are partly to do with the economic development of the colonies, but the crisis itself cannot be understood in isolation from how this growth interacted with the imperial policy of Britain.
In 1763 Britain emerged victorious from its war with France for control of the North American colonies. But war debts concentrated the minds of the British ruling class on regaining full control of its colonial possessions and imposing new taxes. In 1764 the Currency Act and the Revenue (or Sugar) Act aimed to make colonial merchants pay in sterling rather than their own coin, and to slap duty on imported sugar even when, as had not previously been the case, it came from other parts of the British Empire. In 1765 the Stamp Act ruled that any transaction specified by the act was illegal unless the appropriate stamp was purchased. Legal, church, political and commercial documents, passports, dice and playing cards, books, newspapers and advertisements were all subject to taxation under the act. Furthermore, there was a directly political side to the act. Money raised under the act would stay in the colonies but would be directly under the control of Britain’s appointed governors, not, as before, the colonial assemblies. Here was the origin of taxation without representation.
Even before the Stamp Act, a coalition of merchants, professionals and slaveowners together with artisans, labourers, farmers, servants and sailors had emerged to oppose Britain. At first their pamphlets and speeches were cautious, but they grew bolder – graduating from resistance to revolution and from protest to a war for independence – with each imperial crisis. Resistance to the Stamp Act was the first phase of radicalisation. A Stamp Act Congress brought nine colonial delegates to New York City to pass strongly worded resolutions and addresses to the king. But in the towns from which the delegates came, tax collectors were being tarred and feathered by angry crowds, protesters gathered at the foot of ‘Liberty trees’, and collective political organisations, the Sons of Liberty, sprang into being. The first of the various Sons of Liberty organisations were the Loyal Nine of Boston, and among their members were a printer, a brazier, a painter and a jeweller. These artisans were joined by men like Sam Adams and, later, Tom Paine, intellectuals whose lives were closely intertwined with those of the artisans, but who were able to command both the respect and fear of the merchants and slaveowners of the revolutionary coalition.
The popular movement in America emerged sooner and reached its peak earlier in the revolutionary process than in the English Revolution. Colonial society allowed far greater freedom to speak, write and organise than did Stuart England before the summoning of the Long Parliament. Loyalism to Britain was probably weaker than loyalism to Charles I, and American revolutionaries had the English Revolution on which they could model their movement. In the upper reaches of the revolutionary coalition John Locke’s theories of representative government, and of the population’s ultimate right to revolt against tyrannical authority, were invoked. But at the plebeian end of the spectrum thoughts also turned back a century or so. Many of the colonies were originally peopled by Puritan refugees from Stuart tyranny and later by Cromwell’s troopers. In 1774 one ‘Joyce, Jun’ appeared as ‘Captain’ of the ‘Committee for Tarring and Feathering’ in Boston, where most inhabitants would have caught the reference to the officer who took Charles I prisoner in 1647. About the same time farm families were frequently calling their newborn boys Oliver, to make plain their admiration of Charles’s nemesis. [8]
Popular mobilisation defeated the Stamp Act, which was repealed the year after it was introduced. But Britain was by no means finished with the American colonies. Just as the Stamp Act was repealed the Declaratory Act was passed, insisting that Britain could ‘make laws ... to bind the colonies and people of America...in all cases whatsoever’. [9] In 1767 the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Charles Townshend, passed acts taxing paint, paper, lead, glass and tea. Colonial America responded with a tax strike which ran until 1770. Throughout this period popular mobilisations continued. They culminated in the event which precipitated the repeal of the Townshend duties, the Boston massacre of 5 March 1770. British Redcoats opened fire on an angry crowd of protesters, killing five of them. The dead give an accurate social cross-section of the movement: an African-Indian sailor, a ship’s mate, a leather maker, a rope maker and an ivory turner’s apprentice. Their deaths helped to cement the lower levels of the revolutionary alliance to their leaders.
The movement deepened and radicalised. And it did so again after the Boston Tea Party in December 1773, when protesters disguised as Mohawk Indians dumped tea, the one remaining commodity subject to Townshend duties, from ships into Boston harbour. Even before the Continental Congress met in 1774, Committees of Correspondence staffed by the same sort of people – indeed often by the very same individuals – who had formed the Sons of Liberty to resist the Stamp Act a decade earlier, carried the newly revolutionary message throughout the colonies.
By 1775 the committees had replaced the ruins of royal government as the effective power in the colonies, transacting ‘all such matters as they shall conceive may tend to the welfare of the American cause’. Committees raised militias, organised supplies, tried and jailed the revolution’s enemies and began to control goods and prices. They called mass meetings to ‘take the sense of citizens’, and they frustrated Britain’s plans to regain control by calling an election for a provincial assembly by ensuring that radicals won. In January 1776 Tom Paine published a revolutionary manifesto, Common Sense, which used the plain language of ordinary artisans and farmers to urge the movement on to a final break with Britain. It sold 150,000 copies and its arguments were repeated wherever revolutionaries met to convince others that establishment resistance must give way to independence.
This decade long radicalisation could not help but alarm the elite figures who tried to stay at the head of resistance to Britain, even as they realised that Britain could not be beaten without such popular agitation. The War of Independence helped them to keep this movement within bounds. Unlike the conflict of 1642-1645 in England, this was not a civil war but a colonial war for independence from Britain. Consequently, the effect of the war was not to further polarise the revolutionary camp, as it had done the New Model Army or would do during the French Revolution, but rather the opposite. In the decade of popular protest which preceded the American War of Independence, class antagonism against the rich of colonial America ran along the same courses as fury at Britain. Once war broke out, the Colonial Army under George Washington increasingly replaced the guerrilla methods of the first battle at Lexington with regular army discipline enforced by the rich and powerful who dominated the officer corps. By contrast, the creation of the New Model Army required the ‘internal coup’ of the self denying ordinance against the aristocrats who had stayed with parliament, and the fact that the war was fought against fellow Englishmen fuelled social radicalism.
Popular disaffection with the war was, if anything, greater in America than in England, although in both cases some felt, wrongly but understandably, that it was a ‘rich man’s war’ which would change little regardless of who won. Daniel Shays, a poor farm hand and former soldier, led a rebellion in 1786 which briefly raised the spectre of renewed popular radicalism. The rebels used the same tactics that had proved so effective against Britain, gathering in arms to close the local court house. But now their allies of 1774, the Boston radicals, were divided. Some, allied with conservative merchants, ran the state government and sent loyal militiamen to scatter the Shaysites. Sam Adams was one such, helping to draw up a Riot Act and to suspend habeas corpus and so allow the authorities to keep prisoners in jail without bringing them to trial. One defeated Shays supporter pleaded, ‘Tis true I have been a committeeman,’ but, ‘I am sincerely sorry ...and hope it will be overlooked and pardoned’. [10] Unmoved by such sentiments, Adams argued, ‘In a monarchy the crime of treason may admit of being pardoned or lightly punished, but the man who dares rebel against the laws of a republic ought to suffer death’. [11] The Shays Rebellion never developed either the programmatic clarity of The Agreement of the People nor the political weight of Lilburne’s organisation. Nevertheless, the parallel with the defeat of the Levellers at Burford is obvious.
The triumphant ruling class, led by the Federalists Alexander Hamilton and James Madison, moved to create a strong unitary state. They, like Cromwell, were successful for a decade before the restoration of the monarchy gave power back to the social centre of the ruling class. In Britain power came to an alliance of landowners and the bourgeoisie; in America to slaveholding landowners and, in a subordinate position, the predominately Northern bourgeoisie. But neither conservative dominated coalition would or could return to the pre-war settlement. And in both cases the bourgeoisie asserted itself within this more conducive framework in the longer run. In England in 1689 the ruling class frustrated renewed Stuart attempts at establishing monarchical power, and by 1832 the industrial bourgeoisie established complete hegemony over its old landowning partner. In America the epilogue was more dramatic than the prologue. The second American revolution, fought as the American Civil War, utterly crushed the power of the Southern landowning slaveocracy.
The French Revolution 1789: The French was the greatest and most complete of all the bourgeois revolutions, involving the mass of the population on a scale far greater than either the American or even the English Revolution. [12]
The Declaration of the Rights of Man ... set forth human and national rights with a feeling for their universality far surpassing the empirical statement of liberties made by the English Revolution of the 17th century. Similarly the American Declaration of Independence, although couched in universal language and natural law, still contained limitations restricting the application of its principles. The bourgeoisie who formed the Constituent Assembly believed that their work was grounded in universal reason, and the Declaration expressed this clearly and forcefully. [13]
One reason for the unique depth and breadth of the French Revolution was that the bourgeoisie’s cumulative experience of challenging the old order fed into French events. Thomas Jefferson was actually in Paris when the Declaration of the Rights of Man was written. Tom Paine and Lafayette, ‘the hero of two continents’, joined the revolution, although significantly both were on its moderate wing. More broadly, the French, like the Americans a decade or so before, drew on the political theory of John Locke and the Enlightenment tradition which owed so much to the impulse of the English Revolution.
But these direct and indirect ideological influences were not the main reason for the great reach of the French Revolution. The fundamental causes lay in the social and economic conditions under which the revolution took place. France was a much more economically advanced society at the time of its revolution than either England in the 1640s or America in the 1770s. Indeed, in 1789 in France the proportion of national product coming from industry and commerce (18 percent and 12 percent respectively) were similar to England and Wales at the same time. Even the proportion of national income coming from agriculture, at 49 percent, was only 9 percent higher than the figure for England and Wales. [14]
Yet this is only half the story. France’s social and political development, unlike Britain’s, stood diametrically opposed to its economic progress. France’s class structure and the shape of its state remained caught in the long shadow of feudalism. The monarch’s absolutist pretensions overawed most of the bourgeoisie (and even some of the aristocracy). But the most important dividing line ran between the aristocracy as a whole and the rest of society, whose leading non-noble element was the bourgeoisie. Abbé Sieyes’ famous pamphlet What Is The Third Estate?, the initial manifesto and rallying call of the bourgeoisie, complained:
all the branches of the executive have been taken over by a caste that monopolises the Church, the judiciary and the army. A spirit of fellowship leads the nobles to favour one another in everything over the rest of the nation. Their usurpation is complete; they truly reign. [15]
This was no exaggeration: only nobles could be bishops or officers in the army. Nobles were exempt from taxes, which fell most heavily on a peasantry treated as little more than beasts of burden. Some historians have balked at describing French society before the revolution as feudal because some of the features of the high feudalism of the Middle Ages had already disappeared. But this is to miss the point made so clearly by de Tocqueville at the time:
Feudalism had remained the most important of our civil institutions even after it had ceased to be a political institution. In this form it aroused still greater hatred, and we should observe that the disappearance of part of the institutions of the Middle Ages only made what survived of them a hundred times more odious. [16]
It was the intensity of the contradiction between the economic development of France and the unreconstructed nature of its social structures which underpinned the scale of the French Revolution. In the final analysis the bourgeoisie, often far from willingly or enthusiastically, found that the intransigence of the old regime was so great that they had to rouse far greater numbers of the small bourgeoisie, and the ordinary people and the peasants below them, if they were to be victorious. Yet in 1789 no leader of the French bourgeoisie realised how great a struggle would be needed to vanquish the old order, any more than Hampden or Adams had done before them. Once again, only successive crises and successive renewals of the revolutionary leadership revealed the full extent of what would be necessary to accomplish the revolution.
At first it even seemed as if sections of the aristocracy might be willing to participate in the work of reforming the old order. But by the time the king was forced to call the Estates General on 5 May 1789 the challenge of this ‘aristocratic revolution’ had run its course. In this first internal crisis the Third Estate nominally represented the whole of the non-noble, non-clerical nation. In fact they represented the bourgeoisie. Of the 610 delegates of the Third Estate, the biggest single element (25 percent) were, as in so many capitalist parliaments since, those professionally engaged in advocacy for the wealthy: lawyers. Some 13 percent were actually manufacturers; another 5 percent were from the professions; only 7 to 9 percent were agriculturalists. [17]
The Third Estate declared itself the leadership of what, at this stage, remained an attempt to force the king into reform without destroying the entire ruling institutions of society. The first radicalisation of the revolution took place as a minority of the Third Estate joined the majority of the clergy and the aristocracy to work for compromise. And, despite the fall of the Bastille and the first eruption of the peasant struggle which deepened the revolution at every turn, the remaining majority of the Third Estate, now renamed the Constituent Assembly, still searched for agreement with its enemies.
The king’s flight to Varennes on 21 June 1791 made it clear to even the most ardent compromiser that no such agreement was possible. The nobility now fomented open counter-revolution at home and conspired with the crowned heads of Europe to wage war from abroad, hoping that the experience of war would unite the nation behind the traditional ruling class. ‘Instead of civil war, we shall have war abroad, and things will be much better’, wrote Louis XVI. [18]
The popular response to this threat took not only the aristocracy but also the existing leadership of the revolution by surprise. In 1792 the popular mobilisation against the threat of counter-revolution within and without sealed the fate of the monarchy and marked a further radicalisation of the revolution. The Girondins, named after the region of France they came from, insisted that the ‘passive citizens’, the lower orders of ordinary people, now be called upon to defend the nation and the revolution. But the mobilisation of the popular masses under the banner of the sans culottes and the enragés brought with it demands which the Girondins could not countenance. In Paris in May 1792 the ‘red priest’ Jacques Roux demanded the death penalty for hoarders of grain; a year later he was insisting, ‘Equality is no more than an empty shadow so long as monopolies give the rich the power of life and death over their fellow human beings’. [19] This message was carried through Paris by means of direct democracy: the assemblies and meetings of administrative ‘sections’ of the city, the associated political clubs and left wing newspapers.
Under pressure from the aroused small bourgeoisie, journeymen and labourers, and the continued peasant risings, divisions emerged between the Girondins and the Mountain, the left wing deputies led by the Jacobins, so called because they occupied the upper tiers in the National Assembly. Fearful of the movement they had called into existence, the Girondins stood aside from the revolutionary movement of 10 August 1792 which overthrew the monarchy and the restrictive electoral system. It was a fatal abstention, and the fate of Girondins was sealed along with that of the king.
The Jacobins were the recipients of the laurels of 10 August. But the Jacobins themselves relied on the support of two different class fractions, the small bourgeoisie and the artisans on the one hand, and the day labourers and journeymen whom they employed, the sans culottes, on the other. The sans culottes had their own organs of mobilisation in the Paris sections which only in part overlapped with those organisations, like the Jacobin Club and its affiliates, which were more or less fully under the control of the bourgeoisie. This alliance, and the popular mobilisation which underlay it, reached its high point in 1793–1794.
By 1793 the Jacobin revolutionary government finally constructed itself in such a way that it was capable of effectively and definitively dealing with its aristocratic enemy, in part by granting the popular demand for a law setting maximum prices for essentials (and also for wages). But at the very moment of victory the alliance between the Jacobins and the sans culottes, which made victory possible, fell apart. On the 22 June 1793 Jacques Roux spoke at the radical Cordeliers Club, demanding the punishment of speculators:
If that article was not in the constitution ... we could say to the Mountain; You have done nothing for the sans culottes, because it was not for the rich that they fight, it is for liberty ... We adore liberty, but we do not want to die of hunger. Suppress speculation and we have nothing more to ask.
At the same meeting another enragé, Jean Varlet, added:
The sans culottes of Paris, Lyons, Marseilles and Bordeaux ... alone comprise the people; we must thus establish a line of demarcation between the shopkeeper, the aristocrat and the artisan; the first two classes must be disarmed ... tomorrow the people must triumph, tomorrow we must finish our work. [20]
Even the Jacobins could not allow either an economic programme which limited the bourgeoisie in this way, or a redefinition of ‘the people’ which rested on sans culottes alone and thereby excluded the section of the bourgeoisie on which the Jacobins predominately relied. ‘It is hardly surprising,’ notes George Rudé, ‘that the political ideas and social aspirations of such men should differ in important respects from those of proprietors, lawyers, doctors, teachers and businessmen who sat in the Convention or even from those of the smaller lawyers, tradesmen, and civil servants who predominated in the provincial Jacobin clubs and societies’. [21]
The sans culottes posed a danger to the French bourgeoisie greater than that posed by the Levellers to Ireton and Cromwell. The Levellers spoke of a radical form of petty bourgeois democracy, and so did the sans culottes. But the sans culottes raised the spectre of economic equality far more consistently and insistently, even if in a backward looking form. There was no equivalent of the laws of the maximum prices in the English Revolution. But even this was not the main distinction between the Levellers and the sans culottes. The differences lay not in the demands or the programmes of the Levellers and the sans culottes, but in the social forces which these political designations represented.
The Levellers were an organisation of the petty bourgeoisie in fact as well as in aspiration. Their leaders were never much troubled by any distinctive element contributed by those of the lower classes who chose to follow their banner. Nor had larger capitalists developed to the degree that they had in France, and therefore the distinction of interest between these different layers of the bourgeoisie was not so sharp.
Not so the sans culottes. They united petty bourgeois and craft workers in one organisation at a time when these layers found themselves pitted against a more developed layer of bigger capitalists. The sans culottes could not form a working class organisation, because this class did not yet have the capacity to frame its own demands and form its own movements. But they were an organisation which channelled the economic desperation of the common people, the wage labourers, journeymen and artisans who did not own the capital, even in the small amounts, which would have allowed them to count amongst the humblest of the bourgeoisie. Albert Soboul writes:
Falling under the province of the popular classes through their conditions of existence and often their poverty, the artisans nonetheless possessed their own workshops, their little sets of tools and were looked on as independent producers. Having journeymen and apprentices under them and under their discipline accentuated their bourgeois mentality. But the attachment to the system of small production and direct sale opposed them irredeemably to the bourgeoisie. Thus among the artisans and shopkeepers who formed the bulk of the sans culottes movement and with whom the bourgeois revolution must end, there arose a social ideal in contradiction with economic necessities. [22]
The sans culottes wanted restrictions on capitalist wealth and a republic of small proprietors; but they were small capitalists themselves (or under the influence of small capitalists) and could hardly constrain the accumulation of capital with any consistency. They demanded that they be kept in work and their wages be protected; but this only gave confidence to the journeymen whom they employed. Thus ‘the demands of this class of artisans and shopkeepers were sublimated in passionate complaints, in spurts of revolt, without ever specifying a coherent programme’. [23]
As yet there was no class developed enough to provide the social base on which a coherent anti-capitalist programme could rest. The journeymen and wage workers were still mainly dispersed in small workshops with little division of labour, not clearly differentiated from the peasantry from which they sprang. Strikes predated the revolution, but no wider political programme was yet developed from this experience. Certainly journeymen and wage workers participated in the revolution as part of its most radical wing, but they did so under the political programme of their masters:
The revolutionary vanguard was not composed of factory workers but ... an alliance of small employers and the journeymen who lived and worked with them. This mixed social composition gave the popular movement ... a series of contradictions that derived from its inherent ambiguity. The workers’ view of the world was dominated by that of the petty bourgeois craftsman, which was ultimately that of the bourgeoisie. Thus workers did not form an independent group either in the realm of thought or action. They failed to realise the connection between the value of their labour and the level of their wages ... they had not fully realised the social function of labour. [24]
The leadership of the Jacobins, who perhaps form a more accurate French counterpart to the Levellers, found in the sans culottes a force they could employ in a way which their forerunners in 1647 did not, as a result of the greater economic development of France. And they also found greater need to make use of such a force as a result of the entrenched and determined resistance of their aristocratic enemy, less weakened by partial integration into capitalist economic development than the English aristocracy of the previous century. But, even for the most radical bourgeois democrats, the alliance with the sans culottes was a pact with the devil. And they reacted against it, even more furiously than Cromwell reacted against the Levellers, as soon as its necessity had passed.
The effect was similar in both cases, but the consequences followed more swiftly and decisively in the French case. Deprived of its most radical support, the revolutionary government became prey to its enemies on the right. Cromwell had ten years, and the full term of his life, before counter-revolution repaid him for the suppression of the Levellers. Robespierre survived a matter of months before Thermidor (as the month was called in the new revolutionary calendar, 27 July 1794 in the old calendar) repaid him for the suppression of the sans culottes. The Thermidorians introduced their new constitution with a familiar cry, first heard from Henry Ireton in the Putney Debates and later theorised by Thomas Hobbes, now uttered by ‘the champion of the new rich’, Boissy d’Anglas:
We must be governed by the best men; those most suited to govern are men of good education and endowed with a great concern for the maintenance of order. You will rarely find such men outside the ranks of the propertied ... A country governed by men of property belongs to ‘the social order’ whereas one governed by men of no property reverts to a ‘state of nature’. [25]
The radical left once again enjoyed a bright but brief Indian summer. In the footsteps of Winstanley and Shays came Babeuf. But this ‘revolution after the revolution’ was, again, different to its forerunners. If the sans culottes’ programme ultimately expressed a nostalgic reaction of a half emerged artisan working class to the contradictions of capitalism, then Babeuf’s Conspiracy of Equals came close to connecting a utopian vision of communism, which gave it some continuity with the Diggers, with a class of wage workers far more developed than that in 17th century England. Moreover, in the Conspirators’ organisation, despite the misleading indications of their title, the first dim outlines of modern working class political organisation can be traced. [26]
 
What changed in 1848?
Even before the outbreak of the 1848 revolutions Marx and Engels were clear on two points. The first was that the coming revolution would be a bourgeois revolution; that is, it would herald a capitalist state, hopefully democratic and republican in form. The second was that the bourgeoisie would have to be pushed to a decisive settling of accounts with the old order, since the growing strength of the working class made them fearful that unleashing the full power of the revolution would sweep them aside along with the feudal state. For Marx and Engels the revolution in Germany would be ‘carried out under far more advanced conditions of European civilisation, and with a much more developed proletariat, than that of England in the 17th, and of France in the 18th century’, and would therefore be ‘the prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution’. [27]
Thus in the early stages of the revolution Marx and Engels fought as the furthest left wing of the democratic revolution. But even The Communist Manifesto, written before the outbreak of the revolution, urged that although the working class should ‘fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary way’, socialists should also ‘instil into the working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat’. [28] Marx and Engels’ approach at the start of the revolution was ‘to spur on the bourgeoisie from an independent base on the left, organising the plebeian classes separately from the bourgeoisie in order to strike together at the old regime, and to prepare this democratic bloc of proletariat, petty bourgeoisie and peasantry to step temporarily into the vanguard should the bourgeoisie shows signs of cold feet, by analogy with the Jacobin government in France of 1793–1794’. [29]
But this position was significantly altered by Marx and Engels as the 1848 revolutions developed. For the first three months of the German revolution it looked as though the bourgeoisie, though irresolute, might be pushed into decisive action. But the longer the revolution went on, the more timid and paralysed the bourgeoisie became. By the time of the ‘June Days’ all the exploiting classes, including the bourgeoisie and most of their democratic spokesmen, were ranged on the side of reaction. Marx and Engels were increasingly driven to the conclusion that only the exploited classes, the workers and the peasants, could drive the revolution forward. As Marx wrote in his paper, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, whose bourgeois backers were abandoning it because of its radical stance:
The German bourgeoisie developed so sluggishly, so pusillanimously and so slowly, that it saw itself threateningly confronted by the proletariat, and all those sections of the urban population related to the proletariat...at the very moment of its own threatening confrontation with feudalism and absolutism ... The Prussian bourgeoisie was not, like the French bourgeoisie of 1789, the class which represented the whole of modern society ... It had sunk to the level of a type of estate ... inclined from the outset to treachery against the people. [30]
Faced with far greater treachery on the part of the bourgeoisie than they had at first expected, Marx and Engels altered their strategic position. Marx and Engels now concluded that independent action on the part of the working class and a more critical stance, on tactical issues as well as theoretical ones, toward the bourgeois democrats was essential. Marx’s explanation of the attitude of the workers to the democrats is of great relevance:
The workers must drive the proposals of the democrats to their logical extreme (the democrats will in any case act in a reformist and not a revolutionary manner) and transform these proposals into direct attacks on private property. If, for instance, the petty bourgeoisie proposes the purchase of the railways and factories, the workers must demand that these railways and factories simply be confiscated without compensation as the property of reactionaries. If the democrats propose a proportional tax, then the workers must demand a progressive tax; if the democrats themselves propose a moderate progressive tax, then the workers must insist on a tax whose rates rise so steeply that big capital will be ruined by it; if the democrats themselves demand the regulation of state debt, then the workers must demand national bankruptcy. The demands of the workers thus have to be adjusted according to the measures and concessions of the democrats. [31]
As the revolution developed, political divisions within the revolutionary camp based on underlying class differences began to harden:
It is the fate of all revolutions that this union of different classes, which in some degree is always the necessary condition of any revolution, cannot subsist long. No sooner is the victory gained against the common enemy than the victors become divided amongst themselves into different camps and turn their weapons against each other. It is this rapid and passionate development of class antagonism which, in old and complicated social organisms, makes revolution such a powerful agent of social and political progress. [32]
In response to this polarisation Marx urged revolutionaries to concentrate on the independent political organisation of the working class, confident that the more powerful this became the more it would push the bourgeois democrats to the left whether they are in government or not. Marx hoped the movement of workers could become so strong that it could result in a revolution against the liberal democrats. Marx now believed, as he did not clearly believe before the 1848 revolutions, that this would be a socialist revolution.
It was this new perspective which led him to conclude that, since the state apparatus is not a neutral body that can simply be passed from one class to another, the working class must concentrate on building up its own state apparatus alongside and in opposition to that of the propertied classes. Organisations such as strike committees, local delegate bodies of workers and mass meetings will emerge from the struggle against the old regime. Where conditions of struggle allow, these will involve the formation of workers’ militias, armed with what they are able to find or to take from the armed forces of the state. Marx described these ‘counter-state’ organisations as ‘revolutionary local councils’ or ‘revolutionary workers’ governments’, and they cannot coexist with the bourgeois state for long without a decisive settling of accounts in which either the workers will smash the state or the state will smash the organs of workers’ power:
The German workers...must contribute most to their final victory, by informing themselves of their own class interests, by taking up their independent political position as soon as possible, by not allowing themselves to be misled by the hypocritical phrases of the democratic petty bourgeoisie into doubting for one minute the necessity of an independently organised party of the proletariat. Their battle-cry must be: the Permanent Revolution. [33]
Thus we see that the perspective of permanent revolution did not originate with Trotsky in 1906, but with Marx in 1850. Here is the origin of the idea that there should be, from the beginning of the revolution and even while a workers’ party is supporting ‘democratic demands’, a strategic perspective of independent working class socialist organisation, aiming first at the creation of dual power and then at a socialist revolution.
 
The bourgeois revolution from above
The 1848 revolutions definitively brought to a close the epoch in which the bourgeoisie were willing and able to act as a revolutionary class. After this date there were no more attempts by the bourgeoisie to lead the mass of the people in open revolution against the old order. But this did not mean that the bourgeoisie were now the effective political power, even in all the economically most developed countries. Nor did it mean that the dynamic process of capital accumulation came to a halt – far from it. Rather the effect of the bourgeois revolutions was to increase the tempo of capital accumulation and forge a world market, and therefore increase the competition between nation states, more completely than had previously been the case. Neither did the unwillingness of the bourgeoisie to provide political leadership for the mass of the population mean that popular revolts against the old order were a thing of the past.
Instead, there were two broad lines of causality which originated in 1848 and ran on through the 19th century. One was the element of continuing popular revolt, increasingly involving self conscious working class activity and organisation. The high tide of this current was reached in 1871 when the first successful workers’ revolution flowered briefly in the Paris Commune. But even where such peaks were not scaled, popular and working class action could be seen – for instance, in the New Unionism of the 1880s in Britain and the growth of Marxist influenced unions and social democratic parties throughout Europe towards the end of the century.
The second process of change which followed 1848 was the bourgeoisie’s continuing attempt to develop political and state forms adequate for the new conditions under which capital accumulation was now taking place. National unity and the attendant reshaping of the state machine to meet capitalist needs, a key prize won by the English, American and French revolutions, was now a pressing necessity for every capitalist class, especially since the competitive advantage which the forerunners gained from their revolutions was increasingly obvious to the laggards.
In the American Civil War, Lincoln sublimated popular mobilisation to the military struggle against the South, thus recasting American capitalism as a whole in the image of the Northern bourgeoisie. In so doing he forcibly unified the ruling class and enabled it to pursue its ‘manifest destiny’ of conquering the land to its west as far as the Pacific. In Italy, national unification and the creation of a bourgeois state involved popular mobilisation around the figures of Garibaldi and Mazzini, but this was kept within the limits of Cavour’s constitutionalism. In Germany, Napoleon’s armies had done much to clear the ground for Bismarck’s state building enterprise. The defeat of 1848 allowed this process to surge forward with little popular impediment until the rise of the Social Democratic Party and the organised working class.
The importance of briefly signposting this process is to demonstrate that the bourgeoisie did not cease to pursue its own political goals, including those which involved major social transformations, when it renounced revolutionary methods of action. Neither did it wholly dispense with the desire to utilise the energies of social classes beneath it. It merely refused to give such classes revolutionary leadership. The bourgeosie feared their action, and yet at the same time sought to profit from the upheavals which popular movements created. [34]
 
Lenin and Trotsky on the socialist revolution and the democratic revolution
Lenin’s initial estimation of the forces involved in the Russian Revolution is contained in his Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution. This work obviously predates the experience of 1917; in fact it even predates his full absorption of the lessons of the 1905 Revolution. In some important respects it is a regression to a point less politically developed than that of Marx and Engels in 1850. In Two Tactics, Lenin argued that the economic and social conditions in Russia were not sufficiently advanced for the coming revolution to be a socialist revolution. The revolution would be bourgeois democratic in content:
The degree of Russia’s economic development (an objective condition), and the degree of class consciousness and organisation of the broad masses of the proletariat (a subjective condition inseparably bound up with the objective condition) make the immediate and complete emancipation of the working class impossible. Only the most ignorant people can close their eyes to the bourgeois nature of the revolution which is now taking place. [35]
Lenin thought the Russian bourgeoisie was too weak to lead the democratic revolution in the way that the English bourgeoisie had done in the 1640s, or the French bourgeoisie had done in the 1790s. The working class would therefore have to lead an insurrection which would overthrow tsarism and establish a democratic republic. But for the working class to be able to perform this task it would have to be led by a revolutionary party which insisted on a political strategy free of compromises with the vacillating bourgeois democrats and their fellow travellers inside the organisations of the working class, the Mensheviks.
This position clearly had a number of strengths. The greatest of these was the assertion of the leading role of the working class in the democratic revolution and the insistence on the building of a revolutionary party carrying out socialist propaganda, even though socialism was not the immediate aim of the revolution. Such a strategy required sharp criticism of and political independence from both the bourgeois democrats, the emerging Cadet party, and the Mensheviks.
But for all Lenin’s insistence on these crucial elements, his position in Two Tactics contains a weakness which allows for constant backsliding, especially by those who claimed to be Lenin’s supporters but who did not share his revolutionary intransigence. For, if the revolution is to result in a bourgeois democratic settlement, if a ‘democratic dictatorship’ is the furthest stage to which the revolution can advance, then the working class is reduced to being the furthest left wing, the most consistent element, in the democratic revolution. Its political representatives would play the role of the Levellers in the English Revolution or the sans culottes in the French Revolution. This situation contains the inherent danger that the revolutionary party will underestimate the consciousness and activity of the working class, tailoring its slogans to the democratic tasks of the day and forgoing independent socialist agitation. If such a situation arises the party can become a force retarding the development of the working class by failing to formulate a strategy which crystallises its aspirations. Instead the party can channel the energies of the class into fighting for goals far short of those which workers are capable of attaining.
The crucial advance made by Trotsky in his 1906 work Results and Prospects was to point out that if one looked at Russian society in isolation from the world economy it seemed true that it was too economically backward to support a socialist society. Yet capitalist industry had developed to the point where tsarism was in a terminal crisis. Although industry had not developed on the scale of, say, Britain or Germany, where it did exist in Russia it existed in a very advanced form. So it was that St Petersburg’s Putilov works (destined to become a ‘citadel of Bolshevism’ in 1917) was the largest and one of the most technologically advanced factories of its kind anywhere in the world. This is what Trotsky called ‘combined and uneven development’: the most advanced forms of capitalist development are transplanted, often by international investment, into the heart of underdeveloped countries. [36]
Trotsky went on to agree with Lenin that the Russian bourgeoisie was too timid to lead a democratic revolution, largely because the working class which had grown up around the new industries frightened the bourgeoisie with the spectre of a revolution which could sweep both tsarism and the bourgeoisie away in a single blow. Consequently, the working class would not limit itself to bourgeois democratic demands. When the working class fought it could only do so using working class methods: strikes, general strikes, workers’ councils and so on. But these methods of struggle were as much directed against the bourgeoisie as they were against tsarism. They raised the question, ‘Who will run the factory?’ as well as the question, ‘Who will run the state?’ The revolution would therefore be a social revolution (ie an economic and political revolution), not simply a political (ie democratic) revolution.
Trotsky completed his analysis by showing that the socialist revolution would be able to sustain itself, despite Russia’s backwardness, because Russia was part of the world economy, because the crisis of capitalism was international and, therefore, because the revolution could spread to the advanced capitalist societies of the West. In so doing it could provide the material base to develop a socialist society, making the revolution permanent. In other words, the democratic revolution, by virtue of its dependence on the working class as its leading force and by virtue of its international dimension, would immediately grow over into the socialist revolution.
This is, of course, exactly what happened in 1917. But in 1917 the Bolshevik Party was still operating the perspective of Two Tactics. This is why it tailed the provisional government and the Mensheviks between February and April 1917. This is why the entire leadership of the Bolsheviks thought Lenin was mad when he returned to Russia and, at the Finland station, made a speech calling for a second, socialist revolution. This is why Lenin’s April Theses at first found virtually no support among the Bolshevik leadership. Lenin had, in essence, accepted Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution.
 
The Russian Revolution
The main novelty which the Russian Revolution of 1917 added to this scene was that some socialists were, from the first, the willing assistants of the petty bourgeois democrats in their efforts to contain the revolution. The Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries (SRs) and, until Lenin’s return to Russia in March 1917, a sizeable section of the Bolsheviks including Stalin and other leaders of the party, were willing supporters of the provisional government. The Mensheviks and the SRs at first performed this service from their seats in the Petrograd Soviet, but in April they formally joined the government. The Bolsheviks, despite the misgivings of some party members, supported the government without joining it. Only Lenin’s April Theses rearmed the party by adopting the substance of Trotsky’s (and Marx’s) perspective of permanent revolution. From that point on the Bolsheviks were in opposition to the provisional government and solely concerned with strengthening the soviets, the independent organisations of the working class. As Trotsky wrote:
In all past revolutions those who fought on the barricades were workers, apprentices, in part students, and the soldiers came over to their side. But afterwards the solid bourgeoisie, having cautiously watched the barricades from their windows, gathered up the power. But the February Revolution of 1917 was distinguished from former revolutions by the incomparably higher social character and political level of the revolutionary class, by the hostile distrust of the insurrectionists towards the liberal bourgeoisie, and the consequent formation at the very moment of victory of a new organ of revolutionary power, the soviet, based on the armed strength of the masses. [37]
It was by strengthening the power of the soviets that the Bolsheviks both managed to defeat the Kornilov coup against the provisional government and lead a successful socialist revolution in October 1917. But victory did not go uncontested, and nor did the strategy of permanent revolution.
The great division between revolutionary socialism and Stalinism was fought over precisely this issue. Stalinism was a counter-revolutionary movement. To understand why, we have to look at the condition of Russia in the early 1920s. Internationalism was at the core of the October Revolution, not as an abstract moral injunction but as the very means of the revolution’s survival. Lenin repeated again and again, both before October and afterwards, that the Russian Revolution could only survive if the revolution spread to the West:
It is not open to the slightest doubt that the final victory of our revolution, if it were to remain alone, if there were no revolutionary movement in other countries, would be hopeless ... Our salvation from all these difficulties, I repeat, is an all European revolution. [38]
Trotsky repeatedly made the same argument. [39] It became the common coin of the Bolshevik party. [40] Most of all, Lenin and Trotsky hoped the revolution would spread to Germany. Had it done so it would not only have altered the whole international balance of class forces, making it impossible for the imperialist powers to continue their wars of intervention and unnecessary for the revolutionary government to cede the huge territories it lost in the peace of Brest-Litovsk. It would also have transformed the domestic situation of the revolution. Industry, and with it the numbers and confidence of the working class, could have been restored. The crucial alliance with the peasantry, on which the revolution depended, could have been maintained as manufactured goods were sent to the country to be exchanged for grain to feed the starving cities.
But without such an international victory, the Russian Revolution remained isolated. The working class, decimated by the civil war, the wars of intervention and the starvation and famine which followed, recovered at a snail’s pace, if at all. Grain had to be requisitioned from the peasantry at the point of a gun. Eventually the regime introduced a partial restoration of the market – the New Economic Policy – which gave rise to a profiteering layer of bureaucrats and richer peasants. Indeed, the bureaucracy remained the only stable element in a society whose revolutionary institutions had been undermined by the terrible price the working class had to pay in the fight to defend them.
These are the conditions under which the Stalinist trend in the bureaucracy began to assert itself. It came to represent a class which set its face against the whole idea of internationalism: Stalin’s slogan was ‘Socialism in One Country’. As we have seen, Trotsky and Lenin had realised that if the revolution was to be a socialist revolution, rather than simply a democratic revolution which at best would issue in a capitalist economy and a parliamentary republic, it must spread to the advanced industrialised countries. This was the whole theoretical basis on which the Third International was formed. Trotsky defended the principle on which the October Revolution had been, and could only have been, won: internationalism.
Once Stalinism broke the link between the possibility of socialist revolution at home and the fight to maintain it by spreading it internationally, the whole basis of the Bolsheviks’ revolutionary policy in October collapsed. Stalin’s ‘Socialism in One Country’ insisted that the Russian state could ‘go it alone’, and castigated Trotsky for ‘underestimating the peasantry’. In the international arena this returned Bolshevik policy to the Menshevik position in 1917. The alternative model of revolution which Stalin propagated throughout the Third World was the ‘two stage’ revolution. The first stage was the democratic revolution, in which the working class should subordinate specifically socialist aspirations to a broad alliance aimed at achieving a democratic revolution. Only after this stage had been completed could socialist demands be raised. Stalin’s approach meant that the revolution did not need the international working class to ensure victory, since a ‘democratic revolution’ could be achieved by a cross-class alliance of progressive forces acting within a purely national arena. Thus it became acceptable for socialists to argue that the working class should ally itself with the peasantry and ‘progressive sections of the bourgeoisie’ in future revolutions. In China in 1927 and in Spain in 1936 this led to disaster, because it subordinated working class revolution to bourgeois nationalists (Chiang Kai-shek) or bourgeois parliamentarians (the Republican parties in Spain). The result was counter-revolution and dictatorship in both cases.
 
The bourgeois revolution after the defeat of the Russian Revolution
The counter-revolution led by Stalin was, of course, not the only defeat suffered by the working class movement in the inter-war period. The rise of fascism centrally entailed a crushing series of working class reverses. In Italy, the ‘two red years’ of revolutionary struggle immediately following the Russian Revolution were ended by Mussolini’s rise and the consolidation of fascism in the 1920s. The charge of the German Revolution took longer to dissipate, but ultimately the failure of the Stalinist dominated German Communist Party to resolve the crisis of the Weimar Republic in the working class’s favour paved the way for Hitler to take power in 1933. The following year a belated workers’ rising in ‘Red Vienna’ was crushed as the fascists took power. In 1936 the Spanish Revolution and the rising struggles around the election of the Popular Front government in France briefly raised the hope of turning the Nazi tide, but again the conduct of Stalin’s Comintern destroyed the opportunity. The scene was set for world war.
The destruction engendered by the war, and the further demobilisation by the Communist Parties, especially in Italy, of the post-war wave of popular left wing struggles meant that the widespread revolutionary mood which attended the end of the First World War was present only in a muted form after the Second World War. Furthermore, sustained arms spending at a level quantitatively higher than during the inter-war period led to a 30 year period of economic expansion unparalleled in capitalism’s past. In this respect the period after the Second World War was quite unlike the crisis ridden 1920s and 1930s. The international scene was also transformed during the long boom. The old European colonial powers, whether victors or vanquished, ended the war economically exhausted. Faced with twin pressures to open their markets to competition from newly dominant US corporations and from growing anti-colonial resistance, they were unable to sustain their empires. The second half of the 20th century became the great era of decolonisation, although economic power wielded by the imperial states proved to be as disabling for the mass of the population in the former colonies as the old set-up of direct rule had been.
These great anti-colonial transformations combined with the previous defeats suffered by the international working class movement and the economic growth which attended the long boom to throw the dynamics of the revolutionary process into a unique new pattern. The assumptions which lay behind Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution were called into question by these new developments. Trotsky’s theory had been constructed between two poles. One was the fact that the bourgeoisie was incapable of recreating its revolutionary past under modern conditions, and therefore of carrying through the construction of a unified, independent capitalist state in the face of concerted opposition from pre-capitalist or colonial ruling classes. The second was that the working class would fill the political vacuum thus created, simultaneously solving the problems of the democratic and the socialist revolution. But what would happen if the first of these conditions, the objective weakness of the bourgeoisie, remained true while the second, the subjective potential of the working class, remained unrealised?
Trotsky could not have foreseen the unprecedented conditions which conspired to bring about just this situation after the Second World War. Nevertheless, such conditions required a fresh analysis. This was provided in Tony Cliff’s pioneering essay Deflected Permanent Revolution. [41] In analysing the Chinese Revolution of 1949 and the Cuban Revolution of 1959, Cliff demonstrated that in periods where the working class was unable to mount a challenge to the old order, and yet the old order was decomposing as a result of a wider social crisis, other social forces were able to play a significant political role. The peasantry often provided the forces for popular mobilisation in these circumstances but, since modern revolutions are overwhelmingly urban events, they could not provide indigenous or effective political leadership. This leadership could be provided, however, by sections of the middle class intelligentsia – lawyers, state bureaucrats, teachers, literary figures, owners of small businesses, academics, and so on.
This layer had, in an earlier incarnation, often been a crucial element of the practical leadership of the classical bourgeois revolutions. The bourgeoisie proper does not often directly provide its own political representatives. The middle classes are often professionally engaged in forming general ideological conceptions of society, and live closer to the mass of the population whom they are trying to lead. They are, therefore, better political representatives of bourgeois political programmes than the oligarchs of the bourgeoisie themselves. This is a relationship which holds to this day: better for the ruling class that they be represented by a university educated grocer’s daughter like Margaret Thatcher (and the lawyers who dominate the House of Commons) than that Rupert Murdoch and his fellow plutocrats attempt to directly represent themselves.
One of the great strengths of the analysis which Cliff provided was a political profile of this layer of people as they appear in modern ‘developing’ societies. The intelligentsia in these societies is peculiarly open to playing a leadership role in popular movements when the working class is quiescent. But the revolution made under these circumstances is a modernising, nationalist, anti-colonial revolution, not a socialist revolution.
The intelligentsia is ... sensitive to their countries’ technical lag. Participating as it does in the scientific and technical world of the 20th century, it is stifled by the backwardness of its own nation. [42]
Thus the intelligentsia turns its face against the ruling class, whose ‘mismanagement’, ‘corruption’ and ‘cowardice’ in the face of imperialism has brought the nation to this pass. Such individuals are in search of a new god, which they find in the abstract notion of ‘the people’, especially those sections of the people who have the greatest difficulty in organising for themselves, the peasantry.
The spiritual life of the intellectuals is also in crisis. In a crumbling order where the traditional pattern is disintegrating, they feel insecure, rootless, lacking in firm values. Dissolving cultures give rise to a powerful urge for a new integration that must be total and dynamic if it is to fill the social and political vacuum, that must combine religious fervour with militant nationalism. [43]
But this desire to be part of ‘the people’ and to end the subordination of the nation is always combined with a sense of superiority, the elite feeling that the masses are too backward or apathetic to accomplish a revolution for themselves:
They are great believers in efficiency, including efficiency in social engineering. They hope for reform from above and would dearly love to hand a new world over to a grateful people, rather than see the liberating struggle of a self conscious and freely associated people result in a new world for themselves. They care a lot for measures to drag their nation out of stagnation, but very little for democracy. They embody the drive for industrialisation, for capital accumulation, for national resurgence. Their power is in direct relation to the feebleness of other classes, and their political nullity. [44]
This political profile made the whole strategy of autocratic, state led capital accumulation very attractive for this social class throughout the 30 years of the long boom. China and Cuba were only the purest expressions of this trend. But, as Cliff noted, ‘other colonial revolutions – Ghana, India, Egypt, Indonesia, Algeria, etc – more or less deviate from the norm. But ... they can best be understood when approached from the standpoint of, and compared with, the norm’. [45]
As the post-war colonial revolutions ran their course, the long boom came to an end and the terminal crisis of the East European regimes set in, this model lost its attractiveness. But the class who saw modernisation as the key objective of popular movements did not disappear. And although its members no longer held to Stalinist derived economic models, they continued to see the state as the crucial vehicle for their political strategy. In some cases, for instance in South Africa, they remained caught within the old Stalinist ideology until the very collapse of Stalinism itself. As the leadership of the liberation movement, and the working class struggle as it revived, they influenced it accordingly. In Eastern Europe, where opposition necessarily defined itself against Stalinism, other ideologies were pressed into service and often had to contend with socialist and revolutionary alternatives for hegemony. In the Indonesian Revolution, very little of the old nationalist and Stalinist ideology survived the 1965 coup which brought Suharto to power, simultaneously overthrowing the nationalist founder of Indonesia, Sukarno, and crushing the Indonesian Communist Party. Some 32 years of dictatorship have united aspirant members of the excluded middle class around pro-democratic sentiments. They now seek to benefit from the overthrow of Suharto by pacifying the movement which achieved it. So wherever other social forces, principally the working class movement, were weak or lacking in coherent, socialist political leadership, this crucial layer of the middle classes has continued to play a role long after its state capitalist ideological incarnation has passed away.
 
The revolutions of 1989
The causes of the East European revolutions of 1989 exist in three registers: firstly, the international register, which is the arena of economic and military competition with the West; secondly, the imperial register, which is the internal economic and political decay of the national economies and the Russian empire; and lastly, the class register, which is the way in which these forces expressed themselves as class struggles and political strategies.
The deepest and most lengthy processes which resulted in the East European revolutions are primarily to be found in the first register. In these regimes, the ‘normal’ political function of the state, the exclusive use of force in a given territory, was combined with the ‘normal’ function of a capitalist class, the exclusive right to hire and fire wage labour. They were therefore best defined as ‘state capitalist’. In Eastern Europe such regimes resulted from the Russian occupation at the end of the Second World War. But although the Russian model and its East European copies saw the state capitalist method of industrial development at its most extreme, elements of this approach were clearly visible in many economies of the 1930s and 1940s. The international experience of the economic crisis of the 1930s, followed by the centralising imperative of total war, meant that state capitalist elements were strongly present in Hitler’s Germany as well as in Stalin’s Russia, in the New Deal United States as well as in wartime and welfare state Britain. This is why state led economic development became such an attractive model for post-colonial regimes as well.
The attraction was not wholly based on illusion. In the immediate post-war period the state capitalist regimes’ economic expansion was faster than that of the Western powers. Indeed, the correlation appeared to be that the more state capitalist the regime, the faster the economic expansion. The index of industrial production in West Germany rose by seven times between 1950 and 1969 – but Poland’s rose by almost the same amount. Britain’s rose less than twofold, while Hungary’s rose nearly fivefold. France’s increased by just over two times, yet in the same period Romania’s index rose over 10 times. [46] Of course these figures only measure the rise in industrial production, not the absolute size of the various economies. Nevertheless, they show that the picture of the state capitalist economies as stagnant by their very nature is a myth.
In the same period, however, the world economy as a whole expanded massively, making it the most sustained period of growth in the history of capitalism. And the character of the world economy was transformed as it grew. Private monopoly and multinational firms came to dominate the Western economies as never before. International trade expanded as never before. These developments began to undermine the progress that was possible using state capitalist methods of accumulation. This was especially true for the autarkic state capitalisms of Eastern Europe, those states which had attempted the most complete isolation from the rest of the world market. Isolationist state capitalist methods had been very good at developing an industrial base from weak beginnings in a post-war world where the international economy was itself weak. But when the Western economies recovered and grew, and when international trade expanded, the isolated Eastern economies were at a disadvantage. Western corporations, whether private or state owned, were free to organise and trade on a global scale, searching for the cheapest raw materials, plant and labour, and for new and lucrative markets. The Eastern state corporations traded in a bloc which had always been weaker than its Western rivals, even in the pre-war years. Now non-convertible currencies, restricted resources and the imperial demands of the Russian state undermined their competitiveness on a world scale.
The very isolation of the Eastern state capitalist economies protected them from this fact for a time, but ultimately it was brought home to them in two crucial ways. Domestically, it was obvious that the industrial progress of the post-war period was not being converted into a ‘second revolution’ in consumer durables. Internationally, and this is where the second, imperial, register is important, the inability to keep up economically eventually meant an inability to keep up militarily. The state capitalist ruling class was losing the Cold War. Détente was the result: an attempt to transfer resources from the military to the civilian economy, the better to be able to develop military capacity in the future. The stakes in this game had become very high by the 1980s when Ronald Reagan proposed the Star Wars defence system and Mikhail Gorbachev, fearful of another huge hike in defence spending, countered with a series of disarmament proposals which he hoped the US could not refuse. He was right, but it was too late.
Gorbachev was too late because developments in the class struggle, the third register, were already closing the road to the kind of reform for which he hoped. To understand this process we have to look at how the economic crises of state capitalism and the attempts by the ruling class, including the Russian ruling class, to deal with these crises were expressed in the class struggle. Poland is the key to this process – indeed, the key to understanding the whole dynamic of the revolutions of 1989.
This revolutionary narrative, however, begins much earlier. In the 1970s the then Stalinist leader of Poland, Edward Gierek, attempted a new strategy to deal with mounting unrest, notably the massive wave of strikes and factory occupations which had toppled his predecessor in December 1970. He tried to undertake a ‘second industrial revolution’ by borrowing from the West. New plant would be built with Western loans and repaid by exporting Western quality goods back to the West. The plan was a catastrophic failure, in part because the world economy was no longer expanding as it had done in the post-war period but actually entering the current prolonged era of slump and slow growth. In 1976 Poland’s hard currency debt stood at $10 billion. Three years later it had reached $17 billion. [47]
Other East European leaders had tried the same ‘consumer socialism’ experiment – Janos Kadar in Hungary, Erich Honecker in East Germany – and by the late 1970s per capita debt in these countries had reached the same level as in Poland. Economic failure led to political change: Honecker tried cautious rapprochement with the Protestant Church, Kadar implemented a slight easing of restrictions on intellectual freedom.
But Poland had sustained the longest and deepest tradition of mass working class resistance to the state, and it was this which was to be the decisive factor in the overthrow of Stalinism. In 1976 workers were once again involved in a huge wave of strikes against price increases. Several thousand workers of the Ursus tractor factory in Warsaw marched to the rail lines, ripped them up and stopped the Paris-Moscow express. In Radom, south west of Warsaw, workers burnt down the Communist Party headquarters. The price rises were withdrawn, but the workers paid for their victory in other ways: thousands were sacked, many jailed and, in Radom and Ursus, those who kept their jobs were beaten back to work between lines of truncheon wielding police.
To defend the workers in the aftermath of the 1976 strikes, activists and intellectuals formed the Workers’ Defence Committee (KOR, by its Polish initials). In September 1977, a year after KOR was founded, it began to produce its own newspaper, Robotnik (The Worker). On May Day 1978 the Founding Committee of Trade Unions on the Coast was announced in Gdansk, and it soon began producing its own paper, Robotnik Wybrzeza (The Worker on the Coast): ‘KOR worked very much as Lenin recommended (in What is to be Done?) the conspiratorial communist party should work, raising the political consciousness of the proletariat in key industrial centres’. [48] The activists drawn together in these and other similar initiatives were to become the leadership of Solidarity in the wake of the greatest of all Polish strike waves in 1980. Their political development was crucial to the whole process of revolution in Eastern Europe.
The workers’ movement which gave birth to Solidarity was insurrectionary in its scope. In July 1980 the government announced another round of price rises, and again these were met with a series of rolling strikes. Despite the regime’s attempt to pacify the workers with a wage increase, the strikes spread. By August they had reached Gdansk, and the Lenin shipyard was occupied in response to the sacking of The Worker on the Coast activist Anna Walentynowicz. The yard management conceded the occupiers’ demands, but the occupation continued in solidarity with the local strikes which the action at the Lenin yard had sparked. An Inter-Factory Committee (MKZ) was established for the whole of Gdansk. The strikes and occupations spread, involving mines and steelworks in southern Poland for the first time. So too did the MKZs, springing up one after another across the whole country. In September they united in one national organisation, Solidarity. The government was forced to negotiate an unprecedented agreement, the 21 points, granting a host of reforms, most importantly the right to ‘independent, self governing trade unions’. [49]
This unprecedented rupture in the authority of a Stalinist state effectively created a situation of dual power. The state tried, but failed, to undermine Solidarity in the months after the initial strike wave. And Solidarity for its part came to take on more and more of the actual running of society. One KOR activist paid eloquent testimony to this fact, though he saw it as more of a problem than an opportunity:
At this moment people expect more of us than we can possibly do. Normally, society focuses on the party. In Poland nowadays, however, society gathers around the free trade unions. That’s a bad thing. Thus there is an increasing necessity for us to formulate a political programme. It would be a good thing if the party took the lead and removed the people’s expectations from our shoulders. But will it do so now? In the eyes of the people the new trade unions should do everything: they should fill the role of trade unions, participate in the administration of the country, be a political party and act as a militia. [50]
Unless Solidarity was willing to meet these expectations by overthrowing the government it was bound to gradually disappoint its own supporters. Worse, it began to limit the actions of its rank and file in the name of not provoking the government. Worse still, such a policy divided and exhausted the movement, giving the ruling class its chance to regain the initiative and organise the military coup headed by General Jaruzelski in December 1981.
What brought the Solidarity leadership to act in this way? Why did they not support the demands of the rank and file, and of the radicals within the Solidarity leadership, and use the power which they acknowledged the union to have to overthrow the government? Crucial to this decision was the political strategy developed by the KOR leadership in the period before Solidarity was created. Jacek Kuron is perhaps the pivotal, certainly the emblematic, figure in this story.
Kuron was a long-standing militant with an impressive record of opposition to the Polish regime. As early as 1965 he had written, with Karol Modzelewski, the pathbreaking Open Letter to the Party. This document, which still has an impressive power when read today, was a Marxist critique of the Polish state. Similar in its social analysis to the theory of state capitalism, it insisted on revolutionary conclusions: it called for a return to genuine workers’ councils, the arming of the workers, and an ‘anti-bureaucratic revolution’. Indeed, it went on to call for ‘the organisation of workers’ circles, nuclei of the future party’. [51] But by the time he played a leadership role in KOR and then Solidarity Kuron had abandoned this revolutionary perspective. Why?
Paradoxically, the economic and social fate of the state capitalist regimes played an important part. The economic success of Stalinism in the 1950s and 1960s allowed the opposition in Poland and throughout Eastern Europe to think that what was necessary was a renewal of socialism, a return to the genuine Marxist tradition and to the democracy of the early Russian Revolution. Even those who broke completely with the notion of ‘reform Communism’, as Kuron did, could not help but be influenced by the evidence that state ownership was a viable economic model. Furthermore, Kuron developed his position and maintained it during a period of international working class advance, but abandoned it when the great wave of international struggles had been defeated, after the Prague Spring and the Polish struggles of the early 1970s as well as the May events in France.
The Open Letter had argued that the threat of armed Russian intervention would be met by the spread of the revolution to the rest of the Eastern bloc. It could therefore paralyse the Russian ruling class’s ability to intervene. By 1980, however, Kuron was defending the reformist perspective precisely by reference to the Russian military threat. Just as the Western left was abandoning the revolutionary perspectives of 1968 in favour of the reformist perspective of the ‘long march through the institutions’, so Kuron was coming to believe in a ‘self limiting revolution’, in which the institutions of civil society would be built up within the old order, gradually forcing it to accommodate to liberal democratic norms.
Kuron’s change of heart was equally marked on the question of party organisation. The Open Letter had been unambiguous on this issue:
In order that the working class can have the chance to play the leading role, it must be conscious of its distinct, particular interests. It must express them in the form of a political programme and organise itself – as a class fighting for power – into its own political party or parties. [52]
But by the time KOR was founded Kuron and fellow activist Adam Michnik were writing a series of essays calling for a ‘New Evolutionism’. KOR itself was renamed the Committee for Social Self Defence, and although the central role of the working class was never abandoned, as it would have been difficult to do given the combativity of Polish workers, this force was now to be harnessed to a gradualist political strategy. New political allies were to be sought, especially among the intellectuals gathered around the Catholic Church. This new ‘popular front’ reformism had little need for the revolutionary organisation outlined in the Open Letter. When, in the midst of the crisis which engulfed Solidarity in 1981, radicals began to call for the formation of such a party Kuron spoke against them. [53] As we shall see, such ideas were not peculiar to Kuron but became the common coin of oppositions throughout Eastern Europe in the 1980s.
The military coup of 1981 was a brutal refutation of this perspective – or at least it should have been. Yet the reformist vision continued to be held by the leaders of Solidarity even as they were imprisoned and chased into the underground by Jaruzelski’s troops. But if the 1981 coup was a defeat for Solidarity, it was not a victory for the regime. The Polish ruling class was so burnt by the cost of imposing martial law that it seems to have concluded that it could not repeat the experience. Marian Orzechowski joined the Central Committee of the Polish CP in 1981, its politbureau in 1983, and was effectively the party’s last foreign minister. He says:
I personally feel that 13 December 1981 had been a hugely negative experience for the army and the police. I had discussions with General Kiszczak and General Siwicki that martial law could only work once. The army and the riot police could not be mobilised against society. Most of the party leadership realised this ... You couldn’t rerun martial law. [54]
The Russian ruling class had, ironically given Kuron’s fears, been unwilling to act and seemed to have drawn the conclusion that it would henceforward not be possible to intervene against civil unrest in its empire. The ‘Sinatra doctrine’, ‘I Did it My Way’, as Gorbachev’s spokesman Gennady Gerasimov would later call it, was sung to a Polish tune. General Jaruzelski himself recalls:
Gorbachev on many occasions said that Polish changes were an impulse to perestroika... He often requested materials about what we had tried and tested ... I was closely linked to Gorbachev. We spoke to one another without reserve, saying that old men like Zhivkov [of Bulgaria] and Honecker [of East Germany] did not understand a thing. [55]
And as the crisis sharpened again with the 1988 strikes, Gorbachev had an immediate political motivation for continuing to support the Polish government’s decision to attempt to hang on to power by compromising with, rather than cracking down on, Solidarity. Polish foreign minister Orzechowski again:
When in February 1988 I told him [Gorbachev] that the position of Jaruzelski was under attack, he was very worried ... Gorbachev realised that if economic reforms in Poland were to collapse, his hardliners could argue that deviation from the principles of socialism must lead to catastrophe. He came to Poland in June 1988 to provide moral support. At every meeting with Jaruzelski, Gorbachev approved of what was happening in Poland. [56]
This underlines the degree to which the ultimate cause for the change of political heart towards Solidarity was rooted in economics: Poland and other East European states were now connected to Western regimes by trade and debt. Poland’s external debt totalled over $38 billion in 1988, the highest in the Eastern bloc. Armed intervention would endanger both trade and loans. It would therefore worsen an already dire economic crisis, thus precipitating civil unrest, the very thing intervention was meant to suppress. Beyond these internal consequences the whole project of détente would have been destroyed by Russian police action in Eastern Europe.
Solidarity itself maintained an underground structure. Renewed strike action in 1988 left the Polish regime with no other option but to try and negotiate its way out of the impasse. Despite continuing strikes – which Lech Walesa tried to demobilise – student protests, and protests from the radical wing of Solidarity, ‘round table’ negotiations with the government began in January 1989. Kuron’s response to the radical critics of the ‘round table’ strategy reveals the degree to which he had now adopted a fully articulated reformist strategy:
Many of our friends, members of the opposition in Poland, asked us, ‘Why did you go to the roundtable discussions? Wouldn’t it have been better to continue organising people and to increase the potential for social explosion – a social explosion which would wipe out the totalitarian system?’ Our answer was ‘no’. We don’t want to destroy the system by force ... the road to democracy has to be a process of gradual evolution, of gradual building of democratic institutions. [57]
The round table went ahead and resulted, in June 1989, in elections which the regime thought it might win, especially as they were rigged in its favour. In the event Solidarity swept the board with an electoral victory far greater than many in Solidarity had imagined possible. The path to the ‘velvet revolutions’ in Eastern Europe now lay open. But Jacek Kuron was right when, looking back from 1990, he wrote:
The real breakthrough took place in 1980, when a massive wave of strikes led to the founding of Solidarity, an independent union that the government was forced to recognise. This was truly the moment when the totalitarian system in Poland was broken. [58]
At the same time as these events were unfolding in Poland, the Hungarian ruling class was feeling its way towards a similar reconstruction of the political regime. Indeed, six days after Solidarity swept the board in the Polish elections, the Hungarian Stalinists opened their own round table discussions about reform. A week later over 100,000 people gathered at the reburial of Imre Nagy, the murdered leader of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution. But there was comparatively little popular mobilisation in Hungary in 1989, and certainly no recreation of the workers’ councils of 1956. Yet if the Hungarian events do not tell us very much about the role of the working class in the revolution, the very quietude of the transition in Hungary allows us to see the reconstruction of the ruling class in its purest form.
In the 1970s Hungary followed many of the same policies and confronted many of the same problems as Gierek’s Poland. Opening the economy to the West meant accepting Western loans and increased indebtedness. Hungary’s external debt rose from $0.9 billion in 1973 to $5.8 billion in 1978. [59] But the Hungarian ruling class pushed on down this road, combining economic liberalisation with a degree of intellectual liberalism. Elemer Hankiss, a Hungarian academic and, after 1989, head of Hungarian television, writes:
In the 1970s in certain places a kind of social democratisation began. Already during the late 1960s in Hungary the Kadar regime introduced a more tolerant policy to the opposition and society in general. It allowed a ‘second economy’ to evolve; it allowed a process of cultural pluralisation to emerge, though of course it did not allow political pluralisation. [60]
The formal economy continued to slide into deeper crisis during the 1970s and 1980s, but the ‘second economy’ grew. The number of independent craftsmen in Hungary was 50,000 in 1953. By 1989 it had risen to 160,000. In the 1970s there were reckoned to be 2 million Hungarian families involved in the ‘second economy’. The numbers of entrepreneurs, shopkeepers and their employees rose from 67,000 in 1982 to almost 600,000 in 1989. Of course, these figures are tiny compared to the formal economy, and the economic activity these forces generated could not reverse economic decline. Their importance is sociological and ideological, not economic. They were one indicator showing the Hungarian ruling class a way out of the crisis. [61] By the mid-1980s this growth was combined with limited but real political change. A popular groundswell, unsuccessfully resisted by the state, got genuinely independent candidates elected in the 1985 general election. Independents won 10 percent of parliamentary seats. This was unheard of in any Stalinist state and was another straw in the wind for a ruling class which at that very point must have been absorbing the lessons of the Solidarity era in Poland.
The question of whether or not the whole Hungarian ruling class would attempt a transition to a more market oriented form of capitalism would be decided by the behaviour of the upper echelons of the state bureaucracy and the managers of the major industrial enterprises. In this respect Hankiss notes, ‘Since the writing appeared on the wall in 1987, the Party and state bureaucracy have been trying to convert their bureaucratic power into a new type of power which will be an asset that can be preserved within a new system, namely in a market economy or even a democracy.’ The result ‘may be called the rise of a kind of 19th century grande bourgeoisie’. [62] This class is an amalgam of different elements of the old ruling class. Firstly, the state bureaucracy of the old order used its family ties to diversify its power:
There are various ways of converting to new power if you are a Kadarist oligarch ... The characteristic oligarchic family in the mid-1980s was the father or grandfather, a party apparatchik, a high level party or state official; his son a manager of a British/Hungarian joint venture; his son-in-law with a boutique in Vaci Street; his daughter an editor for Hungarian television; his nephew studying at Cambridge or Oxford; his mother-in-law having a small hotel or boarding house on Lake Balaton, etc. ... These family businesses are absolutely top secret. However, we did discover more than 250 businesses belonging to this kind of diversified oligarchic family, and there must be several hundred more. [63]
Secondly, as soon as the dam broke in 1989, party bureaucrats found they ‘could convert power on an institutional level’, and so they began to transform high value properties and real estate, including party buildings, training centres and holiday complexes, into semi-private or joint stock companies. And besides the party bureaucrats proper there were also the managerial bureaucrats, the ‘Red Barons’, who were busy relocating themselves as private capitalists.
This process naturally led to a generalised consciousness on the part of the ruling class: ‘A third way for the regime to convert power was, ironically, to transform the Hungarian economy into a market economy. This ... has been carried out in such a way that this new grande bourgeoisie profits most from the new laws’. [64] Indeed, this consciousness predated the upheaval of 1989 and provides a crucial part of the explanation of the peaceful nature of the transition in Eastern Europe. The political institutions of Eastern Europe were transformed in 1989, but the ruling class was not overthrown and no new mode of production was advanced by the revolutions. Rather, the ruling class transformed one method of capitalist accumulation, the autarkic state capitalist method, for another method of capitalist accumulation which involves a combination of private monopoly, orientation on the world market and a continuing element of state ownership and regulation. That is, a reproduction of the really existing capitalism of the West, but not the fantasy ‘free market’ model of ideological fame.
The relationship between this new model of capital accumulation which arose within the womb of the old state capitalist model and the quietude of the political changes of 1989 is well expressed by Hankiss:
I have tried ... to answer the question, ‘Why did they not shoot?’ ... Let me focus on one single factor which played an especially important part in the Hungarian (and to a lesser extent in the Polish) process of transition: loss of interest in preserving the party. In the late 1980s a substantial part of the Hungarian party and state bureaucracy discovered ways of converting their bureaucratic power into lucrative economic positions and assets (and also indirectly into a new type of political power) in the new system based on market economics and political democracy ... When in the late 1980s they discovered the possibility of ... becoming part of an emerging new and legitimate ruling class or grande bourgeoisie, they lost interest in keeping the Communist Party as their instrument of power and protection. And, as a consequence, on the night of 7 October 1989 they watched indifferently, or assisted actively in, the self liquidation of the party. [65]
This process of self transformation by the ruling class is probably more extreme in Hungary than elsewhere in Eastern Europe and none of it is conceivable without the actions of the Polish working class in 1980–1981 and again in 1988. It was the Polish workers’ struggle which both demonstrated to the ruling classes of Eastern Europe the impossibility of continuing to rule in the old way and the penalty that might be paid if they persisted in trying to do so. Furthermore, it was the experience of Solidarity combined with Russia’s own economic problems and the consequent need to break into the world economy which created the Sinatra doctrine of non-intervention. And this in turn created the space in which the Hungarian and other ruling classes could recompose themselves.
The Hungarian events did, however, contribute one vital link to the chain of the East European revolutions. Early in 1989 the still ruling Hungarian Communist Party decided to open its border with Austria. It was a dramatic move which broke apart the then intact Eastern bloc. The then Minister of Justice, Kalaman Kulcsar, explained why his government acted:
We wanted to show that we meant what we were doing and saying. Poland and Hungary were then the only two countries on the road to reform and it was by no means excluded that others in the Warsaw Pact would try something against us. We were pretty sure that if hundreds of thousands of East Germans went to the West, the East German regime would fall, and in that case Czechoslovakia was also out. We were not too concerned about Romania, the only danger to us came from the DDR [East Germany]. We took the step for our own sakes. [66]
But even though the Hungarian government correctly foresaw the international implications of opening the border, they did not see the domestic consequences. Kulcsar again: ‘Our internal situation changed completely. Suddenly conscious of the strength of its position, the opposition was able to advance the date of the elections, and that was the end of the party’. [67] Even so, it was still not clear in all cases that a peaceful transition was inevitable, as the case of East Germany shows.
The East German ruling class instantly understood the meaning of the Hungarian decision to open the borders. When a Hungarian government delegation met its East German counterparts and told them of the decision, Erich Mielke, the head of the Stasi secret police, ‘called it treason’. [68] The East German leader Erich Honecker described it as ‘nothing short of treachery’. [69] Some 24,000 East Germans left the country by this route between 10 September and the end of that month.
East Germany was the western watchtower of the Russian Empire. Its fate was always closely tied to the fate of the empire which created it from a Cold War partition. Two thirds of East Germany’s trade was with Russia. Honecker himself remembers being told by Russian leader Brezhnev in 1970, ‘Never forget that the DDR cannot exist without us; without the Soviet Union, its power and strength, without us there is no DDR’. [70] East Germany could not simply be ‘hollowed out’ by its own ruling class in the way that the Hungarian regime had been. Neither had there been the long tradition of combativity by which the Polish working class had worn down the resistance of its ruling class.
Consequently the East German regime fell as a result of the decay of the empire which sustained it and the simultaneous pressure, both through mass demonstrations and mass emigration, of its ordinary people. The fact that the regime did not attempt a violent counter-revolution was not a result of lack of will on the part of its leaders. It was the result of the fact that imperial decay ran just ahead of popular mobilisation, eroding the regime’s capacity for repression.
The East German state marked its 40th anniversary on 6 October 1989.Gorbachev arrived to attend the celebrations. Neues Forum, the dissident civil rights organisation, had already been banned shortly after its formation the previous month. Some 1,000 people were arrested the day Gorbachev arrived, and another 3,456 during the few days of his visit. To mark the anniversary a triumphal torchlight procession marched past a saluting stand in Berlin on the night of 6 October. But, though they marched to order, the crowds could not be made to chant to order. Instead they chanted ‘Gorbi, Gorbi’. The following morning Gorbachev and Honecker held their final private meeting. In the corridor afterwards Gorbachev deliberately let slip a phrase which, although it was not his intention, damned the East German state: ‘Whoever acts too late is punished by life’. He then delivered a speech to the SED (Communist Party) central committee which was a oblique attack on the speed of reform in East Germany, beginning the process of upheaval in the SED leadership which would see Honecker replaced by Egon Krenz on 18 October.
But as the succession was being decided in the old way, very different things were happening in the streets. On 7 October violent arrests accompanied a 6,000 strong march in East Berlin; the next day 30,000 marched in Dresden. On the same day, 8 October, special security forces were put on alert. For the following day’s demonstration in Leipzig huge numbers of police, plus ambulance and hospital services, were mobilised. Honecker is reported to have ordered the use of live ammunition. On 9 October 50,000 marched in Leipzig. There was no shooting. Honecker’s order to shoot had been lost by one vote at the central committee. [71] Local district party bosses also refused to carry out Honecker’s orders any longer. [72]
It is not clear who led the opposition to Honecker’s plan at the highest levels – Krenz, the Russian leaders, or both – but it is obvious why the governing class as a whole were no longer willing to follow Honecker. He had been publicly deserted by Gorbachev, and his rivals were already beginning to campaign for his removal. No one thought that the end of the regime was at hand, merely that the new line from Moscow must be respected. Honecker had lost the trust of Moscow and with it the confidence of his fellow rulers. Consequently, the East German government stayed its hand.
The effect of such governmental paralysis was dramatic. A week later, on 16 October, 100,000 marched in Leipzig. By 23 October the marchers were 150,000 strong; by 30 October 300,000 marched. On 4 November 500,000 attended a rally in East Berlin as tens of thousands left the country through the now open border. In an attempt to stem the tide the regime announced, on 9 November, that border crossings to West Germany were open. The unexpected consequence was that crowds gathered on both sides of the Berlin Wall and began to dismantle it with picks, hammers and chisels. A round table on the Polish model followed, but its only real achievement was to set the date for elections: 18 March 1990. Helmut Kohl and the Christian Democrat machine filled the void left by the collapse of Stalinism, winning the election and setting their own stamp on the process of German unification.
For events to have taken a left wing direction during the East German revolution would have required a left wing organisation and ideology of rare consistency. In the polarised ideological atmosphere of a partitioned country, only an alternative as clear and consistent as either the old Stalinist certainties of Honecker or the Western imperial realpolitik of Helmut Kohl, and equally opposed to both, could have sustained support. The East German opposition had few of these qualities. One of the founders of Neues Forum, Jens Reich, recalls the atmosphere of the opposition in the early 1980s:
The new opposition was individualistic and bohemian, and composed of a kaleidoscope of ‘counter-culture’ social groups: hippies, Maoists, anarchists, human rights groups, greens, gays, lesbians, the protesting ‘church from below’ – a very colourful mixture ... in fact, to professional people, frankly somewhat alien! My wife Eva and I felt like fish out of water. [73]
Of course, it is perfectly possible that out of such a milieu a core of people could emerge who clarify their ideas, formulate a revolutionary strategy and start to build links with workers. This, for all their ultimate weaknesses, was the path taken by KOR in Poland. But this was not the path taken by the people who founded Neues Forum. Jens Reich argued that those who represented an ‘extreme rejection of the status quo ... really could not become a mainstream political force.’ They were ‘too isolated from the culture of the bulk of the population’. Instead:
We had to reach out to a more ‘respectable’ middle aged generation, to give them the courage to come out of their snail shells ... We wished to ensure that we were properly representative; to ensure that Neues Forum incorporated not only clergymen, not only Berliners, not only intellectuals, not only young dropouts from the social ghetto. This criterion brought us together ... a cross-section of normal people with normal professions and different political leanings. [74]
Such a strategy was initially successful, but as the revolution radicalised, and as global political issues quickly came into play with the fall of the Berlin Wall, Neues Forum was thrust aside by more robust political forces. From the one side it was undermined by Helmut Kohl’s pro-market capitalist ideology and the huge CDU and state machine that he could mobilise. But, even though many East Germans rejected this model, and many more came to reject it as they experienced life under ‘really existing capitalism’, Neues Forum could not even present itself as an adequate vehicle for discontent. And so, from the other side, it was undermined by the reconstituted social democratic SED, now called the Party of Democratic Socialism.
This is not the inevitable fate of the kind of petty bourgeois groups who formed the core of Neues Forum. They can often play a very effective political role, as we saw from the theory of deflected permanent revolution, by benefiting from the impotence of the two major classes. Or, as in the case of the KOR activists in Poland, they can ally themselves to the working class. Or, as in the Hungarian case, they can align themselves with a section of the ruling class, although this option allows them very little distinctive political profile. The East German opposition could not align themselves with the ruling class, did not align themselves with the working class and were a dispensable commodity as far as the West German ruling class was concerned. They bloomed briefly in the revolution of the flowers, but wilted quickly in the heat generated when real class forces came to dominate the scene.
The fall of the Berlin Wall signalled that the end of the state capitalist system in Eastern Europe was only a matter of time. Jan Urban, a leading figure in Czechoslovakia’s Civic Forum, recalls:
Poland, Hungary and now East Germany were moving. What about us? On 9 November 1989 the Berlin Wall was breached. Now it was completely clear that Czechoslovakia would be next on the list. [75]
The difference between the Prague Spring of 1968 and the revolution of 1989, as far as Urban is concerned, is that ‘20 years ago it was predominantly a matter of a crisis of legitimacy within the governing Communist elite in one country of the Communist bloc. In 1989 ... it was the Czechoslovak variant of the crisis of legitimacy of whole Communist system’. Although the Czechoslovak regime did not accumulate debt on the Polish scale it did, consequently, create a ‘painful internal debt ... so the structure and equipment of industry became unmaintainable. The transportation system was old, services undeveloped and natural environment devastated’. [76] In common with other ruling classes in Eastern Europe, the Czechoslovak ruling class was losing faith in the state capitalist method of accumulation. The onset of perestroika in Russia from the mid-1980s deepened this mood.
There had long been dissident groups in Czechoslovakia. The most famous of them was Charter 77, patterned on KOR in Poland but more oriented on achieving ‘civic rights’ and less on working class activity. But the real mobilisation of the mass of the population only really took hold after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Throughout 1988 and 1989 many thousands signed petitions of protest against the Czechoslovak regime, the largest of which were organised by the church. Demonstrations did not attract more than 10,000. Indeed, as late as 28 October 1989 this was the number in Prague’s Wenceslas Square when at the same time Leipzig was seeing demonstrations of 150,000 to 300,000. These demonstrations, and the ones that followed, were met with beatings and mass arrests by the police.
Sections of the regime clearly hoped they could stage manage a transition which would maintain nearly all their power. They needed to reform the political system by separating party, state and economic structure and, at the same time, win Gorbachev’s approval. But events ran beyond their control, although not so far beyond as to endanger the whole process of transition to capitalist parliamentary democracy. On 17 November riot police made a violent attack on a Prague demonstration, and a carefully planned security operation was mounted to make it seem as if a student, Martin Smid, had been killed. The incident was meant to be reported by the dissident press. The security forces then planned to produce the unhurt student, discredit the opposition and pave the way for ‘reform Communist’ Zdenek Mlynar to replace Husak as president. At the same time a StB security service briefing was arguing:
Use influential agents to intensively infiltrate opposition parties. Aim to disinform the opponent. Compromise the most radical members of the opposition and exacerbate divisions within the opposition. At the same time, create conditions for StB officers to obtain civil service promotions and posts at selected companies.
The narrower part of this plan, to replace Husak, failed for two reasons. Firstly, Mlynar refused to play his allotted part, even though Gorbachev sought to persuade him. Secondly, and more importantly, after the fall of the Berlin Wall the mass movement took on a momentum which swept aside such plans for an orderly succession. [77]
A week after the Berlin Wall came down the numbers protesting in Prague rose to 50,000. Two days later, on 19 November, they doubled to 100,000. The next day the numbers doubled again to 200,000. Four days later, 24 November, 500,000 demonstrated in Wenceslas Square and listened to Alexander Dubcek, the disgraced leader of the Prague Spring in 1968. The same day the entire politbureau of the CP resigned.
On 25 November, another crowd of 500,000 gathered to hear Civic Forum leader Vaclav Havel and Dubcek speak. On 27 November three million workers took part in a two hour general strike, and 200,000 demonstrated in Wenceslas Square. The result of this massive spasm of popular activity was that Civic Forum announced the suspension of the demonstrations and the government conceded free elections. Within a week a majority reformist government took over.
The Civic Forum leaders were thrown to the head of the movement, but they did not create it. Indeed, it was not until 19 November 1989 that 400 activists founded Civic Forum. But the long history of dissent by the leaders of Civic Forum, many of whom were Charter 77 activists, made them natural figureheads, symbols of the revolt. But it could not be said that they actively and organisationally prepared the revolt in the way that the KOR activists prepared for, and then built and led, Solidarity. The deficiencies of organisation and ideology were made good by the cumulative weight of the revolutions in Eastern Europe, which led directly to massive mobilisations and the internal decay of the regime. Jan Urban’s recollections make explicit both the rapidity of the regime’s collapse and the limited aims of the opposition:
The entire political power structure collapsed in front of our eyes. We didn’t want to allow the state to collapse with it, so we had to act. There was no one else to do so. There were even moments when we had to support some Communist Party officials against whom we had just fought. [78]
Martin Palous, a philosopher at the university in Prague and one of the founders of Civic Forum, describes a similar experience:
Civic Forum leaders were constantly shocked that their proposals, dreamlike, turned into reality. It gave everyone a false impression that they were really marvellous politicians ... The party structure of communications and power disintegrated. [79]
The crucial weakness lay in the ‘popular front’ style political strategy which the Civic Forum leadership had long espoused. Urban again:
In a few hours we had created, from the far left to the far right, a coalition with only one goal: to get rid of Husak ... We did it ourselves, and having done so, we found out it was not enough. Now we had to change the whole system! We decided that the best way to achieve this was through free elections. [80]
Here the forces which determined the fate of the Czechoslovak Revolution stand out in high relief. An exhausted empire was collapsing. The national regime fell apart under the impact of popular mass mobilisations. The working class was willing to take part in general strike action under the leadership thrown to the fore by the revolution itself. But these leaders previously committed themselves to a perspective which limited the revolution to achieving the kind of political structure which dominates the Western powers. They chose to pursue this aim by a cross-class alliance stretching from the political left to the far right. At the crucial juncture they found that this ideology, and the consequent lack of real roots among the mass of the working class, led them to suspend further mass mobilisations and strikes. What followed was an accommodation between the Civic Forum leaders and members of the ruling class which allowed that class as a whole, barring only a few symbolic political figures, to maintain its power by utilising the new political and economic methods of exploiting the working class.
The Christmas revolution in Romania was significantly different from the revolutions in the rest of Eastern Europe. The violent overthrow of the Ceausescu regime requires careful analysis. Certainly, the Romanian regime was engulfed by the rising tide which had already swept away nearly all the East European dictators by the time it overcame Ceausescu. Demonstrators in Romania chanted, ‘We are the people’, copying those in East Germany. But if the mass movement was inspired by and had much in common with the other revolutions of 1989, the state against which it was pitted was significantly different.
Romanian state capitalism was an unreconstructed and unreformed model. External debt had peaked in the early 1980s and been reduced by means of impoverishing the working class. By 1988 food and fuel rationing was in operation. In Bucharest electricity was reduced to one kilowatt per day per household. The Romanian regime had been less undermined by growing economic links with the West. There was some of the gradual demoralisation obvious elsewhere in Eastern Europe, but it found an impenetrable barrier at the core of the state machine in the tightly knit clique of the Ceausescu family circle. Ceausescu had a long history of distancing himself from Russian foreign policy and defence strategy, and had no sympathy with ‘reform Communism’ of any description. This independence from Moscow earned Ceausescu the admiration of Western rulers and resulted in the granting to Romania of ‘most favoured nation’ trade agreements with the US. Consequently, when faced with unrest the Romanian regime was far more inclined to take the traditional stance of East European rulers – military repression, the response of Jaruzelski in 1981 rather than the response of Jaruzelski in 1989.
The revolt came late in the East European revolutionary calendar when, on 15 December 1989, pastor Laszlo Tokes of the town of Timisoara was served with a deportation order. Tokes was an ethnic Hungarian, a fact that was significant for two reasons. Firstly, Ceausescu had announced the previous year a ‘systemisation’ plan for agriculture which involved the demolition of 7,000 of Romania’s 12,000 villages, many of them in areas heavily populated with ethnic Hungarians. Secondly, a diplomatic war between Hungary and Romania had been raging ever since Hungary began its reform programme, and Ceausescu responded with a series of hardline public criticisms. A few months before the deportation order was served on Tokes, Hungarian television had broadcast an interview with the pastor.
The day after the deportation order was served, 16 December, several hundred blockaded Tokes’ house to stop it being enforced. The following day Ceausescu ranted to his Political Executive Committee about the necessity of opening fire with live ammunition: ‘I did not think you would use blanks; that is like a rain shower ... They have got to kill hooligans, not just beat them’. [81] The same day the Securitate police opened fire, killing 71 protesters. In the following days the protests grew in Timisoara and around the country. Troops withdrew from Timisoara on 20 December after workers threatened to blow up the petrochemical plant, and 50,000 demonstrated and sacked the CP headquarters. The next day Ceausescu’s power collapsed after a staged rally turned into a protest demonstration. The scale of resistance required more than the Securitate to repress it, but the conscript army refused to intervene. The Securitate did fight back, firing on demonstrators. Fighting spread, and during the course of the revolution 700 lost their lives. Ceausescu tried, on 22 December, to address a crowd outside the CP central committee building. The crowd broke into the building and Ceausescu had to flee by helicopter from the roof. The army joined the battle against the Securitate as crowds captured the TV and radio stations. Ceausescu and his wife were captured and shot three days later, on Christmas Day 1989.
The newly formed National Salvation Front dominated the provisional government, which also included some ‘dissidents’ and religious leaders. Romania was one of the most repressive states in Eastern Europe. Its dissidents were hardly numerous or well organised enough to be called a movement. There existed no widely recognised programme of reform even among the intelligentsia. There was no KOR, no Charter 77, no Neues Forum. The National Salvation Front was therefore not a dissident organisation, but one of the groups competing for power which emerged from the old governing class. Given the vacuum of political leadership, such a group was always most likely to be composed of former Stalinists who knew the system and were able to take it over more or less intact. The National Salvation Front’s president, Ion Iliescu, was a former leader of Ceausescu’s youth organisation from the 1960s; the NSF’s second in command was a former Securitate officer and diplomat; another senior NSF figure, Silviu Brucan, was a former editor of the party daily paper and an ambassador. Their ‘opposition’ to the regime was limited to the fact that they had all quarrelled with Ceausescu in the past.
The background of some of the leading figures of the revolution, and their relationship to the apparatchiks of the NSF, is revealing. Ion Caramitru took part in the invasion of the TV studios. He was a well known actor and head of Romania’s National Theatre. Octavian Andronic was a cartoonist and news editor of the party paper Informatia before he launched the free paper Libertatea during the revolution. Nicolae Dide made film sets before he helped storm the central committee building. Later he became a parliamentary deputy. Petre Roman was a professor at the polytechnic when he pushed into the central committee building with the first wave, making his way to the balcony to famously declare that the people had taken power.
The relationship between these middle class activists and the core of the old regime that survived in the NSF is described by geologist Gelu Voican-Voiculescu. He was involved in fighting around the Intercontinental Hotel. He remembers coming to the TV centre the following day: ‘I entered the television centre, just like that, someone off the street. By five o’clock I was one of Iliescu’s team, and five days later I was deputy prime minister. It’s almost unimaginable!’ [82] Petre Roman found that his brief moment of revolutionary heroism gained him a similarly swift induction to the elite. At a meeting in the central committee building he remembers, ‘The former top bureaucrats of the Communist system were gathered and I remember how everyone was of the opinion that Iliescu should assume responsibility ... Among the old guard, Brucan, General Militaru and so on, I was the only one to come from the street’. [83] Nicolae Dide also remembers the scene inside the central committee building:
In the afternoon Iliescu arrived, and that was the point where we lost the revolution. We gave it to him not because we wanted to but because we were not good at revolution. For about two hours we had been an alternative government, the first government of the revolution. When Iliescu and company entered the building they spread out ... General Gheorge Voinea appeared. He said, ‘I want to talk to the revolutionary political structure.’ All of us remained rooted on the spot. None of us had any conception of political structure. At that moment Petre Roman stepped up from behind us, to say, ‘We are here.’ And he took General Voinea off to meet up with Iliescu and his friends to form the National Salvation Front and then they went off to television. General Voinea was part of it. And that’s the way they did it. [84]
Thus a paradox was created: the most complete revolutionary experience of 1989 resulted in the least fundamental social change of 1989.
 
The velvet restoration
The experience of revolution in Eastern Europe in 1989 was a mixture of achievement and disappointment. The real achievement of the 1989 revolutions is that they overthrew a dictatorial political system and replaced it with a form of government in which working people have the right to join trade unions which are not state controlled, to express themselves and to organise politically with a freedom they did not have under the Stalinist regimes. The disappointment is that such a powerful international revolutionary movement ended with the installation of a new economic and political order which preserved the wider power of the ruling class, enabling it to renew the process of capital accumulation by further exploiting the working population. This disappointment can be seen in two spheres; firstly, in the disillusionment of many of the leading figures of the 1989 revolutions, and secondly, in the economic exploitation and political exclusion of the mass of workers throughout Eastern Europe.
Many of the leading opposition figures now look on the results of the 1989 revolutions with a profound sense of disillusionment. Most still regard the limits which they imposed on the revolutionary development as necessary, but they regret the effects of what Adam Michnik calls ‘the velvet restoration’. Comparing the mood in Poland in the 1990s with previous periods of restoration, Michnik writes:
The mark of restoration is sterility. Sterility of government, lack of ideas, lack of courage, intellectual ossification, cynicism, and opportunism. Revolution had grandeur, hope and danger. It was an epoch of liberation, risk, great dreams and lowly passions. The restoration is the calm of a dead pond, a marketplace of petty intrigues and the ugliness of the bribe. [85]
And it is the conduct of Solidarity itself which Michnik holds mainly responsible for this state of affairs:
One does not have to like the Solidarity revolution anymore ... With that revolution the time of Solidarity and Walesa had passed. The great myth turned into caricature. The movement towards freedom degenerated into noisy arrogance and greed. Soon after its victory it lost its instinct for self preservation. That is why the post-Solidarity formations lost the last elections ... Let us emphasise this: it is not so much that the post-Communist parties won as the post-Solidarity parties lost. [86]
But Solidarity lost its imagination and its ability to preserve itself because the aims to which it was limited by its leaders had been achieved – a capitalist economy and a fragile and corrupt parliamentary system. Only a deeper revolutionary policy could have maintained Solidarity’s engagement with its base, but this was precisely the policy that Michnik was instrumental in jettisoning from Solidarity in the 1980s.
Michnik is not alone in his disillusionment. Jens Reich of Neues Forum says:
Strange to say, I am not happy and neither are others around me. Now that the state is decaying, people begin to yearn for some of its more sympathetic traits. In a peculiar way, many of us feel homesick for that inefficient and lazy society which is so remote from the tough and competitive society into which we have been thrust. [87]
Reich laments that ‘one cannot deny it makes a difference whether a young mother, made late for work by her child’s sudden illness, can stay at home and afterwards excuse herself without fuss, or whether such a commonplace family event puts her under considerable stress because there is no spare labour capacity at work ... and she knows that she will find little sympathy or understanding of her plight’. Others, like Jan Urban of Czechoslovakia, see ‘real problems before us’, and that ‘economic difficulties await us’. These include ‘nationalist frictions’ and ‘clashes with dissatisfied workers’. But for Urban this is simply the price which has to be endured in order to secure the ‘beginnings of parliamentary democracy’. [88]
If all that were being recorded here were the disappointments of a few revolutionary dreamers then their sentiments might only be of limited interest. But that is not the case. These are some of the leaders of the 1989 revolutions, and the programme with which they entered those events was anything but extreme. They held a view of the West which incorporated an idealised view of parliamentary democracy and a misapprehension that the kind of economic performance demonstrated by the US in the 1950s was the norm for any capitalist economy. What they got was the crisis ridden, monopoly dominated, anti-welfare capitalism of the 1990s wedded to barely reformed state machines, glossed by a thin varnish of parliamentary representation within which corruption has become rife.
The extent of the failure of capitalist democracy in Eastern Europe is captured in the economic statistics. In all the major economies of the area, except Poland, real GDP was lower in 1997 than in 1989. In Hungary it is 10 percent lower; in the Czech Republic 11.4 percent; in Romania 17.8 percent; and in Russia there has been a drop of over 40 percent. Real wages in the same economies dropped by between 8 and 54 percent between 1989 and 1995. Full employment gave way to unemployment of over 10 percent in most of the economies, excepting Russia (3.4 percent), Romania (6.3 percent) and the Czech Republic (3.1 percent). The numbers suffering low incomes have risen to between 20 and 60 percent of the population across the region. [89] Looking out over this vista the Financial Times’ Philip Stephens was forced to concede:
The common assumption was, and still is, that the defeat of communism marked the triumph of democracy. In fact, the victor was capitalism...the EU’s contribution to the creation of a democratic Russia has amounted to a few billion euros and the despatch of a handful of economists from the Chicago School. And to Moscow’s former satellite states, the union has offered plentiful promises and precious little else. [90]
This is what lies beneath the disappointment of the revolutionaries. The mass unemployment, the destruction of welfare rights, the speed up and intensification of the work process have created this mood. Two major social forces have emerged to fill the vacuum where the revolutionaries had no further programme to deal with these issues. The first is reformism, often embodied by the reconstituted Communist parties of the old order. The second is nationalism and national rivalry, which has made two countries of Czechoslovakia and ignited internal conflict across the former Eastern bloc. But by far the most catastrophic effect of the 1989 nationalist revival has been the break up of Yugoslavia.
The destruction of Yugoslavia is, as much as any of the more trumpeted gains of 1989, a child of the revolutions of that year. Firstly, like Romania, there was an enormous upsurge of class struggle inspired by the other East European revolutions. And the former Communist ruling class met this challenge by playing the nationalist card, notably in Serbia, Croatia and Kosovo. But this process was enormously accelerated by the acts of the Western powers who were keen to dismember the country. Germany led the way, flushed by its unexpectedly easy victory in shaping the unification of the country, by encouraging the independence of wealthy Slovenia. But at every step of the way in the last decade all the major powers have concentrated their efforts in the continued dismemberment of the area, finally provoking in 1999 the first war involving the main imperial powers on European soil since 1945.
Thus the disillusionment of the revolutionaries of 1989 was qualitatively different from that which afflicted their forebears. The Levellers, the Sons of Liberty and Babeuf were disappointed because their programmes could not be realised. The Bolsheviks’ programme was simply defeated by counter-revolution. But the democratic revolutionaries of 1989 were disappointed because their programmes were realised. The fault lay in the programme, not in the limits of the objective situation or the power of the forces opposing them.
 
South Africa and the ANC: the bitter fruit of freedom
It might seem that there were few similarities between the Stalinist states of Eastern Europe and the apartheid state in South Africa. Yet there were strong likenesses in certain crucial areas – both societies were industrialised by a process of strong state direction and in relative isolation from the world economy. South African apartheid, like Stalinism, faced its terminal crisis because it was unable to transform this method of capital accumulation when new realities faced it in the 1970s and 1980s. And the South African ruling class, like its East European counterparts, tried to meet the opposition of a revolutionary mass movement with a strategy of partial reform and negotiation.
Deep racial segregation marked the South African state all this century, but it became codified and further institutionalised in 1948 with the ascendancy of the Afrikaner National Party in the elections of that year. This system endured the major challenge which resulted in the 1960 Sharpeville massacre. But in the 1970s the Soweto uprising and the rise of the black consciousness movement, followed in the 1980s by the growth of independent black trade unions, marked successive phases in the crisis of apartheid.
During this 30 year period the structure of South African capitalism was transformed in some vital respects. In the pre-war period South African capitalism had been dominated by its agricultural and mining sectors. In 1936 these contributed a total of 34 percent of GDP, compared with manufacturing and construction’s 13 percent. But industrial development during and after the war, sponsored by state direction of industry and import controls, transformed the economy so that the manufacturing and service sectors became predominant. By 1970 agriculture and mining had dropped to a total of 18 percent and manufacturing and construction had risen to 27 percent of GDP. [91]
Protectionism had been a feature of the inter-war South African economy, as of many others. The Second World War saw tremendous growth of manufacturing industry behind the natural protective wall of the war economy. By 1957 local capital formation accounted for 97 percent of total investment and represented a reinvestment of 30 percent of national income. [92] But after the war South African industry faced increased international competition both within its borders and from other African states. Protectionism was increased in 1959, and after Sharpeville import controls were introduced: ‘Policies of domestic procurement, especially in strategic products such as armaments, energy and transport, also contributed to local expansion’. [93] This method of state led, protectionist development did result in high growth rates for a whole era. But there was a price to be paid, and the price grew greater the more the economy developed. As Merle Lipton notes:
Hothouse development behind protective barriers was for some years effective in maintaining profitability, new investment and growth in manufacturing. But it raised the cost structure of the whole economy, as expensive SA goods had to be used in preference to cheaper imports. As the economy developed and diversified, the costs of protection became clearer, not just to consumers, but also to businessmen, because their inputs were also protected and therefore costly. [94]
State control of the economy was closely linked to apartheid. The maintenance of segregation in the labour market, on which white petty bourgeois and working class support for the state depended, could only be maintained through state direction of industry and isolation from the international economy. Opening the economy to international competition would have meant that South African firms would have had to compete more directly with foreign companies which did not have the burden of apartheid to carry, either in terms of higher wages for whites or the low skills and training of blacks.
But the longer the South African variant of state capitalism remained unchanged, the more it exhibited some of the same signs of crisis as the economies of Eastern Europe. Growth rates declined, as they did throughout the world when the long post-war boom ended. But the resulting problems were made worse by the nature of apartheid. From 1946 to 1970 average annual growth in manufacturing was 7 percent; from 1969 it declined to 2.6 percent; by 1977 it was negative. The restriction of the internal market, an unavoidable consequence of apartheid’s impoverishment of the black population, further limited growth. A restricted internal market encouraged manufacturers to look abroad for sales – yet the protected nature of the South African economy meant that their goods were not competitively priced in international markets. Thus the contradictions of apartheid resulted in a massive expansion of borrowing from the international banking system.
Some sections of the South African ruling class had long believed that partial reform of apartheid was necessary. The words of Anton Rupert, chairman of the Anglo-American conglomerate, were representative of this view: ‘We cannot survive unless we have a free market economy [and] a stable black middle class.’ Eventually a majority were driven to this conclusion by a mixture of economic imperatives and the threat of revolution from below. Yet even while they reached this conclusion, and even while arguments about the speed and direction of reform continued amongst them, a majority of the ruling class also remained convinced that their economic security, and therefore the role of the state as the guarantor of safe conditions for capital accumulation, could not be endangered by the reform process. To the extent that either reform or pressure from below threatened the fundamental existence of private property, the ruling class turned its face against compromise.
This explains the chequered history of attempts at ‘top down’ reform of apartheid. Prime minister Vorster’s attempts at reform and at détente with the frontline African states in the 1970s collapsed in the face of the Angolan war and the Soweto riots. A new clampdown followed. The Riekert and Wiehahn reports, both issued in 1979, renewed reform by trying to develop a black business class and a stable working class which could act as a consumer base for a modern capitalist economy. The most important aspect of these proposals was the Wiehahn report’s provision for the legalisation of independent black unions, which expanded enormously through the early 1980s.
The expansion and militancy of the black independent unions was decisive in convincing the ruling class that unreconstructed apartheid was resulting in the build-up of revolutionary pressure within the system. But only when it seemed possible to separate the reform of apartheid from any threat to capitalist property did the majority of the ruling class accede to the reform project. Crucial in confirming to the ruling class that reform of apartheid and a challenge to capitalist relations of production were not the same thing was the attitude of the leaders of the African National Congress (ANC) and the South African Communist Party (SACP).
The ANC was born in 1912 as a predominantly middle class led organisation focused on constitutional change: ‘The ANC ... drew its leadership largely from the small urban elite – teachers, priests, lawyers and doctors. Its policy was termed “moderate” – removal of discrimination, constitutional means of change, the gradual extension of a qualified franchise’. [95] The relationship with the Communist Party and the ascension to the ANC leadership of former Youth League members Nelson Mandela, Oliver Tambo and Walter Sisulu radicalised the organisation in the late 1940s. In 1955 the ANC adopted the Freedom Charter, the document demanding a number of democratic and civil rights reforms which remained the foundation of ANC politics until the final victory over apartheid in the early 1990s.
The guiding principle of the Freedom Charter, the ANC’s general strategy, and the politics of the Communist Party which informed both, was the stages theory of revolution. The principal argument of this approach is that South African society was in all essentials a colonial society, ‘colonialism of a special type’ as the SACP described it, in which the colonial ruling class resided within the borders of the colony. The first stage of the revolution would be a democratic anti-colonial struggle, and only after this struggle was complete would it be possible to fight for socialism. In the course of defending the Freedom Charter in 1956 Nelson Mandela put it like this:
The Charter does not contemplate economic and political changes. Its declaration,’The people shall govern’, visualises the transfer of power not to any single social class but to all the people of the country, be they workers, peasants, professionals, or petty bourgeoisie. [96]
As Mandela makes clear, the adoption of the stages theory not only precluded a struggle for socialism, but also effectively submerged specifically working class activity in an all-class ‘popular front’. Furthermore, the aim of such an ‘anti-colonial’ movement was to rid the country of apartheid, but not to smash the capitalist state. As Ronnie Kasrils, leader of the ANC’s armed wing, explained in 1990:
There are revolutionary movements which, at their foundation, addressed the question of seizing state power. These immediately recognised and analysed the use of state power and the need to develop a force to seize state power. With us that was not the ethos. [97]
This broad commitment to a national democratic revolution was combined with a wide range of rhetoric – running from appeals for insurrection to demands for compliance – and an equally variable series of tactics, spanning guerrilla struggle and peaceful negotiation. Which of these strategies were prominent in ANC propaganda was determined by the nature of the struggle between the mass movement and the regime. When guerrilla struggle became fashionable on the left in the aftermath of the Cuban Revolution it also became much more central to the ANC’s approach. When the massive growth of the trade union struggle became the dominant feature of the South African mass movement in the 1980s, the ANC necessarily had to adapt its approach accordingly. But throughout the various phases of the ANC’s political development the overarching theoretical framework remained constant: a stages theory of the revolution in which socialist demands had little immediate relevance. Indeed, it was this conception of the democratic revolution which made such catholic attitudes toward the agency and strategy of the revolution possible. After all, if an alteration of the political regime was the limit of the revolution, then it was possible to imagine that a variety of social forces and strategies might achieve such a goal. If, however, the aim had been socialist revolution, then working class self activity would have determined both agents and strategies with much greater precision.
The ANC’s approach did not go uncontested. Perhaps the greatest challenge to the authority of the ANC and the SACP came with the growth of the independent unions in the early 1980s. These unions, first gathered in the Federation of South African Trades Unions (FOSATU), were originally highly democratic in structure, workplace based and militant. The activists who led them at first developed an approach to the struggle which laid far greater stress on working class self activity, and on socialist ideas in general, than had previously been common in the ANC.
The SACP and its trade union organisation, the South African Congress of Trade Unions (SACTU), were at least as surprised by this development as was the regime. The SACTU had held that the South African state was virtually ‘fascist’, and that no genuine trade unions could grow in this atmosphere. As late as June 1982 a SACTU position paper was arguing:
SACTU was forced underground. And there is nothing to suggest that the apartheid regime will ever tolerate a strong, progressive and open trade union movement for very long. It would be a mistake to act on this basis. [98]
The new unions created an alternative pole of attraction inside the working class movement and provoked an enormous and critical debate about the future of the revolution. FOSATU general secretary Joe Foster and president Chris Dlamini forcefully argued that the experience of anti-colonial revolutions proved that the regimes they created did not give workers power or even guarantee the most basic demands of the working class. ‘Worker liberation can only be achieved by a strong, well organised worker movement,’ Dlamini stated. Following a visit to Zimbabwe, he observed that the people were liberated but the workers were not. [99] The ANC and the SACP reacted sharply to this challenge insisting that the CP was the party of the working class:
Dare FOSATU ignore this? And dare it ignore the confusion and division it will sow in the ranks of the working class if it sets up a new ‘workers’ movement’ in competition with or alongside the still living Communist Party? [100]
The debate between the ‘workerists’ from the new unions and the ‘populists’ of the ANC continued up and through the expansion of the independent union movement to include the huge National Union of Mineworkers, among others. The enlarged federation was called the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU). Even at this point:
There was still a great deal of antipathy towards the SACP and their two stage national democratic revolution strategy. Some saw the SACP...formulations as diluting specific working class concerns in its alliance with the ANC and of placing the struggle for socialism on the back burner. The SACP itself continued to argue that ‘workerism’ was necessarily ‘reformist’ and lashed out at the ‘workerists’ who mooted the idea of forming a specifically workers’ party as not dedicated to the ‘overthrow of capitalism’. [101]
Ultimately the SACP and the ANC were able to win both this argument and the allegiance of the best ‘workerists’, like Moses Mayekiso, the general secretary of the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa, because they could provide a wider political perspective than their opponents. The ‘workerists’ were right in their criticisms of the SACP/ANC strategy, but they had no theory about how the struggle for socialism and the struggle against apartheid could be combined in a way which did not subordinate one to the other. This allowed the SACP leaders to portray themselves as more ‘revolutionary’ and more ‘political’ than their workerist rivals. SACP central committee member Jeremy Cronin recalls this debate:
The party intervened around ... the so called populist-workerist debate by saying: The way forward lies neither through workerism in the narrow sense of economism or syndicalism nor through populism ... We need a class perspective, we need to defend socialism, but also the national liberation struggle was the immediate struggle to be fought. [102]
The syndicalist approach of the workerists played into the SACP’s hands. The workerists’ inability to show how the working class struggle was central to a broader assault on apartheid and capitalism, that is to develop a strategy drawing on the insights of Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution, was a decisive weakness. Instead, they saw the unions as defending workers’ interests ‘within the wider popular struggle’, as Joe Foster put it during a crucial policy debate. [103] Neither could they show that they had an alternative and superior model not only of working class self activity but also of revolutionary organisation. Thus they were always at an ideological and organisational disadvantage when dealing with the SACP. The experience of the socialists in the South African unions, like that of KOR activists in Poland, is testimony to the fact that faith in rank and file militancy is only the beginning of a revolutionary perspective. To bring such a project to a successful conclusion in the face of rival political projects, a broader revolutionary theory, and a party which attempts to win a minority within the class to that theory, is necessary.
In the absence of such a commitment on the part of the workerists, the ANC was able to incorporate the massive social force represented by the new unions into its democratic revolution strategy. The ANC gained a huge and decisive addition to its arsenal by this adoption:
The intensity of grassroots struggle continued well into 1986. The ANC and its internal UDF [United Democratic Front] allies were riding high ... With the added strength of COSATU an attitude of supreme confidence reigned that liberation, or as the nationwide slogan proclaimed, ‘People’s Power’, was just around the corner. [104]
The ANC never abandoned the rhetoric of revolutionary struggle. Indeed, the decline in the international significance of guerrilla struggles (and its obvious ineffectiveness in the South African case) combined with the rise in organised working class resistance, both in the unions and the townships, to propel the ANC into adopting an insurrectionary language more akin to the classical Marxist tradition. There was talk of ‘dual power’ as the basis of a revolutionary challenge to the regime. But such an approach could never become the settled strategy of the SACP or the ANC without the wholesale rejection of the stages theory of revolution. Only when smashing the capitalist state becomes the objective can the question of dual power be raised seriously. If removing apartheid and establishing a non-racial parliamentary capitalist regime is the objective then the mass movement is only necessary to compel change in the political superstructure. Thus the mass movement of the 1980s became the adjunct of a strategy aimed at a negotiated settlement, just as the ANC’s previous adherence to the armed struggle had been. In 1985 Oliver Tambo told a radio audience:
They [domestic capital] ... want to reform the apartheid system in such a way that the result is a system that secures their business but is minus racial discrimination. And that is ... a system that falls short of the stipulation of the Freedom Charter ... Well, we do not think that such a system is different. [105]
But a year later Tambo was arguing that the ANC’s aim was not ‘military victory but to force Pretoria to the negotiating table’. [106]
Despite the state of emergency declared by P.W. Botha in June 1986, the union-dominated struggles of the 1980s were the final, crucial conflict which propelled the regime down the path of reform. The victory of the SACP in the ideological battles inside the union movement during the 1980s meant that COSATU now shadowed the national negotiations in the industrial sphere. COSATU signed accords with the state and began participation in the National Manpower Commission, devoting increasing energies to institutionalising bargaining arrangements with the state and the employers. But there were also other factors at work.
As part of the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Iceland in 1986 it had been unofficially agreed that aid to Third World clients would be scaled down. The cessation of Russian and East German aid in everything from weapons to the printing of journals was a blow to the ANC and a further pressure in the direction of a negotiated settlement. The 1988 New York agreement involving Russia, Cuba, the US and South Africa ended the war in Angola. It was a defeat for South Africa and so helped to create a willingness to reform. But the New York agreement also underlined the fact that Russia was no longer willing to support the ANC’s armed struggle. And in the wake of these developments the US sponsored a massive propaganda offensive through a variety of non-governmental organisations. Financial assistance was channelled through a ‘Human Rights Fund’ and a ‘Labour Union Training’ operation. This last organisation was controlled by the African-American Labour Institute of the US union federation AFL-CIO, previously denounced by the SACP as a CIA front. More aid poured in through the ‘Special Self-Help Fund’ for ‘community development’, projects for students to be educated in the US, and the National Endowment for Democracy’s fund for ‘strengthening democratic institutions’, another project thought to have close CIA links. [107]
The crucial element, however, was the growing sense among South Africa’s rulers that the ANC would negotiate a settlement which would leave their fundamental economic power untouched. As Zach de Beer, executive of the giant Anglo-American corporation, had put it in 1986:
We all understand how the years of apartheid have caused many blacks to reject the economic as well as the political system. But we dare not allow the baby of free enterprise to be thrown out with the bathwater of apartheid. [108]
It was on precisely this crucial point that the ANC’s stages theory of revolution allowed it to compromise with the desires of capital. In 1987 the ANC’s national executive unequivocally stated:
Once more we would like to affirm that the ANC and the masses of our people as a whole are ready and willing to enter into genuine negotiations provided they are aimed at the transformation of our country into a united and non-racial democracy. This, and only this, should be the objective of any negotiating process. [109]
The path to the eventual majority rule settlement was still the subject of great conflict between the mass movement and the regime. But this conflict was no longer over whether or not there would be a social revolution in which capitalist relations would be challenged. Now the conflict was reduced to one in which the contending parties fought to decide who would have how much power inside a new parliamentary capitalist system. The de Klerk regime was quite willing to use the violence of the security forces, and to stir up reactionary forces like Inkatha, to force the ANC into accepting a more disadvantageous settlement than it wanted. The ANC for its part realised that it could not operate effectively without mass mobilisation as a counterweight to the violence of the state. This was its sole bargaining counter of any real value. But on both sides it was understood that these forces were now adjuncts to the negotiations. Just 12 weeks after the fall of the Berlin Wall, de Klerk used the state opening of parliament to announce the unbanning of the ANC and the SACP. This, and the freeing of Nelson Mandela nine weeks later, was a watershed. The regime could not go back to full blooded apartheid and the ANC would not go forward to a struggle against capitalism. Even those who were critical of the slow pace and inadequate gains made in the negotiations, like Ronnie Kasrils, saw the mass movement as a tool which could create a ‘Leipzig option’ in which ‘de Klerk is propelled out the exit gate’. That is, the democratic revolution would be attained by faster, ‘bottom up’ methods.
Even this was not to be, but not because the popular movement lacked the desire to take this path. There was constant dissent and outbreaks of struggle which threatened to break the limits of the ANC/SACP’s strategy. Even SACP central committee member Jeremy Cronin later admitted that ‘there was a tendency to underemphasise socialism ... I think the party underrated the mass support, particularly working class support, for socialism’. [110] And this estimate is supported by survey evidence stretching back through the 1980s and 1970s showing sustained support for revolutionary ideas among a substantial section of black militants and workers:
The Buthelezi Commission found ‘a growing climate of revolutionary ideology’, with violence becoming a ‘respectable option’, particularly among the educated. However, militancy was not necessarily correlated with racist or undemocratic views ... Hanf concluded that ‘the more democratic a black South African is, the stronger his demands for political rights, and the readier he is to adopt non-peaceful means to attain them’ ... Marxism has become influential among younger blacks, and surveys showed a growing hostility to capitalism, though this may have been mainly to white capitalism. [111]
Yet the ANC’s hegemony, and its two stage theory, survived. Indeed, it survives to this day with opinion poll support well above 50 percent in the population as a whole and 70 percent among blacks. But nearly a decade after the ANC entered negotiations the bitter fruits of compromise are easy to see. The central promise to build a million homes has still not been delivered, in part because of corruption and mismanagement by the new black elite, but mainly because resources have not been made available. It is the same story with the provision of education. Unemployment, at more than 40 percent, is higher than it has ever been. [112] And in 1997 state expenditure on health was a smaller percentage of the total budget than it was in 1991. [113]
This is the tragedy of a working class movement which both objectively had the power and subjectively had the willingness to overturn the capitalist system. Yet it is still suffering the same injustices and deprivations under the black bosses it elected as it did under the white bosses it did not elect. But such is the reality of power in capitalist societies, as workers in the parliamentary capitalist regimes of the West have long experienced. Whatever power parliament possesses is easily negated by the economic power of the capitalist class. Changing the skin colour of government ministers may signify a defeat for racism, but it does not alter the fundamental fact of class exploitation and oppression for the vast majority of black South Africans.
 
The left and the Indonesian Revolution
Indonesian society in the 1950s and 1960s, the two decades after independence from the Netherlands, was dominated by a state bureaucracy which became the leading force in investment and corporate ownership. No great landed families existed as they had done in Europe and Latin America. Consequently, the state bureaucracy which led the industrialisation process was not subordinated to the same degree to a pre-existing conservative oligarchy. The middle classes, the other crucial contending class force in earlier transitions to capitalism, were also weak. The middle classes were composed of a small layer of professionals and intellectuals allied to a wider group which depended almost entirely on the state bureaucracy for their employment. This state machine and its huge military industrial complex increasingly dominated Indonesian society, from independence under Sukarno, through Suharto’s bloody coup in 1965, until the 1980s.
Over this period the international economic climate changed dramatically, and so did the economic role of the state. As the world economy grew in the post-war period the Indonesian state adopted the autarkic, isolationist model of development common to the Stalinist states and many post-colonial Third World regimes in the 1950s and 1960s. As late as the early 1980s the economy was more highly regulated and controlled than at any time since the 1930s. But in the late 1980s and into the mid-1990s, just at the end of the 15 year period in which the South East Asian boom doubled Indonesian GDP, the state moved towards a strategy of promoting international investment and attracting foreign investment. This process was accelerated in 1982 and 1986 by the decline in state controlled oil revenues, which had helped boost annual growth to 7 percent between 1973 and 1981. [114] The result was greater reliance on private investment. The finance sector was deregulated and state monopolies in banking, television, airlines and public utilities were brought to an end. The result was a massive surge in private corporate capital during the 1980s. [115]
The resulting overproduction produced an economic crash which was, in turn, a major cause of the May 1998 revolution. The fate of the revolution is caught up with the transformation of the class structure which accompanied the earlier economic growth. The rise of a newly confident middle class is obvious from the sight of the canyons of corporate skyscrapers which line the main highways of Jakarta, interspersed with luxurious, air conditioned shopping malls whose patrons go home to the new security guarded and enclosed housing developments. The number of new apartments aimed at the middle class and corporate elite, and worth between US$100,000 and US$500,000, rose from 753 in 1985 to 8,427 in 1992.
This new middle class remains tied to the state in many ways and certainly looks to the state to protect it from ‘the mob’. But in recent years it has also chafed against the limits of the old Suharto power structure. Such divisions have limited the political effect of this class:
It is little wonder that middle class reformers have made such limited political progress in the last 40 years. Internally divided, dependent upon the state and fearful of social and economic chaos, they have largely been immobilised. [116]
But the economic transformation of the last two decades has built up pressure on the regime from the middle class. Some of this pressure is not directly political: demands for efficient public services, medical facilities, rational building codes and so on. One account, written before the overthrow of Suharto, noted:
… stronger demands from the ‘new capitalists’ who are not part of the large conglomerates for a level playing field, a more transparent regulatory regime, and stricter control over the business activities of the families of high government officials. Such demands...have been increasingly heard during the 1990s, reflecting the growing strength and confidence of the indigenous middle class, working in the private sector as white collar employees, as employers or as independent, own account workers. [117]
These demands meshed with the kind of pressures from the major powers that we have seen also existed in South Africa:
By attempting to ignore ... politically unpalatable but nevertheless important new issues within its supposedly all encompassing corporatist structures the state has allowed room for institutions and expertise outside its apparatus to take the lead. This has resulted in rapid expansion of non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in areas such as legal aid and human rights, environmental matters, community development and social research. Often receiving foreign funding, especially from Western European foundations, NGOs now employ many highly qualified younger generation lawyers, economists, managers, researchers and organisers. [118]
This layer of the middle class and their allies in the ruling class were certainly not the moving force behind the overthrow of Suharto. But once that had been achieved by other forces, their political representatives, whether in the elite already or figures who had been excluded from it during previous dynastic quarrels, moved to ensure that their own agenda dominated the movement. They, like a previous generation of middle class activists in the deflected permanent revolutions discussed earlier, could only act because of the space created by other classes. And, unlike their forebears, the Communist Party had not been their political organisation nor revolutionary nationalism their ideology. For this generation the NGOs and academic forums provided much of the organisation, and the ‘Western values’ of democratic civil, society and free market economics provided the ideology.
So who did create the revolutionary situation which allowed the middle class politicians to act? In May 1998 the Suharto dictatorship was broken by a mass student movement which coincided with, and gave political direction to, an uprising of the urban poor. There has been some discussion on the Indonesian left about whether the fall of Suharto can be called a revolution at all. The evidence usually adduced to support the claim that nothing approaching a revolution took place in May 1998 is that Suharto was deposed by a kind of ‘internal coup’ within the governmental machine, and that the figures who replaced him at the apex of government, President B.J. Habibie and armed forces chief General Wiranto, were both members of the Suharto elite.
It is certainly true that there was no social revolution in May 1998. No class was overthrown, no mode of production transformed. But was there a political revolution in which the nature of the governmental system was changed? The fact that the immediate cause of Suharto’s resignation was that all his 14 senior economic ministers refused to serve in his cabinet and his senior army officer told him the security situation was bleak does not prove the case one way or another. [119] The key question is why these long serving elite figures acted in this deeply uncharacteristic way. After all, the regime was a personal dictatorship and nothing of this kind had ever happened before. The governmental elite acted in this way because the student demonstrations, the occupation of the parliament building and the urban riots made it plain that if Suharto did not go then the entire economic system, as well as the existing political system, stood under threat. The elite reacted to the economic crisis and under pressure from below – and so began a process of transformation which has not yet run its course.
The Habibie regime is a classic example, on the political level at least, of a provisional government. The parallels with the provisional government in Russia after the February 1917 revolution are especially striking. The February revolution resulted in a regime that preserved much of the tsarist state while forcing the abdication of the tsar himself, just as the May revolution in Indonesia resulted in a regime which preserved much of the Suharto state while forcing the abdication of Suharto himself. The provisional government of 1917 was led by Prince L’vov, a member of the tsarist aristocracy, and in 1998 the Indonesian government formed in May 1998 was led by a ‘prince’ of the Suharto ‘aristocracy’, B.J. Habibie. The Russian capitalist class, with the conditional support of the officer class of the army which was central to the tsarist state, hoped that the new regime would stabilise the situation and preserve their power:
The February revolution of 1917 which overthrew the Romanov dynasty was ... welcomed and utilised by a broad stratum of the bourgeoisie and of the official class, which had lost confidence in the autocratic system of government and especially the persons of the tsar and his advisers; it was from this section of the population that the first provisional government was drawn. [120]
The Habibie government represented very similar forces with very similar intentions. The first provisional government in Russia was almost exclusively composed of ruling class figures. Indeed, the Bolsheviks’ paper Pravda denounced the provisional government as ‘a government of capitalists and landowners’, [121] just as socialists and others in Indonesia today denounce the Habibie government as a continuation of Suhartoism without Suharto.
That the provisional government came during successive crises throughout 1917 to include socialist ministers was a product of the force exerted on it from the outside by the revolutionary movement. Such ‘socialist’ evolution had nothing to do with the intrinsic nature of the provisional government itself. Indeed, if we look at the policy of the provisional government, rather than at its personnel, it becomes obvious that the fundamental nature of the government was not changed at all by the inclusion of socialist ministers. The government continued to prosecute the imperialist war, continued to oppose the seizure of the factories by the workers and the land by the peasants, and continued to resist the pressure of the workers’ councils. It continued on this path after the socialists joined it, just as it had done before they arrived.
Nevertheless, for all these striking similarities between the provisional government of 1917 and the Habibie government, there are also some equally striking differences. Most importantly the provisional government of 1917 represented a break between an old semi-feudal governmental layer around the tsar and a more modern pro-capitalist layer represented by the provisional government. This break was a product of the highly uneven and rapid social development in Russia before the revolution.
In Indonesia the situation is different because capitalist development before the revolution lasted much longer and is more deeply entrenched than in Russia in 1917. The most important index of this fact is the development of the working class: in Russia in 1917 it numbered 12 million out of a total population of 160 million; in Indonesia today it numbers some 86 million out of a total population of 200 million. In short, the Russian working class in 1917 was 10 percent of the population, whereas in Indonesia it represents 43 percent of the population. If we look at the proportion of GDP contributed by the agricultural sector of the economy we see the same extensive growth of industry from another angle. According to the World Bank, agriculture accounted for 53.9 percent of Indonesian GDP in 1960. This fell to a mere 19.5 percent by 1991. In the period 1975–1993 alone the contribution of agriculture to total GDP fell by 50 percent. In 1993, according to the Asia Development Bank, it stood at only 18.4 percent. Russian agriculture was still standing at 19 percent of national product in 1960, a full 53 years after the revolution. [122]
Even before the Indonesian revolution, one commentator noted that ‘growing numbers of unskilled and semi-skilled wage workers in the non-agricultural sectors of the economy were demanding more autonomous worker organisations which could press for better wages and working conditions’. [123] This reflects the changing profile of the Indonesian working class where there has been a ‘particularly striking ... increase in the proportion of the labour force comprising employees in both industry and services.’ Indonesia, like many developing countries, still possesses a huge pool of surplus and semi-employed labour – the urban poor. But the economic growth of recent decades has had an effect even here: ‘Accelerated economic growth ... from the late 1960s has pulled labour from...the traditional economy into wage employment in modern enterprises run along capitalist lines’. [124] This is important because the popular base of middle class politicians like Megawati is often composed of the urban poor and the smallest of the petty bourgeoisie who live among them. But the growing weight of the working class enables socialist arguments to carry greater weight among these sections of the population than they would have done before, provided such arguments are clearly articulated by socialist organisations who do not allow the liberal bourgeoisie an open field.
The increasingly capitalist nature of Indonesian society can also be seen if we look at the ruling class. The Suharto regime was dictatorial and militaristic as far as its political form was concerned, but it was not a semi-feudal regime in its economic content. Nor did it rest on semi-feudal landowning classes. It was a fully capitalist regime intent on using the state machine to develop the economy and break into the world market. This difference becomes politically important when we consider the nature of the Habibie regime. The Russian bourgeoisie wanted to clear away the tsarist excrescences and remodel the state machine, although in the event they were too cowardly to do so. The Indonesian bourgeoisie has even less reason to want to interfere with the state which Suharto built. This is obviously true of Habibie, Wiranto and their like because they have been loyal servants of this state from the beginning. But it is also true of the liberal opposition of Megawati and Amien Rais. They represent would-be alternative governmental parties. They certainly do not represent an alternative class to the present government. The Financial Times had this to say at the time of Megawati’s party congress in Bali last October:
The upside of this for foreign investors is that Mrs Megawati...rejected appeals to restrict access to foreign investors, hamper the free market or break up the conglomerates which dominate the Indonesian economy but are also, in times of crisis like this, the main source of cash. [125]
Amien Rais’s economic programme is not qualitatively different to that of Megawati, who he joined in an electoral alliance in May 1999. The desire of Megawati and Amien Rais to run the Indonesian state with as little alteration as possible does not mean, however, that they will not give voice to demands for reform if they believe that raising such issues are necessary to unseat Habibie. But they will prefer to do this with as little threat to ‘order’ as possible, they will pray that they can do so constitutionally, that the popular movement will not force them to make uncomfortable choices. They hope that demonstrations, riots and strikes will give way to peaceful, ‘democratic’ development. One Western diplomat accurately captured Megawati’s dilemma:
The elite feel they can trust her. But her base is clearly with the poor people. People who have been disempowered, who want wealth and power sharing. She can’t be both a leader of the elite and the poor. [126]
If, however, the mass movement does not agree to fulfil its allotted role as stage army and voting fodder for the liberal opposition there is little doubt that the fundamental loyalties of both Megawati and Amien Rais will be to the Indonesian ruling class and its state.
Certainty in this question rests in part on the analysis of the similarities and differences between Russia in 1917 and Indonesia today. In Russia the bourgeoisie really did need to clear away elements of a pre-capitalist state machine. Even so, they were still too cowardly to do so. The Indonesian bourgeoisie already has a capitalist state machine. Some sections of the bourgeoisie may now wish for a governmental reform which will re-establish the credibility of their state in the eyes of the mass of the population and at the same time hoist their party into power. But the Indonesian liberal bourgeoisie are even more afraid of the popular movement than the Russian bourgeoisie were, because they in no sense represent a fundamentally different class and have no desire for a fundamentally different state.
The only forces that can maintain the forward momentum of the revolution are the workers, students and urban poor who have been the sole source of all its progress to date. And, of these forces, the workers are by far the most important. But this raises the question of what attitude socialists should take to the democratic demands which dominate the revolution at the moment. This question became centrally important when the movement, which subsided after the overthrow of Suharto, revived on an even grander scale in demonstrations at the November 1998 meeting of the People’s Consultative Assembly (MPR).
The sessions of the MPR focused discontent with the Habibie government’s lack of commitment to real change. The mass of workers and students clearly saw how tied to the old Suharto state the new regime remains. This transformed the call for the overthrow of the Habibie government from being the property of relatively small and fragmented demonstrations in September to being the popular aim of mass demonstrations in November 1998. In wide layers of the movement the demand for ‘reformasi’ gave way to the call for ‘revolusi’. These demonstrations, the largest of which involved hundreds of thousands, culminated in the killing of 18 protesters by the Indonesian army and marked a new stage in the Indonesian Revolution.
The November demonstrations failed to unseat the government and replace it with a ‘proper’ provisional government as many of the organisers hoped it would. But the Habibie regime’s attempt to break the opposition movement in a ‘Tiananmen style’ crackdown also failed. The killings outraged many students, workers and urban poor but did not break the movement. The armed forces were weakened by internal divisions as some army units either sided with the demonstrators or remained neutral, including elements of the elite marine units. All these factors meant that the Habibie government, already unstable, was propelled down the road of reform.
The elections, which there had been plans to delay, were called for June 1999. Early in 1999 a pledge was given that a referendum would be granted on autonomy for East Timor. East Timorese and other political dissidents began to be released from jail. The People’s Democratic Party (PRD), the party furthest left on the Indonesian political spectrum, was legalised and allowed to stand in elections, although some of its leading figures remain behind bars. All these reforms were urged on by the US, backed up by Australia. As in South Africa, a variety of NGOs, often with links to the opposition, have been urging on the rapid transition to capitalist democracy.
But the regime did not just trust the outcome of the elections to pro-democratic sentiment. It has reshaped the armed forces, giving the police a separate structure it did not have before. It recruited hundreds of thousands of ‘civilian militia’, armed with shields and bamboo canes, and under military command. And it continued to spread religious and ethnic conflict through agents provocateurs. The aim is not to totally suppress the movement in the Suharto manner, but to keep it within the bounds of the election process and so destroy the possibility of a revolutionary alternative arising among the mass of the population, a fear common in ruling circles at the start of 1999.
The Indonesian bourgeoisie, including its liberal wing, is in an analogous position to the bourgeoisie that Marx described in 1848. It is even now ‘grumbling at those above, trembling at those below’. Megawati and Amien Rais are, like their German precursors, ‘revolutionary in relation to the conservatives and conservative in relation to the revolutionaries, mistrustful of their own slogans, which were phrases instead of ideas, intimidated by the ... revolution yet exploiting it; with no energy in any respect, plagiaristic in every respect’. [127] But the Indonesian liberal bourgeoisie is not in this condition because it is tied to an old feudal order by its late development, but because it is tied to an already developed capitalist state, which they want to reform but not to overthrow. They are also confronted by a working class of far greater size than that which so terrified the German bourgeoisie in 1848.
The Indonesian student movement and the left have been caught off guard by these developments. They did not see the Habibie government as a provisional government, but as a continuation of the Suharto state, and so did not expect this ‘democratic’ development. On the contrary, they expected the state to resist any such change and assumed that it would have to be fought for in a ‘proper’ democratic revolution. Early in 1999 it became apparent that the student movement was divided on this issue. Some wanted to continue fighting under the previous year’s slogans, ‘Down with Habibie’ and ‘End the political role of the armed forces’, in order to push for a real provisional government. Some wanted to settle for making sure that the elections were ‘free and fair’, and so volunteered as election monitors. The PRD seemed split between standing in the elections because the masses were clearly looking to them and boycotting the elections because they were not called by a democratic provisional government.
The solution to this quandary is to be found in the history of previous revolutions. Every revolution, including every socialist revolution, begins with the battle for democratic demands. Socialists should be in the forefront of the fight for all kinds of democratic reforms. The characterisation of the Indonesian state as capitalist and of the Indonesian bourgeoisie as wedded to the state is simply meant to show the limits of democratic politics, the speed with which socialist politics can emerge in the course of the further development of the revolution, and the importance of raising socialist politics. More important still is that socialists raise democratic demands in a different way to those who are simply adherents of the ‘democratic revolution’ and use very different methods and techniques in organising to achieve these demands.
In 1848 Marx insisted that workers stay one step ahead of the liberal opposition and that their demands, while ‘democratic’, should have a specific class content which sets the workers at odds with the liberal democrats. This is why in Indonesia today socialists should not just echo the slogans of the popular movement, slogans which are quite acceptable to Megawati and Amien Rais. For instance, ‘End the dual function of ABRI [the armed forces]’ should always be combined with the slogan, ‘Cut the arms budget, feed the starving.’ The second slogan is still a ‘democratic demand’ in a certain sense, but it raises issues specific to the working class and combines them with an attack on the state which Megawati and Amien Rais will be reluctant to endorse.
And for Marx this approach to the tactics and slogans of the day was part of a wider strategic understanding that a socialist revolution was the goal to which the movement was headed. He did not talk of the workers forming a provisional government, nor did he speculate on what shape a provisional government formed by the bourgeois democrats would take. Marx and Engels understood that class polarisation was dividing the democratic camp. Engels noted that all revolutions begin with a cross-class ‘democratic unity’ against the old order. But, as the revolution develops, the initial phase, the ‘revolution of the flowers’, gives way to political divisions within the revolutionary camp based on underlying class differences. This has been the case in all previous revolutions, including the very first bourgeois revolutions.
But in all the revolutions after 1848 there was the potential for this class differentiation to develop to the point where workers created their own distinctive organs of power: workers’ councils. Of course there are no workers’ councils in Indonesia, and therefore no organised form of dual power. Yet it is not true to say that the Habibie government, or the government formed after the elections, could rule without having to take account of the power of the mass movement. The demonstrations which coincided with the meeting of the MPR clearly forced the government onto the defensive, at least in the short term. The crucial question is how this power can be consolidated into an institutional form which commands the allegiance of wide layers of the working class, and which can become an organising centre of opposition to the government.
One thing seems clear: a ‘real’ or ‘democratic’ provisional government cannot simply be declared. The students’ attempt to create an alternative ‘parliament’ during the November demonstrations was a valuable propaganda weapon, but a real alternative to the Habibie government will have to built from the bottom up, not just proclaimed. Local meetings of activists including students and workers could have begun such a process. Even if these beginnings of workers’ power cannot yet be built, socialists can argue that they should be built and gather around them the best militants in the movement, even if they are a small minority of the working class, on the basis of this programme of action.
For an illustration of this process at work we can turn to the experience of French workers during the strikes of 1995. These strikes involved an all out strike by rail workers combined with a series of one day public sector general strikes. The strikes were called in opposition to the austerity plans of then prime minister Alain Juppé which increased workers’ retirement age, raised the taxes paid by the poor, increased health charges and cut welfare benefits. The strikes were massive by comparison with any struggles in France since 1968, but still far from a revolutionary situation. And while the reformist left in France was represented by two large organisations, the Socialist Party and the Communist Party, the forces of the revolutionary left were small. Nevertheless, French workers began to form rank and file forums in a way which is instructive.
As different sections of public sector workers came out on strike they began to pull out other sections, fuse their separate strike committees and call local assemblies of workers. What follows is the story of one teacher in one local area of Paris. His school had just voted to go on strike:
We went down to the local postal depot which was out on strike. There were about 100 of them having a meeting in the canteen. It was amazing, everyone was applauding us, just a little school! They proposed a local demonstration on Thursday morning, before the national march, to go around the local workplaces. Everyone thought that was a great idea and it was decided straight away to contact other local strikers. Armed with leaflets we set off on a tour of local workplaces-the office of the Paris water company, where a delegation walked straight in while the rest chanted outside, a large residential nursing home, where a group of the home’s workers comes to the door, nearly all low paid, women and black, the big Monoprix supermarket, into which about 20 striking teachers, postal workers, bus workers and school students marched. [128]
Such work made it possible to organise a meeting of 500 workers from workplaces across the locality a few days later. This meeting set up a regular coordinating committee. Similar initiatives were taken in other areas of Paris and in other cities. In Rouen, western France, the rail workers held daily ‘general assemblies’ at the goods yard, where other workers were invited to participate and argue out plans to fight the government. Something similar happened in Dreux, a town of 35,000 people 60 miles from Paris:
The rail workers pushed for a new, open form of struggle against the Juppé plan... Discussions took place in front of comrades from other parts of the private and public sector.
The small premises by the railway line became a humming beehive of activity where everything was debated-how to carry the movement forward, the preparation of demonstrations, providing daily meals, the organisation of the creche for strikers’ children...and the making of links with other sectors. The railway workers went to meet the postal workers, the hospital workers, the gas workers, the teachers, the council workers. And then everyone found themselves together in front of private factories with loudhailers, songs, red flags, leaflets with the call for the general strike in the public and private sectors. [129]
Such councils of action have arisen, frequently spontaneously, in every revolutionary upheaval: in Germany in 1918, in Hungary in 1919, in Italy during the two red years, 1919 and 1920, in Spain in 1936, in Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia and France in 1968 and in Portugal in 1974. They are non-party bodies representing as wide a cross-section of the working class struggle as possible. There may be long periods when they are dominated by moderate socialists who want to compromise with the provisional government, as the Russian soviets were dominated for much of 1917 by the Mensheviks and SRs. The outcome of the Russian Revolution was decided by whether or not the revolutionaries won a majority in the soviets during the course of the revolution. When they did, it enabled them to lead the soviets in smashing the provisional government.
 
What is the People’s Democratic Party strategy?
The People’s Democratic Party (PRD) is the best known left wing organisation in Indonesia and its members have a brave record of opposition to the Suharto regime. Its strategy has widespread support far beyond its own membership. What is the PRD’s assessment of the Indonesian Revolution? The statements, manifestos and interviews with PRD leaders available on the party’s publications and website give a clear account of the PRD’s strategy. [130]
The overwhelming majority of PRD statements, including the ‘Manifesto of the PRD’ issued in July 1996, talk in terms of fighting for ‘a government that is democratic and people-oriented’ and of the need ‘to unify and mobilise the existing democratic forces’. [131] In discussion of the PRD’s approach to the June 1999 elections, Muhammad Ma’ruf, editor of the party’s fortnightly magazine, Liberation, says, ‘We would like the elections to be organised democratically by a provisional government’. [132] In a recent interview Ma’ruf explains, ‘The PRD, Student and People’s Committee Against the Dual Function of the Armed Forces, KOBAR, and KPM (Megawati Supporters Committee) are campaigning for a democratic coalition government comprising forces that have struggled consistently for democracy’. [133] The attainment of a ‘democratic provisional government’ is undoubtedly the PRD’s immediate aim, and so discussion of specifically anti-capitalist struggles and of working class self activity is a secondary factor in these statements. There is no discussion of fighting to set up councils of action as sources of independent working class power in opposition either to the provisional government of Habibie or to any future, more democratic provisional government.
US based PRD supporter Malik Miah believes that the Indonesian Revolution is a ‘democratic revolution’ which aims at the establishment of ‘a more democratic capitalist regime’. He argues, as do many in Indonesia, that there is no possibility, given the current consciousness of the Indonesian working class, for socialist arguments to gain an audience: ‘There is no discussion about overthrowing the market or establishing a government based on a planned economy. That consciousness does not exist there any more than it exists ... in the United States’. [134]
It follows that all socialists can do in this situation is ‘build a stronger democratic movement’ by raising ‘demands to further isolate Habibie and the military from the masses’. This sentiment is echoed by the PRD central committee document entitled Let’s Create Democracy Without ABRI’s Dual Function, in which it is argued that there are positive benefits for the armed forces if they stay out of politics, such as ‘ABRI will no longer be confronting their own people because they are devoting themselves to the interests of certain social groups’. [135] Malik Miah believes that this strategy is founded on the experience of the Bolsheviks during the Russian Revolution:
The real lesson of the Russian Revolution was the programme followed by the Bolsheviks before 1917 ... The pre-1917 programme was to end tsarist rule and establish a bourgeois democratic republic.
It was that correct programme (see Lenin’s Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, discussing the 1905 revolution) that laid the basis for the toilers to have a chance to achieve their own rule. Lenin always defended that strategy. In fact, it was the socialists who disagreed with the Bolshevik strategy and took a more leftist position who were not able to build a party before 1917. [136]
Let us take these points one by one. As we have already seen, it is only partially true to describe the Indonesian Revolution as a ‘democratic revolution’. Indonesia’s revolution is democratic in the sense that it has overthrown a dictatorship and that the Habibie government was forced into making democratic reforms. Actually it would be more accurate to say that the mass movement has de facto created a degree of political freedom which the Habibie regime has been forced to endorse. Indonesia’s revolution is also democratic in the sense that all the major political currents, from Habibie through Megawati to the PRD, now express themselves in favour of democratic government of some kind.
But the Indonesian Revolution is not a simply a democratic revolution in the sense that this term has been used in the Marxist tradition. For Marxists, the democratic revolution refers to conditions in which it is objectively impossible to go beyond the limits of a capitalist economic system and a parliamentary republic. These conditions prevail where a feudal or semi-feudal class still controls and shapes the state, where the working class is too weak to take power, and where the bourgeoisie is the main opposition to the old order. These were the conditions under which the classical bourgeois revolutions, like those in 17th century England, and in America and France in the 18th century, took place. The democratic revolution in these cases was not merely a political phase, created by the subjective weakness of the working class and its political representatives, but a social transformation. It is therefore more properly called a bourgeois revolution, the culmination of the economic and social transition from feudalism to capitalism, not simply a democratic transformation of the political superstructure.
The 1848 revolutions occurred when the further development of capitalism had created a more powerful and numerous working class than had existed during the classical bourgeois revolutions. This development alarmed the bourgeoisie to such an extent that they became more afraid of the class rising beneath them than they were of the old order standing above them, as we saw that Marx and Engels discovered at the time. In 1917 Lenin once again discovered that even in backward Russia the working class would have to directly proceed to simultaneously solve the problems of the democratic revolution and the socialist revolution. The fact that there were ‘phases’ in the development of the consciousness of the working class in 1917 was not a result of objective economic barriers to the socialist revolution. Workers always begin a battle with faith in their traditional leaders, because these leaders tend to reflect the compromises with the system which are the inevitable experience of most workers most of the time under capitalism. But these factors and the consciousness that arises from them only mark the workers’ point of departure; they do not place any limits on the distance they may travel under the impact of revolutionary struggles and the urgings of that organised minority of the class which is its revolutionary leadership.
The social structure of Indonesia is much more advanced than that of Russia in 1917. Indonesia is a capitalist country with a massive working class. More than 30 years ago this working class could support a Communist Party of three million members. Indonesia has no feudal landowning class. The army is controlled by capitalist bureaucrats. The Indonesian state is a capitalist state. Megawati and Amien Rais are bourgeois democrats but they do not face a feudal or semi-feudal state; they face a capitalist state run by the very same class from which they themselves come. What separates Megawati and Amien Rais from Habibie and Wiranto is a difference of political strategy, not a class divide of any kind. This is why the two forces so easily compromise with each other all the time.
Is it at least true, as many on the Indonesian left assert, that the Indonesian working class lacks the consciousness that will permit discussion of a socialist solution to the crisis? It seems obvious that this assertion cannot be true. It hardly seems likely that a class which is suffering from the ravages of a market produced crisis of the depth of that now afflicting Indonesia will be unwilling to listen to criticisms of pro-capitalist policies. Is it really being argued that when the IMF, one of the leading international capitalist agencies, enforced the removal of the rice subsidy there was no Indonesian worker willing to listen to anti-capitalist agitation? When the whole revolutionary movement considers ABRI to be its main enemy, and when this same military machine dominates the state and defends the capitalists’ property from the starving, is it really impossible to combine democratic and anti-capitalist demands?
Moreover, in a country whose Communist Party was the largest outside the Stalinist states it seems clear that, despite the destruction of the left in 1965, a memory of what it stood for will persist among a sizeable minority of workers. Proof of this was inadvertently provided by ABRI’s attempt to start ‘red scare’ in late 1998. The military claimed that the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) was mounting a comeback and that it was infiltrating the PRD. In response The Jakarta Post ran an opinion poll asking respondents if they believed that the PRD was infiltrated by the PKI and if they equated ‘radicalism’ with ‘communism’. The responses were as follows: 75 percent said they did not equate radicalism with communism and 73 percent said they did not think that the PRD had been infiltrated by the PKI. [137] The form in which these questions were posed does not allow us to draw many conclusions about whether or not people supported radicalism, communism or the PRD, although in one of the survey’s most interesting findings, 22 percent said that they believe that ‘communism is very much alive as an ideology’. But it does allow us to prove conclusively that a broad cross-section of Indonesians are aware of the issues and are quite willing and able to engage in debate about them. Among these there certainly exists a militant minority capable of forming a genuinely revolutionary organisation.
Indeed, opinion about the current consciousness of the Indonesian working class seems to be divided in the PRD itself. Although wishing to limit the current demands of the movement to the call for a democratic provisional government, Muhammad Ma’ruf argues that the current consciousness of the movement is running beyond this perspective: ‘Workers’ unrest in particular is increasing everywhere. These last weeks there have been four demonstrations each day in Indonesia. All of them were political and are directed against government leaders at regional and local level’. [138] And when asked in an earlier interview about the ‘thirst for Marxist ideas among campus students in Indonesia’, Ma’ruf replies:
That is true. For 32 years, under the Suharto regime, people were not allowed to learn about Marxism. The government has always said that Marxism is bad, vile, atheist and so on, so many students are anxious to find out what was actually taught by Marx ... Following the May uprising which overthrew Suharto, more and more students have begun to develop a high level of political consciousness. Even on the city buses there are people selling books and photocopied material – usually attacking Suharto. [139]
So even though Ma’ruf contradicts his own report by saying that ‘the workers’ consciousness is still low’, he does not share the pessimism common on the Indonesian left about the consciousness of those in the mass movement. Indeed, his more recent statement following the November demonstrations raises issues which normally receive little attention in PRD material. Ma’ruf argues that ‘no face of capitalism can bring a solution. The only government that can solve the economic catastrophe is a government that is 100 percent supported by the people and that puts into practice an economic programme that is 100 percent controlled by the people.’ He continues:
We are in favour of an uninterrupted movement, an uninterrupted revolution. The struggle for democracy means a freeway for socialism. A strategic demand for the actual situation is the building of people’s councils at every level ... In our propaganda we can make no illusions in bourgeois democracy. We must propagate socialism widely. For instance with the nationalisation of crony capitalism the workers will gain experience about how to nationalise all capitalism. The people’s councils will be the instrument to put the socialist programme into practice. [140]
There is much to welcome in this approach, even though it is not the general approach of the PRD. But, even here, there are still some important issues which need to be clarified. Peoples’ councils – it would be better to call them councils of workers, students and the poor, or simply councils of action – should not been seen as the base on which a new ‘democratic’ provisional government rests, as Ma’ruf has argued. [141] They are organisers of struggle of the working class against the provisional government, even if the political leadership of the provisional government is composed of democrats or socialists. The councils of action can only become governmental bodies if they smash the capitalist state, headed by the provisional government. Until that time, no matter how many administrative functions they begin to take over from the government, they remain primarily organisers of the struggle against the provisional government.
Any provisional government which comes to office before the soviets take power, even if it were to be composed exclusively of members of the PRD and possessed of the best intentions in the world, would still be faced with a state machine which is capitalist and an economy which is still run by the capitalists. Not until the workers’ councils are strong enough to overthrow both the provisional government and the bosses in the factories can revolutionaries think of being part of the government. This is the whole lesson of Lenin’s State and Revolution and of the practice of the Bolshevik Party between February and October 1917. Without this perspective Trotsky’s epitaph for the struggles in France in the 1930s might also come to apply to the Indonesian Revolution:
Recent history has furnished a series of tragic confirmations of the fact that it is not from every revolutionary situation that a revolution arises, but that a revolutionary situation becomes counter-revolutionary if the subjective factor, that is, the revolutionary offensive of the revolutionary class, does not come in time to aid the objective factor. [142]
And if this tragedy comes to pass, the ethnic and religious rivalries, on which the army and the electoral parties are already playing, can take centre stage. This has already begun to happen since the fragmentation of the student movement earlier this year. It will not cease unless the Indonesian ruling class can recreate the boom conditions which suppressed these divisions before the crash of 1997. And if this unlikely eventuality does not come to pass then capitalist democracy will not enjoy even the limited stability it has achieved, at enormous cost to the working class, in South Africa and Eastern Europe. Neither could the major powers stand aside and watch a renewed crisis unfold in Indonesia without intervening. Richard Nixon famously described Indonesia as ‘the greatest prize in South East Asia’. Its importance to the West has risen since then. That is why the US police commanders are now training their Indonesian counterparts in riot control, why Japan is considering sending police to Jakarta, and Australia has mobilised troops to Darwin ready to intervene in East Timor. All of this is regarded by China with the greatest suspicion. Liberation for workers and the oppressed of Indonesia or descent into a crisis of the Yugoslavian type are the alternatives which rest on the outcome of the current struggles in Indonesia.
 
The prospects for revolution
Not every revolution involves the same range of political forces as the East European, South African and Indonesian cases. The Iranian Revolution of 1979, for instance, was ultimately dominated by a very different Islamic ideology to the parliamentary capitalist ideology that triumphed in Eastern Europe and South Africa, although this fact has served to disguise a more fundamental similarity in the class forces which made that outcome possible. Neither is it the case that the transition from authoritarian rule to capitalist democracy is in some way the inevitable outcome of modern economic trends. China, the most populous country on earth, is set on a course of ‘totalitarian market capitalism’. The Tiananmen Square massacre reminds us that the price that opposition forces can pay for adopting a ‘democratic revolution’ strategy can be a great deal higher than a velvet restoration. Indeed, just such a counter-revolutionary solution still hangs over the Indonesian Revolution as one of its possible fates.
The pattern of revolution in the last ten years is also distinct from developments in the parliamentary democracies of the West. All the 20th century revolutions examined above took place in collapsing dictatorships. In these cases the reformist and centrist currents necessarily emerge as interior to the revolutionary camp. This was true of the Mensheviks, the ANC, KOR and the PRD. In the West reformism is already organisationally and politically distinct and feels no need to adopt revolutionary language or methods in the face of an intransigent authoritarian regime. Here, consequently, the undermining of reformism involves a longer process of work by existing revolutionary organisations which utilise united front tactics to win layers of workers away from established labour party type politics. Yet, even while such work is in progress, any revolutionary crisis in the West will throw up new left reformist and centrist currents with similar programmes to KOR, the ANC or the PRD. Learning from their mistakes today can save Western revolutionaries from defeat tomorrow.
But, after all the qualifications have been duly noted, the patterns described in this article are now common enough to justify close examination. Moreover, there have also been similar transformations from authoritarian rule to capitalist democracy in Brazil, Chile, South Korea the Philippines, Portugal and Spain, to mention only some of the most important examples in the last 30 years. The Portuguese Revolution was the equal of any the events of the last ten years in carrying the same explosive charge of popular mobilisation. Others did not. But much of what happened in these cases can best be understood using the framework described here. So what are the principal lessons of recent attempts to revive the idea of the democratic revolution as we face a new century?
In the English, American and French revolutions the level of industrial development and the restricted size, organisation and consciousness of the working class prevented any socialist solution to the conflicts which emerged within the revolutionary camp. But for the revolutions in Eastern Europe, South Africa and Indonesia this was not the case. Each of these countries is an industrialised society in which the ruling class is a capitalist class and the working class is not only a substantial proportion of the population but also has behind it a considerable history of self organisation and a developed class consciousness.
The revolutionary crises which have occurred in these societies in the past decade have been crises of capital accumulation. A particular form of state led capital accumulation which was laid down in the post-war period has proven an inadequate vessel for the renewed conditions of worldwide capital accumulation which have emerged in the period since the end of the long boom in the late 1970s. In each case, authoritarian regimes previously thought impervious to revolt from below were brought to the ground. In the decisive stages of the confrontation in Poland and South Africa the organised working class was a key element in that revolt.
Once the rebellion was under way a process of polarisation within the revolutionary camp took place, much as it had done in all the revolutionary situations analysed in this account – 1649, 1776, 1789, 1848 and 1917. What determined the eventual outcome in all these cases was the way in which the revolutionary leadership which emerged in the course of these struggles interacted with the class battles of which they were a part. What separates the early bourgeois revolutions from the later revolutions is that the organisation of the revolutionaries in the first case mainly emerged only in the course of events and it mainly represented a programme of the bourgeoisie, not an alternative to it. With KOR in Poland, the SACP in South Africa and the PRD in Indonesia the fact that such organisations existed and influenced even quite small numbers before the outbreak of large scale struggles allowed them to become the political beneficiaries of those struggles – even when the objective logic of events pointed in quite another direction than these organisations’ declared strategies.
The industrial struggles in Poland and South Africa in the 1980s might have raised the spectre of social revolution, and this may even have been the more or less conscious aim of the activist rank and file in these struggles (just as it is of the PRD today in Indonesia). These same activists were nevertheless drawn to organisations like KOR and the SACP. And to the extent that KOR and SACP strategies became hegemonic they actually demobilised the struggle by settling for achievements far short of those which the movement was actually capable of attaining. The same would have happened in Russia in 1917 had the Bolsheviks not replaced the Mensheviks as the dominant force in the workers’ movement.
Even those organisations with an orientation on rank and file workers were unable to overcome the problems with which they were confronted by the development of the revolution. In these cases there was a political failure to correctly apprehend the implications of the debate over the socialist revolution and the democratic revolution. KOR had an orientation on the working class, and so did the activists who built the independent unions in South Africa in the early 1980s. And many of the best activists in the PRD and the student movement in Indonesia today also acknowledge the importance of organising workers. But the key activists in KOR came to see Solidarity as the engine of a democratic revolution, and did not maintain their earlier commitment either to the goal of a socialist revolution or to building a revolutionary party. In South Africa a syndicalist orientation on rank and file workers could provide no adequate alternative to the political strategy offered by the SACP – and so eventually became absorbed by it. Even though many of the activists in the new unions were socialists highly suspicious of the ANC’s downgrading of working class struggles, they had neither the ideological reserves nor the party organisation to provide an alternative. Similarly, in Indonesia an orientation on workers is essential to any socialist project, but in itself building militant union organisation will not provide an alternative to the PRD’s democratic revolution strategy.
This points to the high premium to be placed on theoretical clarity and organisation in the revolutionary movement. In all the cases examined here a small and determined minority have exerted massive influence during a revolutionary crisis. But they have only done so by expressing a political programme which reflects the class interests of one major force in the revolution, or by interposing themselves in the vacuum created by contending class forces which have neutralised each other. In many cases, though not all (the Bolsheviks being the most notable exception), these groups were predominantly middle class in origin. This need not be decisive for their political orientation if they choose ideologically and practically to build among the working class, as KOR chose to do. What is decisive is whether they then choose to build on a reformist or a revolutionary basis, and whether they correctly apprehend the class forces involved in their own revolution. This essay is an attempt to help socialists make those judgements correctly.

Notes
1. Quoted in G. Rudé, The French Revolution (London 1996), p. 14.
2. K. Marx, Speech at the Trial of the Rhenish District Committee of Democrats, 8 February 1849, first published in Neue Rheinische Zeitung, nos. 231 and 232 (25 and 27 February 1849). A text of this is available in K. Marx, The Revolutions of 1848 (Penguin 1973), p. 262, but I have used the translation available on the Marx-Engels Archive website: www.marx.org
3. The definitive account of this process is B. Manning, The English People and the English Revolution (Bookmarks 1991).
4. See Rudé’s excellent synopsis of class consciousness in the bourgeois revolution in Ideology and Popular Protest (Chapel Hill 1980), p. 75.
5. Quoted in L. Trotsky, Writings on Britain, vol. 2 (London 1974), p. 90.
6. Quoted in P. Gregg, Oliver Cromwell (London 1988), pp. 88–89.
7. See S.R. Gardiner, Oliver Cromwell (EP Publishing 1976), pp. 167–168.
8. B. Leviné et al., Who Built America?, vol. 1 (New York 1989), p. 140, p. 148.
9. Ibid., p. 132.
10. Ibid., p. 163.
11. Quoted in H. Zinn, A People’s History of the United States (Longman 1980), p. 94.
12. For an excellent short introduction to the French Revolution see P. McGarr, The Great French Revolution, in P. McGarr and A. Callinicos, Marxism and the Great French Revolution (International Socialism 1993).
13. A. Soboul, A Short History of the French Revolution 1789–1799 (University of California Press 1977), p. 71.
14. B.R. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics 1750–1970 (London 1975), pp. 799–800. The figures for England and Wales are from 1788.
15. Quoted in A. Soboul, A Short History ..., op. cit., p. 10.
16. Ibid., p. 23.
17. See G. Rudé, The French Revolution, op. cit., p. 38.
18. Quoted in A. Soboul, A Short History ..., op. cit., p. 79.
19. Quoted ibid., pp. 86–87.
20. Document 22, an account of a Cordeliers Club session, in D. Andress, French Society in Revolution (Manchester 1999), p. 188.
21. G. Rudé, The French Revolution, op. cit., p. 103.
22. A. Soboul, Understanding the French Revolution (London 1988), p. 23.
23. Ibid.
24. A. Soboul, A Short History ..., op. cit., p. 97.
25. Quoted in G. Rudé, The French Revolution, op. cit., p. 118.
26. See I. Birchall, The Babeuf Bicentenary: Conspiracy or Revolutionary Party?, in International Socialism 72 (Autumn 1996), pp. 77–93. Also I. Birchall, The Spectre of Babeuf (London 1997).
27. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party, in K. Marx, The Revolutions of 1848 (Penguin 1973), p. 98. The Manifesto was of course written before the outbreak of the revolution.
28. Ibid., p. 97.
29. D. Fernbach, Introduction to K. Marx, Revolutions of 1848, ibid., p. 38.
30. K. Marx, The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution, ibid., pp. 193–194.
31. K. Marx, Address of the Central Committee, ibid., pp. 329–330.
32. F. Engels, quoted in H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. II (London 1978), p. 257.
33. K. Marx, Address of the Central Committee, op. cit., p. 330.
34. A good account of the bourgeois revolutions from above can be found in A. Callinicos, Bourgeois Revolutions and Historical Materialism, in P. McGarr and A. Callinicos, op. cit.
35. V.I. Lenin, Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, in Selected Works (Moscow 1975), p. 60.
36. Trotsky’s theory is given in full in the Pathfinder Press book Permanent Revolution. But perhaps the best account of the theory of combined and uneven development as it applies to Russia is given in the chapter on Peculiarities of Russia’s Development in Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution.
37. L. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (Pluto Press 1977), pp. 180–181.
38. Quoted in E.H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution 1917–1923, vol. III (London 1966), p. 53.
39. See ibid., pp. 17–18.
40. Ibid., p. 59.
41. T. Cliff, Deflected Permanent Revolution (London 1986). Originally published in the first series of International Socialism, no. 12 (Spring 1963). Also see T. Cliff, Trotskyism After Trotsky (London 1999), ch. 4.
42. Ibid., p. 20.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid., p. 21.
46. Calculated from figures in B.R. Mitchell, op. cit., p. 358.
47. T. Garton Ash, The Polish Revolution: Solidarity (London 1985), p. 17.
48. Ibid., p. 25.
49. See the excellent account in C. Barker and K. Weber, Solidarnosc: from Gdansk to Military Repression (International Socialism 1982).
50. Quoted ibid., p. 29.
51. The latest English language editon is J. Kuron and K. Modzelewski, Solidarnosc: the Missing Link? The Classic Open Letter to the Party (Bookmarks 1982), pp. 72–82, p. 86.
52. Ibid., p. 56.
53. See C. Harman, Class Struggles in Eastern Europe 1945–83 (London 1983), pp. 279–280.
54. See interview with Orzechowski in D. Pryce-Jones, The War That Never Was: the Fall of the Soviet Empire 1985–1991 (London 1995), p. 213. Pryce-Jones’s book combines unreconstructed right wing Cold War commentary with genuinely valuable interviews with some of the leading figures in the East European revolutions.
55. See interview with Jaruzelski, ibid., p. 215.
56. See interview with Orzechowski, ibid., p. 212.
57. J. Kuron, Overcoming Totalitarianism, reprinted in V. Tismaneanu, The Revolutions of 1989 (London 1999), pp. 200–201.
58. Ibid., p. 199.
59. C. Harman, op. cit., p. 297.
60. E. Hankiss, What the Hungarians Saw First, in G. Prins (ed.), Spring in Winter: the 1989 Revolutions (Manchester, 1990), p. 15.
61. Ibid., pp. 25–26.
62. Ibid., p. 26.
63. Ibid., p. 27.
64. Ibid.
65. Ibid., pp. 30–31.
66. See interview with Kulcsar in D. Pryce-Jones, op. cit., pp. 224–225.
67. Ibid., p. 225.
68. Interview with Istvan Horvath, then Hungarian minister of the interior, ibid., p. 232.
69. Honecker quoted ibid., p. 274, by the then Russian ambassador to East Germany.
70. Quoted ibid., p. 236.
71. See the account in J. Reich, Reflections on Becoming an East German Dissident, in G. Prins (ed.), Spring in Winter, op. cit., p. 81.
72. Ibid., p. 88.
73. Ibid., pp. 71–72.
74. Ibid., pp. 72–73.
75. J. Urban, Czechoslovakia: the Power and Politics of Humiliation, in G. Prins (ed.), op. cit., p. 116.
76. Ibid., p. 108.
77. The events surrounding the 17 November demonstration and the degree to which they were shaped by a plot to replace Husak have been the subject of two Czechoslovakian government commissions of inquiry. The account in this paragraph is based on evidence cited ibid., p. 116–117, and in D. Pryce-Jones, op. cit., p. 322.
78. Ibid., p. 121–122.
79. Quoted in D. Pryce-Jones, op. cit., p. 321.
80. Quoted in G. Prins (ed.), op. cit., p. 124.
81. From the transcript of the Political Executive Committee meeting, quoted in D. Pryce-Jones, op. cit., p. 341.
82. See ibid., p. 358.
83. Ibid., p. 353.
84. Ibid., p. 350.
85. A. Michnik, The Velvet Restoration, in V. Tismaneanu, op. cit., p. 248.
86. Ibid., p. 249.
87. J. Reich, op. cit., p. 97.
88. J. Urban, op. cit., p. 136.
89. M. Haynes and R. Husan, The State and Market in the Transition Economies: Critical Remarks in the Light of Past History and Current Experience, The Journal of European Economic History, vol. 27, no. 3 (Banca Di Roma, Winter 1998), pp. 367–368.
90. P. Stephens, Dark Continent, Financial Times, 23 April 1999.
91. M. Lipton, Capitalism and Apartheid (Gower Publishing, 1985), Table 4, p. 380.
92. Ibid., p. 286.
93. Ibid., p. 240.
94. Ibid.
95. Ibid., p. 263. See also D.T. McKinley, The ANC and the Liberation Struggle (London, 1997), p. 6.
96. Quoted in D.T. McKinley, op. cit., p. 22.
97. Quoted ibid., p. 34.
98. D. MacShane, M. Plaut and D. Ward, Power! Black Workers, their Unions and the Struggle for Freedom in South Africa, (Spokesman 1984), p. 119.
99. Ibid., p. 125.
100. As the CP’s journal African Communist put it in 1983. See ibid.
101. D.T. McKinley, op. cit., p. 70.
102. Interview with J. Cronin in A. Callinicos (ed.), Between Apartheid and Capitalism: Conversations with South African Socialists (London 1992), p. 81.
103. J. Foster, The Workers’ Struggle – Where does FOSATU stand?, a keynote address given to the April 1982 FOSATU Congress. See Appendix 1 in D. MacShane et al., op. cit., p. 150.
104. D.T. McKinley, op. cit., p. 71.
105. Quoted ibid., p. 85.
106. Quoted ibid., p. 78.
107. Ibid., p. 92.
108. Financial Times, 10 June 1986.
109. Quoted in D.T. McKinley, op. cit., p. 89. Emphasis in the original.
110. J. Cronin, in A. Callinicos (ed.), op. cit., p. 85.
111. M. Lipton, op. cit., p. 359.
112. A. Duval Smith, ANC Heading for Election Landslide, The Independent, 7 May 1999.
113. Statistics South Africa, Health and Welfare, Table 8.2: State Expenditure on Health Welfare. This is the South African government’s statistical service, available on the following website: www.statssa.gov.za.
114. A. Booth, The Indonesian Economy in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Macmillan Press, 1998), p. 87.
115. This account of the class structure in Indonesia draws on Richard Robison’s excellent account, The Middle Class and the Bourgeoisie in Indonesia, in R. Robison and D.S.G. Goodman (eds.), The New Rich in Asia (Routledge 1996), pp. 79–84.
116. Ibid., p. 87.
117. A. Booth, op. cit., p. 323.
118. R. Robison, op. cit., pp. 83–84.
119. See the account of Suharto’s fall in M.R.J. Vatikiotis, Indonesian Politics Under Suharto: the Rise and Fall of the New Order (Routledge, 3rd edn. 1998), p. 231.
120. E.H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution 1917–1923, vol. 1 (London 1966), p. 81.
121. Ibid., p. 84. There was one socialist in the first provisional government, Alexander Kerensky, who broke the discipline of the Petrograd soviet in order to join the government.
122. B.R. Mitchell, European Historical Statistics (London 1975), p. 813.
123. A. Booth, op. cit., p. 323.
124. Ibid., pp. 324–325.
125. Financial Times, 10 October 1998.
126. Ibid.
127. K. Marx, The Bourgeoisie and the Counter-Revolution, op. cit., p. 194.
128. Quoted in C. Harman, France’s Hot December, International Socialism 70 (Spring 1996), p. 87.
129. Ibid., p. 69.
130. Malik Miah, The Dynamics of Revolution, in Against the Current 76 (Detroit, September/October 1998), pp. 43–44. The PRD’s website can be accessed through www.peg.apc.org/~asiet/.
131. Manifesto of the PRD, 22 July 1996. Even since the fall of Suharto, leading PRD figures still call for the creation of a ‘democratic coalition’. See the interview with jailed PRD leader Dita Sari, Dita Sari: “I am so Optimistic” by Jill Hickson on the PRD website, op. cit.
132. How We Fight Habibie, an interview with Muhammad Ma’ruf by James Balowski, PRD website, op. cit.
133. Indonesia: “The Radicalisation Will Spread”, interview with Max Lane for the Australian publication Green Left Weekly, PRD website, op. cit.
134. Malik Miah, op. cit.
135. Wilson bin Nurtias, Mari Ciptakan Demokrasi Tanpa Dwo Fungsi ABRI, Central Committee, PRD (Jakarta, 26 April 1999), p. 3. My thanks to Tom O’Lincoln for this reference and translation.
136. M. Miah, op. cit.
137. Communist Threat is Scapegoat Politics: Survey, The Jakarta Post, 21 October 1998.
138. Interview with PRD editor of Pembebasan [Liberation], Socialist Appeal, July 1998.
139. How We Fight Habibie, op. cit.
140. Interview with PRD editor of Pembebasan, op. cit.
141. See ibid.: ‘We ... struggle for the organisation of people’s councils that will be the base for a transitional government of those who participated in the liberation of the people.’
142. L. Trotsky, Leon Trotsky on France, quoted in T. Cliff, Trotsky: the Darker the Night the Brighter the Star, 1927–1940, vol. 4 (London 1993), p. 204.
 



The Labour Party’s landslide election victory on 1 May 1997 has already made the record books: Labour’s largest ever Commons majority, the Tories’ lowest vote since 1832, the most cabinet ministers unseated in an election, the most women MPs ever elected, and so on. The victory had a still greater impact than the bare figures reveal because it was, in many quarters, so unexpected. Chief among those who could not find it in themselves to believe the consistent reports of the pre-election opinion polls was Tony Blair himself. His now infamous remark just days before the vote that ‘this is not a landslide country’ was matched on the very night of victory itself when he refused to believe the predictions of the exit polls until long after the first results were declared.
But the Labour leader was not alone in doubting that his party would win handsomely, or indeed that it would win at all. Many Labour voters and activists, and many to the left of Labour, were scarred by the experience of the 1992 election when victory seemed to slip away at the last moment, to the confusion of the opinion pollsters. They refused to acknowledge the vital differences between the two successive elections, not least the fact that Labour began the 1992 campaign some 5 percent ahead in the polls rather than the 20 percent lead they had attained for months before the 1997 election was announced. For some, the doubts became deeper as the policy and leadership of the Labour Party became more right wing under Blair. Surely, the argument ran, Blair is so like the Tories that people will become demoralised and refuse to vote for him. The ghost of this argument has survived its decisive rebuttal by the election result. Some, Labour’s leaders among them, now argue that Blair won because he was so right wing. On the left this argument leads to the pessimistic conclusion that the socialist project is as difficult to realise under Blair as it was under the Tories. ‘People are just right wing,’ it is said, and the fact that they would only vote Labour when the party was led by its most right wing leader in the post-war period proves the point.
The causes of Labour’s election victory are therefore an important part of the argument about its consequences. If the Labour leaders, and their pessimistic cousins on the left, are right that the Labour vote was only possible because of the party’s move to the right then the prospects for further change are both limited and dependent on the actions of MPs and ministers. If, on the contrary, Labour’s victory was a result of a pre-existing and longstanding radicalisation of working class consciousness strongly at variance with the policy of its electoral beneficiaries, then the prospects for socialists are much brighter.
 
Why did Labour win?
New Labour’s electoral strategy could not have been clearer. It unmistakably set out to distance the party from previous ‘Old Labour tax and spend policies’. Tory taxation and spending plans for the next two years are to be rigidly followed, Gordon Brown insisted during the election campaign. Little or no new money will be found for the NHS or for education. Nationalisation is ruled out but privatisation is endorsed – even in the middle of the election campaign Labour floated the idea of privatising air traffic control, and Blair personally accompanied Richard Branson on board one of his privatised trains. Indeed, the renationalisation of the rail network, one of the Road to the Manifesto commitments, was dumped by the time the election manifesto was published. All this was just a small part of Labour’s pro-business agenda. As both Gordon Brown and Tony Blair have repeatedly said, they see no reason why Labour should not be a ‘pro-business party’ on the model of the Democrats in the United States. The trade unions, by contrast, are ritually denounced. Their leaders were as silent as trappist monks during the election campaign. Since the election the Labour leadership has pushed ahead with its Party into Power document which plans to further reduce both the duration and the decision making powers of Labour’s annual conference, and the unions’ role in those decisions.
Now, if these attitudes had been shared by a majority of those who voted Labour, Blair and Mandelson could rightly claim that only by moving Labour’s programme into alignment with these views could they hope to win an election. The consequence would be that the post-election situation had little to offer those to the left of the Labour leadership. But this is far from being the case. For years before the election opinion poll evidence showed a yawning gap between the aspirations of the majority of working people (indeed a majority of all people) and the attitudes and policy proposals of the Labour leadership.
Take, for instance, some of the findings of the 1996 British Social Attitudes Survey. A majority, nearly 52 percent, agree that the ‘government should redistribute income from the better-off to the less well-off’; between 56 percent and 66 percent, depending on which part of the country they live in, agree that ‘big business benefits owners at the expense of workers’; between 59 percent and 70 percent, again depending on locality, agree that ‘ordinary people do not get their fair share of the nation’s wealth’; between 66 percent and 75 percent agree that ‘there is one law for the rich and one for the poor’; and 69 percent believe that ‘unemployment should be a higher priority than inflation’, while 55 percent think that ‘unemployment benefit is too low and causes hardship’. Commenting on these figures the right wing Financial Times columnist Samuel Brittan wrote that ‘the British public remains hopelessly collectivist in its attitudes’, adding that the attitude towards big business revealed by the survey ‘represents something much more hostile than a call for tighter anti-monopoly laws’. [1]
These attitudes are underpinned by a deep sense of class identification. In 1991 the British Social Attitudes Survey asked people to indicate the class to which they belonged. Some 46 percent described themselves as working class and an additional 18 percent said they were ‘upper working class’ while another 4 percent simply said they were ‘poor’. But people are not only quite at variance with the ideologists of New Labour in their collectivist attitudes and in identifying themselves as working class, they are also diametrically opposed to the Labour leadership’s attitudes in their assertion that there is a struggle between the classes.
‘Class struggle’ is, of course, a phrase eradicated from the New Labour lexicon, most famously by Tony Blair in his speech to the 1996 Labour conference when he insisted that ‘there are no longer bosses and workers, them and us’ in modern Britain. The majority of people, however, think quite otherwise. The Gallup organisation has asked people the very same question – ‘Do you think there is a class struggle in this country or not?’ – every year since 1961. In that first year 56 percent thought there was a class struggle and 22 percent said not. At the height of the militancy of the 1970s, in February 1974, the figures stood at 62 percent who believed there was a class struggle and 27 percent who thought not. But those figures have been dwarfed by the responses given in the 1990s when there has never been less than three quarters of the population who agreed that there was a class struggle in this country. The most recent figures, for August 1996, found that 76 percent agreed there was a class struggle while just 15 percent thought there was not. [2]
The election result itself was further proof of the centrality of class in British politics and a standing refutation of Blair’s belief that victory was only possible by appealing to middle class voters. Labour’s lead was greatest among unskilled workers (social categories D and E, to use the government statisticians’ jargon) at a massive 40 percent. Next came the skilled workers (in category C2), with a 28 percent lead over the Tories. Then came the skilled white collar workers (C1, a category that also includes supervisors and lower managers), with a 21 percent lead, but the biggest swing to Labour. The only social group who gave the Tories a lead, of 11 percent, was that which included the wealthiest (the ABs). In Scotland, where many expected the Scottish Nationalists to profit from disillusionment with Blair, the scale of the class vote dwarfed all other considerations. The results of the French election of 1 June 1997 provide further comparative evidence that Labour could have won the British election on a much more left wing platform. Lionel Jospin’s Socialist Party achieved an even greater swing than Blair’s New Labour, but on a considerably more radical programme. Jospin, for instance, promised to create 750,000 new jobs, three times the figure promised by Labour. He also promised the introduction of a 35 hour working week.
The fact that Blair, Brown and Mandelson are so completely dismissive of those who point to these realities shows only that they, like most of the governing class in Britain, have more fully absorbed the ideology of the Tory era than they have understood the disastrous effects it has had on the lives of working people. But this huge disparity between the concerns of most ordinary people and those of the politicians did surface during the election campaign. An ICM poll of voters aged 18 to 40 years old, for instance, asked respondents to list the 14 issues which were most important to deciding how they voted. The politicians’ and the media pundits’ favoured election issues – Europe, lower taxes, the need for a change of government – came fourteenth, twelfth and eleventh respectively in the list of priorities. Voters’ first three priorities were education, jobs and health. Poverty, homelessness and employees’ rights – issues virtually unmentioned by any politician during the campaign – came sixth, seventh and eighth. Asked, ‘Which social issues do you feel most strongly about?’ respondents again listed concerns almost completely absent from the established parties’ agendas: racism, pollution and nuclear weapons were three of the top four. [3]
Other polls have shown a similar gulf between working people’s attitudes and Labour’s policies: majorities now think that the unions are too weak rather than too strong, that the rich should be taxed more heavily, that the railways and public utilities should be taken back into public ownership. Most remarkably of all, after decades of being told that free markets are the best form of economic organisation and that socialist planning has been conclusively proved a failure, 61 percent of Labour voters (42 percent of the population) persist in thinking that there should be ‘more socialist planning’ in the economy.
This chasm between the ruling class and the mass of workers is the ideological inheritance of 25 years of social crisis, 18 of them under the Tories. The roots of renewed enthusiasm for the unions are not hard to find in the permanently high level of unemployment (affecting 20 percent of households even during a period of ‘economic expansion’), the job insecurity, the lengthening of the working day (twice as much overtime is worked now as it was ten years ago), the spread of low paid jobs, and the intensification of supervision and workload, in white collar and manual jobs alike, which have characterised this period. Add to this the recession, negative equity and debt hangover which followed the Lawson boom of the late 1980s and it becomes clear why looking to working class organisation as a form of economic self defence is increasingly attractive to workers.
The popularity of renationalising the public utilities and the railways, or of socialist planning in general, is not the product of outmoded dogma as Tony Blair imagines. Rather it is the wholly rational response of people who have had the free market, privatising creed rammed down their throats for 18 years and who find at the end of it all, for instance, that they have to phone three different numbers to find out a train time, that the services and ticketing are no longer co-ordinated, fares have risen, and that the service has frequently deteriorated. Or perhaps it results from finding that water companies making record profits are demanding their customers reduce the amount of water they use while failing to reduce the 30 percent of water that escapes through leaking pipes.
The same experience of life under the Tories stands behind disillusionment with the legal system. Not only is there, in many working class areas, the direct experience of an increasingly authoritarian police and legal system, there is also the cumulative experience, direct or at a distance, of the same system at work in the Great Miners’ Strike, the Wapping print workers’ dispute, the anti poll tax rebellion, against roads or animal rights demonstrators, against ‘illegal’ raves and anti Criminal Justice Act protesters, or anti-Nazi activists. Add to this the ideological effect of high profile miscarriages of justice – the Guildford Four, the Birmingham Six, the Bridgewater Four, Winston Silcott. And, at the other end of the social spectrum, one could note the effect of the notorious failures of the Scott inquiry, the Serious Fraud Office or the Downey committee to punish wrongdoing among our rulers. Taken together even this incomplete list proves that one does not have to be a trained sociologist to discover the roots of popular disaffection with this central aspect of the state’s activities.
All this, and much more, has seared into the minds of many working people an intense hostility to the Tories and, in some important respects, to the system they represent. It is this fact above all else which delivered Labour its election victory. Tony Blair may have done little to give voice to the feelings of people who would vote for him. He may have done nothing to indicate that there would be the fundamental change that so many hope for. But as misery piled on misery for another five years after 1992, under Major as it had done under Thatcher, all that Blair had to do was provide an electoral alternative to the government. The gradual decomposition of the Major government under the successive blows of the 1992 pits crisis, Black Wednesday (sterling’s ignominious exit from the ERM) tax increases including VAT on fuel, plus the Tory party’s own divisions over Europe, made Labour’s task all the simpler.
Of course, there was an obvious contradiction built into this situation: Labour was pursuing an extremely right wing project at a time when popular consciousness was moving in the opposite direction. The election of a Labour government has not resolved this contradiction – it has heightened it.
 
The effect of Labour’s victory on class consciousness
The first and most important effect of the election result on the consciousness that has built up over the preceding period is to give it the endorsement of official electoral politics. Even in the final stages of the Tory government many socialists and trade union activists still felt it hard to justify their argument that the Tories and their values were bitterly disliked. The hype of the Thatcher era and the very real after effects of the defeats of those years weighed heavily on their confidence. Even when they weren’t in a minority, they felt as if they were – and of course the media and the policy of the Labour leadership and the trade union bureaucracy added to this sense of isolation.
The election result has decisively ended that psychosis. Now it is obvious that the critics of Tory free market ideology, at least at the base of society, are in the ascendant. The sheer scale of Labour’s victory is important here. A majority of 30 would not have had the same effect. But with a majority of 179 it seems to many Labour voters that there is nothing that the party cannot do. Paradoxically, the speed with which the Labour government has moved to implement parts of its programme has enhanced this mood. Despite the fact that parts of what Labour has done are right wing (for example, giving independence to the Bank of England), despite the fact that parts of what it has done are mostly mere rhetoric (such as the ethical foreign policy), the sheer number of announcements has given the impression that real and fundamental change is both possible and realistic.
Much of the tone of the press coverage, especially on the front pages and in the feature articles, has been adulatory. Tony Blair and his wife, Cherie, were treated by some journalists to the kind of myth making which surrounded the White House when John and Jackie Kennedy were in residence. But from the very first another note also sounded. For days after the election the letters page of The Guardian was full of demands on the new government. Pressure groups and think tanks who for many a long year had been completely shunned by Tory MPs and ministers now felt their time had come: teachers wrote demanding immediate action on class sizes; the NatWest Staff Association demanded the reinstatement of the sacked Liverpool dockers; the Coalition Against Runway 2 at Manchester Airport demanded government support; the director of National Energy Action demanded the abolition of VAT on fuel bills and more; the Railway Development Society insisted that John Prescott intervene to regulate the industry.
Union conferences held in the weeks after the election also raised demands for reform. At the AEEU, FBU, GMB and CPSA conferences there were demands for change running far beyond the desires of the Blairites, often passed in the teeth of opposition from the union leaders. In the postal workers’ union, the CWU leadership accepted demands that the anti-union laws be repealed ahead of the union conference precisely because they were worried by the mood of the delegates. Of course, not all such demands were won and union conference delegates are not necessarily representative of the average consciousness in the class as a whole. But even the normally conservative conference of headteachers unanimously passed a vote of no confidence in Chris Woodhead, the chief of Ofsted. All of this made it clear that, at the very least, a substantial minority of working class activists are already deeply distrustful of the Blair government.
On the ground there were some signs that activists long ground down by the war of attrition with the Tories were so lifted by the election result that they were unwilling to listen to counsels for delay. There were strikes and protests, all of which ended in victory, by building workers on London Underground’s Jubilee Line extension, teachers in London’s Holloway School, lecturers at Kingsway College (plus a wave of strikes and protests in colleges across the country), 3,000 engineers at Immingham, firefighters in Essex, construction workers at Avonmouth, workers on the Isle of Wight ferry and postal workers at London’s NDO, among others. The overall strike figures remain low and the action so far has fallen short of making a decisive shift in the balance of class forces. But the importance of these examples is not just that they may be harbingers of future struggles. They are important because they are the visible manifestation of a much wider mood which exists among hundreds of thousands who are not yet willing to take action but want change; a mood perhaps best captured by the slogan of a gay and lesbian protest outside Sheffield City Hall in May: ‘Tony Blair, we won’t wait. Scrap Clause 28.’
It is easy to misread these heightened expectations because they can seem to be part of the fawning over Blair which is, temporarily no doubt, a prominent part of the press coverage. Seen in this light the expectations of the Labour government can seem like mere illusions. ‘Don’t these people realise’, the argument goes, ‘that Labour won’t deliver.’ And of course there is an important element of truth in this argument. Blair will realise hardly any of the expectations which Labour supporters have of the government. And Blair and Brown, credit where its due, have said as much.
But simply to speak of the illusions in Labour in this way is only half the story. Expectations become illusions if they depend for their realisation on waiting passively for the government to fulfil, or disappoint, those expectations in the fullness of time. But expectations are something very different if they begin to fuel demands for change and, in even an important minority of cases, promote action to achieve that change. In other words, expectation can become a license for confidence and an encouragement to action, not a promoter of passivity.
Let’s take one small example of this process. In late May Tony Blair attacked the salary rises of the directors of the lottery operator Camelot. They were hauled before Chris Smith, the national heritage minister, to explain their conduct. At one level a properly cynical response to this development is quite right: it is cheap progressive publicity for Labour and, in any case, Blair is close to Richard Branson who wants to take over the lottery and run it as a non profit making operation (although the ‘consumer friendly’ publicity will generate lots of profitable business for the Virgin empire). Certainly it is right to say that no anti-capitalist intent is visible here. Anyone who claimed that there were such intentions would be painting Blair in colours far more favourable than he deserves.
But that is far from being the only important argument about this issue. It is at least equally important to note that if a Labour prime minister attacks the salaries of the directors of one nationally prominent corporation it cannot help but give encouragement to every shop steward and union activist to make the same point about the managers and directors of their company. What seems like the promotion of illusions can turn into the inspiration for resistance. As the old adage has it, life looks very different depending on whether you view it from the cottage or the castle.
Of course, it is only the fact that working class consciousness had already moved to the left before the election, and that this move was bolstered by the election result, that allows this interpretation of events. If there were no such consciousness among workers then Blair’s manoeuvres would never have effects contrary to his intentions. But as such a consciousness does exist much of a socialist strategy depends on recognising the contradictory impulses of Labour’s statements and exploiting them to the advantage of rank and file workers. Concretely, in this case, it would be a mistake if every resolution over pay and conditions in every union in the country did not make use of Blair’s attack on the directors of Camelot to sanction action against directors in other firms who have enjoyed similar rises over recent years.
This kind of approach is all the more important because Blair quite deliberately follows an approach which combines either small reforms, the appearance of reform or the rhetoric of reform with policy which is wholly reactionary. Thus Blair talks of a ‘People’s Europe’ in which ‘there is less obsession with ourselves and our institutions, more focus on the things that matter to people’ but, in reality, he refuses to support the social chapter in the new European treaty unless if encourages ‘flexible labour markets’ (ie low pay and job insecurity). Yet these are the very things that most trade unionists think the social chapter will alleviate. Similarly, Blair’s priority of ‘education, education, education’ is already being used by teachers and parents campaigning against Labour’s plans to close schools, ‘fast track’ the sacking of teachers, and send in ‘hit squads’ headed by the very man, Chris Woodhead, who became hated as the head of Ofsted under the Tories. Or again, the government’s decision to lift the ban on unions at GCHQ can give confidence to every activist trying to organise a non-unionised workplace, despite the fact that Labour is committed to keeping the Tory anti-union laws which make the task so difficult.
These contradictions are going to repeat themselves across the entire front of government policy. Blair and his advisers are keen to emulate Bill Clinton’s ‘tough love’ approach, described by The Guardian’s Larry Elliot as an ‘anomalous mixture of liberalism and authoritarianism. The Prime Minister will be Tony, just as Bill Gates of Microsoft is Bill, but the jeans and open necked shirt approach has to co-exist with ruthlessness ...’ [4] Peter Mandelson seeks to exploit this contradiction to Labour’s advantage, almost matching each reactionary policy with an announcement of some cosmetic or superficial measure which appeals to the progressive sentiments nurtured by Labour’s victory. The vestiges of political control may be removed from the Bank of England but, don’t worry, Labour will run an ‘ethical foreign policy’. Single parents will be targeted for ‘welfare to work’ interviews but at the same time Clare Short plans to ‘end world poverty’ by freeing overseas aid from being tied to business deals. Refusal to tax the rich is coupled with the windfall tax on the profits of the utilities.
This public relations operation is already seen for what it is by a very substantial proportion of Labour activists. For some, doubts about Blair have not been alleviated by the scale of the election victory. And as time passes it will be the hard core of pro-capitalist policy which emerges as by far the dominant, and obviously dominant, part of the New Labour equation. The full force of circumstances pushing Labour in this direction will become clear when we examine the economic prospects facing Labour (see below). Here it is only necessary to note that Blair is ideologically committed to allowing the ‘full rigour of the market’ to do its work.
It was this commitment to the market which stood behind Blair and Brown’s decision to make the Bank of England independent, as Larry Elliot explains:
This change … underpins Labour’s technocratic approach to running the country. Once you have dispensed with the idea that conflict is natural – even healthy – and that there are [any] real class or sectional interests, the answer to every problem is to call in the experts. It makes perfect sense to hand over the interest rates to the Bank of England and to call in the head of BP as minister for export promotion. They are, after all, likely to make a better fist of things than elected politicians. [5]
Since this was written Martin Taylor, chief executive of Barclays Bank, has been appointed to head a Whitehall team on tax and benefits, and Lord Hollick, chairman of United News and Media, has been called in to advise on industrial policy. Indeed Blair has been forced to admit that he has made more political appointments in Whitehall than the Tories did. He also looks set to have more unelected ministers in the Lords than the Tories, making a mockery of the election pledge to reform the upper house. In this world ‘independent’, ‘expert’ and ‘neutral’ are simply euphemisms for free market economics.
Blair and Brown and the massed ranks of their advisers will stick to this element of their project long after the elements of superficial radicalism have been swept away. It is an article of faith among the Blairites that ‘corporatism’ was to blame for keeping Labour out of power for 18 years and, more broadly, that ‘planning’ was the root of all evil in the Stalinist states. They are consequently much more ideologically committed to market solutions than the previous generation of Labour right wingers.
This pro-market stance puts them on a trajectory diametrically opposed to both the interests and the consciousness of the vast majority of people who voted Labour. Yet it would be a mistake to assume that, even when this contradiction becomes sharper than it is today, such a conflict will result in the Blairites giving way or changing course. One only has to recall the ruling classes’ free market policy, in particular the defence of the gold standard, followed by Labour’s Ramsay MacDonald and Philip Snowden in Britain in the inter-war years, to see that no amount of evidence of failure, or working class discontent, or even the wrecking of their own party, is necessarily enough to make Labour’s leaders shed their belief in the market.
Moreover, these pro-market attitudes are much more than an economic orthodoxy. Every aspect of Blair’s social policy is riddled with the same assumptions. If there is unemployment it can’t be the fault of the market, it must be a result of welfare (described by new minister Frank Field as ‘the enemy within’). If there is ‘choice’ in the supermarket, why not ‘parental choice’ in education? And if ‘choice’ isn’t working it must be the fault of lazy teachers and failing schools. If young people are breaking the law the answer can’t be a job or a decent wage, it must be ‘fast track sentencing’.
Even a commentator as sympathetic to the Blarite project as The Observer editor Will Hutton finds Labour’s orthodoxy unsettling:
The Conservative vote may have fallen to the lowest since 1832, but the lesson drawn by some at the top of the Labour Party is not – in social policy at least – that neo-conservative approaches to welfare and work should be qualified. Paradoxically, they should be intensified.
For these Labour zealots, Hutton argues:
… systems of social insurance become obstacles to work because those who use them become scroungers and welfare cheats...welfare must become conditional upon effort, and offer no more than a safety net between jobs; if inequality results, it must – like death and taxes – be seen as an unavoidable fact of life about which the community can do nothing. [6]
In both social policy and economic strategy the contradictions between the needs and desires of working people and the direction upon which the new government is set can only grow sharper. But even today, in its current unstable form, these contradictions open up opportunities for socialists, if they know how to take them. This requires that where Blair is at his most reactionary – in his Downing Street meeting with Thatcher, in sending the hit squads into schools, in freezing public sector pay – the left should unequivocally condemn the government and explain how its policies are linked to its acceptance of the very same capitalist priorities that the Tories were thrown out of office for defending. But this criticism will be all the more effective if we take some of Labour’s pronouncements as the basis for arguing against the government. Is spending £13 billion on the Trident missile system and another £3 billion on a new class of nuclear submarine, for instance, an ‘ethical foreign policy’? Is it an ‘ethical’ domestic policy when we are told there is no more money for hospitals and schools? If it is wrong for Camelot directors to increase their own six figure salaries by 30 percent, is it not also wrong to put an academic who ‘earns’ a six figure salary in charge of the commission which will decide the level of the minimum wage? Even before the election, an editorial in The Independent pinpointed exactly the kind of paradox Blairism creates:
... New Labour’s bid to have capitalism and all its works without its ‘cultural contradictions’...strives to produce rules for social life when economic life is less rule-bounded than ever. The question is whether government can impose these rules ...
Mr Blair would like parents to spend more time with their children. Quite right. Does that mean that he is in favour of maximum 48 hour weeks, or new laws to force employers to recognise the domestic circumstances of their staff? [7]
Such arguments can gain a substantial audience now. The probable economic prospects mean that the size of that audience is likely to increase the longer the Labour government lasts.
 
Short term economic prospects under Labour
Labour has come to power during the recovery phase of the business cycle. Unemployment is falling, even if the Tory government’s fiddling of the figures is discounted. The rate of inflation matched former chancellor Kenneth Clarke’s 2.5 percent target in May. The deficit on government spending, the public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), is £3.6 billion less than the Treasury estimated. The Financial Times crowed, ‘Mr Gordon Brown...seems to have the ball rolling nicely’. [8] The TUC seems to agree that the economy is not in bad shape and that unemployment will keep falling this year. The TUC also considers that growth is relatively high in spite of some worrying signs on the inflation front, and that consumption is relatively strong and will be fuelled by the building society conversion payouts.
Yet behind the headline grabbing statistics a more complex picture emerges. Firstly and most obviously, at 2.5–3.5 percent the kind of growth rate forecast for the economy during the peak of a ‘boom’ is about the average over the trade cycle in the post-war period. So there will be no expansion of investment in industry or welfare on the scale of 1945 based on this economic performance. Indeed investment has remained almost unchanged by the present expansion, a much worse performance than during the boom of the 1980s (see tables 1 and 2).
Secondly, economic expansion poses its own problems. For instance, price inflation may only be running at 2.5 percent but wage rises are running at 4.5 to 5 percent. Labour is committed to a freeze on the wage bill for public sector workers. But if workers in these areas see their real living standards decline, while workers in the private sector are using the effects of a tighter labour market to claw back some of what they lost in the last recession, then public sector workers are more likely to take action to rectify the situation. And Labour is not even going to be able to take any solace from the fact that workers in the private sector will feel more warmly towards the government if their wages are rising. The ‘feelgood factor’ that so eluded the Tories is equally likely to escape Labour’s grasp, and for the same reason. Many people feel no better, even when their wages are rising, partly because they are having to work longer and harder to get the extra money in the first place. But they also feel no better because, when they do get more money, they don’t spend it. Instead they save it – or, more likely, they pay off debt.
A comparison of consumer spending in the boom of the 1980s and in the expansion of the 1990s (table 3) makes the point. Between 1982 and 1986 consumer spending rose by 20 percent. Between 1992 and 1996 it rose by half that figure. Personal savings figures are equally revealing (table 4). In the 1980s boom and its aftermath saving plummeted to finance consumption whereas in the 1990s expansion savings have risen to pay off debts and ward against greater job insecurity.
And although government debt is somewhat smaller than first estimated, the total is still so great and spending plans remain so tight that most analysts assume that Labour will have to either revise its plans or face conflict over cuts and wages. In fact the debt has doubled since 1990. Some think government debt is so great that even if spending is increased, conflict with cuts protesters and unions is still likely. The National Institute Economic Review, for instance, argues:
While government borrowing in 1996/7 has turned out to be lower than was forecast in the November budget, by 0.5 percent of GDP, this good news should not obscure the fact that the deficit remains very large ...
With substantial tax increases to be avoided, the new government will have little option but to follow existing spending plans. Total government spending is set to rise on average by only 0.5 percent per annum in real terms over the next three fiscal years.
The institute report continues:
Many commentators claim that these plans are not achievable because they imply a substantial fall in the level of provision of public services ... It is difficult to see that further tax increases or spending cuts can be delayed indefinitely. [9]
The Labour government’s problem is very great indeed. Even under the Tories’ public spending grew by about 2.3 percent a year – four times greater than the 0.5 percent Labour is planning. If Labour overshoots its spending targets, as the Tories often did, but still keep spending lower than at any time since 1963-1964 an £11 billion (4 percent) a year overspend would remain. If spending were to hit the average for the last 18 years the overspend would double. The deficit would then be £10 billion higher than the figure which is precipitating the crisis today.
The NHS looks set to be a particular sufferer. Department of Health funding is due to increase by just 0.8 percent in real terms this year. In 1998 it will fall by 0.7 percent. In 1999 an 0.1 percent increase is planned. Within these figures, capital spending will be cut by 22 percent over three years. The shortfall is supposed to be made good by private finance. Overall, ‘The projected growth in health spending over the next three years is far lower than the average growth in health spending since the Conservatives took office in 1979, or at any time over the last 35 years’. [10]
In other words, British workers face their own version of France’s Juppé plan, the austerity measures which provoked the 1995 strike wave, whether or not Blair decides to adopt the Maastricht criteria for the single currency. As the Institute of Fiscal Studies Election Briefing 1997 reports:
Given the tightness of the [government’s spending] plans, there will be considerable pressure for them to be overshot... Health is one area where pressure to allocate more resources in future years will be immense. Both parties have said in their manifestos that they will increase the real level of resources going into the NHS each year, but the spending plans as they stand only have real increases written into them for the first year ... Another example of where spending plans could come under strain is the funding of public sector pay settlements if average earnings growth in the economy starts to pick up. [11]
This last point, the pressure on public sector pay is important. The Tories’ public sector pay freeze did succeed in cutting about 5 percent off the government paybill. But this was achieved less by reducing wages and more by cutting the number of jobs, particularly in the civil service, and by contracting out. But now earnings in the private sector are rising faster than inflation it will be more difficult for Labour to continue down this road, not least because jobs in many services have already been cut to the bone. In a survey by Nursing Times 78 percent of nurses reported staff shortages. [12] In the NHS Labour’s high profile commitment to increasing the numbers of ‘frontline staff’ make further staff cuts difficult and the pay issue more pressing.
Labour could thus face a double jeopardy – a bonfire of expectations caused by spending cuts and conflict over wages. In the case of the NHS it is even possible to judge how far the distrust of New Labour has progressed. Even though nurses voted Labour in unprecedented numbers in the 1997 election, and despite the fact that over 30 percent of them said they trusted Labour with the NHS (compared to 5 percent for the Tories), still more, some 41 percent, said they trusted none of the political parties with the NHS. [13] Now, there is still a considerable difference between not trusting Labour to defend the NHS and having the confidence to defend it by your own actions. Nevertheless, these figures do show that those who wish to argue for the self activity of health workers in defence of the NHS will not find themselves confronted by an audience which has a pronounced faith in the government whose policies they will have to resist.
In addition to these budgetary considerations, the Labour government has to reckon with the fact that, if the duration of recent business cycles are any guide, the current weak expansion will give way to another slump at some point around the mid-term of its time in office. Rising unemployment would then begin to put more pressure on social spending during the harshest period of the current plans.
And if Labour continues with its plans for constitutional reform – devolution, reform of the Lords, and possibly, though not probably, the introduction of proportional reform – these issues could add an important political dimension to the developing crisis of Blairism. Such a crisis is unlikely to be simply the result of conflicts over the nature of the constitutional reforms themselves, since they are wholly compatible with a capitalist economy. But such issues nevertheless have a habit of becoming cyphers for much more deep rooted social and economic problems. The referendums which Blair proposes on devolution and on the election of a mayor for London, for instance, could easily become votes of confidence in a government which is becoming unpopular for reasons quite unconnected with devolution or the local government of the capital.
The political effects of all this are difficult to predict in detail, and the exact timescale on which they will be played out is even more difficult to estimate, but the broad outlines are not so hard to imagine: growing discontent with Labour among the mass of the working class and intense pressure on the government to continue making cuts and to ‘stand firm against the unions’ from the ruling class.
 
Prospects for socialists
The enormous radicalisation of consciousness which was the inheritance of the Tory years remains the central fact of British politics for all those concerned with building a socialist organisation which can mount a fundamental challenge to the capitalist class in Britain. This mood has been extended and deepened by Labour’s victory. In most workers’ minds expectations of the Labour government co-exist with doubts and distrust that Blair will really be able or willing to deliver real improvements in their lives. In the immediate future the success of the socialist opposition to Blairism depends on knowing how to address this contradictory consciousness in such a way that it becomes a coherent, rank and file opposition to Labour’s attempts to police the social crisis on behalf of capital.
Concretely this means that where Labour attempts to carry out Tory policies they are opposed in the name of all those, the majority of the population, who voted against the Tories precisely because they rejected these policies. Where Labour either makes rhetorical gestures in the direction of reform or, in a minority of cases, where it actually makes a reform of some substance, socialists should use the example as a platform to encourage the self activity of the class and to demand that the inconsistencies in Labour’s policy are eradicated by extending the logic of the reformist measures (i.e. by demanding that the lifting of the ban on unions at GCHQ is extended into support for unionisation in other non-union workplaces, say in the print industry, and by the government’s abandoning of its support for the Tory anti-union laws).
In the mid-term the ‘sado-monetarist’ strategy followed by the Labour government will clash increasingly sharply with a working class movement which has drawn hope and confidence from its electoral victory over the Tories. When a similar clash occurred under the last Labour government in the late 1970s the Communist Party and the Labour left were the decisive force able to corral a movement fresh from its victories in the early 1970s. They ensured the acceptance of the Social Contract, which tied that movement to the failure of the Callaghan government. Now the battle for independent rank and file working class action against a much more right wing government will be fought without such an impediment. Even if the Labour left revives, its roots in the organised working class and its ideological coherence will be much reduced by the demise of the old CP.
This battle will, however, be more ideological than in the past despite the erosion of the reformist left. Blair is himself more ideologically committed to the market than previous Labour leaders. Every corner of his policy is steeped in individualistic, pro-market ideology. But, more importantly, the intensity of the social and economic crisis inevitably makes the capitalist system and its politics volatile and unpredictable across the whole range of social, political, economic and ideological issues. In the last extended period of Labour government, 1964–1970 and 1974–1979, the key issues deciding the fate of the struggle were not just battles over wages and conditions. The struggle over the Vietnam War, Northern Ireland, Europe, the IMF austerity package of the late 1970s, over education and the family, women’s and gay rights, the nature of the Stalinist states in Eastern Europe, and racism and opposition to the National Front, all helped to decide which currents on the left survived and which did not because they determined who would get a hearing among newly radicalised workers. Today’s struggles will be no less all embracing and demand no less political clarity from socialists.
The decisive battles will therefore be decided by the weight and coherence of the revolutionary alternative inside the working class movement. That alternative is currently larger than it has ever been, but small, too small, when judged by the enormity of this task. Yet there is time for us to remedy this deficiency in the struggles still to unfold – if we are clear that the British working class has taken one important step forward and that Tony Blair may yet come to see that he was not its most important beneficiary.

Notes
1. S. Brittan, Better Than You Deserve, Financial Times, 3 May 1997.
2. See B. Deer, Still Struggling After All These Years, New Statesman, 23 August 1996.
3. The ICM poll was commissioned by the Daily Mirror. See the edition of 2 April 1997 for the results.
4. L. Elliot, Message From America: We’re All Californian Now ..., The Guardian, 26 May 1997.
5. L. Elliot, As Ever, We Must Fight and Fight Again, The Guardian, 12 May 1997.
6. W. Hutton, Let Labour Beware the Clintonite Rhetoric, The Observer, 1 June 1997.
7. How Will Blair Deliver his Decent Society?, The Independent, 15 October 1996.
8. A Little Help for Mr Brown, Financial Times, 28 May 1997.
9. M. Sheldon, M. Weale and G. Young, Fiscal Report, National Institute Economic Review 160 (1997), pp. 26, 29, 30 and 33.
10. Institute of Fiscal Studies, Election Briefing 1997, p. 17.
11. Ibid., p. 10.
12. Nursing Times, vol. 93, no. 5, 29 January 1997.
13. Ibid.
 



Tony Cliff’s death leaves this journal short of a loyal friend. International Socialism has always opened its pages to debate and discussion from across the spectrum of the left but it remains the theoretical journal of the Socialist Workers Party and, as such, Cliff maintained a close interest in its development across many years. That interest tells us a great deal about Cliff’s conception of the relationship between revolutionary theory and political activity.
This relationship was central to Cliff’s life, as his Trotskyism After Trotsky and his posthumously published autobiography, A World to Win, make clear. In this last book Cliff is at great pains to locate his own theoretical contribution – the theory of state capitalism, the development of his understanding of the permanent arms economy and the course of revolution in the Third World, and his recovery of Lenin’s theory of the party – in the context of unfolding problems facing revolutionary socialists. The whole point of these books is to demonstrate that, no matter how small the forces of revolutionary socialism, they cannot progress without a clear theoretical grasp of the fundamental nature of the system with which they are confronted. But it is equally the point of Cliff’s life story that such theoretical enquiry can never choose its subjects, or conclude successfully, unless it develops in the closest possible contact with active participation in the business of building a revolutionary organisation. Cliff was so far removed from the academic notion of knowledge as an end in itself that he repeated to me on many occasions, ‘I only ever write when I have a problem.’
International Socialism began publication in 1960. Naturally Cliff contributed to the journal. Trotsky on Substitutionism, his seminal essay on party-building now collected in the book Party and Class, first appeared in the second issue. As Cliff notes in A World to Win, his critique of Isaac Deutscher’s capitulation to Stalinism appeared in it in the mid-1960s. What I remember most clearly as I became politically active in the mid-1970s was the series of articles on Lenin and the party, and on Lenin’s conceptions of the revolutionary paper and of democratic centralism, in which the themes of Cliff’s biography of Lenin first appeared in print. These were of course directly related to the transformation of the International Socialists, as it still was then, into a small but real revolutionary party.
When the first series of International Socialism came to an end, leaving the magazine format to the new Socialist Review, and reappeared in its second and still current series in 1978, it remained the forum for theoretical innovation. Crucially for Cliff, it became the arena where his analysis of the downturn was given its most elaborated shape in the debate with Steve Jeffreys, then a leading member of the SWP. Jeffreys’ Striking Into the 1980s appeared in issue five, and Cliff’s reply, The Balance of Class Forces in Britain Today, appeared in the following issue.
The debate over feminism, closely related to the discussion of the general state of the class struggle, began around the same period, and Cliff’s crucial interventions – essays on Clara Zetkin and Alexandra Kollontai – appeared first in the journal and only later formed chapters in Cliff’s book Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation. This polemical function of the journal, the function with which Cliff was most closely associated, continued up to and through the miners’ strike of the mid-1980s. It was the defeat of this emblematic struggle of the decade which prompted Cliff’s Patterns of Mass Strikes, which patiently explained the difference between the spontaneous and elemental revolts of a rising strike movement and the defensive ‘bureaucratic mass strikes’ of which the miners’ strike was a classic exemplar. This understanding helped the SWP orient in the late 1980s through the printers’ strike at Wapping, the seafarers’ strike in Dover and many others.
There are two other aspects of Cliff’s relationship with International Socialism that are worth noting. The first is Cliff’s attention to detail. Cliff had no great concern for style. I cannot remember a single occasion where the look of the journal, its cover design or the appearance of the text excited any comment from Cliff. But he did care passionately about the precision with which the text was presented. Soon after each issue of the journal appeared, especially when I first became its editor, Cliff would ring me and list any typographical errors he had noticed. An even greater crime would be if the footnotes to any article contained factual errors, no matter how minor. ‘For me,’ he would say, ‘if I can’t trust the article to get the date of publication of a book correct how can I trust anything else the article says?’ The second and final aspect of Cliff’s relationship to the journal is not very flattering to International Socialism. He said to me on many occasions, ‘If the party were to fall on hard times do you know which publication would go first? The journal. Then Socialist Review. The paper would be the last thing we would ever let go.’ It was a way of saying this: the last thing we must ever let go is the most direct link between Marxist theory and political practice.
 
A revolutionary personality
The article that follows is the view of an outsider, an Israeli journalist who met Cliff in 1991. No doubt some readers will find it strange that we should reprint an appreciation of Cliff written by someone whose roots clearly lie deep in the Zionist tradition which Cliff radically rejected from an early age. Yet for me the interest lies in part in the sympathy which both the SWP and Cliff personally evoke in someone so distant from the Marxist tradition. But the piece also reminds us that even someone who struck those of us born in Britain as an exceptional and unique personality is nevertheless formed as part of a common culture. I have never, for instance, heard anyone else who spoke with Cliff’s accent. And so to hear that it is instantly recognisable to this journalist as indicative of a certain type of political activist at a certain time in the past is suddenly to see the roots of Cliff’s particularity.
Nevertheless, there are certain central aspects of Cliff’s personality that it is harder to capture if one is not a socialist. It is only right that here we mention some of them. I want to concentrate on those which, it seems to me, are important for any socialist to develop. This is not an exercise in hagiography. Cliff, like all of us, had his faults. He would have wanted, if this were simply a personal portrait, to have been painted like Cromwell, ‘warts and all’. But the aim is not personal portraiture. The aim is simply to record those aspects of Cliff, some of which he strove quite deliberately to cultivate, which meshed most closely with the practical business of building a revolutionary organisation.
The first of these traits is willpower. Cliff was simply the most determined person I have ever met. It is impossible to read the section entitled Exceptional Single-mindedness in volume one of Cliff’s biography of Lenin without catching the note of admiration: ‘There has probably never been a revolutionary more single-minded, purposeful and persistent than Lenin. It is significant that the most commonly recurring words in his writings are probably “relentless” and “irreconcilable”. Above all he had unbending willpower.’
Cliff repeated many times Lenin’s injunction that if one wants to avoid being thrown out of a sleigh one must sit deeply in it. Cliff usually used this as an encouragement to think deeply about an issue or to study the Marxist tradition deeply. But it also speaks of his determination to seize a problem by its roots and to pursue it, both theoretically and proactively, to the finish. His most common self criticism in his autobiography is of those times when he felt that he did not do this with sufficient vigour – for instance, in not seeing the downturn and its consequences fully enough, early enough.
But once Cliff was convinced that he had grasped the nature of a problem clearly, whether the state capitalist nature of the Stalinist states or the practical details of a particular aspect of party work, he would pursue it relentlessly and with great impatience. No detail of such work was beneath his interest, no incident so insignificant that it would bore him. He hoovered up information from all those around him to see if it confirmed, amended or contradicted the main concerns of his line of thought. This close empirical interest was the dialectically related opposite of his commitment to grasping the theoretical roots of any question.
Theoretical seriousness always grew out of practical problems, but it was also only tested and modified by practice. Great pragmatism over the details of work was necessarily combined with theoretical depth. This was simply a recognition of the fact that, as Cliff repeatedly quoted Lenin quoting Goethe, ‘all theory is grey, my friend, but green is the tree of life’. That is, theory, because it is a necessary generalisation, can only ever give an approximation of the complexity and uniqueness of real life and therefore has constantly to be modified in a ‘pragmatic’ way by real experience.
The second aspect of Cliff’s personality that is of general significance is his honesty. I do not mean by this that he was any more or any less honest in his personal dealings than the next person. He was a shy man and he was very polite. He did not have that brutal personal ‘honesty’ which has become a feature of modern manners. But it was different where a political question was at stake, even though he quite often had to screw himself up to any personal encounter that even this might involve. But even this is not quite the point. The point is that Cliff was wholly unable to lie to himself or others about political questions, principally about the balance of forces in the class struggle and the prospects for socialists. Of course he could be wrong, but he was not a self deceiver and not at all afraid of arguing unpalatable or unpopular points of view.
It is indicative that one of Cliff’s most often repeated quotations from Marx involved a paraphrase which subtly alters the meaning of the passage in question. In The Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels write that communists have ‘nothing to hide’ from the working class – meaning that they do not hide their revolutionary politics. Cliff repeatedly rendered this as ‘Marx said you should never tell lies to the class’, a broader and more absolute injunction. Cliff often used this quotation to insist that revolutionaries should not lie to themselves about their own prospects for success, that they should look reality in the face no matter how difficult that might be. This attitude must have been born out of the 1930s: the midnight of the century when the twin evils of Nazism and Stalinism almost obliterated the revolutionary tradition. If one could face this reality without giving way to the tempting embrace of Stalinism then the requirements of later situations, to acknowledge the downturn of the late 1970s for instance, must have been easier to meet.
The third aspect of Cliff’s personality that any socialist would wish to possess is his decisiveness. Once convinced of the correctness of a course of action, Cliff was never for pursuing it by half measures. He was a devotee of Lenin’s formulation that it is necessary in any given situation to grasp the key link that guarantees possession of the whole chain of events. Whether this was the turn to industry in the early 1970s, opposition to the Nazis in the late 1970s, insulating the party from the rightward moving activists in the class in the 1980s, or reaching out to the new mood of resistance in the 1990s, Cliff insisted that it was done speedily and completely.
Without such decisiveness it is impossible to tell correct from incorrect strategies. If a strategy or tactic is implemented in a weak and incomplete way it is impossible to tell whether it failed because it was wrong in its basic conception or because it was never fully and properly implemented. It is possible to learn even from an incorrect tactic if it is implemented thoroughly. At least it is clear that the error arose from the basic conception and not from poor implementation.
The final aspect of Cliff’s personality was his sense of humour. Much of Cliff’s humour had the same aim as satire: to puncture pomposity. He used absurdity to expose absurdity in the world. But there was little of the cruelty that sometimes attends this form of humour, mainly because its subjects were often part of the socialist movement. He often, for instance, told a story at the expense of longstanding SWP member Roger Cox, whom Cliff had known since Roger was a teenage engineering apprentice. The story went something like this:
Roger told me he had just been elected to a trade union post where he represented 17,000 workers. So I said to Roger, ‘How many people were in the room when you were elected?’ ‘Ten,’ said Roger. So I said, ‘In that case you represent ten workers. And, by the way, how many of the ten voted for you?’ ‘Six.’ ‘In that case, you represent six workers.’
It was a story about realism, about not pretending or exaggerating. So was Cliff’s legendary joke about the ox and the flea. At the end of a day’s ploughing the flea on the ox’s head says, ‘My, haven’t we ploughed a lot today.’ Same point: don’t claim for yourself things that are really a product of much greater forces.
Others of Cliff’s jokes were about timing in politics – about the necessity of saying the right things at the right time in the right place. The same point was made conversely when a comrade who had made the same argument, wrongly, for years suddenly made it in a situation where it fitted: ‘Even a stopped clock is right twice a day’ was a favourite Cliff response, or, ‘Even a blind hen can sometimes pick up a grain of corn.’
Many people will recall hard arguments they had with Cliff, but a lot of the loyalty which he drew from those around him was because he was unstinting and sincere when work was done which he admired. More often you felt that he was saying something so absolutely obvious that you could not believe how you had not seen it yourself.
These, then, are the aspects of Cliff’s personality which seemed distillations of the best aspects of the party he founded and which we should struggle to perpetuate: an unshakeable grip of the classical Marxist tradition, insistence that it can only be understood and only has any purpose as part of the struggle to build a revolutionary party, great tenacity and determination allied to great flexibility and pragmatism, and honesty and realism expressed with an eye for exposing the absurd and the ridiculous.
 



Shallow grave
Dir: Danny Boyle
Shallow Grave has its heart in the right place and, unlike practically every other bodily organ, it doesn’t become severed from its proper location during the film.
Boyle sets his sights on three Edinburgh yuppies of the high Thatcherite period. Their avarice, duplicity, cruelty and greed are pilloried from the very first scenes where they humiliate a series of applicants for the spare place in their fashionable flat.
The successful interviewee turns out to be a gangster who promptly dies of a drug overdose, leaving behind a suitcase full of money. The yuppies decide to keep the money and bury the body, pausing only to dismember it to prevent identification.
When the dead man’s two accomplices catch up with the yuppies, another bout of bloodletting ensues, resulting in a further two bodies which have to be disposed of in the same manner.
As the police close in, the worm of guilt and paranoia eats away at the three friends and a final session of mutual torture and violence gets under way.
All this should add up to a thoroughly macabre, anti-middle class morality tale, but the film doesn’t deliver on its early promise.
This is mainly because the focus of the film is so narrow. We spend all our time in the company of the three yuppies, rarely moving beyond the confines of their flat.
One consequence is to diminish the impact of the film’s hostility to the yuppies. Yuppies aren’t evil simply because they dress in expensive clothes and have designer kitchens or even because they are nasty to one another.
Yuppies have become a hated symbol of Tory Britain because they have climbed to where they are on the backs of the poor and because they deliberately and callously flaunt their wealth in the faces of the people on whose work they depend.
Shallow Grave extracts them from this circumstance and no amount of brutal individual behaviour can replace what is lost by failing to look at their brutality as a social group in relation to others.
The one scene which provides an exception proves the rule. At a social function the three bump into a working class bloke they previously humiliated as an applicant for their flat. He catches one of the yuppies and gives him a bloody nose. It is a rare moment of release in the length of the film.
Elsewhere tricky photography, ‘ironic’ dialogue and the inevitable fashionable nostalgic tune accompanying the menace (this time Nina Simone), plus other ‘postmodern’ devices, try to put a few bumps in the flatness of the film’s surface.
You know that this is going to lead to trouble when, early on, a voiceover mimics the classic film noir line ‘it could have been any city – they are all the same.’ But in this case the camera is skimming over the streets of Edinburgh’s New Town, one of the most visually distinctive European cities.
This kind of thing simply gives Shallow Grave the air of an art school graduation project when what it really needs is less flash and more attention to, for instance, a plot line which has the semblance of logic. (Why, for instance, do they have to dump the body in the first place? Why not report the death to the police and hide the money?)
That the critics have been so kind to Shallow Grave has more to do with it being a British film than any inherent qualities, as has the fact that the prodigious amounts of violence have largely gone unremarked upon, unlike the vastly superior, but American, Pulp Fiction.
All things considered, it was very brave of the film makers to include the word ‘shallow’ in the title.
 



What The Butler Saw
by Joe Orton
It could have been bad. The stalwarts of British TV sitcom, ancient (John Alderton from Please Sir!) and modern – Richard Wilson from the programme whose title overestimates its liveliness, One Foot in the Grave – lined up in a farce to pull the middle classes into the National Theatre. And all over by 10 p.m. in time for the train to Guildford.
But, with the pen in Joe Orton’s hand, the joke is on the middle classes. Orton was famously and flamboyantly gay in a time when it was still a jailable offence no matter how old you were. He wasn’t interested in the farce of the Brian Rix variety.
What the Butler Saw doesn’t even try to get a few chuckles out of mild innuendo about adultery. Orton’s out to get gales of laughter from transvestism, lesbianism, nymphomania and a few other things which it would do no good for potential audiences to find out about in a review.
The action takes place in a sanatorium where the doctor’s attempts to seduce an applicant for the post of his secretary, the calamitous state of his own marriage and the inconvenient arrival of a government inspector (by far the maddest of a barmy bunch) conspire to trigger the usual loss of sanity and outer garments.
In passing, quite a few establishment icons get demolished – Winston Churchill is revealed as, literally and metaphorically, a big prick, psychiatrists as crazed and/or sex maniacs, and policemen as crossdressers (well, actually, nearly everyone is a crossdresser in this play.)
Orton’s triumph is to take the almost moribund form of the farce and turn it into something which is progressive without being po-faced.
Orton’s intentions are most clearly signalled in his diaries:
‘26 March 1967. Easter Day. Nothing on television but uplifting programmes. BBC crooning to itself as usual ... Kenneth [Halliwell, Orton’s lover], who read the Observer, tells me of the latest way-out group in America – complete sexual licence. “Its the only way to smash the wretched civilisation,” I said, making a mental note to hot up What the Butler Saw. Sex is the only way to infuriate them. Much more fucking and they’ll be screaming hysterics.’
Now as a theory of revolution this may, as they say, leave something to be desired. Nevertheless, it produced a marvellously funny and subversive play, even if time and this production have taken out some of its bite.
Plays at the National Theatre, London.
 



The State We’re In
Will Hutton
Jonathan Cape £16.99
This book has caught the mood of the hour. It has already been reprinted four times since its publication a few weeks ago.
Hutton has used his perch as The Guardian’s economic correspondent to assemble an impressive indictment of the Tories’ market mania. If you want a coherent argument about why creating mass unemployment and increasing inequality is simply self defeating for a government which is supposed to be reducing public spending; if you want the economic proof that the internal market is wrecking health care; if you want the statistics which prove how great a fraud pension funds are or what a disaster the privatisation bonanza has been, The State We’re In has it all.
Since only 11 percent of the population trusts the government, even if a rather higher percentage intend to vote for them, the book was always likely to find an eager audience.
But what has assured its popularity is not just its damning indictment of the Tories. Hutton’s book is also an intellectual manifesto for Tony Blair’s ‘modern’ Labour Party. So he curses Tory privatisation, but approves of ditching Clause Four; he condemns the undemocratic nature of Tory rule, but wouldn’t repeal the anti-union laws, he hates poverty, but believes that the Tories’ picture of the unions ‘as greedy and stupid vehicles of militant shop steward power, solely responsible for running down the country ... had sufficient truth to sustain the Conservatives’ political position.’
In one respect Hutton is to the right of Tony Blair. he still believes in the desirability of an electoral alliance between the Liberals and Labour.
In place of ‘a tradition of purely oppositional working class culture, concerned only with conditions on the shopfloor and old memories of exploitation’ – Hutton’s description of the British Leyland unions in the 1970s – he holds out the old social democratic model of business, union and government cooperation.
Hutton’s only originality is to weld this old Keynesian cliché on to an old constitutional cliché. He insists that what undermined the old welfare state consensus was Britain’s archaic political setup – the monarchy (although he does not necessarily think it should be abolished), House of Lords, first-past-the-post voting system and the lack of a written constitution. Above all Hutton blames Britain’s decline on the economic predominance of the City – the demand for quick profits by southern coupon clippers undermines the efforts of those sterling John Bull figures who run manufacturing industry in the Midlands and the north.
The State We’re In therefore confirms not just what the vast majority of people feel about the Tories, but also the particular prejudices of what a section of the middle classes and some capitalists think should be done about the decline of Britain.
Such ideas also spill over into the working class – through the channel of the Labour Party and trade union bureaucracy, and papers like The Guardian and the New Statesman. So the left has to take them seriously.
The most obvious point to make is that the postwar consensus did not fall apart because Britain is not a republic, does not have a written constitution, an elected second chamber or proportional representation. Italy has had all these for most of the postwar period and yet it would be hard to prove that the political crisis engulfing Italian society is less severe than that in Britain.
Hutton’s reheated Keynesianism suffers from a similar objection – it has been tried before and it has failed. Indeed, anyone who lived through the 1970s will experience an intense sense of deja-vu as they read how much better things would be if the ‘two sides’ of industry were to sit down with the government and work things out.
Hutton seems oblivious of the fact that it was precisely this Social Contract which ended in the defeat of both the unions and the Labour government in 1979. People did not desert Labour because the unions were too powerful, they did so because they were disillusioned not only with Labour’s inability to deliver the promised reforms, but with its increasingly frantic attacks on their living standards.
Towards the end of his book Hutton seems to sense that the scale of the economic and political problems that have accumulated in more than 20 years of stagnation and crisis are not amenable to his kind of reform, ‘the country is at a turning-point like that of the 1630s, 1680s, 1830s, 1900s and 1940s.’ These are significant dates. They all, with the arguable exception of the 1940s, were years which contained or were soon followed by years of massive class struggle. In three of the five cases revolution or revolutionary movements were a palpable reality.
Hutton hopes that reformist change may win the day, but admits that ‘the political base for change is still weak, and the hysterical reaction of the highly politicised business and financial community, allied with the conservative media, to reform of what they consider to be “enterprise” can easily be imagined.’ And he notes, ‘no state in the 20th century has ever been able to recast its economy, political structures and society to the extent that Britain must do, without suffering defeat in war, economic collapse or revolution.’
No Keynesian economist of the 1960s talked in such despondent or apocalyptic terms about their own project. It is a mark of how far the crisis has developed and how much more real the prospect of revolution has become.
 



Eric Hobsbawm
Age of Extremes, The Short Twentieth Century 1914–1991
London 1994, £20
The opening pages of Eric Hobsbawm’s great panorama of the 20th century are devoted to a series of 12 quotations from famous intellectuals, each no more than a sentence or two long, in which they struggle to catch the essence of their century. These views fall into three broad categories – optimists, pessimists and the fashionably agnostic.
For a minority, it is, in spite of everything, a century of scientific or human progress. ‘There have been revolutions for the better in this century’, as Rita Levi Montalcini, the Italian Nobel prize winner, argues, citing the ‘emergence of women after centuries of repression’.
The majority, however, incline to pessimism. In the case of novelist and concentration camp survivor Primo Levi such emotions are only too understandable. But even Isaiah Berlin and Spanish anthropologist Julio Caro Baroja, who both admit having suffered no personal hardship, find their age, respectively, ‘the most terrible century in Western history’ and a century of ‘terrible events which humanity has lived through’. For writer William Golding it is ‘the most violent century in human history’.
Fashionable agnosticism is perhaps under-represented by historian Franco Venturi. His remarks are composed of two sentences, the first of which seems to be a resignation note for his whole profession: ‘Historians can’t answer this question’. But, in the way of academics, his second sentence is a lifetime re-employment contract: ‘For me the 20th century is only the ever-renewed effort to understand it.’
It is not the least of Eric Hobsbawm’s virtues that he has stood out against this kind of postmodern defeatism. He is still committed to the idea that history can be understood, can be explained, and that there is a difference between the subjective prejudices of the writer and the real events which are being described.
A still greater virtue is that Hobsbawm does not give in to either the facile optimism or the understandable pessimism displayed by the comments he gathers together on the opening pages of the Age of Extremes. As the book’s title suggests, Hobsbawm sees the contradictory nature of our world: unimaginable wealth piled high beside indescribable poverty, machinery capable of unheard of productivity standing beside unbelievably destructive weapons, the most inhumane and brutal oppression calling forth the most courageous and principled resistance. Perhaps Yehudi Menuhin comes closest to catching this mood when he describes the century as one which has ‘destroyed all illusions and ideals’ yet also ‘raised the greatest hopes ever conceived by humanity’.
The structure of the Age of Extremes follows this pattern. It rightly sees the first half of the 20th century as the Age of Catastrophe – the period of the First World War, the rise of Italian fascism, the demise of the Russian Revolution, the slump of the 1930s, the rise of Nazi Germany, the defeat of the Spanish Revolution, and the Second World War. The second part of the book, The Golden Age, traces the long post-war boom which accompanied the Cold War and decolonisation. Finally, The Landslide charts the collapse of economic prosperity, the end of Stalinism (or socialism as Hobsbawm mistakenly calls it), the close of the Cold War and the re-emergence of economic crisis and political instability.
All this means that Hobsbawm has the broad measure of a century which threatened, even in its most prosperous years, mass destruction and which called forth, even in its blackest moments, forces which could secure a better world. This alone sets Hobsbawm apart from those theorists who assume that the history of the century, especially that of its closing years, self evidently shows the superiority of liberal democracy and free market capitalism – former US state department official Francis Fukuyama is probably the best known. [1] It also mostly sets Hobsbawm apart from those determinists for whom the growth of the world’s population and the progress of technology spell the doom of humanity, although Age of Extremes is not entirely above giving way to this kind of millennial gloom on occasions. [2]
Sometimes these strengths carry over into Hobsbawm’s account of the turning points of 20th century history. He is generally good, for instance, on Lenin and the Russian Revolution. [3] Hobsbawm stayed in the British Communist Party until it collapsed and so will have heard the McCarthyite view of the Bolsheviks all too frequently the first time round to be overly impressed now that it is being recycled in the wake of events in Eastern Europe. He is insistent that ‘Contrary to the Cold War mythology, which saw Lenin essentially as an organiser of coups, the only real asset he and the Bolsheviks had was the ability to recognise what the masses wanted; to, as it were, lead by knowing how to follow’. [4] More surprisingly, Hobsbawm gives due weight to the central perspective of the October Revolution:
Lenin’s programme … gamble[d] on the conversion of the Russian Revolution into a world, or at least a European, revolution. Who – he said so often enough – could imagine that a victory for socialism ‘can come about … except by the complete destruction of the Russian and European bourgeoisie’? [5]
Hobsbawm is similarly clear sighted about how the ‘years of unbroken crisis and catastrophe, German conquest and penal peace, regional breakaways, counter-revolution, civil war, foreign armed intervention, hunger and economic collapse’ undermined the revolution. The Bolsheviks, he rightly argues:
could have no strategy or perspective beyond choosing, day by day, between decisions needed for immediate survival and the ones which risked immediate disaster. Who could afford to consider the long term consequences for the revolution of decisions which had to be taken now, or else there would be an end to the revolution and no further consequences to consider? [6]
But once outside the narrow confines of the immediate revolutionary events Hobsbawm’s political background begins to show its darker side. It was Stalin who formulated the theory of ‘socialism in one country’, denying the possibility of Russia relying on the potential of world revolution. Hobsbawm seems to supply retrospective justification for this view. So, although we are told that ‘a wave of revolution swept across the globe in the two years after October, and the hopes of the embattled Bolsheviks did not seem unrealistic’, the general impression given does not do justice to the depth of the world revolution or to how close it came to hitting its mark. The crucial German revolution is, for instance, described at one point as ‘an illusion’ since ‘the bulk of German revolutionary soldiers, sailors and workers remained … moderate and law abiding’. [7]
Since Hobsbawm underestimates the intensity of the revolutionary upsurge, he is under no special obligation to explain its failure, which had a good deal to do with the Stalinisation of the Communist International. Nor does he have to present the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy as anything other than the regrettable but unavoidable result of the pressure of events. This then establishes the continuity between the revolutionary era and the whole subsequent history of Stalinism – so that the chapter on world revolution generalises wildly and unconvincingly past the 1920s and on to Mao’s China and the ‘second great wave of world revolution, from 1944 to 1949’, by which he appears to mean the invasion of Eastern Europe by the Russian army. [8]
Indeed, Hobsbawm even goes so far as to write of the post-war world that ‘the net effect of 12 years of National Socialism was that large parts of Europe now lay at the mercy of the Bolsheviks’. [9] Yet he knows that virtually the entire leadership of the Bolshevik Party and a great proportion of its rank and file of 1917 had vanished into Stalin’s gulag during the 1930s. Certainly there was nothing of it remaining by 1945. Failure to acknowledge the reality and completeness of this counter-revolution necessarily distorts Hobsbawm’s view of the century.
The shame of Age of Extremes is that the strengths of Hobsbawm’s generally Marxist approach are so often cancelled by the legacy of his politics. The actual historical account therefore becomes an infuriating mix of interesting detail and description coupled to a failure to really explain the turning points of 20th century history. [10]
Nothing could better illustrate the bind in which Hobsbawm finds himself than his account of the Spanish Revolution of 1936. We are told that ‘the Spanish people’s reaction to the [Franco] coup was undoubtedly revolutionary’ and that, in spite of this, ‘the Spanish government and, more to the point, the communists who were increasingly influential in its affairs, insisted that social revolution was not their object, and, indeed, visibly did everything within their power to control and reverse it, to the horror of revolutionary enthusiasts’. He goes on, with commendable honesty, to admit that:
The interesting point is that this was not mere opportunism or, as the purists on the ultra Left thought, treason to the revolution. It reflected a deliberate shift from an insurrectionary to a gradualist … even a parliamentary, way to power. [11]
This electoralist approach is then praised because it described ‘with considerable accuracy the shape of politics in the anti-fascist war of 1939–45’ and that ‘the logic of anti-fascist war led towards the Left’.
The remarkable fact in all this is that we are never given any account of why, when confronted with such a successful policy, Franco triumphed. Neither are we told how it was that the poor old wrongheaded ‘revolutionary purists’ (in fact, figures as politically divergent as Trotsky and Independent Labour Party member George Orwell) were able to predict that the Communist Party’s policy would lead to the fall of the Republican government and to the destruction of the CP itself.
In reality of course the CP’s policy amounted to a policy of counter-revolution. It paralysed and disorganised working class resistance to Franco just when it most needed to be extended and defended. The CP attacked both physically and politically the leaders and organisations of the Spanish Revolution and used the authority they derived from the support given to the Republican forces by the USSR to ensure that the government bent to their will. Hobsbawm’s sole gesture towards explaining the defeat of the Republican side is to point to its internal divisions. But the CP was responsible for helping to create these divisions and for resolving them at the expense of workers’ control in the factories, the agrarian revolution and the existence of any organisation to the left of the CP. When the revolutionary momentum was halted, the right wing punished the error ruthlessly. [12]
And while the course of the Second World War certainly radicalised working people throughout Europe, it was the CP’s new found parliamentarianism which prevented this from resulting in any far reaching social transformation. Crucially, for instance, it brought Italian workers four generations of right wing government and French workers the de Gaulle regime. In both cases the CP’s strategy led to their own exclusion from real influence. [13] Certainly the logic of war led to the left, but the logic of the CP’s strategy led to defeat.
But Hobsbawm’s residual attachment to the disappeared world of Moscow centred ‘communism’ carries an even greater disabling burden: his explanation of the rise and fall of the long post-war boom, necessarily entailing an account of the collapse of the Eastern bloc, never rises above the level of description. The fundamental role of arms spending in sustaining and then destroying the boom is never analysed because to do so would mean seeing the Eastern bloc as regimes whose military and economic competition with the West defined the nature of the post-war world economy. [14] The way in which arms spending first boosted the world economy and then, since it was unequally born by the major powers, undermined the competitiveness of its biggest contributors and therefore its own effectiveness, is not fully grasped.
Even so, the insight and detail are often impressive – the chapter on Third World and Revolution, for instance, is strong on the class make up and aims of the leaders of the Third World revolutions of the 1950s to 1970s. The way in which the popular image of guerrilla struggles has obscured the contribution of working class actions to the process of decolonisation is well described. The fact that the leaders of these revolutions were young and middle class and the fact that they often harked back to an older, pre-1917 tradition of agrarian struggle is usefully recalled. The distance between their political programme – land reform plus modernisation plus national independence – and the original Marxist conception of revolution has been obscured by the Cold War desire to see every threat to American interests as emanating from Moscow. Hobsbawm redresses the balance. But still the significance of all this in the wider history of the Cold War is undermined by the weakness of the theoretical framework which cannot stand the weight of explanation demanded of it.
The same flaw reappears time and again. It is there in the cringe inducing praise for Gorbachev and the snide asides reserved almost exclusively for any political current to the left of the CP. Worst of all, Hobsbawn accepts that political defeat and technological change have undermined the power of the organised working class and so eroded both the possibility of revolution and the voting base of Labour and social democratic parties. This last claim is an extension of his original article, The Forward March of Labour Halted, published in the now defunct Marxism Today. It is a rather strange conclusion when, for instance, France has had a Socialist Party president, Spain a Socialist Party government and Sweden has had a social democrat government for nearly as long as the Tories have been in power in Britain – and when even here the Labour Party is now 40 points ahead of the Tories in opinion polls.
There are two other faults which, although minor, are worth noting. The first is that Hobsbawm has chosen to inject a personal tone into his narrative which is often irrelevant and nearly always irritating. Is it, for instance, the best way of illustrating the debilitating specialisation which has developed in academia in the 20th century to be told that Hobsbawm himself was at Cambridge at the same time as Crick and Watson were discovering the structure of DNA and that, ‘though I even recall meeting Crick socially at the time, most of us were simply not aware that these extraordinary developments were being hatched within a few tens of yards of my college gates, in laboratories we passed regularly and pubs where we drank’? [15] Hobsbawm, like Woody Allen’s Leo Zelig, seems to pop up all over the century giving us his particular view of events. But memoir and history, particularly the kind of grand history that Hobsbawm specialises in, are not comfortable bedfellows.
A second, related, point is that the personal judgments which Hobsbawm makes often seem based on no more than the kind of ill tempered snobbiness which readers expect from letter writers to the Daily Telegraph. What does it mean for Hobsbawm to tell us that ‘no one who has been asked by an intelligent American student whether the phrase “Second World War” meant that there had been a “First World War” is unaware that knowledge of even the basic facts of the century cannot be taken for granted’? [16] Is this the reflex anti-Americanism so common among CP members during the Cold War, or a lament for declining standards in education, or a donnish joke? Take your pick – but any one of them diminishes a book like this.
Similarly, Hobsbawm tells us that for his generation history was ‘part of the texture of our lives’ (in a way which it is not for younger people) because ‘streets and public places were still called after public men and events (the Wilson station in pre-war Prague, the Metro Stalingrad in Paris), when peace treaties were still signed and therefore had to be identified (Treaty of Versailles) … ’ [17] Now, were Hobsbawm to take a short trip outside his Hampstead home he might come across Hackney’s C.L.R. James Library (named after the black nationalist and sometime Trotskyist), the Isle of Dogs’ Jack Dash House (after the CP dockers’ leader), the huge granite head of Nelson Mandela outside the Royal Festival Hall (and a number of streets and public buildings now bearing his name) or the carved head of black nationalist Marcus Garvey in the entrance hall of the Tottenham Leisure Centre. And a brief glimpse at the daily papers might reveal not only that treaties continue to be signed (for instance, SALT I, SALT II and START) but that they are also sometimes still named after places (the treaties of Rome and Maastricht spring to mind).
This bad humour is more than the product of a liverish disposition or old age. It is the mark of a historian who knows that the century is ending as badly as it began, confronting humanity with the choice described in the Communist Manifesto: ‘either social revolution or the common ruin of the contending classes’. [18] Such a stark choice is inevitably posed once we raise our eyes from the small events of everyday life and look back over a century which has seen more wars and revolutions, more social crises and catastrophes, than any previous 100 year period. For those Marxists of Hobsbawm’s generation the decision for or against socialism was inevitably bound to the question of whether they were for or against Stalinism. Yet to be for Stalin was to be against genuine socialism and democracy in Russia and, eventually, as the Spanish Revolution demonstrated beyond question, everywhere else.
For a long time Hobsbawm’s historical work could avoid meeting this fact head on. As he has often said, the tacit agreement between the CP and the CP historians’ group was that they could be mostly free of party control so long as they avoided writing about the 20th century. Hobsbawm kept the bargain until the end, loyally elaborating the CP line where current politics were concerned but staying safely in the long 19th century when it came to historical writing. The death of the CP has released him from that bargain, but not from the attitude of mind which went with it. Age of Extremes is, consequently, a huge landscape painting of the century, but one painted by an artist who has lost his sense of perspective. And so, despite his initial denial of pessimism, Hobsbawm’s world stands in shadow, repeating the dilemma with which it opened:
If humanity is to have a recognisable future, it cannot be by prolonging the past or the present. If we try to build the third millennium on that basis, we shall fail. And the price of failure, that is to say, the alternative to a changed society, is darkness.
These very last sentences are a clarion call for change, but one issued more in the hope than the expectation that it will be answered. Hobsbawm’s version of Marxism can see the contradiction at the heart of the century but has long since failed to explain how working people can resolve it.

Notes
1. See his The End of History and the Last Man (Penguin 1993).
2. See, for instance, P. Kennedy, Preparing for the 21st Century (London 1993).
3. Hobsbawm seems, in this respect at least, to have recovered his composure after the shock of the collapse of the Eastern European regimes. His initial reaction was to distance himself much more completely from the whole experience of the October revolution. See his Waking from History’s Great Dream, Independent on Sunday, 4 February 1990, where the Russian Revolution is described as ‘a freak result’ of the age of catastrophe which might have been avoided if the Bolsheviks had heeded Menshevik warnings.
4. E. Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes (London 1994), p. 61.
5. Ibid., p. 63.
6. Ibid., p. 64.
7. Ibid., p. 68.
8. Ibid., p. 75.
9. Ibid., p. 175.
10. Perry Anderson has made a similar point in his Guardian review: ‘Hobsbawm stresses that the purpose of his book is to explain, not to describe events. But at three crucial turning points – the Great Depression, the onset of the post-war boom, and the slide into “stagflation” – he admits that real explanation lies beyond its scope, settling essentially for description.’
11. E. Hobsbawm, op. cit., p. 162.
12. It was only the Bolsheviks’ insistence on deepening the revolution in the face of the attempted military coup headed by Kornilov in 1917 which prevented, as Trotsky put it, fascism being a Russian rather than an Italian word.
13. See, for instance, the masterly Politics of War by Gabriel Kolko (second ed., New York 1990).
14. For an account of the arms economy see A. Callinicos, J. Rees, C. Harman and M. Haynes, Marxism and the New Imperialism (London 1994); C. Harman, Explaining the Crisis (London 1987); M. Kidron, Western Capitalism Since the War (London 1968).
15. E. Hobsbawm, op. cit., p. 527.
16. Ibid., p. 3.
17. Ibid., p. 4.
18. This non-deterministic approach was central to Marx, quite contrary to Hobsbawm’s claim that, for Marx, ‘the class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat … could only have one outcome.’ As footnote 17 above, p. 57.
 



The resurgence of radicalism in the anti-capitalist movement and the trade unions has provoked an important debate across the left internationally. The issue is this: what kind of party should socialists build? Should it be a broad socialist party or a revolutionary organisation? This is a discussion that has recurred many times in the socialist movement since at least the days of Marx and Engels. But it has been renewed today both because of the rebirth of radicalism and because of the decline of Labourism and the traditional Communist parties. Murray Smith and Nick McKerrell have made important contributions to this discussion in recent articles in the magazine Frontline, reproduced in this journal. Murray Smith also raises some important questions about the history of the Socialist Workers Party, and so before we address the substance of this debate it is worth recalling the path that the left has taken to reach its current position.
 
How did we get here?
There have been four distinct phases in the class struggle in Britain since the Second World War. The first was the long post-war boom, a period of social stability. This ended in the late 1960s and was followed by a second period marked by radicalism and intensifying class struggle. This upturn was broken by a renewed employers’ offensive decisively assisted by the Labour government from the mid-1970s until the election of Margaret Thatcher in 1979. By this point the third phase, the downturn, was under way. It became one of the most systematic series of defeats inflicted on any working class in the industrialised world. During the succeeding decade steel workers, miners, dockers and printers were beaten in set-piece battles with the employers and the state. The fourth phase is the current revival in consciousness and combativity, discernable from the mid-1990s and unmistakable since the Seattle demonstration in 1999.
These changes in society necessarily had an impact on the Labour Party. In a period of economic expansion the Labour Party could both implement reforms and remain within the parameters of the capitalist system. As the long period of low growth and stagnation set in after the early 1970s, Labour governments delivered fewer reforms and became ever more determined to attack working people’s living standards in the name of ‘strengthening the competitiveness of the economy’. Thus opened an era of reformism without reforms. But working class allegiance to reformism did not disappear since the mainstream alternative, the Tories, was even worse. This loyalty to Labour was reinforced by the fact that the self activity of the working class was at historically low levels, undermining more radical alternatives.
It is necessary, if a little tedious, to rehearse this well known story because the tactics of any socialist organisation have to rest on an understanding of the phases through which the class struggle passes. Murray Smith treats the development of the Socialist Workers Party as if it were only tangentially related to the state of the class struggle when in fact that was the central, and publicly discussed, heart of the matter. [1]
Briefly, the central relationship ran as follows. During the long boom a small, organisationally loose but ideologically clear propaganda group, the International Socialists (IS), was all that it was possible to build. The Labour Party and the Communist Party monopolised much of the political space on the left. This changed in 1968 and the IS grew. Over the subsequent years it gained a small but real working class implantation. The IS also developed the capacity to undertake effective agitational work. From 1968, after a fierce argument, it became a democratic centralist organisation in order to be more effective in the new situation. Thus more open and agitational work, including the establishment of rank and file papers, Women’s Voice and Flame, went together with a more ‘Leninist’ form of party organisation. Murray Smith is quite wrong to imply that a ‘sectarian’ political line went ‘hand in hand’ with ‘an increasingly authoritarian regime’. He has, quite apart from anything else, got his dates wrong.
Neither is it true that ‘Cliff developed a theory of the downturn in the class struggle to justify this sectarian line’. Cliff spotted, as early as 1978, that the wave of working class victories that had characterised the period since 1968 was coming to a close. It was a vital insight. Thatcher’s election came as less of a surprise to the SWP than to much of the rest of the left. And we were better prepared for the nature of the battles that followed, critically the 1984–1985 miners’ strike, than we would have been otherwise. However, we did not ignore the political battles that raged in the same period: the rise of Bennism, ratecapping, the GLC and Liverpool’s Militant-led council. Indeed we described this phenomenon as an ‘industrial downturn and a political upturn’. But we did make the point that unless the industrial struggle rose to meet the level of political radicalisation then the forces involved on the political front would ultimately be isolated and defeated. And so it proved to be successively for Tony Benn, Ken Livingstone and Militant.
Our own stance was to fight when possible and to hold together as large an organisation based on revolutionary ideas as we could. Insulation from an era of defeats did take its toll. Propaganda methods, habits of thought and forms of organisation dominated the organisation for nearly 20 years. Much of that has changed as the movement has revived, but still more needs to be done. But at the end of that period the SWP emerged with more forces to deploy on the new terrain of the class struggle than all the other left of Labour organisations put together. We made mistakes during the downturn, but we did not mistake the central characteristic of the period. And we did not, even when we were intimately involved with mass campaigns like the ANL, the miners’ support groups or the poll tax campaign, lose sight of the need to establish a larger revolutionary organisation at the end of the campaign than we had at the beginning.
Others took a different path. The Revolutionary Communist League (LCR) in France survived by allowing many of its members to become embedded in union or campaign organisations. Whether or not this was a more effective strategy in the past, it certainly seems that it leaves that organisation with no fewer problems in relating party-building to the new radicalisation than those faced by the SWP. For myself, I’m happy to pay my respects to anyone who survived the last 20 years and emerged as a Marxist. But that alone will not tell us what to do next. Critically it will not give us the answer to the key question raised by Murray Smith and Nick McKerrell: is the Labour Party finished as a working class reformist organisation?
 
The nature of Labourism
Has there been a ‘transformation of the reformist Labour parties into openly capitalist organisations’, as Nick McKerrell argues? If Labour is finished then the whole political territory that it previously occupied is, potentially at least, open to a new socialist party. What is needed, Nick McKerrell says, is ‘a unified socialist party that would fill the void created by the transforming of Labour into a party of big business’. [2] The distinction between reform and revolution has become redundant since one pole of this opposition has collapsed. And, therefore, the need for united front work will also have become unnecessary since without any organised reformist forces an agreement for action between reformists and revolutionaries, the definition of a united front, is clearly irrelevant.
If all these conditions pertain to the current political situation then it might be perfectly correct to launch a new broad party without immediately confronting the issue of reform or revolution. We would have been returned to the situation that Marx and Engels found themselves in at the end of the 19th century before the rise of the Labour Party.
But a moment’s calm reflection tells us that this analysis of the Labour Party bares little relation to the facts. The defeat of the Labour left in the 1980s has certainly paved the way for the most right wing Labour leadership in a generation. And the adoption by that leadership of the neo-liberal economic and social agenda has hugely diminished the policy differences between the major parties. These facts explain the massive disparity between the views and aspirations of many, perhaps a majority of workers, and the leadership of the Labour Party.
But these facts do not mean that the Labour Party has ceased to be a reformist organisation. All parties are defined not only by their policies but also by their class composition. This is especially true of reformist parties, since they have always been organisations composed of workers but with policies and leaderships wedded to the continued existence of the capitalist system. This contradiction has been pushed to extremes by New Labour – and it is this fact that creates the opportunity for socialist organisation independent of Labourism – but it has not yet been broken.
Labour remains working class in the following crucial senses: its individual members are overwhelmingly working class, even though the apparatus is more dominated by middle class elements than it was before; its voting base is overwhelmingly working class; the majority of its election funds still come from the unions. The unions, as this year’s Labour Party conference demonstrated beyond doubt, are still organically connected to the Labour Party in a manner that makes a mockery of the idea that Labour is a second Tory party. There was no revolt over the Private Finance Initiative, successful or otherwise, by the mass organisations of the working class at either the Tory or the Liberal Democrat conferences. Such a revolt is only possible at the Labour Party conference because there remains a strong organisational bond between the unions, especially the union leaders, and the Labour Party.
The intense contradiction between the leaderships of reformist organisations and their working class supporters is a central aspect of the contemporary political scene. But the fact that neither reformist consciousness nor reformist organisation has disappeared from this picture makes the issue of how revolutionaries relate to these forces absolutely crucial.
 
The united front approach
Some workers who are disillusioned with the Labour Party will simply decide to support another socialist organisation, like the SSP or the Socialist Alliance. They will suddenly see, more or less in one glance, the failures of Labour and the possibilities of a socialist alternative. But these people are, at the moment, a minority.
The majority who are breaking from Labour do so unevenly, partially, and at different speeds over different issues. They may be appalled at Labour over the ‘war on terrorism’ but still vote Labour in elections. They may hate PFI, and join with revolutionaries in their unions to fight the government and Labour councils over this issue, but still support the existing political fund in the unions. They may protest alongside revolutionaries against the Nazis, hate David Blunkett’s attitude to refugees, but still retain their membership of the Labour Party.
This is why Nick McKerrell is wrong to assume that it would simply be tidier if all these issues could be bundled together in one socialist organisation. Arguing against the SWP’s participation in a wide range of different united fronts he says, ‘If all these campaigns attract broad support, how much stronger would it be if a unified pluralist socialist party could take up these issues across England the way that has been done in Scotland?’ [3]
The answer is that the movement would not be stronger at all. It would be weaker. People who are willing to join with socialists in fighting against war are not necessarily socialists themselves, and we should not assume that they agree with us about asylum seekers or anti-capitalism. People who are willing to fight the Nazis may not agree with socialists about the war. This is why each united front must be constructed specifically with a particular aim in mind. Underestimating the variety and unevenness of consciousness in the working class restricts the numbers involved to those who already consider themselves socialists or, at the minimum, share a complex of interlocking ideas with socialists. This is the quick way to arrive at a sectarian model of the party and a conception of the united front as no more than a party front.
The fact of uneven consciousness in the working class movement means that it is simply counterproductive to turn our backs on the united front approach. It will not do to tell such people, as Murray Smith does, that they are part of ‘the bourgeoisification of social democracy’, or to argue that to address them as ‘reformist or even social democrat, not to mention socialist, is a misuse of language’. [4]
What is needed is a careful discussion about the forms of organisation that are necessary to maximise the unity of the working class in struggle, and at the same time give revolutionaries and reformists the chance to discuss their wider differences. In the course of such discussions the revolutionaries will hope that their ideas, and the example of their conduct of the struggle, will prove sufficiently convincing that reformist workers join revolutionary organisations. But this cannot be achieved unless the immediate aim of the united front is to provide the most effective fighting organisation for both reformists and revolutionaries. Neither can it be done by simply lecturing Labour Party supporters along the lines of ‘you lot are just new Tories – join the real socialists’.
The first point to be made about Murray Smith’s treatment of the united front is that it is self contradictory. Murray claims the disappearance of reformism with regard to the Labour Party, but is then forced to admit that the Stop the War Coalition, like the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign, ‘involves forces which are revolutionary, reformist or representing different interests’. This is rather an understatement about an organisation that put 400,000 people on the streets of London on 28 September in the biggest political demonstration since the Second World War, and which binds together many Labour MPs, the support of 11 national unions, the representatives of Muslim organisations, the Green Party, the support of CND and the revolutionary left.
Murray’s account is also factually incorrect. He describes the Anti Nazi League as a front for the SWP. Yet on three crucial occasions – in the late 1970s at the time of the rise of the National Front, in the early 1990s when Derek Beackon was elected as a BNP councillor in east London, and again today – the ANL has successfully mobilised tens of thousands against the fascists. It could only do so because it bound together revolutionaries and sections of the Labour and trade union movement. The ANL is supported by 17 national unions including the PCS, GMB, CWU, MSF, FBU and RMT. The ANL steering committee elected at the ANL conference includes Labour MPs John Cryer and Mark Hendrick, Labour MEP Glyn Ford and Len Duvall from the Greater London Authority, plus representatives from the national executives of the FBU, CWU and TSSA. Of course we would like to have the forces to oblige the Labour Party and the TUC as a whole to participate in a united front of this kind. But at present the ANL seems to be a fairly effective example of the united front approach.
Finally, Murray is theoretically flawed because he seems to limit his definition of the united front to single issue campaigns of limited duration (ie the kind of campaigns that have been most common on the British left in recent years). But this is far too narrow a definition. Indeed, in the work most commonly associated with systematically elaborating the idea of the united front, Trotsky’s writings on fascism in the 1930s, we find an altogether broader approach.
The trade unions are, for instance, described as ‘the rudimentary form of the united front in the economic struggle’ because they unite revolutionaries and reformists in the common struggle over wages and conditions. Trade unions are of course neither single issue nor temporary organisations. Moreover, Trotsky describes the soviets themselves as united fronts: ‘The soviet is the highest form of the united front under the conditions in which the proletariat enters the epoch of fighting for power’. The soviets were of course permanent bodies with their own executives, subcommittees, military apparatus, newspapers and fundraising arms.
The need for a united front approach, even during the insurrection itself, stems from the fact that reformism and reformist organisation cannot be simply declared null and void because of the reactionary politics of reformist leaders.
Could the Communist Party succeed, during the preparatory epoch, in pushing all other parties out of the ranks of the workers by uniting under its banner the overwhelming majority of workers, then there would be no need whatever for soviets. But historical experience bears witness to the fact that there is no basis whatever for the expectation that...the Communist Party can succeed in occupying such an undisputed and absolutely commanding position in the workers’ ranks, prior to the proletarian overturn. [5]
It seems that if, at one extreme, the trade unions and, at the other, the soviets can be described as united fronts we are not making any great theoretical innovation in describing the Socialist Alliance as a united front of a special type. Murray Smith may here be led astray by his own narrow conception of the united front. Murray and Nick McKerrell seem to think that no organisation that has a party-type structure can be described as a united front. The Socialist Alliance certainly has all the attributes of a party – membership, manifesto and policies, conferences, and elected leaders. And to voters in the elections it appears, as it should, as a party.
But in its political construction it is a united front because it brings together former Labour Party members who are not revolutionary socialists and those, like the SWP, who are revolutionaries. Its programme, broad as it is, represents the minimum acceptable to the revolutionaries and the maximum acceptable to the former Labour Party members. In its executive the SWP members are a small minority.
The SSP is different, but not necessarily better. Some 11 of its 14 executive members are all from one grouping, and all of them are revolutionary Marxists. They have taken a strategic decision not to build a revolutionary party but to build a broad socialist party. Consequently they have a lower political condition for membership than a revolutionary party, but have been less successful at building a heterogeneous political profile than the Socialist Alliance. More importantly, the SSP often presents itself with the kind of arrogance that Murray Smith believes is the special preserve of revolutionary sects. Precisely because it is dismissive of the need for the united front (or pretends that every united front must really be a party front), the SSP appears to think that every broad campaign should be under the party’s own banner or dominated by SSP forces.
The paradox is that the broad party structure supposed to banish the old sectarianism ends up recreating just such attitudes with regard to reformist workers, who stubbornly refuse simply to throw up their hands and join the SSP on being told that they are merely ‘new Tories’. This is why, for all the genuinely admirable electoral success that the SSP has achieved, its record of mobilising for Genoa and other anti-capitalist events, and against the war in Afghanistan and now the war drive on Iraq, is much weaker than that of the SWP and the united fronts it has initiated in Britain. Likewise it is the much newer Socialist Alliance that has led the way on the battle over the political fund, with its 1,000-strong conference and strong intervention at union conferences this year. Neither does the SSP have any industrial united front work that compares with the rank and file papers initiated by the SWP, especially those in the CWU and RMT.
This is not simply a question of whether or not an organisation takes the correct position on, for instance, opposition to war or fighting the Nazis. The SSP has of course taken very similar positions to the SWP on both these issues and a host of other critical questions. But the issue is not words and policies but deeds and actions. The point at issue is whether a party constituted like the SSP can mobilise the same forces as a revolutionary organisation relating to others through the united front.
The reason that these dissonances occur is that the broad party model forces unity where there is principled difference between reform and revolution (by pretending this distinction is no longer valid), and breeds schism by insisting on party primacy where there should be common action in the united front (by pretending it is no longer necessary). Nick McKerrell makes this bias explicit. While conceding that united front campaigns may still be necessary over certain issues, he insists that ‘the historical role for Marxists today is to form new unified pluralist socialist parties which will act as a beacon to the working class and youth politicised by the anti-globalisation movement’. [6]
But genuine unity in action depends on separation on matters of principle such as reform and revolution. We cannot properly determine those immediate issues on which we can unite unless we also properly, and organisationally, separate over matters of principle. If we are constantly paralysed by arguments over matters of principle inside a broad party we are unable to coherently decide those tactical issues over which we are able to act alongside others without compromising ourselves.
Once we have made an organisational separation over principles it is all the easier to make agreements with others over immediate questions on which we agree. This is the point Lenin made to the Italian revolutionaries when they left the old Socialist Party dominated by Turrati. He said, ‘Split from Turrati in order to unite with Turrati.’
 
The need for a revolutionary party
The need for a revolutionary organisation never simply rested on the existence of reformist organisation, as Murray Smith implies. The justification for a revolutionary organisation actually rests on the nature of three other more fundamental characteristics of capitalist society: the state, the capitalist class, and the nature of working class consciousness.
If the nature of the capitalist state had been transformed in the last ten years then the argument against a revolutionary party might have some validity. If the state had become somehow more amenable to simple pressure from a mass movement, if socialism were possible without a complete overthrow of the old state apparatus, then the argument for a party that does not have this as one of its declared aims would gain credence. But there has been no such transformation. The state’s readiness to act against its own population, even in the parliamentary democracies, is still as great as ever. Doubt on this issue was banished at the demonstration in Genoa in 2001, and the name Carlo Giuliani is there to remind us of the fact.
Neither has the hierarchy of economic power and its immunity from popular pressure diminished in the last decade. Now more than ever it seems obvious that the economic power of the capitalist class will not be taken from them without the complete transformation of society. A party that explains this necessity to a new generation now more alive to this argument than any since the early 1970s is still a vital requirement.
Finally, the very nature of working class consciousness is that it is uneven. Some workers, through their practical and intellectual experience of the labour movement, come to political consciousness faster than others. The most effective way for this minority to relate to the wider working class movement is for them to assemble in a separate organisation that can then influence others by the clarity of its analysis and the coherence of its actions. If the more politically conscious and the less politically conscious coexist in the same organisation theoretical confusion and practical paralysis result.
This was the weakness of the POUM in the Spanish Revolution and of the USPD in the German Revolution. It was the key difference between Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg while the latter remained in the SPD. As George Lukács observed:
Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg were agreed politically and theoretically about the need to combat opportunism. The conflict between them lay in their answers to the question of whether or not the campaign against opportunism should be conducted as an intellectual struggle within the revolutionary party ... or whether it was to be resolved on the level of organisation. [7]
Murray Smith asserts that the SSP has not wavered from the tactical positions that revolutionary socialists should take on matters of the hour, even though it has abandoned the idea of a Leninist party. But this is a deceptive generalisation. It is deceptive because the SSP retains a leadership dominated by revolutionary Marxists. It is living off accumulated intellectual capital. And it is not yet of a size where that leadership has been challenged by new members not trained in the same revolutionary politics. What will happen as the SSP grows if there is not a renewed commitment to revolutionary politics? Can such coherence be maintained merely by a loose attachment to the day to day positions common to both revolutionaries and non-revolutionaries?
Murray Smith relies on the strength of the Marxist current within the SSP to ensure its future direction. But this simply reproduces the dilemma that faced Rosa Luxemburg – even if the Marxists win the intellectual argument, how can they effectively translate this into the united action of the whole party when a substantial section of the party disagrees in general and in the specific with its Marxist component?
Would it not be better to be united in a common organisation, like the Socialist Alliance, with those comrades with whom we agree on a broad range of basic socialist politics but retain the independence of action, for them and for us, on those matters of principle on which we disagree? This approach preserves the virtues of united broad organisation without pretending that broader issues of reform and revolution have either disappeared or have no bearing on strategic and tactical issues.
And although Murray Smith protests that there is no ideological confusion attendant on abandoning the Leninist theory of the party, it seems from his own recent articles that this is not the case. In his ‘Notes on the Workers’ Party’ Murray Smith writes as if the whole perspective of building revolutionary organisations is redundant. But in his polemic with the SWP in the most recent article he writes as if the formation of broad parties is simply the most effective way for the revolutionary left to increase its influence in the present conjuncture. If the former is true, then why remain even a Marxist current within a broad class struggle party? Why not dissolve all distinctively revolutionary organisation? But if the latter is true, when will the revolutionaries reveal their true colours to the comrades who have joined their organisation on the understanding that it was not committed to revolutionary politics?
All this begins to look rather like the old Militant’s relationship with the Labour Party. At the heart of it is a refusal to acknowledge that an independent revolutionary party, combining with others in united front organisations, can be more effective than a broad socialist party that has made it the founding condition of its politics that the distinction between reform and revolution is no longer operative in modern politics.
This discussion is still ongoing in the SSP, and we welcome the opportunity to take part in it. The SSP is indeed a bold attempt to break the inertia into which the left had fallen during the long years of the downturn. Certainly the SSP has been electorally successful. And everyone on the left can learn from this success. Yet it is also clear that such electoral success is not the privileged acquisition of one type of party. Similar percentages of the vote have been gained by a wide variety of left wing organisations – by a refounded Communist Party in Italy, by a revolutionary organisation, the LCR, in France, and even by a sectarian organisation like Lutte Ouvrière, also in France. It is also clear that the votes obtained by the Socialist Alliance, like that of Paul Foot in the mayoral contest in Hackney, are now beginning to compare more favourably with those of the SSP. And the SSP has not resolved some wider critical strategic issues.
We are as yet only in the foothills of a revival in working class struggle. The most difficult struggles and the toughest decisions still lie ahead. We can only expect to emerge victorious from these trials if we prepare for them with the utmost care today. We need the deepest possible roots in the new movements and the working class. And this requires that we work with renewed urgency to create united organisations of working class people capable of advancing the struggle on the most pressing issues of the day. But we also need roots in our own tradition. And this tradition speaks emphatically on this issue – there is no substitute for building a revolutionary party.

Notes
1. On the downturn, see S. Jeffreys, Striking into the 1980s, International Socialism 5 (Summer 1979); T. Cliff, The Balance of Class Forces in Britain Today, International Socialism 6 (Autumn 1979); A. Callinicos, The Rank and File Movement Today, International Socialism 17 (Autumn 1982). On Women’s Voice, see L. James and A. Paczuska, Socialism Needs Feminism, International Socialism 14 (Autumn 1981). Tony Cliff’s reply was Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation (London 1984), some chapters of which originally appeared as articles in this journal. Lindsey German’s response can be found in Sex, Class and Socialism (London 1989).
2. N. McKerrell, The United Front Today, Frontline 8 (September/October 2002), www.redflag.org.uk, reprinted in this journal. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
3. Ibid.
4. The first description is from Murray Smith’s most recent article in Frontline, reprinted in this journal. The second is from his Notes on the Workers’ Party, reprinted in International Socialist Discussion Bulletin, no. 1 (July 2002).
5. L. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Penguin 1975), pp. 170–171.
6. N. McKerrell, op. cit.
7. G. Lukács, History and Class Consciousness (Merlin 1971), p. 284.
 



Lenin’s theory of the party is one of the most disputed questions on the left, certainly since the Bolshevik Revolution, and it is one of the most important in terms of how the left is organising around current anti-capitalist and industrial struggles. It is also a central issue in the political debates about creating a socialist alternative to Labourism.
One of the most common misapprehensions about the revolutionary party is that it is something imposed on the working class from the outside. The picture is that a group of ideologues get together, form a party and, using the most undemocratic means, impose their will on the rest of the working class movement. In fact, properly understood, Lenin’s theory of the party implies exactly the opposite. Its necessity emerges out of the very nature of working class struggle. There is a central feature of working class resistance to the capitalist system which demands that we understand how some of us can organise to strengthen the organisation and consciousness of the whole class.
The fundamental issue here, and an issue that Lenin confronted very early on, is the way in which the struggle against the system is inherently uneven. Different groups of workers, at different times, with different sets of ideas, move into struggle against the system. This is the problem of uneven consciousness in the working class movement. If life were simpler, if the ruling class lined up their forces on one side and workers lined up on the other side, perhaps no further discussion of political organisation would be necessary. But this is not how the class struggle works. Everywhere we look we see, instead of neat regimentation, a hugely differentiated field of battle. There are the discontinuities of time – periods of intense class conflict are followed by periods of quietude. There are discontinuities in the type of struggle that takes place – some are economic, others political and still others ideological, to name only the three broad categories in Engels’ famous formulation. Then there are the discontinuities between different sections of the working class – different traditions, conflicting working class ideologies, varying levels of consciousness, confidence and combativity and so on. The battles are many and diverse. Workers have varying strengths and weaknesses, can win or be defeated, can generalise in different directions and come to different conclusions. Finally, there are the discontinuities between the working class and other sections of society that may find themselves opposed to the capitalist system – for instance peasants, sections of the petty bourgeoisie, oppressed nationalities.
All this presents any socialist – Leninist or not – with a particular problem: how is it that we can develop organisations within the working class that can relate to this fundamental fact about working class struggle?
There is of course a traditional response within the working class movement, a response which has as long a tradition as, if not longer than, Leninism: the Labour Party in this country and reformist parties internationally. The notion here is that the party represents the class in its totality – that every strand of opinion within the working class should be represented within the organisation. The goal of such organisations is to alter the condition of the working class using the institutions provided by the system – the parliamentary system, local councils, etc. The fundamental difficulty with such an approach (and we can review the history of Labour governments in office to justify this claim) is that, so long as the system continues to dominate the lives and the ideas of workers, the organisation itself will end up reflecting the ideology of the system. It will turn from an organisation of resistance to an organisation of incorporation. Moreover, the political institutions of the capitalist system are incapable of effectively countering the political and economic power of the capitalist class.
Of course contradictions will arise between the interests of working class supporters and the limits imposed on such parties by their form of organisation and their political goals. There will be battles for the soul of such organisations, but this will be a continuous state, as it has been for the Labour Party. Sometimes they will move to the left, sometimes to the right. But they will never resolve these contradictions because in principle they attempt to represent the whole working class, and large sections of the working class, for long periods of time, reflect the dominant ideology of society – the ideology of the capitalist class.
We need an alternative view of how party organisation relates to the broader struggle of the working class. It is this idea more than any other with which Lenin’s name is associated. The basic conception is that there emerges from the working class struggle a militant minority that is convinced by its experience that the system has to be transformed as a whole, that the direct methods of struggle employed by the working class are the most efficacious methods of doing so, and that the party and the class must be universal – in Lenin’s words, the tribune of the oppressed.
The key question then becomes, how do we organise a minority so that they become the lever which can raise the combativity of the entire class? We don’t seek to simply ‘represent’ the class, but to represent the traditions of struggle, the high points of class struggle, and bring that experience together with the activity of the minority into the current struggles. Trotsky expressed this idea in an effective metaphor. He said that the first five workers that he met told him everything he needed to know about revolutionary organisation. There was one who was always militant, would always stand up for the oppressed, and was always at the forefront of any battle. There was one who was an out and out reactionary, who was born a scab and would die a scab – if there were a strike on the gates of heaven he’d scab on that. But there were three in the middle who could sometimes be influenced by the reactionary, and sometimes be influenced and won over by the militant. The purpose of the revolutionary organisation is to group together the one militant in every five workers and to give them the organisation, the strength, the consciousness, the traditions of struggle that would enable them to win over the three in the middle and isolate the right wing, and not to allow the right wing to win over the three in the middle and isolate the socialist.
The idea of an organised minority is not that it cuts itself off from the rest of the working class or imposes its will on them, but that through interaction in struggle with the rest of the working class it seeks to spread its ideas and to win a majority within the movement. Georg Lukács put it very well: we separate in order to unite. We separate in an organisation that is, in principle, opposed to the system, but at every opportunity we seek to unite in particular struggles with the majority of the class in order to advance the whole class struggle. The interaction between party and class is vital here. Lukács quotes Engels thus: rank and file soldiers under the pressure of battle develop all the advances in military tactics. The job of good leadership is not to say that they have all the answers, but to take the best of what is invented by the rank and file in the midst of battle and to generalise it throughout the army. Any revolutionary party that is worth its salt is about learning from people in struggle and generalising what it learns throughout the class. The party learns from the class, but it is also the mechanism by which every section of the class learns from the best experiences of struggle.
This form of organisation is absolutely necessary in the situation in which we now find ourselves. The principle that we stand in opposition to the capitalist system, that we will fight its market logic and the state repression that it entails, is still vital. We need no other argument than the shooting of Carlo Giuliani on the great anti-capitalist demonstration in Genoa in July 2001 to remind us that we still have a state machine that will use deadly force when threatened. But that is only part of it. The real core of this idea of opposition to the system is that it determines how we act in each and every struggle. If you believe, as every Leninist believes, that ordinary working people have the capacity to completely transform the system by democratic organisations, workers’ councils, built from the rank and file up, it affects how you treat every day to day struggle.
In every struggle, every strike meeting or campaign meeting, there will always be more than one argument put in the room. There will always be people who will say, ‘We don’t want to rock the boat. We don’t want too big a protest. We should just write to our MP, use the established channels,’ and so on. There will be other people, revolutionaries who in principle believe that working people have the capacity to change the system from below, who will argue differently. They will say, ‘No matter how small the struggle in which we are engaged, it is mass organisation, it is the involvement of people in demonstrations, it is the ability of people to elect strike committees so that they don’t get told what to do by the officials, that can give us the best chance of winning.’ It is that principle embodied in each struggle before the revolution which makes the revolutionary principle active in every struggle on the way to the complete transformation of society.
Only an organisation that believes in this end of the day goal will raise this same prospect in each struggle as we go along. When it comes to the recent rail strikes it will be people coming from this tradition who will most consistently raise the idea of picketing, asking for solidarity from other workers, of strikers relying on their own strength and not relying on the trade union leaders, the local MP or the local paper to do the fighting for them. The key question within the anti-capitalist movement is that of mass working class mobilisation as opposed to, on the one hand, compromising with the IMF or WTO or, on the other hand, allowing a small elite of activists to substitute for mass action. When it comes to building an alternative to Labourism, the debate is about how we recompose an alternative to New Labour’s neo-liberal agenda from the rank and file up. When it comes to beating the fascists is it enough to allow them freedom of the airwaves and hope that they expose themselves? Is it enough to just pass resolutions? Or do we need the participation of the unions and of rank and file workers to beat the Nazis in Oldham and Burnley?
In all of these cases what is required is one militant, helped by his comrades, supported by his press, to stand up and say, ‘No, we all need to do it together.’ In that famous scene in the film Spartacus, someone stands up first and says, ‘I am Spartacus,’ not because they could do it on their own – if no one else had stood up after them and said, ‘I am Spartacus,’ they would have been isolated and victimised – but somebody said it first, and them saying it first allowed everybody else to say it after them. The act of a minority triggers the act of resistance of the majority, and that is what guarantees us the greatest chance of victory.
 



The scale of the movement against war on Iraq has reached a historic and epic scale. The weekend of 15 February saw not only the biggest ever demonstration in Britain, but tens of millions protesting in all corners of the globe in a co-ordinated attack on Bush and Blair’s war drive. An international movement which has swept through the world, seeing demonstrations in over 60 countries, was a unique experience. In virtually every country the demonstrations were either the largest ever or ranking among the largest. The rulers of the ‘new Europe’ should feel particularly chastened: Blair, Berlusconi and Aznar all had millions marching against them; their Australian counterpart, John Howard, saw several huge protests at his own version of pre-emptive intervention.
Governments of the world are now on a collision course with their peoples if they insist on going to war. Nowhere is this more the case than in Britain. Tony Blair faces a crisis in taking Britain into a war against the wishes of the vast majority of people in Britain, and against the wishes of the majority of ordinary members of his own party as well as an unprecedented number of his own MPs.
The issue has ceased to be just the war, but has now also become a question of how people express their democratic will in the face of a government clique which ignores them. This crisis of representation and legitimacy is now at the centre of British politics. The convening of an alternative ‘people’s assembly’ and a campaign of mass civil disobedience, including strikes, are on the immediate agenda.
The success of the Stop the War Coalition in Britain in creating this situation cannot be overestimated. The coalition was launched at a meeting in central London just days after the events of 11 September 2001. Around 2,000 people turned up, and 500 people attended the organising meeting the following week. It was clear that the feeling against the so called ‘war on terror’ ran very deep. The coalition mobilised for a CND demo against the bombing of Afghanistan in October, and called its own demo for 18 November. Although the war looked to be nearing an end, this 100,000-strong march was remarkable for its mix of peaceniks, socialists, trade unionists, young people and, crucially, Asians and Muslims. The success of the march marked Britain out as one of the leading ant-war movements internationally.
As Bush and Blair declared the fall of the Taliban in Afghanistan a humanitarian victory, it was clear that the war on terror was not going away. The coalition maintained itself by calling a protest at the Israeli embassy over Palestine, and calling for a national anti-war demonstration in March. Many peace campaigners thought this would be tiny as there was no war on at the time. The fact that the coalition was able to bring 20,000 out onto the streets was testimony not only to the respect the coalition had won, but to the depth of anti-war feeling in society.
The strong movement in Britain has had an impact across the world. The 400,000-strong march on 28 September 2002 led the Stop the War Coalition to argue at the European Social Forum in Florence that 15 February – the date of the next major London demo – should become a global day of action against the war on Iraq.
The strength of the coalition lies in its grassroots organisation. This is a movement of firsts – towns like Swindon and St Albans have reported the biggest political meetings in generations, if not ever. Equally as important is the democratic ethos of these meetings. There is a strong feeling – one that has been building for some time, as this journal has noted [1] – that most working people are disenfranchised from ‘official politics’. Labour Party members who have been drifting under Blair are throwing themselves into the anti-war movement and looking round for a new political home. Since 28 September, and magnified now after 15 February, the movement is providing an alternative to the establishment. The ‘democracy’ represented by parliament – which is unwilling to listen to 2 million people voting with their feet – can be challenged by a movement which has a historic opportunity to stop this war. The movement gives people a taste of the real democracy that they lack in everyday life.
But the scope of the movement extends beyond the war on Iraq. People connect the war drive with the war at home – attacks on firefighters, tube workers, a crumbling NHS and a transport system on its last legs. People also have an increasingly global picture. Globalisation has created a world-wide movement in which the same concerns – privatisation and war – are taken up by workers in all continents. Social democratic parties have so wholeheartedly embraced the neo-liberalism of the Thatcher-Reagan era that the gap between their agenda and the consciousness of most workers is becoming a gulf. This is not a passing glitch, but points to a more fundamental shift in attitude to ‘official politics’ manifested in the historically low turnout at the 2001 general election.
The millions who voted Labour in 1997 did not do so to see a continuation of the warmongering and privatisation of the Tory years. As George Galloway MP has put it, ‘The Labour Party is in the process of declaring itself politically bankrupt.’ [2] This raises crucial questions for the labour movement in Britain: how much longer can the trade unions continue to fund a party which has so systematically trampled on them? Is it time for a new workers party?
The issue of the unions’ political fund will be a key one over the coming months, as conferences debate whether to democratise the fund by making it available only to those candidates and parties which support the union’s aims. Around 40 percent of the Labour Party’s day to day funding comes from trade unions and individual union members. Records of donations to political parties show that from July to September 2002 Labour received £2.3 million from trade unions – some 89 percent of the total donations.
We need to strengthen those forces which are prepared to challenge the New Labour project. Parties like the Scottish Socialist Party and the Socialist Alliance have begun to tap into this mood. The anti-war movement has produced a sea change in British politics. Now is the time to deepen and broaden the scope and type of activities, especially to look at action taken by the organised working class. The 7 million trade union members in this country will be key to the success of the movement. The renewed confidence already apparent in some sections of the trade union movement can spread to other workers and reshape class politics in this country. The anti-war movement has definitely swept away any notion that collective action is ineffective. The people’s assembly can help to provide an alternative political focus which expresses the depth and breadth of the movement.
Calls for civil disobedience have been taken up around the country in the form of college occupations, walkouts, roadblocks and banner drops. But the key here is mass involvement. Some peace activists have advocated small actions by individuals representing everyone else. The only way to build a strong and lasting movement is for every individual to be a leader in their workplace, street, estate or college, and to involve the maximum number of people in action. In that way the movement can be truly democratic and decisions about its future tactics can involve thousands of activists.

Notes
1. See J. Rees, Anti-Capitalism, Reformism and Socialism, International Socialism 90 (Spring 2001).
2. Across the Tracks, no. 8, February 2003.
 



Activists from the anti-war and anti-globalisation movements joined forces with delegates from across the Arab world at a historic conference in the Egyptian capital, Cairo, on 18–19 December 2002. The Egyptian government tried to ban the conference, but was forced to allow it to go ahead. The Cairo Sheraton cancelled the conference venue even as the 400 delegates were arriving, but they reassembled in the Conrad hotel on the banks of the Nile.
There were delegates from across the Middle East, but the delegates from Egypt were the core of the event. They included socialists, academics and artists, some Islamic groups, and supporters of the political trends established by modern Egypt’s founder Gamal Abdel Nasser – some of them MPs from the Egyptian parliament.
Crucially, the conference was focused on building action and solidarity with the international anti-war movement. The illegal demonstration on the day following the conference was announced from the platform by the conference organisers and many at the conference were also on the streets.
The conference established the International Campaign Against US Aggression on Iraq to organise anti-war activity and promote the Cairo Declaration, the test of which follows here. The co-ordinating committee’s president is Ahmed Ben Bella, leader of the great struggle for Algerian independence and the country’s first president. He urged that links be made with anti-globalisation movement that had so impressed him at Novemeber’s European Social Forum in Florence, when one million marched against the war. He spoke passionately at the conference of the need to build a movement in the Middle East as big as that seen in Europe.
The Cairo Declaration’s strength is its insistence on the connection between neo-liberal globalisation and war, and on the need to build international action with the widest numbers possible to take on the warmongering privatisers. Hundreds added their names in support of the declaration in the first weeks of publication – including 80 members of the Russian Duma, trade union leaders, academics from as far afield as South Korea and Canada, and hundreds of working people from all over the globe. This is a vital political initiative that needs the support of everyone who is opposed to an attack on Iraq.

The Cairo Declaration
 



Peter Linebaugh wrote to me about your case. While I can
understand the pressures on you to take such a decision, I cannot say
how strongly I hope that you will change your mind.
Peter is absolutely right to say that your decision will influence
much more than the feelings of the relatives of those who you killed.
It will influence the whole debate about capital punishment and
therefore the chances of others avoiding execution, some of whom will
have committed no crime.
You say in your letter to your friends and correspondents that you
would ‘like to expose these people for who they are in the hopes
that it will help prevent them from hiding the truth and manipulating
the outcome of someone else’s trial’.
I think you are mistaken in this argument. In this country the
Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four and the Maguire family have shown
that years of campaigning can force the judges and the political
establishment to back down. A host of other cases – the Cardiff
Three, the trials of those arrested in the anti-poll tax riot, the
case of the Taylor sisters wrongly accused of murder, those accused
of killing a policeman during the Broadwater Farm riots – have all
had success.
In your country many of these people would have been dead many
years ago, executed by the state. Any act which helps those who want
to keep or extend the death penalty endangers the lives of people
like these and many others.
That is why you must not give up the fight, even though you are
guilty. You cannot bring the women you killed back to life, but you
can play a part in saving the lives of those who the state will
execute if the pro death penalty lobby gains in strength. Many of
those the state will execute will be as innocent as the Birmingham
Six or the Taylor sisters in this country. Please stay alive to play
your part in saving their lives.
John Rees is editor of International Socialism.
 



A strange thing has happened to the reputation of Frederick Engels in the 100 years since his death. For the vast majority of that time both Engels’ allies and his enemies agreed that he was Marx’s alter ego. Indeed, the very expression ‘alter ego’ was Marx’s own description of his relationship to Engels. Most commentators and virtually all Marxists thought that a lifetime of common work, the undeniable and almost undisturbed years of close personal and political co-operation, spoke for themselves. [1]
But by the 1960s that easy certainty was faced with a sustained challenge. The first cracks in the Cold War consensus were beginning to appear. The growth of CND, the rise of the New Left and, later, opposition to the Vietnam War inevitably produced an enormous increase in interest in radical ideas in general and Marxist ideas, or what passed for Marxist ideas, in particular. This process necessarily led to a reaction against the stifling conformity of reformism and the oppressive legacy of Stalinism. Much of what was said and written marked a rebirth of interest in the genuine Marxist tradition and delivered a long-delayed blow to the reformist and Stalinist traditions.
Yet the reaction against Stalinism was also shaped by Stalinism, in two senses. Firstly, some of those reacting to Stalinism got no further than adopting another variant of Stalinism, either Maoism, or Third Worldism or the ‘reform Communism’ that came to dominate the Western European Communist Parties. Secondly, even those who broke completely with Stalinism tended to confuse elements of the genuine Marxist tradition with the economic determinism characteristic of Stalinism.
All this led to altered perceptions of the Marxist inheritance. Perhaps inevitably, critics began to search the writings of the founders of Marxism for the seeds of Stalinism and failures of reformism. Many of these developments particularly affected students and so fuelled the expansion of academic Marxism. They also coincided with the wider availability of Marx’s early ‘humanist’ writings. A new consensus emerged, both in academic circles and among many on the left, about the nature of Engels’ thought.
 
The critics of Engels
One of the first studies to systematically assert a cleavage between Marx’s ideas and those of Engels was George Lichtheim’s Marxism: an Historical and Critical Study, first published in 1961. [2] Lichtheim insisted that in Marx’s vision ‘critical thought was validated by revolutionary action’, but in Engels’ scheme ‘there now appeared a cast-iron system of “laws” from which the inevitability of socialism could be deduced with almost mathematical certainty … the “goal” was transferred from the here-and-now of conscious activity to a horizon so distant as to be almost invisible.’ [3]
For Marx, Lichtheim claims, ‘the only nature relevant to the understanding of history was human nature.’ Engels therefore broke with Marx when he argued that ‘historical evolution is an aspect of general (natural) evolution and basically subject to the same “laws”.’ [4] This meant that Engels had appropriated Hegel’s heritage quite differently to Marx. Marx had taken from Hegel the importance of self conscious activity in the making of history. In contrast ‘what really fascinates’ Engels ‘is Hegel’s determinism: his ability to make it appear that nature (and history) follow a pre-ordained course’. [5] Such a drastic recasting of Marxism inevitably had political consequences:
… determinism in thought making for dogmatism in action. The cast-iron certainty which Engels imported into Marxist thinking found its counterpart at the political level in an unshakable conviction that the stars in their courses were promoting the victory of socialism. [6]
Consequently, Engels, Kautsky – the leading thinker of the Second International – ’and the orthodox school in general’ transformed Marxism ‘from the vision of a unique breakthrough into a doctrine of a causally determined process analogous to the scheme of Darwinian evolution’. [7]
Lichtheim’s book rehearses many of the themes that were to become so familiar in other work published over the following 20 years: that Engels replaced Marx’s notion of conscious activity with an empiricist notion of science, that he mistakenly extended Marxism so that it covered the natural as well as the social world, that this inevitably drew him into deterministic and reductionist formulations and that these in turn led him at the end of his life to endorse a reformist political practice on the part of the German Social Democratic Party. And not for the last time the revolutionary, humanist Marx was counterposed to the reformist, determinist Engels by a writer such as Lichtheim who was an opponent of Marxism in theory and a convinced reformist in practice.
After Lichtheim the deluge. Alfred Schmidt’s otherwise more careful and interesting book, The Concept of Nature in Marx, first published in German in 1962, argued that ‘where Engels passed beyond Marx’s conception of the relation between nature and social history, he relapsed into a dogmatic metaphysic’. [8] Schmidt also saw a departure from the concerns of the early Marx: ‘For Engels, nature and man are not united primarily through historical practice; man appears only as a product of evolution and a passive reflection of the process of nature, not however as a productive force’. [9] By adopting this approach Engels also abandoned Marx’s view of how consciousness is formed:
The movement of thought in Marx is by no means limited to a mere mirroring of the factual. The uncritical reproduction of existing relationships in consciousness has precisely an ideological character for Marx. [10]
So Schmidt believed that where Marx saw ideas formed in interaction with the material world Engels saw only a crude reflection of the outside world in the brains of human beings, a vulgar ‘copy theory’ of consciousness. By 1969 Lucio Colletti could question, almost in passing:
how far this distortion of Marx’s thought by Kautsky and Plekhanov … was already prepared, if only in embryo, in some aspects of Engels’s work; and how in general the search for the most general laws of development in nature and history made these attempts a preconstitution of the contamination with Hegelianism and Darwinism. [11]
He went on to argue that Engels’ influence on the leaders of the Second International was partly a result of ‘the place given in Engels’ work to philosophical-cosmological development, “the philosophy of nature”, in other words, the “extension” of historical materialism into “dialectical materialism”.’ [12]
In books as diverse as John Lewis’s The Marxism of Marx (1972), Shlomo Avineri’s widely read textbook The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx (1970) and Leszek Kolakowski’s sophisticated and profoundly anti-Marxist Main Currents of Marxism (1978) it became an article of faith that Engels had distorted Marx. [13]
Even authors Paul Walton and Andrew Gamble, who were sympathetic to Marxism at the time they wrote From Alienation to Surplus Value (1972), could conclude that:
[Engels] seems debarred from understanding the real premises of Marx’s method because he seeks to make Marxism an objective science on the model of the natural sciences … he tries to establish the truth of historical materialism by treating human interaction as analogous to the interaction of chemical particles. [14]
For Gareth Stedman Jones, influenced by Louis Althusser’s structuralism, it was Engels’ ‘inability adequately to think through the novelty of historical materialism as a science’ which ‘led him to an understandable attempt to fill in the gaps with philosophy – the Hegelian philosophy of his youth’. This not only led to a ‘lack of any theory of the political instance of social formations’ but to Engels embracing ‘a dangerous implication of the Hegelian theory of knowledge – that everything in reality is, in principle at least, already known’. Thus Engels ‘unintentionally converted the infant science of historical materialism into the appearance of a finished system, a corpus of absolute knowledge which encompassed the whole of empirical reality’. [15]
By the early 1970s the pattern was fully established – Engels was the villain. And it did not seem to matter what political or theoretical position a writer set out from – the neo-Kantianism of Colletti, the humanism of Avineri or Schmidt, the Althusserianism of New Left Review contributors – the destination was always the same: Engels was at the root of whatever was wrong with Marxism. With few exceptions, [16] the argument against Engels had now become a virtual orthodoxy, perhaps best summarised in Norman Levine’s The Tragic Deception: Marx contra Engels (1975) and Terrell Carver’s Marx and Engels, the Intellectual Relationship (1983). Levine states the anti-Engels orthodoxy in its bare essentials:
Engels’ materialism … was a cold, unremitting, and remorseless system. Men had little impact on fashioning the course of development of history and nature. Rather than being the subject of history, men were basically the passive objects of unrelenting external forces … Engels’ materialism was mechanistic. [17]
Naturally, for Levine, it followed that ‘Engels continuously affirmed the copy theory of knowledge … there was absolutely no variance, no difference between our comprehension of the external world and the external world itself’. [18]
Engels’ grave error lay in ‘making the laws of nature themselves dialectical … something which Marx himself never attempted’. [19] Engels ‘was a unilinear evolutionist’ [20] for whom ‘causality … meant additive sequence’ [21] and from whose thought ‘the notion of human praxis was absent’. Consequently:
Engels’ thought moved from a mechanistic materialist view of the universe to a deterministic view of human history … it was Engels, not Marx, who was the originator of economic determinism. [22]
Carver’s work is more qualified and careful in its argument, but it arrives at similar conclusions. [23] Engels was led to ‘incorporating the causal laws of physical science and taking them as a model for a covertly academic study of history, “thought” and, somewhat implausibly, current politics’. [24]
There are many more writers who have argued that Engels was responsible for transforming Marxism into a crude, deterministic philosophy of nature which led to the reformism of the Second International and even Stalinism. To those already quoted could be added Richard Gunn in Marxism Today, Jeff Coulter in Socialist Register, Frederick Bender’s The Betrayal of Marx, Z.A. Jordan’s The Evolution of Dialectical Materialism and many others. [25] These authors combine different elements of the argument in different ways, and few agree on all the arguments used against Engels, but they say little new.
There are two ways of examining these claims. One is to look at the record of Marx and Engels’ partnership. The second is to study the works in which, both jointly and separately, they elaborated their ideas.
 
The unity of Marx and Engels’ thought
The most remarkable aspect of the view that there was a fundamental divergence between Marx’s theory and Engels’ thought is that it ignores the evidence of their lifelong partnership. Some considerable intellectual contortion is necessary to overcome the elementary biographical facts of Marx and Engels’ lives. For Terrell Carver ‘the intellectual relationship between the two living men, however, was very much the story of what they accomplished independently’. These accomplishments ‘were by no means theoretically coincident’. After Marx’s death ‘Engels moved into an all-powerful role’ in which he ‘invented dialectics and reconstructed Marx’s life and works accordingly’. [26] Nor is Carver alone in this kind of assertion. It is common coin among Engels’ critics to insist that he codified Marxism as a rigid dialectical philosophy either without Marx’s explicit approval or after his death. Norman Levine argues:
The height of Engels’ career corresponded with the termination of Marx’s life. It is, therefore, entirely consistent that five of Engels’ major works were published in the years closely preceding Marx’s death, or after the termination of Marx’s life. Anti-Dühring appeared in 1878, Socialism: Scientific and Utopian [sic] in 1882, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State in 1884, and Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy in 1888. The Dialectics of Nature was first published in 1927 by Riazanov, although the manuscript itself appears to have been completed by 1882. [27]
Levine makes a more extraordinary claim when he attempts to answer the obvious question of ‘why basic intellectual differences between the two men did not come to the surface as tangible and real, articulated and acknowledged dispute’. This is a question to which no convincing reply is easily available. Levine’s answer takes us into the ghost world of ‘the psychological meaning the friendship had for each’. In this realm ‘Engels chose to tie himself’ to Marx because Marx ‘would also build a place of fame and renown in time for him’; and Marx needed Engels because ‘Marx did not find the professional and emotional support he needed from his wife’. [28] But if we leave the territory of Mills and Boon and return to the world of Marx and Engels a very different picture reveals itself.
The first and most striking point about Marx and Engels’ relationship is the strength of the foundations on which it rested. In the 1840s both men arrived at what would later be known as the historical materialist view of the world. But it is by no means the case that Engels simply followed where Marx led. On the vitally important strategic question of the attitude which the pair took to the trade unions it was Engels who blazed the trail. And the entire content of Marx and Engels’ joint work, The Communist Manifesto, was first outlined by Engels alone in Principles of Communism.
On economic questions Engels led the way, even though Marx’s later work in Capital was the decisive contribution. Marx was still extracting himself from the coils of Hegelian philosophy when Engels wrote his Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy. Not only was this the spur to Marx’s own 40 year immersion in economic analysis, it was also the immediate inspiration for Marx’s own transition to a fully materialist class analysis, a process recorded in his Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844. Indeed, Marx thought Engels’ work ‘brilliant’ and Capital itself carries the subtitle A Critique of Political Economy. Even Carver admits that ‘Marx’s manuscript notes on Engels’ essay prefigured the course of his lifework’ and that ‘Marx’s Capital was in effect a much elaborated specification of the contradiction discussed by Engels in his Outlines’. [29]
Having arrived at a common outlook, Marx and Engels jointly authored two key works which elaborated their views, The Holy Family and The German Ideology. They struggled together to win the organisation they were both involved in, the League of the Just, to their ideas, transforming it into the Communist League. The Communist Manifesto was issued in its name. They went on to fight together in the 1848 revolutions – in Engels’ case literally revolver in hand, on the barricades. This then was the foundation of Marx and Engels’ partnership, forged by intense, common intellectual and practical, political work.
The start of Marx’s exile in England and Engels’ life in Manchester unavoidably altered the pattern of their joint work, but it did not end it. Partly, Marx and Engels chose to specialise in different areas. Partly also this differentiation was forced on them by the economic circumstance of Marx’s poverty and Engels’ decision to support his friend while Marx worked on what became Capital. But these new circumstances did not break the intellectual and political trust between them. When Marx had to write articles for newspapers in order to earn some money he never hesitated to put his name to articles which were, in fact, written by Engels.
In the long gestation of Capital Engels was Marx’s constant adviser, either in their almost daily exchange of letters or in conversation when they paid each other visits. Marx consulted Engels on everything from the correct German translation for ‘gigs’ to rent theory, constant and variable capital, surplus value and exploitation. In August 1862 Marx implored Engels to visit him:
I have overthrown so many old views in my critique [i.e. Capital] that I would at least like to consult you over a few points. Writing about the rubbish is tedious for you and me. [30]
Constant collaboration continued at every stage of the writing of Capital up to and including the reading of the proofs, which Marx largely entrusted to Engels. Even the presentation of Capital bears Engels’ mark. Looking at the proofs, Engels advised Marx that the dialectical points might be made more historically and that Marx had made ‘a great mistake’ in not following the pattern of Hegel’s Encyclopedia with its short sections and many sub-headings. [31] Marx followed this advice, but ignored other suggestions, ‘to proceed dialectically in this regard also’, as he joked to Engels in reply. Nevertheless, he insisted, ‘your satisfaction up to now is more important to me than anything the rest of the world may say of it’. [32] At the end of it all Marx was in no doubt about his debt to Engels. He wrote:
Without you, I would never have been able to bring the work to completion, and I assure you, it has always weighed on my conscience like an Alp that you have dissipated your splendid energy and let it rust on commercial matters, principally on my account, and into the bargain, still had to participate vicariously in all my minor troubles. [33]
In this Marx was undoubtedly right, and not just about his debt to Engels. He was right in his assessment of the terrible cost to Engels’ intellectual output during the years in which he worked in Manchester. Although he never complained, Engels knew it too – as is confirmed by the image left to us by Marx’s daughter of Engels joyously coming home from the factory after his last day’s work. When Engels was able to retire he could once again publish major works.
Levine argues that Marx’s death left Engels free to publish his distorted version of Marxism. But even the chronology of publication which Levine gives undermines his own argument. Anti-Dühring was not only published during Marx’s lifetime, the whole project was Marx’s idea. Moreover, Engels read the entire manuscript to Marx and Marx himself wrote one of the chapters on economics. The idea behind the book was to give a defence of Marx’s ideas, so it is hardly likely that such an obviously programmatic statement of his views would have been published without his complete agreement. As Engels noted, ‘it was self-understood between us that this exposition of mine should not be issued without his knowledge’. [34] Socialism, Utopian and Scientific was extracted from Anti-Dühring and also published before Marx’s death. The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State appeared after Marx’s death, but was composed by Engels using the ethnographical notebooks which Marx had written. Ludwig Feuerbach was also published after Marx died but, as if to stress the continuity of the ideas expressed in it with the views of Marx and Engels’ first writings, Engels published Marx’s newly discovered Theses on Feuerbach as an appendix. Engels obviously saw no contradiction between the ‘humanist’ young Marx and the ‘determinist’ older Engels, otherwise he would scarcely have risked such a course, going so far as to describe the Theses as ‘the brilliant germ’ of historical materialism.
Finally, The Dialectics of Nature, which is often used to support distortions of Engels’ work, was never intended for publication and actually bore the inscription, ‘All this to be revised’, almost as if it were a warning to those who were to take every last word as a finished, polished formulation. Nevertheless, the broad sweep of Engels’ intention was clear from Anti-Dühring, which was written at the same time.
On the key issue of whether Marx endorsed the idea of a dialectic in nature there can be little doubt. In Anti-Dühring Engels specifically quoted Marx’s Capital to this effect: ‘Here, as in natural science, is shown the correctness of the law discovered by Hegel in his Logic, that merely quantitative changes beyond a certain point pass into qualitative differences.’ [35] And Marx goes on to say in a footnote that: ‘the molecular theory of modern chemistry … rests on no other law’. [36] Marx himself had earlier drawn Engels’ attention to these passages in Capital, explicitly stating his belief that dialectical laws were in evidence in natural science: ‘in that text I quote Hegel’s discovery regarding the law that merely quantitative changes turn into qualitative changes and state that it holds good alike in history and natural science’. [37] Also in Capital Marx described exchange relations as operating like ‘a determining law of nature’. And, despite Carver’s claim that Engels’ admiration for Darwin is evidence of his inclination toward the model of natural science, Marx shared Engels’ assessment: ‘Darwin’s book is very important and it suits me well that it supports the class struggle in history from the point of view of natural science’. [38]
So the idea that Marx and Engels developed along separate theoretical paths finds little support in the biographical evidence. Naturally, the rough division of labour which they evolved led to different emphases. Equally naturally, they stressed different aspects of the theory depending on whether they were arguing against empiricists or idealists, system builders or vulgar economists, anarchists or reformists. But in all essentials they were at one. Perhaps nothing conveys this fact as forcefully as the testimony of Laura Marx’s husband, Paul Lafargue:
Engels was, so to speak, a member of the Marx family. Marx’s daughters called him their second father: He was Marx’s alter ego …
… From their youth they developed together and parallel to each other, lived in intimate fellowship of ideas and feelings and shared the same revolutionary agitation: as long as they lived together they worked in common … But after the defeat of the 1848 Revolution Engels had to go to Manchester, while Marx was to remain in London. Even so, they continued their common intellectual life by writing to each other almost daily … As soon as Engels was able to free himself from his work he hurried from, Manchester to London, where he set up his home only ten minutes away from his dear Marx. From 1870 to the death of his friend, not a day went by but the two men saw each other, sometimes at one’s house, sometimes at the other’s …
Marx appreciated Engels’ opinion more than anybody else’s, for Engels was the man he considered capable of being his collaborator. For him Engels was his whole audience. No effort could have been too great for Marx to convince Engels and win him over to his idea. For instance, I have seen him read whole volumes over and over to find the fact which he needed to change Engels’ opinion on some secondary point … It was a triumph for Marx to bring Engels round to his opinion.
Marx was proud of Engels. He took pleasure in enumerating to me all his moral and intellectual qualities … He admired the versatility of his knowledge and was alarmed that the slightest thing should befall him … [39]
Marx and Engels were inevitably prey to the limitations of their age. They could not foresee all that natural science would achieve or the problems that would arise in the course of the next century of class struggle. But it is their joint legacy, as the content of their work also demonstrates, on which modern socialism rests.
 
Human history and natural history
For Marx and Engels human beings remain part of the natural world from which they have evolved. The human hand, the human brain, the development of language and consciousness have all taken place as part of the processes which dominate the natural world. From their very earliest collaborations Marx and Engels were insistent that no rigid and absolute distinction could be drawn between human history and natural history.
The book in which they first systematically worked out the principles of their approach was The German Ideology. In it Marx and Engels were unambiguous in asserting that human biology and the physical constitution of nature were essential starting points in any attempt to understand the world:
The premises from which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogmas, but real premises … They are the real individuals, their activity and the material conditions of their life, both those which they find already existing and those produced by their activity …
… Thus the first fact to be established is the physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relation to the rest of nature. [40]
And, while they elaborate these factors at length, Marx and Engels did spell out that they included ‘the actual physical nature of man’ and ‘the natural conditions in which man finds himself – geological, orohydrological, climatic and so on.’ They argued that ‘all historical writing must start out from these natural bases and their modification in the course of history through the action of men’. [41]
Marx and Engels castigate one of their philosophical opponents for going ‘so far as to speak of “the antithesis in nature and history” as if these were two separate “things” and man did not always have before him an historical nature and a natural history’. [42]
More than 30 years later Engels returned to the same argument in Anti-Dühring, his broadside against Eugen Dühring, an academic who was gaining a hearing among Marx and Engels’ supporters in Germany. Engels criticises Dühring for ‘accepting “consciousness”, “thought”, quite naturalistically, as something given, something opposed from the outset to being, to nature’. And he continues:
If that were so it must seem extremely strange that consciousness and nature, thinking and being, the laws of thought and the laws of nature, should correspond so closely. But if the further question is raised what thought and consciousness really are and where they come from, it becomes apparent that they are products of the human brain and that man himself is a product of nature, which has developed in and along with its environment; hence it is self-evident that the products of the human brain, being in the last analysis also products of nature, do not contradict the rest of nature’s interconnections but are in correspondence with them. [43]
But the idea that human beings form part of the natural world does not exhaust Marx and Engels’ views on this issue. In the first place, it was the process of development in nature which gave rise to conscious human beings who, from that point on, formed a quite distinct part of nature. This consciousness has material preconditions, and when it has emerged, its further development cannot be separated from the development of the material base on which it rests. In The German Ideology, Marx and Engels outline the preconditions for the emergence of human consciousness:
We must begin by stating the first premise of all human existence and, therefore, of all history, namely, that men must be in a position to live in order to be able to ‘make history.’ But life involves before everything else eating and drinking, housing, clothing and various other things. The first historical act is thus the production of the means to satisfy these needs, the production of material life itself. [44]
The second prerequisite is ‘that with the satisfaction of the first need, the action of satisfying and the instrument of satisfaction which has been acquired, leads to new needs; and this creation of new needs is the first historical act.’ [45] The third precondition is that ‘men who daily re-create their own life, begin to make other men, to propagate their kind: the relation between man and woman, parents and children, the family.’ [46]
Once these elements have developed, and not before, Marx and Engels see the development of a human consciousness which distinguishes human beings from the animal world:
Only now … do we find that man possesses ‘consciousness’. But even from the outset this is not ‘pure’ consciousness. The ‘mind’ is from the outset afflicted with the curse of being ‘burdened’ with matter, which here makes its appearance in the form of agitated layers of air, sounds, in short, of language. Language is as old as consciousness, language is practical, real consciousness that exists for other men as well, and only therefore does it exist for me; language, like consciousness, only arises from the need, the necessity, of intercourse with other men. Where it exists it exists for me: the animal does not ‘relate’ itself to anything, it does not ‘relate’ itself at all. For the animal its relation to others does not exist as a relation. Consciousness is, therefore, from the very beginning a social product, and remains so as long as men exist at all. [47]
And not only is consciousness social, it is also historical. Just as consciousness developed from a long historical process, so its further development is part of a historical process – it develops over time. The consciousness of our very earliest ancestors was only narrowly distinguishable from the instincts of the apes from which they had evolved. It is only with the accumulation of productive forces that human consciousness really becomes distinct from, but not ever separate from or independent of, the natural world.
Neither is this the end of Marx and Engels’ view of the relationship between human history and nature. There is more at stake in this relationship than a historical account of the way in which human history emerges from the history of ‘raw nature’. Indeed, for Marx and Engels, there is no longer any such thing as ‘raw nature’: ‘nature, the nature that preceded human history … is nature which today no longer exists anywhere (except perhaps on a few Australian coral islands of recent origin). [48]
The nature which does actually exist is one which has been moulded by human beings. The unity of human beings and nature ‘has always existed in industry and has existed in various forms in every epoch according to the lesser or greater development of industry, and so has the “struggle” of man with nature’. So it is that ‘in Manchester, for instance’, there are ‘only factories and machines, where a hundred years ago only spinning wheels and weaving looms were to be seen, or in the Campagna di Roma … only pasture and swamps, where in the time of Augustus … nothing but the vineyards and villas of Roman capitalists’. [49]
Here, then, are Marx and Engels’ early views on the relationship between human beings and the natural world. They stressed the essential unity of human beings and the natural world and the difference between the two and the historical development of this relationship. It was a brilliantly dialectical analysis, a presentation of an internally differentiated totality, a unity of opposites, in which human labour’s interaction with its natural, material environment is the basis of the transformation of both the natural and the human world over time.
As a result of adopting this starting point, Marx and Engels were able to resist the temptation to make a rigid separation between the human sciences and the natural sciences, since materialism is the basis of both, but also to see that human history contained a vital distinguishing feature, conscious labour, which required a distinct approach.
Did Engels depart from this early vision in later life, as his critics insist? Did he abandon the view that conscious human labour was what distinguished human history from natural history? Did he simply revert to a natural science model which he then imported into the received version of Marxism? The quotation from Anti-Dühring, above, indicates that his general attitude had not altered. But in The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man, written in 1876, we can also see that Engels’ approach remained identical. This manuscript, unfinished and unpublished in Engels’ lifetime, forms part of the much derided Dialectics of Nature. Yet the account of the relationship between human beings and the rest of nature reproduces in all essentials the account which Marx and Engels gave in their earliest writings.
The account of evolution, for instance, although much more detailed in the light of the publication of Darwin’s work, still stressed the development of human capacities which resulted from the necessity of meeting the most elementary material needs. Engels’ magnificent account of the development of the human hand, the first human tool, stressed not only the strictly natural, evolutionary development but also the role played by labour in the development of the hand:
Thus the hand is not only the organ of labour, it is also the product of labour. Only by labour, by adaptation to ever new operations, through inheritance of muscles, ligaments, and, over long periods of time, bones that had undergone special development and the ever-renewed employment of this inherited finesse in new, more and more complicated operations, have given the human hand the high degree of perfection required to conjure into being the pictures of a Raphael, the statues of a Thorwaldsen, the music of Paganini. [50]
But this labour and the power of speech which developed from it ‘were the two most essential stimuli under the influence of which the brain of the ape gradually changed into that of man’. Yet even now this ‘was not labour in the proper sense’. [51] Labour begins, according to Engels, with the making of tools. But even then the fundamental distinction between humans and animals has not yet been made. Animals, says Engels, ‘change the environment by their activities in the same way, even if not to the same extent, as man does, and these changes … react upon and change those who made them’. [52] It is not hard to see here the kind of dialectical process of natural development which Engels thought united the natural with the human world. Nevertheless, he was far from seeing this as a one sided identity. There was, just as in Marx and Engels’ early writings, not only an identity but also a difference between natural and human history. This is why Engels goes on to insist:
But animals exert a lasting effect on the environment unintentionally and, as far as the animals themselves are concerned, accidentally. The further removed men are from animals, however, the more their effect on nature assumes the character of premeditated, planned action directed towards definite preconceived ends. [53]
And he summarised his attitude in absolutely unambiguous terms:
In short, the animal merely uses its environment, and brings about changes in it simply by its presence; man by his changes makes it serve his ends, masters it. This is the final, essential distinction between man and other animals, and once again it is labour that brings about this distinction. [54]
This conclusion was not, however, designed to make a final and irrevocable separation between human beings and nature. It was merely a distinction, albeit a vital distinction, within the unity of man and nature. Engels goes on to say that we should not ‘flatter ourselves overmuch on account of our human victories over nature’ since although our conscious designs are often realised in the first place they later bring about results which have unforeseen effects. And so:
… at every step we are reminded that we by no means rule over nature like a conqueror over a foreign people, like someone standing outside nature – but that we, with flesh, blood and brain, belong to nature, and exist in its midst, and that all our mastery of it consists in the fact that we have the advantage over all other creatures of being able to learn its laws and apply them correctly. [55]
And just in case the final phrases of this quotation should make it seem as if Engels’ critics are in the right when they argue that he had a technocratic approach to social change, one in which science simply paves the way for a better life, Engels concludes:
This regulation [of the natural world] requires something more than mere knowledge. It requires a complete revolution in our hitherto existing mode of production, and simultaneously a revolution in our whole contemporary social order. [56]
From this account of Marx and Engels’ view of the relationship between human beings and the rest of the natural world it is clear that: (i) at the close of his life Engels held the same general attitude that he held in his early writings, (ii) that this attitude was the same as Marx’s, (iii) that it was not a view which sought to either force human history into the same pattern as natural history or to insist on a rigid separation of the two, and, (iv) that it did try, concretely and empirically, to spell out both what unites human society with, and distinguishes it from, its natural environment.
 
The dialectic
It was on the basis of their new materialist conception of history that Marx and Engels generalised to produce a dialectical approach to human and natural change. ‘The dialectic’ is often said to be obscure and difficult to understand. Yet its fundamental approach is not hard to grasp, especially against the background of natural evolution and social change outlined in the previous section.
The first basic principle on which the dialectic rests is that the world is in a process of change. Society and nature are not static, neither do they ‘move in an eternally uniform and perpetually recurring circle’, as Engels says. Instead they undergo a ‘genuine historical evolution’. [57] Yet static views of society are still very common today. Through all the hurly-burly of society certain values and institutions are seen as virtually eternal – the family, the market, nationalism, religion, parliamentary democracy and, above all, ‘human nature’. A dialetical view would recognise that all these ideologies and institutions have a history, that in the past they came into being and in the future they will cease to exist. Marx and Engels developed their own views in criticism of the ideas of the great German philosopher Hegel. But one of Hegel’s great virtues was that he saw ‘the whole world, natural, historical, intellectual … as a process, i.e., as in constant motion, change, transformation, development’. [58] Rejecting static views of the world is, however, only the first step. Trying to understand the way in which this process of change unfolds is the next step.
Here the key is to see all the different aspects of society and nature as interconnected. They are not separate, discrete processes which develop in isolation from each other. Mainstream sociological and scientific thought ‘has bequeathed us the habit of observing natural objects and processes in isolation, detached from the general context’. [59] Much of our schooling today still follows this pattern – the development of the arts is separated from that of the sciences, and ‘technical’ subjects are separated from languages, history and geography. Our newspapers and TV news programmes divide the world up in the same artificial way – poverty levels and stock exchange news, wars and company profit figures, strikes and government policy, suicide statistics and the unemployment rate are all reported in their own little compartments as if they are only distantly related, if at all. A dialectical analysis tries to re-establish the real connections between these elements, ‘to show internal connections’. It tries, in the jargon of dialectics, to see the world as ‘a totality’, ‘a unity’.
To see society and nature as an interconnected totality which is in a process of constant change still leaves one vital question unanswered. What makes this whole process develop? Why does it change? There are any number of religious and philosophical theories which try to answer this question by insisting that the motor of change lies outside the historical process – with god, or in the unchanging pattern of human nature or in the eternal features of the human soul. Marx and Engels rejected these approaches as mystical and, literally, supernatural. They insisted that the processes which drove the development of nature and society forward must be internal contradictions, not supersensible entities like god, the soul or, as Hegel had argued, the general essence of human consciousness existing somewhere in the ether beyond the consciousness of actual living human beings.
The relationship between nature and the conscious labour of human beings is, as we have seen, one example of a contradictory totality in a process of change. Since the rise of class society, the struggle between the exploited (the slaves, peasants and wage labourers of ancient Greece and Rome; the peasants and craftsmen of feudal society; the modern working class) and the exploiters (slave owners, landlords and capitalists) provides another example of a series of class contradictions which have led to changes in the totality of the social structure as one great mode of production rises, falls and gives birth to another. In all these cases it is the relationships, the contradictions, between the different parts of the totality which give rise to change. Engels argues:
So long as we consider things as at rest and lifeless, each one by itself, alongside and after each other, we do not run up against any contradictions in them. [60]
But as soon as we look for the cause of change we are confronted with contradictions – ’as soon as contradiction ceases, life, too, comes to an end, and death steps in.’ [61]
These then are the basic terms of the dialectic – contradiction, totality and change. The ‘three laws’ of the dialectic described by Engels cannot be understood without this larger context, since they are ways of specifying how this process of change takes place. Engels’ simplified codification has sometimes led both his followers and his critics to try and isolate the ‘three laws’ from the more general principles of the dialectic. This is a mistake, as the following brief account of those laws makes clear:


The unity of opposites. This is simply another way of describing a totality composed of contradictory elements. The totality of capitalist society, for instance, develops in response to the contradiction between the two major classes contained within it, workers and capitalists. The natural and human worlds form, as we have seen, a unity of opposites. Nature and humanity are united, but not identical. It is the relationship between them which shapes the development of each.
 
The transformation of quantity into quality. This is the process by which small changes of degree eventually result in changes of type. For example, an economic strike in one factory or industry might spread to others until the point is reached where they become a political strike against all employers and the government. Or the working class may suffer a series of individual defeats at the end of which an entirely different type of period in working class history has opened up.
 
The negation of the negation. This phrase is designed to show how two contradictory (but not necessarily equal) forces react on one another in such a way that the situation which results from their clash both preserves and completely alters them at the same time. Engels follows Marx’s example from Capital. Marx had explained how the change from feudal society to capitalist society had dispossessed peasants and craftsmen of their individual private property, pushing the peasants off the land and depriving craftsmen of the means of production, and consolidated it in the hands of the capitalist class. Capitalism thus expropriated, or negated, individual private property as it had existed under feudalism. A socialist society would ‘expropriate the expropriators’. It would put means of production in the hands of society collectively and extend ‘individual ownership to the products, that is, the articles of consumption.’ Thus the original negation, of feudal property by capitalist property, is negated once more by a socialist form of ownership. [62]


Engels immediately recognised that this process, the negation of the negation, might be interpreted in a fatalistic fashion – it might be read as if socialism were inevitable. He insisted that the negation of the negation was not ‘a mere proof producing instrument’. He went on:
Thus, by characterising the process as the negation of the negation, Marx does not intend to prove that the process was historically necessary. On the contrary: only after he has proved from history that in fact the process has partially occurred, and partially must occur in the future, he in addition characterises it as a process which develops in accordance with a definite dialectical law. [63]
This was a point which Marx and Engels were to make again and again with regard to the whole dialectical approach, not just the negation of the negation. It was not, they insisted, a substitute for studying the real world, not an equation into which the facts merely had to be slotted, or a pattern into which historical events had to be forced. Each aspect of society had to be studied empirically and in detail. Only then might the unique dialectical pattern be discovered. In each circumstance it could be expected to contain particular features: ‘Every kind of thing therefore has a peculiar way of being negated in such a way that it gives rise to development, and it is just the same with every kind of conception or idea.’ Just playing with dialectical phrases without studying real, empirical developments could only result in ‘the silliness of the person who adopts such a tedious procedure’. [64]
Engels approached the distinction between natural and human history in this way. He looked, as we have seen, not just for what unified the two, but also for what made them distinct. Not surprisingly, the distinction between natural evolution and human history reappeared in Engels’ attitude to the dialectic. In The Dialectics of Nature Engels makes an important distinction between the dialectic in human history and that in nature:
In history, motion through opposites is most markedly exhibited in all critical epochs of the foremost peoples. At such moments a people has only the choice between two horns of a dilemma: ‘either-or!’ and indeed the question is always put in a way quite different from that in which the philistines, who dabble in politics in every age, would have liked it put. [65]
And he goes on to give an example from the 1848 revolutions when ‘even the German philistine … found himself in 1849, suddenly, unexpectedly, and against his will confronted with the question: a return to the old reaction in an intensified form, or the continuation of the revolution …’ But on the same page Engels outlines a significantly different pattern of dialectical change in the natural world:
Hard and fast lines are incompatible with the theory of evolution … ‘Either-or’ becomes more and more inadequate … For a stage in the outlook on nature where all differences become merged in intermediate steps, and all opposites pass into one another through intermediate links, the old metaphysical method of thought no longer suffices. Dialectics, which likewise knows no hard and fast lines, no unconditional, universally valid ‘either-or’ and which bridges the fixed metaphysical differences, and besides ‘either-or’ recognises also in the right place ‘both this-and that’ and reconciles opposites, is the sole method of thought appropriate in the highest degree to this stage. [66]
In an important passage in Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy Engels wrote that ‘dialectics was … the science of the general laws of motion, both of the external world and of human thought’ and that they were ‘two sets of laws which are identical in substance’. But he explained that the laws were necessarily ‘different in their expression insofar as the human mind can apply them consciously, while in nature … these laws assert themselves unconsciously, in the form of external necessity …’ [67] He also added that, so long as human beings are prevented from consciously controlling the social world it will continue to resemble the natural world in that its laws will operate beyond the will of human beings.
A few pages later Engels returns to and elaborates this point. He notes that human beings do not, in class society, have collective conscious control of their destiny and so ‘that which is willed happens but rarely’. Consequently, social laws become analogous to those prevailing ‘in the realm of unconscious nature.’ Nevertheless, Engels insists:
In one point, however, the history of the development of society proves to be essentially different from that of nature. In nature – insofar as we ignore man’s reaction on nature – there are only blind, unconscious agencies acting on one another, out of whose interplay the general law comes into operation. Whatever happens …does not happen as a consciously desired aim. On the other hand, in the history of society the actors are all endowed with consciousness, are men acting with deliberation or passion, working towards definite goals; nothing happens without conscious purpose, without intended aim. [68]
Such a complex and dialectical approach has only one weakness: it makes it easy for critics to isolate one side of the analysis and then adopt superior airs by correcting Marx and Engels’ supposed shortcomings by presenting the complementary side of the analysis as if it were their own invention.
 
An arrogant theory?
Engels, like Marx, believed that the natural and social worlds should not be rigidly separated and, therefore, that similar if distinct patterns could be discerned in both. But does this not make Engels guilty of having devised an all embracing theory which prescribes the findings of science? Certainly Gareth Stedman Jones argues that Engels embraced the idea that ‘everything in reality is, in principle at least, already known’, and that he invented ‘a finished system, a corpus of absolute knowledge which encompassed the whole of empirical reality’.
In fact, Engels repeatedly insisted that any such ‘system building’ was completely foreign to historical materialism. Indeed, the whole of one of his major works, Anti-Dühring, is specifically designed to combat such a system. So it is that Engels writes, ‘To me there could be no question of building the laws of dialectics into nature, but of discovering them in it and evolving them from it.’ [69] It was not only in relation to natural science that it was important not to impose dialectical laws from the outside. Both Marx and Engels often made precisely the same point about the study of history, insisting that their method was a guide to studying history, not an excuse for not studying history.
Any general statements had first to be proven in detailed empirical and historical study, not simply asserted as universal laws. Engels insisted that ‘a system of natural and historical knowledge, embracing everything, and final for all time, is a contradiction to the fundamental laws of dialectic reasoning’. But why did Engels believe that a finished, all embracing system of knowledge was an illusion? One of the fundamental tenets of the dialectic is that the world is in a state of continuous change. Any finished system would necessarily imply that this process had halted, which is why Engels describes such notions as in conflict with the fundamental laws of dialectical reasoning. He elaborates:
If at any time in the development of mankind such a final, conclusive system of interconnections within the world – physical as well as mental and historical – were to be brought about, this would mean that human knowledge had reached its limit, and, from the moment when society had been brought into accord with that system, further historical development would be cut short – which would be an absurd idea, sheer nonsense. [70]
It is not surprising that Marx and Engels were hostile to any kind of universal system – their own ideas had been developed as a critique of the grandest of all universal systems, that developed by Hegel. [71] But Marx and Engels’ ideas were not only a critique of Hegel’s idealist system. They were also a critique of the mechanical materialism of the Enlightenment and of the similarly one sided materialism of the post-Hegelian philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach. So it was, on the face of it, unlikely that Engels would simply recoil from Hegel’s idealism into the arms of a crude, empirical materialism. Indeed, part of Marx and Engels’ critique of existing philosophy was that the two undialectical extremes, idealism and crude materialism, often collapsed into one another in a completely uncritical (and unacknowledged) way.
Marx and Engels frequently make the point that Hegel was forced to simply incorporate, in an ad hoc manner, economic facts and the discoveries of the physical sciences into his philosophical system. And the empiricists suffer the same fate from the opposite starting point: they find great, undigested lumps of theorising appearing willy-nilly in what they assume to be a mere recitation of ‘the facts’:
It is the old story. First of all one makes sensuous things into abstractions and then one wants to know them through the senses, to see time and smell space. The empiricist becomes so steeped in the habit of empirical experience, that he believes that he is still in the field of sensuous experience when he is operating with abstractions. [72]
So Engels was far from being an empiricist inclined system builder. His thought was constitutionally opposed to all-embracing abstract models of thought, whether they issued from the expected direction of idealism or from the less usual route of abstract empiricism. Engels’ own method was once again more dialectical. It involved a conscious recognition both of the theoretical elements in any empirical study and the necessary empirical basis on which any theoretical generalisation must stand. And once again Engels’ critics largely rely on removing one side or the other of his approach; they then insist that what remains proves that he was either a Hegelian intent on pushing the natural world into the preconceived forms of the dialectic, or a positivist who had abandoned the key terms of Marx’s dialectic.
 
An economic determinism?
The charge most commonly levelled at Engels is that he was a determinist intent on maintaining that every aspect of society could only be explained by its direct causal relationship with the economic structure. For example, George Lichtheim believes Engels’ thought was ‘hardly different from the fashionable materialist evolutionism of the epoch’. [73] In Norman Levine’s view, ‘by making economics the primary causal agent … Engels remained in the camp of positivism’. [74]
The grain of truth on which this mountain of speculation rests is that Engels, like Marx, believed that the material circumstances in which human beings find themselves shape their thoughts and actions. These material circumstances do contain an important economic element, although we should be careful about translating the current academically constricted notions of ‘economics’ into the days when Marx and Engels wrote. These see economics as a quantitative science restricted to predicting human behaviour on the basis of supply and demand curves. In this sense modern bourgeois economics is overwhelmingly more determinist than anything Marx and Engels, or for that matter the bourgeois economists of their day, could have imagined.
Indeed, the discipline which Marx and Engels knew was called ‘political economy’, not ‘economics’. Its remit covered much territory now known as sociology and political science. Consequently, the notion of ‘economics’ is much wider in Marx and Engels than many superficial observers comprehend. As we have seen, they considered human beings’ relationships with nature, their family relationships and the social relationships they formed with other human beings to be some of the most important constituents of a materialist analysis of any particular epoch. Marx’s mature economic theory insisted that both means of production (tools, machines, factories, offices and so on) and the relations of production (above all, the class relations) were, together, what constituted the mode of production. And it was upon this basis, the ‘production and reproduction of real life’ as Engels put it, that they sought to understand the development of social institutions, political parties, ideologies, religions, philosophies and so on.
At no point, however, did either Marx or Engels argue that this was a deterministic relationship. They never suggested that the various political institutions, parties and ideologies had no effect on the course of history. One of the most trenchant statements of this attitude was written by Engels, although it is often attributed to Marx, in one of the sections which he contributed to their joint early work, The German Ideology:
History does nothing, it ‘possesses no immense wealth’, it ‘wages no battles’. It is man, real, living man who does all that, who possesses and fights; ‘history’ is not, as it were, a person apart, using man as a means to achieve its own aims; history is nothing but the activity of man pursuing his aims. [75]
A lifetime later Engels’ attitude had not altered. Towards the end of his life he wrote a series of letters, as well as general statements in his published work, designed to clarify exactly this point. In September 1890, for instance, in a letter to Joseph Bloch, Engels wrote:
Marx and I are ourselves partly to blame for the fact that the younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. We had to emphasise the main principle vis-à-vis our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time, the place or the opportunity to give their due to the other factors involved in the interaction. But when it came to presenting a section of history, that is, to applying the theory in practice, it was a different matter and there no error was permissible. [76]
Engels recommends, as ‘a most excellent example’ of dealing with a particular historical event, Marx’s The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte. This work contains Marx’s famous formulation of the relationship between material conditions and human action in the making of history: ‘Men make their own history, but … not under circumstances they themselves have chosen but under the given and inherited circumstances with which they are directly confronted’. [77] Engels clearly had this formulation in mind when he wrote his letter to Bloch:
We make our history ourselves, but, in the first place, under very definite antecedents and conditions. Among these the economic are ultimately decisive. [78]
And he went on to argue that ‘it is hardly possible, without making oneself ridiculous, to explain in terms of economics the existence of every small state in Germany, past and present’. The next month, October 1890, saw Engels return to the same theme in terms strikingly reminiscent of those which he used in The German Ideology. He complained bitterly that one of his ‘supporters’ had written ‘as if, according to Marx, history makes itself quite automatically, without the co-operation of human beings (who after all are making it!), and as if these human beings were simply played like mere chessmen by the economic conditions (which are the work of men themselves!)’. Engels was quick to point out that this was a repetition of the corruption of Marx peddled by Dühring. He concluded in an exasperated tone, ‘A man who is capable of confusing the distortion of Marxist theory by an opponent such as Dühring with this theory itself must turn elsewhere for help – I give up’. [79]
Later the same month Engels was again recommending Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire, this time to Conrad Schmidt, as a model of non-deterministic analysis because:
[It] deals almost exclusively with the particular part played by political struggles and events, of course within their general dependence on economic conditions. Or Capital, the section on the working day, for instance, where legislation, which is surely a political act, has such a drastic effect.
And he concludes, ‘And why do we fight for the political dictatorship of the proletariat if political power is economically impotent? Force (that is, state power) is also an economic power!’ [80]
But Engels’ letters did far more than simply make general statements to the effect that historical materialism was not a crude economistic interpretation of history. They went on to spell out how Marxists set about relating various political institutions to the economic structure of society.
Engels argued that state power generally can have one of three effects on the economic development of a society. It can accelerate economic change, retard economic change or alter the course of economic development and ‘prevent economic development from proceeding along certain lines, and prescribe other lines’. [81] The state can gain this relative independence because it is based on the development of the division of labour. Engels explains:
Society gives rise to certain common functions which it cannot dispense with. The persons appointed for this purpose form a new branch of the division of labour within society. This gives them particular interests, distinct, too, from those of their mandator; they make themselves independent of the latter and – the state is in being … the new independent power, while having in the main to follow the movement of production, reacts in turn, by virtue of its inherent relative independence – that is relative independence once transferred to it and gradually further developed – upon the course and conditions of production. [82]
And, as each new area of political and social development opens up, there arise institutional structures and networks of social relations which, while ultimately related to the economic structure, develop a certain independent power of their own. Engels uses the example of the legal structure:
As soon as the new division of labour which creates professional lawyers becomes necessary, another new and independent sphere is opened up which, for all its general dependence on production and trade, has also a specific capacity for reacting on these spheres. [83]
More than this, the very nature of the law means that it cannot be a direct reflection of the economic conditions which gave rise to it. This is for three reasons. Firstly, the law, although fundamentally an expression of the ruling class’s control of property, cannot simply be a ‘blunt, unmitigated, unadulterated expression of the domination of a class’, otherwise it would fail to be effective as an arbiter of the class struggle. It must have, at least, the appearance of independence from the ruling class. Secondly, although based on a contradictory economic system, the law itself has to be seen to be internally coherent, to be rational in its judgments. But ‘in order to achieve this, the faithful reflection of economic conditions suffers increasingly’. [84] Finally, and as a result of these two factors, ‘the jurist imagines he is operating with a priori propositions, whereas they are really only economic reflections; everything is therefore upside down’. [85] So this necessarily independent sphere ‘influences the economic base and may, within certain limits, modify it.’ Indeed, Engels adds, laws like those governing inheritance can ‘exert a very considerable effect on the economic sphere, because they influence the distribution of property.’ [86]
None of this, however, was meant to deny the materialism of Marx and Engels’ approach, merely to spell out that they were not mechanical materialists or economic determinists:
It is the interaction of two unequal forces: on the one hand, the economic movement, on the other, the new political power, which strives for as much independence as possible, and which, having once been set up, is endowed with a movement of its own. On the whole, the economic movement prevails, but it has also to endure reactions from the political movement which it itself set up and endowed with relative independence, from the movement of state power, on the one hand, and of the opposition simultaneously engendered, on the other. [87]
Here once again the key elements of a dialectical analysis are in place: the whole of society is shown to be based on a fundamental economic contradiction which gives rise to a state structure which is related to, but distinct from, its economic base. Either completely separating the economic and the political, or completely dissolving either side into the other, destroys the real pattern of relations. It is, in dialectical terminology, a contradictory totality, a unity of opposites. As Engels wrote of his contemporary critics:
What these gentlemen all lack is dialectics. They always see only cause here, effect there. That this is an empty abstraction, that such metaphysical polar opposites exist in the real world only during crises, and that the whole vast process goes on in the form of interaction – though of very unequal forces, the economic being by far the strongest, the primary and the most decisive and that in this context everything is relative and nothing absolute – they cannot grasp at all. As far as they are concerned Hegel never existed. [88]
So even in Engels’ day it was not new for critics to be ignorant of what is involved in a dialectical materialist analysis of society, and allow one side of the analysis to be abstracted, so they could condemn Engels as a determinist.
 
A copy theory of knowledge?
Engels’ did not believe that human society simply reproduced relations found in the natural world, or that the political life of society simply reflected its economic preconditions. Therefore it would be surprising if he held a copy theory of knowledge – a theory which holds that our ideas are simply a mirror of the world around us. But since Engels frequently uses the term ‘reflection’ to indicate the relationship between ideas and reality, this issue requires some further examination.
When Marx and Engels describe thought as a ‘reflection’ of the material world they are usually talking in the most general terms and they are often arguing against idealists, for whom the material world is the creation of thought. So it is, for instance, in a passage from Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy which seems particularly to irritate Engels’ critics. Here, as part of a paragraph in which Engels is polemising against the Hegelian notion that thought is ‘the actual living soul of the whole existing world’, he writes, ‘We comprehend the ideas in our heads materialistically again – as reflections of real things instead of regarding the real things as reflections of this or that stage of the absolute idea’. [89]
But the moment Engels moves beyond such aphoristic formulations he makes it quite obvious that the relationship between thought and its material conditions cannot be reduced to simple reflection. Thus later in Ludwig Feuerbach, where Engels discusses philosophy and religion, he insists that these ‘higher ideologies … are still further removed from the material base’ and that ‘the connection between ideas and their material conditions of existence becomes more and more complicated and more and more obscured by the intermediate links.’ [90] And he goes on to elaborate:
Once it has arisen … every ideology develops in conjunction with the given conceptual material and elaborates on it; otherwise it would not be an ideology, that is, dealing with ideas as autonomous entities which develop independently and are subject to their own laws. [91]
So ideologies develop their own internal coherence and, therefore, have their own relatively independent modes of development (as we saw in the previous section with regard to the law). But there are two more reasons for believing that Engels did not hold a crude copy theory of knowledge.
Firstly, such a theory would have contradicted a fact which Engels regarded as fundamental to his understanding of the dialectic: the natural and the social world are in a never ceasing process of change and development. Any idea, but particularly any widely accepted ideological system, is both relatively abstract and relatively stable in comparison to the diversity and change which is present in the real world. It follows that concepts are necessarily an inexact representation of reality. Sometimes such inexactitude is a virtue – it helps isolate the essential from the inessential – but it always results in a disjunction between thought and reality.
There is a related problem raised by the comparatively static nature of concepts. To analyse certain elements of material reality it is often important to extract them deliberately from the constant passage of time, and then treat them as fixed and unchanging. But this also introduces a necessary inaccuracy into our concepts. Engels elaborated these points in a letter to Conrad Schmidt:
The concept of a thing and its reality, run side by side like two asymptotes, always approaching each other yet never meeting. The difference between the two is the very difference which prevents the concept from being directly and immediately reality and reality from being immediately its own concept … the concept … does not therefore prima facie directly coincide with reality, from which it had to be abstracted in the first place, it is nevertheless more than a fiction, unless you declare that all the results of thought are fictions because reality only corresponds to them only very circuitously, and even then approaching it only asympomatically. [92]
But these difficulties are only half the problem:
… or are the concepts which prevail in the natural sciences fictions because they by no means always coincide with reality? From the moment we accept the theory of evolution all our concepts of organic life correspond only approximately to reality. Otherwise there would be no change. On the day when concepts and reality completely coincide in the organic world development comes to an end. The concept fish includes life in water and breathing through gills: how are you going to get from fish to amphibian without breaking through this concept? [93]
Indeed, for Marx and Engels, one of the main virtues of dialectical thought was that it developed a number of concepts which more accurately corresponded to the changing nature of reality than the more static and abstract categories of either empiricism or idealism. But precisely because such enormous theoretical effort was necessary in order to correctly apprehend the nature of reality, it was inconceivable that either Marx or Engels would have subscribed to the idea that reality was immediately reflected in the mind in any simplistic or automatic manner.
One final argument against the view that Engels held a reductionist explanation of the relationship between society and ideology rests on Marx and Engels’ theory of alienation. This argued that in a society where human beings could not control either their natural environment or the social and economic mechanism it was inevitable that they would fail to be able to easily comprehend the nature of their world. This was true of all class societies, at least to some degree. But it was most true of capitalist society, since capitalism is a society in which the economic exploitation of the working class is masked by the legal equality of all its members. Everyone, capitalist or worker, is subject to the same laws, at least in theory. Everyone, factory owner or wage earner, has the same right to vote. The surface appearance of society is thus very different from its actual workings.
This results in the illusion that the political structure shapes the economic structure – the basis of, among others, the reformist ideology – rather than the reverse. The fact that the ruling class really does use the state to protect its economic power lends weight to this appearance, helping to further obscure the capitalists’ fundamental dependence on its economic power:
The traditional conception … saw in the state the determining element … Appearances correspond to this … so all the needs of civil society – whichever class happens to be the ruling one – must pass through the will of the state to obtain general validity in the form of laws. That is the formal aspect of the matter, which is self-evident. But the question now arises, what is the content of this merely formal will …? If we look into this, we discover that in modern history the will of the state is by and large determined by the changing needs of civil society, by the supremacy of this or that class, in the last resort, by the development of the productive forces and the relations of exchange. [94]
Here, once again, a simple reflection of appearances in the minds of human beings does not accord with reality but with a mistaken image of reality. It would be impossible, on this understanding, for Engels to hold a copy theory of knowledge. If thought mirrored reality it would simply be reflecting the ideological appearance, not the scientifically uncovered reality. Marx made this point in his criticism of the vulgar economists, whose fault lay precisely in the fact that they did simply reflect the appearance (or ‘phenomenal form’, as Marx calls it) not the underlying reality. Engels is unlikely to have missed this point since it was made in a letter to him:
The philistine’s and vulgar economist’s way of looking at things arises, namely, because it is only the immediate phenomenal form of these relations that is reflected in their brains and not their inner connection, Incidentally, if the latter were the case what need would there be of science? [95]
Moreover, not only would there be no need for science if the reality of things were immediately obvious from their appearance, there would be no need for, or possibility of, working class consciousness changing in the course of class struggle. Either the real nature of capitalist society would be obvious and workers would reject it, in which case a revolution would be automatic; or the appearance of capitalism would be taken as true and workers would accept it, in which case a revolution would be impossible. It is because, in the course the struggle, workers move from a consciousness which partly accepts the system at face value to a rejection of the system based on a truer comprehension of its real nature that a revolution is both possible and the culmination of a historical process. So, contrary to assertions by Kolakowski, Schmidt and others, Marx and Engels’ theory requires a rejection of a copy theory of consciousness, both as a method of analysis and as an explanation of working class consciousness.
The self emancipation of the working class
Marx is sometimes acquitted of the charge that he saw socialism as inevitable on the grounds that the commitment to the self emancipation of the working class is unmistakable in his writings, particularly his early writings. Such judgments rarely extend to Engels. Engels, as we have seen, is accused, in Lichtheim’s words, of transferring ‘the here-and-now of conscious activity to a horizon so distant as to be almost invisible,’ or else of propagating a version of Marxism in which ‘the notion of human praxis was absent’. Supposedly Marx is the humanist whose vision incorporated the struggle of real workers, Engels the determinist whose scientific framework had no room for human intervention.
Despite being well established this view has little basis in fact. Much of what was said in refutation of Engels’ alleged determinism is also relevant here. But to avoid straying into the area of general principles again, some of Engels’ remarks about the class struggle should suffice.
Interestingly, even when Engels is deploying some of his most deterministic formulations in response to Dühring’s contention that ‘political conditions are the decisive cause of the economic situation’, even when he is arguing that capitalism is being driven forward ‘as if necessitated by a law of nature’, Engels still insists that there is not one predetermined outcome. He argues that the class struggle can either result in ‘ruin or revolution’. Which possibility actually materialises is clearly dependent on the course of the class struggle. In this respect Engels’ thought reproduced towards the end of his life exactly the patterns which he and Marx had first described in the Communist Manifesto in their youth. There the fate of capitalism is described as either proletarian revolution or ‘the common ruin of the contending classes’. History, for Engels, was no more independent of the course of the class struggle in the 1880s than it had been in the 1840s. Indeed, in those early days it was Engels as much as Marx who took the lead in asserting the centrality of the self activity of the working class.
It was Engels, for instance, who in the face of the whole of accepted opinion on the left at that time, insisted on the importance of trade unions precisely because they were organisations in which workers taught themselves to fight and in which they could learn the real nature of the capitalist system:
What gives these Unions and the strikes arising from them their real importance is this, that they are the first attempt of the workers to abolish competition. They imply the recognition of the fact that the supremacy of the bourgeoisie is based wholly upon the competition of the workers among themselves; i.e. upon their want of cohesion. And precisely because the Unions direct themselves against the vital nerve of the present social order, however one-sidedly, in however narrow a way, are they so dangerous to this social order. [96]
Consciousness and organisation are seen as going hand in hand. And the further development of the struggle is seen as promoting the possibility of going beyond the limits of trade union consciousness and organisation:
If the competition of workers among themselves is destroyed, if all determine not to be further exploited by the bourgeoisie, the rule of property is at an end … The moment the workers resolve to be bought and sold no longer, they take the part of men possessed of a will as well as of a working power; at that moment the whole Political Economy of today is at an end. [97]
And it was in Marx and Engels’ joint work, The German Ideology, that this famous statement of revolution as the act of the working class was made:
Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist consciousness and for the success of the cause itself, the alteration of men on a mass scale is necessary, an alteration which can only take place in a practical movement, a revolution; the revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other may, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found itself anew. [98]
And it was Engels alone who reported a few years later on the practical experience of living through one such moment in the revolutionary Berlin of 1848. And, as he did so, he forged one of the most striking formulations of necessity of the self emancipation of the working class:
The people that fought and won on the barricades is an altogether different people from the one that assembled before the castle on 18 March to be enlightened about the meaning of the concessions obtained, by the attacks of the dragoons. It is capable of altogether different things, it has an altogether different stance with relation to the government. The most important conquest of the revolution is the revolution itself. [99]
Engels’ commitment to the idea of working class self emancipation remained undimmed in later life. In 1888, for instance, he wrote to Margaret Harkness criticising her novel City Girl because she failed to highlight this aspect of working class life:
In the City Girl the working class figures appear as a passive mass, unable to help itself and not even showing (making) any attempt at striving to help itself. All attempts to drag it out of its torpid misery come from without, from above. Now if this was a correct description about 1800 or 1810 … it cannot appear so in 1887 to a man who for nearly 50 years has had the honour of sharing in most of the fights of the militant proletariat. The rebellious reaction of the working class against the oppressive medium which surrounds them, their attempts – convulsive, half-conscious or conscious – at recovering their status as human beings, belong to history and must therefore lay claim to a place in the domain of realism. [100]
In every aspect of Engels’ thought – whether it be the stress on consciousness as the element which which makes human beings a distinct part of nature, or the centrality of the class struggle, or the complaint that a novel does not accurately portray the self activity of workers – he is careful to avoid mechanical materialism. It does not seem, therefore, that any honest reading of Engels’ works can accuse him of neglecting the role of working people in the struggle for their own liberation.
 
Engels and reformism
Another common accusation is that Engels invented a mechanical Marxism which resulted in the reformist strategy which increasingly came to dominate the German SPD and the Second International of which it was a part. This view involves a series of falsifications.
This first falsification is, as we have seen, that Engels’ approach was mechanical to start with. Even Engels’ least guarded formulation of historical materialism was qualitatively different from the kind of fatalism which marked, for instance, the thought of the leading theoretician of the Second International, Karl Kautsky. The future, wrote Kautsky:
Is certain and inevitable in the sense that it is inevitable that inventors improve technique, that capitalists in their greed revolutionise the economic life … that it is inevitable that wage-earners aspire to shorter working hours and higher rages, that they organise themselves and struggle against the class of capitalists and the power of the state … That it is inevitable that they aspire to political power and the abolition of the capitalist domination. Socialism is inevitable because the class struggle and the victory of the proletariat are so too. [101]
There is clearly an intellectual continuity between this kind of general formulation and the passive reformism, the rejection of revolution, that became the hallmark of the leaders of the Second International. If socialism is inevitable, after all, why endanger its progress by revolutionary adventures? Why not wait for its inevitable progress to register in a parliamentary majority for the SPD?
Equally clearly, Engels’ work does not contain anything remotely resembling this kind of formulation. So, for it to be made into an intellectual justification for reformism, selective quotation and distortion must be used. Whereas in Kautsky’s case the general theoretical approach did result in reformist political formulations, there is no evidence that Engels’ supposed mechanical materialism actually resulted in him endorsing a reformist political strategy.
This last assertion requires justification since it is sometimes argued that in his last years Engels did endorse the first signs of reformism as they emerged in the SPD. Indeed, it is even argued that Marx first raised the issue in a speech he gave in Amsterdam in 1872 following the Hague conference of the First International where he said that it might be possible, in England for instance, that ‘workers can achieve their goals through peaceful means.’ This interpretation is, however, only possible on the basis of highly selective quotation. Not only does it neglect Marx’s general statements in his writings on the Paris Commune, where he insisted that workers must ‘smash the state machine’, it also ignores Engels’ explicit and specific elaboration of Marx’s remark about England. In 1886, in his preface to the first English translation of Capital, Engels returned to Marx’s remark that ‘in Europe at least, England is the only country where the inevitable social revolution might be effected by peaceful and legal means.’ Engels goes on to add a crucial qualification: ‘He [Marx] certainly never forgot to add that he hardly expected the English ruling classes to submit, without a “pro-slavery rebellion” to the peaceful and legal revolution’. [102]
The gravity of this remark can be understood by recalling the event to which Engels is referring when he uses the phrase ‘pro-slavery rebellion’. This was the term used to describe the revolt of the Southern states of America against the Federal government – its result was the American Civil War. The full meaning of Engels’ statement is, therefore, that, even if the working class in England were to attain power peacefully, they would then have to defend it by means of a revolutionary civil war. It is, consequently, difficult to see the embryo of reformism in Engels’ formulations or – on Engels’ testimony – in Marx’s statement either.
This is not, however, the end of Engels’ alleged reformism. In the very last year of his life Engels wrote an introduction to Marx’s The Class Struggles in France which is said to have pointed towards a reformist strategy. It is certainly true that Engels insists on the importance of ‘slow propaganda work and parliamentary activity’. But this insistence was born of two considerations.
Firstly, the leaders of the SPD, in whose paper, Vorwärts, the introduction was to appear, were worried that the anti-socialist laws then before the German parliament would be passed and therefore begged Engels to tone down the more revolutionary of his formulations. This he did only in part and then with the greatest reluctance. Engels wrote to Richard Fischer of the SPD executive:
I have yielded to your serious misgivings as much as possible, although with the best will I cannot understand about half of the concerns. I still cannot accept that you intend to pledge yourselves body and soul to absolute legality, legality under all circumstances, legality even in the face of laws broken by their authors – in short the politics of proffering the left cheek to whoever has struck you on the right … I’m of the opinion that you win nothing when you preach the absolute renunciation of striking hard … and no party anywhere goes so far as to renounce armed opposition to illegality. [103]
The second consideration behind some of Engels’ formulations was a tactical desire to instruct his readers on when a revolutionary uprising was possible, and what tactics were appropriate at which stage of an insurrection. Engels explains, for instance, that a premature putsch which does not enjoy the support of the majority of workers can be counterproductive, handing the ruling class a chance to recover its confidence and go over to the offensive. This was not a rejection of revolution, it was a rejection of coups carried out by elites:
The time of surprise attacks, of revolutions carried through by small conscious minorities at the head of masses lacking consciousness is past. Where it is a question of a complete transformation of the social organisation, the masses themselves must be in on it, must themselves already have grasped what is at stake, what they are fighting for, body and soul. [104]
Engels also discussed another, entirely minor, tactical question: when and where it was appropriate to build street barricades. It is possible that Engels’ military interests led him to spend too much time on this issue, but his concerns were not meant to deny the possibility of revolution. His point about street barricades was simply that developments since the 1848 revolutions made these a much more dangerous proposition than they once were. The forces of the state were better armed and trained than in 1848, for instance. Even so, Engels did not completely renounce the use of barricades. He concluded his lengthy overview of the changed conditions since 1848 with the sentence, ‘This is the key point to keep in mind in analysing any future possibilities for street fighting’, clearly indicating the provisional and conditional nature of his judgments. [105] Later he posed point blank the question of whether street fighting would be debarred from future use. His reply: ‘Absolutely not’. These sentences, however, were removed from the printed copy in Vorwärts. These and other alterations made Engels’ piece seem much more reformist than he had ever intended.
Engels wrote a bitter letter of protest to Karl Kautsky, then editor of another SPD paper, Neue Zeit:
To my astonishment I see today in Vorwärts an extract from my Introduction, printed without my knowledge and trimmed in such a way as to make me appear a peace-loving worshipper of legality at any price. So much the better that the whole thing is to appear now in Neue Zeit so that this disgraceful impression will be wiped out. [106]
Engels also wrote to Paul Lafargue complaining of the ‘trick’ that had been played on him by the editor of Vorwärts so that ‘everything could serve him to support that tactics of peace at any price and of opposition to force and violence, which it has pleased him for some time now to preach, especially at present when coercive laws are being prepared in Berlin’. Engels insisted that he supported these tactics only ‘today’ and only in Germany. And even so they ‘may become inapplicable tomorrow’. [107]
All this is of a piece with an earlier letter to Lafargue where Engels argued that the great virtue of legal political work was that it showed ‘with absolute exactitude that day on which one must take up arms for the revolution’. [108]
There is, perhaps, some excuse for those who only had the censored text of Engels’ introduction before them to believe that, in some of his last printed words, he had given ground to reformist ideas. For those who have to hand the full text, and Engels’ subsequent correspondence, such a judgement can only be based on malice or misunderstanding.
 
Engels’ legacy
If Engels’ ideas are not a theoretical precursor of either reformism or Stalinism, why is it that so many theorists have attempted to prove that they are? The answer to this question lies in the theoretical weakness which haunted the New Left in the 1960s and 1970s and which, in different ways, affected many of those who looked at the history of Marxism, whether or not they regarded themselves as radicals.
The dominant tone emphasised philosophical and cultural analysis, often in reaction to what was rightly perceived as the reductionism of the Stalinist tradition and the anti-theoretical nature of reformism. But such an approach was fundamentally flawed when it came to understanding the roots of just those two traditions.
It is one thing to say that Stalinism was a form of economic reductionism and that reformism has a pragmatic distrust of theory. But it is quite another to say that reductionism in theory leads to, much less causes, Stalinism; or that pragmatism in theory causes reformism in practice. The New Left’s concern with culture and theory tilted over into a kind of idealism where the emphasis in explaining any historical event rests on inadequacies of theory. And once this logic is accepted it is not long before the intellectual lines of inheritance are scoured to find the thinker who first introduced such erroneous ideas into the movement. The search for original sin has begun.
Right wingers would, of course, have no difficulty here. For them Engels and Marx are both guilty of determinism and of being the precursors of Stalinism. But those radicalised in the 1960s and 1970s were formed by a rejection of this kind of Cold War mentality. They knew too much about the methods of right wing academia, and too much about Marxism, to accept the right wing argument – but most of them did not know enough to reject the argument against Engels.
What was necessary was a materialist explanation of the rise of reformism and the roots of Stalinism. Kautsky’s revisionism was ultimately the product of the relative stability which accompanied the epoch of classical imperialism (1870–1914), the rise of mass reformist parties and the trade union bureaucracy. Adapting to these material circumstances, the leaders of the Second International were forced to distort the revolutionary essence of Marxism while attempting to preserve its form. Likewise the isolation of the Russian Revolution led to the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy and then to its abandonment of Marxism, while simultaneously retaining the phrases of the revolutionary tradition as an ideological tie between itself and the mass of the population.
This kind of materialist account was adopted by some of those radicalised in the 1960s and 1970s, but the weakness of the Trotskyist movement which carried this analysis limited the numbers it could influence. For those not influenced by this approach the difficulties of surviving a period when the struggle ebbed were enormously increased. Under the pressure of defeat those who started out trying to establish Marxism without Engels tended to end up at Marxism without Marx.
Those who understood the materialist causes of Stalinism and reformism were better equipped to separate the Stalinist and reformist distortions of Engels from what Engels himself intended. This, in turn, left them with a Marxism better able to meet the demands of the coming decades. And this is the real point of rescuing Engels from the hands of his critics. Understanding Engels’ ideas makes it more likely, though far from inevitable, that in the struggles which lie ahead we will avoid defeat and ensure victory.
When Engels spoke the words, ‘Before all else, he was a revolutionist,’ over Marx’s grave, it was an epitaph as fitting for the speaker as for his dead friend. And, because they were more than just active revolutionaries themsleves, Marx and Engels developed an analysis which, while it could not possibly forecast the struggles of the 20th century, provided the basis for understanding that century. And so it is Marx and Engels’ thought which provides socialists today with the best chance of meeting the challenges with which the development of the natural sciences and the capitalist system are confronting us as the millennium approaches.

Notes
1. There were voices within the Marxist movement, notably Lukacs and Korsch in the early 1920s, who were critical of this or that aspect of Engels’ writings, but these did not extend to a blanket denial of the unity of Marx and Engels’ approach as did those which arose after 1960.
2. G. Lichtheim, Marxism: An Historical and Critical Study (London 1961).
3. Ibid., p. 238.
4. Ibid., p. 245.
5. Ibid., p. 253.
6. Ibid., p. 246.
7. Ibid., p. 237.
8. A. Schmidt, The Concept of Nature in Marx (London 1971), p. 51.
9. Ibid., p. 55.
10. Ibid., p. 56.
11. L. Colletti, From Rousseau to Lenin (London 1972), p. 26.
12. Ibid., p. 62.
13. For Lewis and Avineri, Engels’ attempt to give a materialist account of nature was a fundamental mistake and a departure from Marx’s method which was exclusively concerned with human society. For Kolakowski: ‘Engels’ dialectic was formulated under the influence of Darwin’s discoveries … the main trend of opinion, shared by Engels … treats human history as a prolongation and a special case of natural history, and assumes that the general laws of nature apply, in specific forms, to the destiny of mankind.’
This attitude was a mistake, and a break with Marx, since ‘the dialectic, which according to Marx is the unity of theory and practice, cannot be formulated so as to relate to nature in itself as it presupposes the activity of consciousness.’ Like earlier writers, Kolakowski sees one consequence of this being the adoption by Engels of a copy theory of consciousness. (Main Currents of Marxism, Vol. I, pp. 400–405).
14. P. Walton and A. Gamble, From Alienation to Surplus Value (London 1976), p. 64.
15. G.S. Jones, Engels and the End of Classical German Philosophy, in New Left Review 79, May/June 1973.
16. E.P. Thompson, for instance, defended Engels’ method against distortions by Louis Althusser (see E.P. Thompson, The Poverty of Theory, in The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays, London 1978), although Thompson’s own approach tended to downplay the material and objective factors in any analysis in a way that Engels himself did not. Thompson’s hostility to party organisation, also a legacy of his experience in the Communist Party, led him to a much more hostile evaluation of Engels’ practical role in the English working class movement (see his Persons and Polemics, London 1994, pp. 10–23). S. Timpanaro also mounted a defence of Engels (On Materialism, London 1975). Timpanaro has some valuable insights, but he wrongly tends to accept much of the accusation of ‘Hegelianism’ directed at Engels by his critics.
17. N. Levine, The Tragic Deception, Marx contra Engels (Clio Press 1975), p. 145.
18. Ibid..
19. Ibid., p. 152.
20. Ibid., p. 157.
21. Ibid., p. 175.
22. Ibid., p. 157.
23. T. Carver, Marx and Engels, the Intellectual Relationship (Brighton 1983), p. 156: ‘Engels found his vocation in 1859, rather unfortunately, as a systemising philosopher, setting Marx’s work in an academic and philosophical context, drawing out its implications as a universal methodology, and adding … a positivist account of natural science.’
24. Ibid., p. 157.
25. See the survey of anti-Engels literature in H. Sheehan, Marxism and the Philosophy of Science, a Critical History (Humanities Press 1985), pp. 53–60.
26. T. Carver, op. cit., p. 151.
27. N. Levine, op. cit., p. 233.
28. Ibid., p. 232. Even if this were a true picture of Marx’s marriage it would be a dubious claim. But, given the enormous pressure of poverty and the family deaths and ill health which accompanied it, Jenny Marx seems to have given her husband a great deal of ‘professional and emotional support’. This was certainly Marx’s opinion and that of most contemporary witnesses, many of whom stress how close the Marxes’ relationship was.
29. T. Carver, op. cit., pp. 36–37.
30. Quoted in J.D. Hunley, The Life and Thought of Friedrich Engels (Yale University Press 1991), p. 135.
31. Engels, Selected Correspondence (Moscow 1975), p. 175.
32. Marx, ibid., p. 176
33. Ibid., p. 138.
34. Engels, quoted in G. Novak, Polemics in Marxist Philosophy (New York 1978), p. 88.
35. Marx, quoted by Engels, Anti-Dühring, in Marx Engels Collected Works (MECW), Vol. 25 (London 1987), p. 116. The original is in Marx, Capital, MECW, Vol. 35, part III, ch. XI.
36. Ibid., p. 117.
37. Marx, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 177.
38. Ibid., p. 115.
39. Quoted in D. McLellan (ed.), Karl Marx, Interviews and Recollections (London 1981), pp. 77–78.
40. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology, MECW, Vol. 5 (London 1976), p. 31.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid., pp. 39–40.
43. Engels, Anti-Dühring, MECW, op. cit., p. 34.
44. Ibid., pp. 41–42.
45. Ibid., p. 42.
46. Ibid., pp. 42–43.
47. Ibid., pp. 43–44.
48. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology, op. cit., p. 40.
49. Ibid.
50. Engels, The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man, in MECW, Vol. 25, op. cit., pp. 453–454. Engels’ emphasis.
51. Ibid., pp. 455–457.
52. Ibid., p. 459.
53. Ibid., p. 459.
54. Ibid., p. 460.
55. Ibid., p. 461.
56. Ibid., p. 462.
57. Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific (Peking 1975), p. 67.
58. Ibid., p. 68.
59. Ibid., p. 65.
60. Engels, Anti-Dühring, MECW, op. cit., p. 111.
61. Ibid., p. 112.
62. Ibid., p. 121.
63. Ibid., p. 124.
64. Ibid., p. 132. Although it is also true that some of Engels’ own examples, often the ones taken over too literally from Hegel, are misleading. The growth of a grain of barley is not, as Engels suggests, a dialectical development. It does not occur as a result of internal contradictions and is perfectly explicable in ordinary scientific terms. Engels’ other examples, are often brilliant; see for example his description of the relationship between French and Mameluke cavalry (Anti-Dühring, op. cit., p. 119).
65. Engels, Dialectics of Nature, MECW, Vol. 25, op. cit., p. 493.
66. Ibid., pp. 494–495. Engels’ emphasis.
67. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (Peking 1976), p. 40.
68. Ibid., pp. 45–46.
69. Engels, Anti-Dühring, MECW, Vol. 25, op. cit., pp. 12–13.
70. Ibid., p. 35.
71. Even if one accepts the point made by Engels’ critics, which I don’t, that Engels’ critique of Hegel was different from that of Marx, it makes no difference to the force of this point. Engels is said to have simply counterposed the revolutionary Hegelian method to the conservative Hegelian system, rather than carried out a fully materialist critique of both method and system. But since it is precisely the conservative nature of such universal systems to which Engels’ objects, it is highly unlikely that he would have reproduced exactly this fault in his own analysis.
72. Engels, Dialectics of Nature, MECW, op. cit., p. 515.
73. G. Lichtheim, op. cit., p. 248.
74. N. Levine, op. cit., p. 174.
75. Engels, The German Ideology, MECW, op. cit., p. 93.
76. Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 396.
77. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in Marx, Surveys from Exile (Penguin 1973), p. 146.
78. Engels, Selected Correspondence (Moscow 1975), p. 395. Virtually the same phrase – ‘men make their history themselves’ – crops up in Engels’ letter to Turati, Selected Correspondence, p. 442.
79. Engels, Reply to Mr. Paul Ernst, MECW, Vol. 27 (London 1990), p. 84.
80. Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 402.
81. Ibid., p. 399.
82. Ibid., pp. 398–399.
83. Ibid.
84. Ibid., p. 399.
85. Ibid., p. 400.
86. Ibid., p. 400.
87. Ibid., p. 399.
88. Ibid., p. 402.
89. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, op. cit., p. 40.
90. Ibid., p. 54.
91. Ibid., p. 55.
92. Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 457.
93. Ibid., p. 459.
94. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, op. cit., p. 51.
95. Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 179. Marx repeated the same point in Capital, Vol. III. That Engels fully understood this point is not only obvious from his own writings, but also from a revision which he made to Marx’s Wage Labour and Capital when it was republished in 1891. Marx’s original 1849 text had argued, ‘The bourgeois therefore buys the workers’ labour with money. They sell him their labour for money.’ In that original form Marx could be read to mean that this is a just market exchange – a fair day’s work for a fair day’s pay. In Capital Marx had spelt out that this is only the appearance of a fair transaction because, in reality, what the worker sells is his labour power which can be exploited beyond the point where it has earned enough to reproduce itself and so delivers surplus value to the capitalist. Thus there is, right at the heart of the capitalist system, a fateful gap between appearance and reality. Engels amended the 1891 edition to bring out this point: ‘The capitalist, it seems, therefore buys their labour for money. They sell him their labour for money. But this is merely the appearance. In reality, what they sell to the capitalist is their labour power.’ See the excellent account of this and other questions in J.D. Hunley, The Life and Thought of Frederich Engels, op. cit., pp. 87–88.
96. Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England, MECW, Vol. 4 (London 1975), p. 507.
97. Ibid. See also H. Draper, Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, Vol. II (New York 1978), pp. 91–146.
98. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology, MECW, op. cit., p. 53.
99. Engels, quoted in H. Draper, op. cit., p. 75. Engels later found that the people had not been as completely revolutionised as he had at first hoped. Nevertheless, as Draper notes, ‘the principle was still the measuring rod of the limitations of the March revolution: its greatest shortcoming is that it has not revolutionised the Berliners.’
100. Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., pp. 379–380. Also see the discussion in J.D. Hunley, op. cit., pp. 116–117.
101. K. Kautsky, quoted in J. Larrain, A Reconstruction of Historical Materialism, (London 1986), p. 53.
102. Engels, quoted in J.D. Hunley, op. cit., p. 101.
103. Ibid., p. 105.
104. Engels, Introduction to K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, MECW, Vol. 27 (London 1990), p. 520. This is yet another striking testimony to Engels’ insistence that workers themselves must be the conscious authors of their own liberation.
105. Indeed, Engels suggests that the shortcomings of barricades might mean that revolutionaries would have to go over to the offensive rather than simply build defensive street fortifications.
106. Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 461.
107. Ibid..
108. Engels, quoted in J.D. Hunley, op. cit., p. 111.

n Rees: Trotsky and the dialectic of history (Summer 1990)



John Rees Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

John Rees
Trotsky and the dialectic of history
(Summer 1990)

Published in International Socialism 2 : 47, Summer 1990, pp. 113–135.
Copied with thanks from Marxisme Online.
Transcribed by Jørn Andersen.
Marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.




John Rees examines Trotsky’s recently published Writings on Lenin, Dialectics and Evolutionism and evaluates Trotsky’s original contribution to the Marxist method




Even his most determined enemies grant that Leon Trotsky was a great revolutionary. His leadership of the Russian Revolution and the Red Army are acts which even the unholy alliance of right wing and Stalinist historians have been unable to erase in the 50 years since his death. Among academics, if not among revolutionaries, Trotsky’s status as a theoretician is less secure. That same alliance of conservatives and Russia worshippers who have failed to eradicate the facts of Trotsky’s life have been more successful in denying the intellectual contribution that he made to the Marxist tradition. It is an ironic tribute to Trotsky’s continuing political relevance that he remains, even more than Lenin, an outcast from the ivory towers.
Yet Trotsky was one of the great original thinkers of the Marxist tradition. The theory of permanent revolution predicted the course of the Russian Revolution 11 years before it broke out. His analysis of Germany foresaw the dangers of Nazism when many, on the left as well as the right, remained blind. His writings on art and literature gained respect even from the unlikely figures of F.R. Leavis and T.S. Eliot. Trotsky’s monumental History of the Russian Revolution moved historian A.L. Rowse to say ‘his gift is so brilliant and incisive that one is continually reminded of Carlyle’. [1]
But even among those who are willing to grant all this, Trotsky has never had much of a reputation as a pioneer of the Marxist method. In the post-war period Marx’s philosophy has become an object of almost obsessional study. The philosophy of both Lukacs and Gramsci have produced endless debate. Even Lenin’s Materialism and Empiriocriticism and his Philosophical Notebooks have received some attention. But Trotsky it was assumed, even by some of his admirers, had little to contribute in this field. [2] This was always unjust. The evidence of Trotsky’s fine dialectical method was obvious not just in his explicit statements from the 1920s and late 1930s but also from his theory of permanent revolution and his writings on history and art.
Now, however, we have new proof of Trotsky’s original contribution to the Marxist method. In 1986 Trotsky’s Notebooks, 1933–35, Writings on Lenin, Dialectics and Evolutionism were published for the first time. They not only place Trotsky very firmly in the ‘Hegelian’ Marxist tradition, they also develop that tradition in a way which equips it to meet many of the criticisms that are commonly thrown against it today. It has long been asserted, for instance, that Marxism is incapable of dealing with politics and ideology other than by reducing them to economics. Or else it is said Marxism, ‘Hegelian’ Marxism in particular, argues that the course of history is predetermined, developing according to immutable dialectical laws. Any attempt to argue that the dialectic applies to both nature and society is seen as proof that the blind laws of evolution are being indiscriminately applied to society with the inevitable result that human beings are denied any conscious choice about their fate. More recently, post-modernists have argued that any attempt to see the world as a totality where each aspect of reality is linked to the others, a key Marxist concept, is a form of intellectual tyranny and oppression which can only lead to the gulag.
Trotsky’s notebooks on dialectics and his other related writings provide more than a defence of the materialist conception of history. They provide an account of the Marxist method which resolutely refuses all crude reductionism and which articulates a dialectical method which is sophisticated enough to give proper weight to all the different political, ideological and philosophical elements within the totality – without lapsing into idealism.
Of course, the idea that any analysis must be mediated by the different, distinct levels of reality was present in Hegel’s account of the dialectic. But Hegel’s idealism, especially in his later years, robbed these levels of analysis of any real power, flattening out his own account of reality into a sterile dialectic formula. It is this interpretation of the dialectic with which Stalinism and the Marxism of the Second International had most in common. They too needed a fatalistic, closed form of the dialectic which justified the status quo. They too needed to iron out the volatility, the uniqueness and unevenness in the world that the dialectic was first developed to explain. Trotsky is a true inheritor of Marx and Engels’ materialist transformation of the Hegelian dialectic. His materialist analysis deals with real history unfolding in time and space, not just the timeless patterns of consciousness. It therefore needed to develop concepts which were either undeveloped or unknown in Hegel. Trotsky’s concepts of combined and uneven development, his notion of a ‘differentiated unity’ and his distinction between the form of the dialectic in nature and the dialectic in history are an important contribution to this task.
 
The structure of the dialectic
The dialectic ‘adds nothing to our understanding of Marxism and our ability to change the course of history’ and its laws are ‘useless pieces of theoretical baggage which simply serve to mystify.’ They are ‘the remnants of German nature philosophy’ which simply ‘substitutes metaphysical obscurities for genuine scientific analysis’. [3] These are increasingly common reactions, even among Marxists, to those who argue that the dialectic is an essential part of the classical Marxist tradition. In this tradition I include the work of Marx and Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg, Gramsci, the young Lukacs and Trotsky, all of whom adhered to the dialectic. Of these it fell to Trotsky to deal most directly with the kind of objections to the dialectic cited above.
Shortly before his death 50 years ago this summer Trotsky was taking part in a fight inside the American Socialist Workers Party. [4] The substance of the fight, the class nature of Russia, is explained elsewhere in this journal and does not directly concern us here. [5] Trotsky’s central opponent, James Burnham, like many in the SWP (US) at this time, was from the intelligentsia. In the mid 1930s many intellectuals had been drawn to the American Communist Party. They were horrified by the great slump and the rise of Nazism and inspired by the resistance of the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War. A minority of these were also puzzled by a Popular Front tactic which meant welcoming Roosevelt’s New Deal and disgusted by the Moscow Trials. Edmund Wilson, Sidney Hook, James T. Farrell and many others were briefly drawn by ‘the dramatic pathos of Trotsky’s struggle and to his eloquence and literary genius. Trotskyism became something of a vogue. [6]
Trotsky was always wary of this superficial popularity and, as the Second World War grew nearer, the arguments with his intellectual fellow travellers grew more intense. Isaac Deutscher catches something of the atmosphere:
Never yet had any cause looked as hopeless as Trotsky’s began to look to the professors, authors, and literary critics who were deserting him. They came to feel that by opting for Trotskyism they had needlessly involved themselves in the huge, remote, obscure and dangerous business of the Russian revolution; and that this was bringing them into confict with the way of life and the climate of ideas which prevailed in their universities, editorial offices, and literary coteries. It was one thing to lend one’s name to a Committee for the Defence of Leon Trotsky and to protest at the purges, but quite another to subscribe to the Manifestoes of the Fourth International and to echo Trotsky’s call for the conversion of the forthcoming world war into a global civil war. [7]
Under circumstances where a whole layer of intellectuals were breaking with their former attachment to Marxism it is not surprising that the dialectic, the Marxist method, should come into question.
In fact an early episode in this saga had already raised the question of the Hegelian influence in Marxism. Some left intellectuals had probed Trotsky about his role in supressing the Kronstadt rising, claiming that it showed the cynical immorality of Bolshevism’s doctrine that the end justifies the means. American philosopher John Dewey was one of those who traced this supposed failing to Marxism’s ‘Hegelian origins’. Trotsky’s response, Their Morals and Ours, was a masterpiece of polemical writing. It demonstrated with great dialectical verve that only certain means could achieve socialist goals. Lying, deceit and dishonesty could never ‘impart solidarity and unity to revolutionary workers’, consequently the Bolsheviks were the ‘most honest political party in the whole of history.’ [8]
In the subsequent months, as the debate moved from the historical question of Kronstadt to the current question of Russia, the issue of the dialectic became more central. Burnham attacked the dialectic again and again, using formulations almost identical to those used to attack it today. He found Engels writings on the dialectic ‘confused or outmoded by subsequent scientific investigation.’ Burnham saw Hegel as ‘the centurydead arch-muddler of human thought’ and insisted that:
Hegelian dialectics has nothing whatever to do with science. How the sciences have influenced the forms of thought no one will ever discover by spending even a lifetime on the tortuous syntax of the reactionary absolutist, Hegel. [9]
Burnham favoured modern science and empiricism which ‘are the monopoly of no man or group or class, but a common human possession.’ [10] In any case, he argued:
There is no sense at all in which dialectics (even if it were not, as it is, scientifically meaningless) is fundamental in politics, none at all. An opinion on dialectics is no more fundamental for politics than an opinion on non-Euclidean geometry or relativity physics. [11]
It therefore made no difference if:
every revolutionist believed in dialectics and everyone who was against the revolution disbelieved [because] this fact ... would not have the slightest relevance to the question of the truth, falsity, or scientific meaninglessness of dialectics. [12]
Trotsky’s reply to these arguments contains an excellent explanation of why the dialectic is an essential part of Marxism. Trotsky first sketches an account of why:
American ‘radical’ intellectuals accept Marxism without the dialectic (a clock without a spring) ... The secret is simple. In no other country has there been such a rejection of class struggle as in the land of ‘unlimited opportunity’. The denial of social contradictions as the moving force of development led to the denial of the dialectic as the logic of contradictions in the domain of theoretical thought. Just as in the sphere of politics it was thought possible everybody could be convinced of the correctness of a just’ programme by means of clever syllogisms and society could be reconstructed through ‘rational’ measures, so in the sphere of theory it was accepted that Aristolian logic, lowered to the level of ‘common sense’, was sufficient for the solving of all problems.
Pragmatism, a mixture of rationalism and empiricism, became a national philosophy in the United States. [13]
This historical circumstance was most damaging to the intelligentsia because, argued Trotsky, ‘the academically trained petty bourgeoisie[’s] ... theoretical prejudices have been given a finished form at the school bench.’ Academics assume that because they have ‘succeeded in gaining a great deal of knowledge both useful and useless without the aid of the dialectic they can continue excellently through life without it.’ But the test of great events always reveals that ‘in reality they dispense with the dialectic only to the extent that they fail to check, sharpen and theoretically polish their tools of thought.’ [14]
Trotsky replies to those who argue that questions of method are not important in reaching correct political conclusions:
What is the meaning of this thoroughly astonishing reasoning? Inasmuch as some people through a bad method sometimes reach correct conclusions, and inasmuch as some people through a correct method not infrequently reach incorrect conclusions, therefore ... the method is not of great importance ... Imagine how a worker would react upon complaining to his foreman that his tools were bad and receiving the reply: With bad tools it is possible to turn out a good job, and with good tools many people only waste material. I am afraid that such a worker, particularly if he is on piece-work, would respond to the foreman with an unacademic phrase. [15]
Trotsky then goes on to spell out the essence of the dialectic. He makes some elementary points that bear repetition since they are still not widely understood even among Marxists.
Firstly, Trotsky insists that the dialectic is not an alternative to ‘normal’ scientific methods or formal logic. These methods are perfectly valid within certain limits, just as Newtonian physics is perfectly adequate for many purposes. Formal logic, however, like Newtonian physics, has proved inadequate to deal with the ‘more complicated and drawn out processes.’ So the dialectic stands in the same relation to formal logic as Newtonian physics stands to relativity theory or, as Trotsky puts it, as ‘that between higher and lower mathematics.’ [16]
Secondly, Trotsky warns against seeing the dialectic as ‘a magic master key for all questions.’ The dialectic is not a pocket calculator or a mathematical formula into which it is possible to punch the problem and allow it to compute the solution. This would be an idealist method more akin to Hegel than Marx. A materialist dialectic must grow from a patient, empirical examination of the facts not be imposed on them. Although on occasion Trotsky defined the dialectic as a method of analysis, here he is pointing to a deeper truth. A dialectical method is only possible because reality itself is dialectically structured. It is from this material dialectic that the dialectical method must emerge and against this material dialectic that it must constantly check itself. For Trotsky the dialectic ‘does not replace concrete scientific analysis. But it directs this analysis along the correct road.’ [17]
Trotsky had already elaborated this point in his 1926 essay Culture and Socialism:
Dialectics cannot be imposed on the facts; it has to be deduced from facts, from their nature and development. Only painstaking work on a vast amount of material enabled Marx to advance the dialectical system of economics to the conception of value as social labour. Marx’s historical works were constructed in the same way, and even his newspaper articles likewise. Dialectical materialism can be applied to new spheres of knowledge only by mastering them from within. The purging of bourgeois science presupposes a mastery of bourgeois science. You will get nowhere with sweeping criticism or bald commands. Learning and application here go hand in hand with critical reworking. [18]
Trotsky saw that it was the inadequacies and contradictions of formal logic that drove theorists toward dialectical formulations. Even those who pride themselves on a ‘deductive method’ which proceeds ‘through a number of premises to the necessary conclusion’ frequently ‘break the chain of syllogisms and, under the influence of purely empirical considerations, arrive[s] at conclusions which have no connection with the previous logical chain.’ Such ad hoc empirical adjustments to the conclusions of formal logic betray a ‘primitive form of dialectical thinking.’ The only way to escape this ‘primitive’ combination of abstract logic and empiricism is to combine these elements ‘more fully, much better, on a much broader scale, and more systematically ... through dialectical thinking. [19]
The reason why formal logic is often forced to abandon its own procedures in the face of the facts is that it attempts to analyse a living, evolving reality with static concepts. Formally things are defined statically, according to certain fixed properties – colour, weight, size and so on. This is denoted by the expression ‘A is equal to A’. Trotsky, following Engels’ formulations, gives a ‘very concise sketch’ of the inadequacies of this way of looking at the world:
In reality ‘A’ is not equal to ‘A’. This is easy to prove if we observe these two letters under a lens-they are quite different to each other. But, one can object, the question is not the size or the form of the letters, since they are only symbols for equal quantities, for instance, a pound of sugar. The objection is beside the point; in reality a pound of sugar is never equal to a pound of sugar – a more delicate scale always discloses a difference. Again one can object: but a pound of sugar is equal to itself. Neither is this true – all bodies change uninterruptedly in size, weight, colour etc. They are never equal to themselves. [20]
It is not even true, Trotsky continues, that a pound of sugar is equal to itself ‘at a given moment in time’. Even in an infinitesimal moment of time the pound of sugar is undergoing microscopic changes – ‘existence itself is an uninterrupted process of transformation.’ At this point a word of warning is necessary. A criticism sometimes levelled at this kind of example is that it is trying to explain the changes taking place in the pound of sugar. This is obviously not the case. An explanation would have to proceed from the established properties of sugar and the surrounding air etc, to the laws governing the changes in these properties and their interaction. The example merely shows that, since the sugar is in the process of transformation, no static formal definition will even be adequate to formulate the question, never mind deliver the answer. And since we have to formulate the question dialectically, we are justified in hypothesising that the answer will be dialectical as well.
The doctrine that ‘A equals A’ is satisfactory only under conditions where the scale of change is not vital to our understanding – as when we buy a pound of sugar. But for more complex tasks in politics, history and science generally this will not do. Common sense and formal logic are agreed on static definitions of, for instance, ‘capitalism’, ‘freedom’ or ‘the state.’ Much of modern social science is obsessed precisely with this kind of classification and definition, the ‘motionless imprints of a reality that consists of eternal motion.’ But ‘dialectical thinking analyses all phenomena in their continuous change, while determining in the material conditions of those changes that critical limit beyond which "A ceases to be A".’ This method gives theory a ‘succulence’ which ‘brings it closer to the living phenomena. Not capitalism in general, but a given capitalism at a given stage of development.’ [21] Although he recognised that Hegel’s dialectic was only an ‘anticipation’ of scientific thought, Trotsky concludes this passage by saying:
Hegel in his Logic established a series of laws: change of quantity into quality, development through contradictions, conflict of content and form, interruption of continuity, change of possibility into inevitability, etc., which are just as important for theoretical thought as the simple syllogism for more elementary tasks. [22]
As we have already seen this brief outline of the dialectic, like Engels own account, met with sustained criticism. It is said to be an all-embracing determinism, predicting the inevitable unfolding of history according to spurious dialectical laws. The idea that the dialectic applies to the natural world as well as the social world, which Trotsky clearly believes, has been cited as evidence for this determinism. Nature develops blindly and unconsciously, it is argued, and so any dialectic which applies both to the natural world and the social world must end in denying conscious human agency any role in social change. Even Lukacs shared the view that the dialectic could not be applied to the natural world without running the risk of turning Marxism into determinism. For others Hegel himself was a determinist and this is evinced as further proof that the dialectic is an unscientific fatalism. In the last 30 years such accusations have been the common coin of idealists and empiricists alike, of structuralists, Althusserians, post-modernists and analytical Marxists.
Trotsky did not meet such criticisms at the time of the debate in the American SWP. He was mostly concerned with the substantive issue of the class nature of Russia and touched on dialectics only in outline. But some years earlier, in 1933–35, he did study Hegel while working on his biography of Lenin. In preparation for his study of Lenin’s Philosophical Notebooks, Trotsky studied Aristotle, Descartes and, especially, Hegel. The notebooks and the notes that he continued to make until the time of the debate in the SWP contain some of the most incisive thinking about the dialectic since Marx, albeit in fragmentary notes. They form a remarkable unity with his earlier comments on the dialectic in the 1920s and his polemical defence of the dialectic in the debate with Burnham. Many of the formulations bear directly on the objections now frequently raised against the dialectic. Since these notebooks have only been available in the last few years I shall deal with them in some detail.
Trotsky begins by making some important observations on the difference between the Hegelian and the Marxist dialectic. Hegel had insisted on the identity between men’s consciousness of the world and the real structure of the world itself, the identity of knowing and being. Hegel believed that the history of the world mirrored the unfolding of human consciousness. This is the root of his idealism. Marx refused to accept the dialectic in this form, although he understood that Hegel had struck an important blow against Kantian dualism by asserting that thought and reality were part of one whole and could not be separated into two distinct spheres. So how should a materialist theory interpret this relationship’’ Lenin, in an important aside in the Philosophical Notebooks, remarked that Marxists should prefer the formulation ‘the unity of knowing and being’ rather than the ‘identity of knowing and being.’ Trotsky elaborates this insight:
According to Hegel being and thinking are identical (absolute idealism). Materialism does not adopt this identity – it premises being to thought ...
The identity of being and thinking according to H[egel] signifies the identity of objective and subjective logic, their ultimate congruence. Materialism accepts the correspondence of the subjective and objective, their unity, but not their identity, in other words it does not liberate matter from its materiality, in order to keep only the logical framework of regularity, of which scientific thought (consciousness) is the expression. [23]
Hegel’s Logic is of course a massive example of a ‘logical framework’ constructed by ‘liberating matter from materiality.’ However this edifice can only be kept from collapsing by doing both enormous violence to the facts, so that they fit into the construction, and also by hammering the logical framework until it fits the facts. Trotsky is arguing that a materialist dialectic must both show how dialectical logic can only arise from a dialectical reality and that the relationship between thought and reality cannot be as rigid and constricted as it is in Hegel’s idealism. For Marxists the dialectic in history – the contradiction between the forces and relations of production, the clash of the class struggle – cannot have a structure identical to the intellectual process by which we come to understand history. The dialectical method involves analytically separating a chaotic social whole into its various constituent economic formations, classes, institutions, personalities and so on. It then involves showing how these factors interrelate and contradict each other as part of a totality. Such an intellectual operation gives us a finished picture of the dialectic in history, but it is not itself the same as that dialectic. Trotsky goes on to spell out some of the implications that this distinction involves:
What does logic express? The law of the external world or the law of consciousness? The question is posed dualistically, [and] therefore not correctly [for] the laws of logic express the laws (rules, methods) of consciousness in its active relationship to the external world. The relationship of consciousness to the external world is a relationship of the part (the particular, specialised) to the whole. [24]
Trotsky is allowing for interaction and contradiction to emerge between thought and reality in a way that was inadmissable for Hegel. Any materialist theory must develop a method capable of dealing with all history’s lapses, leaps, inconsistencies and unevenness. To meet this challenge the distinction between the Hegelian unity and the Marxist identity of thought and material reality is vital. Trotsky calls this kind of distinction a ‘differentiated unity’. Indeed, he uses this phrase to describe the term dialectical materialism itself. [25] Differentiated unity is a concept which Trotsky uses again and again to distinguish a dialectical materialist approach from a reductionist, deterministic approach. It is particularly useful when it come to the question of the dialectic in nature.
Trotsky realised that natural scientists were less directly affected by the class nature of the dominant ideology than social scientists. He based this belief on the fact that while the bourgeoisie no longer needs to transform the social structure and so no longer has need of a critical social science, as it did in its revolutionary years, it still does need to transform the natural world. The competition between different capitals, the drive to accumulate, mean that capitalism still needs to advance its ability to transform nature and to develop new technology. Of course the class nature of this process leaves its mark even on natural science-by compartmentalising areas of study and subordinating research to the needs of economic and military competition. And the more science attempts to generalise, the more it attempts to overcome this compartmentalisation and restriction, the more it has to confront philosophical issues. And the more it confronts these issues the more it is liable to fall victim to the ideological prejudices of the ruling class.
So, for nature to be fully understood, it had to be seen as a totality and in its full connection with society. Following Marx and Engels, Trotsky sees Darwin’s theory of evolution as an important breakthrough for a materialist understanding of history but argues that it is ‘less concrete, with less content, than the dialectical conception.’ This is partly because of Darwin’s refusal to generalise his findings. He remained a Christian and therefore ultimately compromised the importance of his own theory. But partly also Darwin did not have a conscious dialectical method which would have enabled him to refine his findings, seeing them in the broader framework. Such a framework would have made it easier to see that there is no impenetrable barrier between ‘nature’ and ‘human society’. Human beings’ battle for survival is, as Marx put it, the ‘everlasting, nature-imposed condition of human existence.’
Nature had to be seen dialectically, not just in its connection to society, but in itself as well. Trotsky, again following Marx, saw that human beings are part of the natural world and that any attempt to break this unity would result in dualism:
Dialectics is the logic of development. It examines the world-completely and without exception-not as the result of creation, of a sudden beginning, the realisation of a plan, but as a result of motion, of transformation. Everything that is became the way it is as a result of lawlike development.
... the organic world emerged from the inorganic, consciousness is a capacity of living organisms depending upon organs that originated through evolution. In other words ‘the soul’ of evolution (of dialectics) leads in the last analysis to matter. The evolutionary point of view carried to a logical conclusion leaves no room for either idealism or dualism, or for the other species of eclecticism. [26]
In other words, the alternative to seeing both history and nature as dialectical in structure is to assume that nature has a series of laws totally separate from those governing human society. The result is either to reduce nature to an unknowable realm (a Kantian thing-in-itself), or to abandon the theory of evolution because it assumes that humans did grow out of nature and are still part of nature.
Trotsky had already made some similar observations in his 1925 speech on Dialectical Materialism and Science. Here he argued that each of the sciences were bound in a totality. Psychology ‘in the final instance’ rests on physiology, which rests on chemistry, mechanics and physics. Without such an approach ‘there is not and cannot be a finished philosophy linking all phenomena into a single system.’ [27] In his notebooks on dialectics he put it even more strongly:
All evolution is a transition from quantity into quality ... Whoever denies the dialectical law of the transition from quantity into quality must deny the genetic unity of plants and animal species, the chemical elements, etc. He must, in the last analysis, turn back to the biblical act of creation. [28]
Such phrases inevitably raise the objection that Trotsky is reducing everything to matter, that he is importing the blind, deterministic laws of the natural sciences into Marxism and generally paving the way for a vulgar materialism in the manner of the Second International. Careful reading of Dialectical Materialism and Science alone should dispel these objections. For instance, Trotsky argues:
Human society has not developed in accordance with a pre-arranged plan or system, but empirically, in the course of a long, complicated and contradictory struggle of the human species for existence, and, later for greater and greater mastery over nature itself. The ideology of human society took shape as a reflection of and an instrument in this process-belated, desultory, piecemeal, in the form, so to speak, of conditioned reflexes, which are in the final analysis reducible to the necessities of the struggle of collective man against nature. [29]
Without losing sight of its material base, Trotsky spells out that human ideology is not simply a ‘reflection’ of the historical process but also ‘an instrument in this process,’ and so cannot be pre-determined. Elsewhere in the same speech he uses the idea of a ‘differentiated unity’ in his analysis of the sciences. We have seen that he argues that psychology rests on physiology which rests on chemistry and so on. But he goes on to say that ‘chemistry is no substitute for physiology.’ In fact, ‘Chemistry has its own keys’ which must be studied separately using ‘a special approach, special research technique, special hypotheses and methods.’ Trotsky concludes, ‘each science rests on the laws of the other sciences only in the so-called final instance.’ [30]

This understanding prevents Trotsky from crudely applying natural laws to society. He warns that it is a ‘fundamental mistake’ when ‘the methods and achievements of chemistry or physiology, in violation of all scientific boundaries, are transplanted to human society.’ It is true, says Trotsky, that ‘human society is surrounded on all sides by chemical processes’. Nevertheless, ‘public life is neither a chemical nor a psychological process, but a social process which is shaped by its own laws. [31]
But what of the dialectic itself? It is one thing to say that the laws of natural science cannot be automatically transferred to the analysis of society, but where does this leave the claim that the writ of the dialectic runs in both the natural and the social world? Trotsky has a startlingly original approach to these questions in his notebooks on dialectics. He continues to insist that human beings are part of nature, that the conscious grew out of the unconscious. ‘Our human reason is nature’s youngest child’ he argues. But the development of this consciousness marks a new historical phase which cannot simply be analysed using the tools that are adequate for objective nature:
Dialectical cognition is not identical with the dialectic of nature. Consciousness is a quite original part of nature, possessing peculiarities and regularities that are completely absent in the remaining part of nature. Subjective dialectics must by virtue of this be a distinctive part of objective dialectics – with its own special forms and regularities. [32]
Trotsky then goes on to argue, in an aside levelled at Hegel’s attempt to transfer the dialectic of consciousness onto the dialectic of nature, that ‘the danger lies in the transference-under the guise of “objectivism” – of the birth pangs, the spasm of consciousness, to objective nature.’ Actually, since Hegel, few have tried to claim that nature reproduces the patterns of human consciousness. The main danger, at least within the socialist movement, has been the opposite. It was a feature of both Stalinism and the Marxism of the Second International that they tried to reduce the dialectic to a series of positive laws which rigidly determined the course of history. Trotsky’s differentiation between the form of the dialectic appropriate in nature and that adequate for the study of society both preserves the unity of the dialectic (thus avoiding dualism) and also prevents a deterministic interpretation of Marxism. Trotsky sums up the relationship between theory and practice in words which strongly recall Marx’s use of the term ‘practical-critical activity’:
The dialectic of consciousness (cognition) is not thereby a reflection of the dialectic of nature, but is a result of the lively interaction between consciousness and nature and – in addition – a method of cognition, issuing from this interaction. [33]
For Marx ‘practical-critical activity’, or practice, meant the unique capability of human beings to consciously alter the material world which determines their existence – a capacity summarised in the famous epigram, ‘Men make their own history, but not in conditions of their own choosing.’ Trotsky points to the same dialectical combination of subjective and objective factors in human action when he says that the ‘attempt to set up a hostile opposition’ between determinism, ‘the philosophy of objective causality’, and teleology, ‘the philosophy of subjective purposes’, is ‘a product of philosophical ignorance.’ [34]
Such distinctions between the dialectic in nature and that in history inevitably mean a transformation of some key dialectical concepts. Trotsky, for instance, puts great stress on one particular dialectical lawthe transition from quantity into quality. This emphasis differs from that given in many accounts of the dialectic which stress the negation of the negation. A distorted account of the negation of the negation can be used to accuse Marxism of determinism. Crudely, the argument runs that the contradiction between capitalism and its antithesis, the working class, must inevitably be resolved in a synthesis, a socialist society in which classes disappear. The negation is negated. The Marxists of the classical Marxist tradition have long argued that the resolution of such contradictions is not automatic, but a question that can only be resolved in struggle. Marx and those who followed him have insisted only that the struggle between the classes is inevitable, but not its outcome. Marx argued, in the Communist Manifesto, that the outcome of the struggle might either be socialism or ‘the common ruin of the contending classes’, Luxemburg stressed that ‘socialism or barbarism’ was the choice facing humanity while Lenin insisted that ‘the capitalists can always solve the crisis so long as the working class is prepared to pay the price.’ So far this century the price has proved very high: two world wars, fascism, Stalinism, famine, mass unemployment and the permanent threat of nuclear annihilation.
Trotsky’s interpretation of the dialectic is wholly in this spirit. He says that the dialectic gives us the ‘forms of the transformation of one regime into another’ but then continues:
... in such a general fore: it is only a matter of possibility ... Thus, from the possibility of a bourgeois victory over the feudal classes until the victory itself there were various time lapses, and the victory itself frequently looked like a semi-victory.
In order for the possibility to become a necessity there had to be a corresponding strengthening of some factors and the weakening of others, a definite relationship between these strengthenings and weakenings. In other words: it was necessary for several quantative changes to prepare the way for a new constellation of forces. [35]
Trotsky is so committed to viewing the dialectic in history as tendency not a deterministic law that he defines the negation of the negation, or triad (the thesis negated by the antithesis in turn negated by the synthesis), as ‘the “mechanism” of the transformation of quantity into quality.’
Trotsky expresses his understanding of the dialectic particularly sharply in the notebooks, but he had been using the method for much longer. His analysis of the role of the individual in history shows just how brilliantly he wielded the Marxist method.
 
The individual in history
To account for the role of the individual in history is a serious test for any materialist theory of history. Today, when so much that passes for social theory – including important post-modernists, feminists and analytical Marxists – insists on the irreducible nature of individual experience, it is more important than ever that Marxists approach this problem correctly.
Trotsky gives a marvellous account of the formation of individuality in his Literature and Revolution:
the truth is that even if individuality is unique, it does not mean that it cannot be analysed. Individuality is a welding together of tribal, national, class, temporary and institutional elements and, in fact, it is in the uniqueness of this welding together, in the proportions of this psychochemical mixture, that individuality is expressed. [36]
In the History of the Russian Revolution Trotsky expressed a similar thought: ‘The “distinguishing traits” of a person are merely individual scratches made by a higher law of development.’
Trotsky argues that it is only because each of us is a unique fusion of elements that are common that we can understand individual works of art. The work of art combines forces that are at work on all of us, but it does so in a unique way determined by each particular artist:
So it can be seen that what forms a bridge from soul to soul is not the unique, but the common. Only through the common is the unique known; the common is determined in man by the most persistent conditions which make up his ‘soul’, by the social conditions of education, of existence, of work, and of associations. [37]
This is why ‘a class standard is so fruitful in all fields of ideology.’ But, as should now be obvious, he did not mean that each individual could therefore be reduced to a simple stereotypical example of their class. He wrote:
We do not at all pretend to deny the significance of the personal in the mechanics of historic process, nor the significance in the personal of the accidental. We only demand that a historic personality, with all its pecularities, should not be taken as a bare list of psychological traits, but as the living reality grown out of definite social conditions and reacting on them. As a rose does not lose its fragrance because the natural scientist points out upon what ingredients of soil and atmosphere it is nourished, so an exposure of the social roots of a personality does not remove from it either its aroma or its foul smell. [38]
Of course it is one thing to be able to develop a general formula with which to understand the problem of individuality, it is quite another, more difficult, problem to make it render an account of the specific role of particular individuals. Trotsky is the author of one such study: Lenin’s role in the Russian Revolution.
Trotsky examines Lenin’s role in April 1917, when the Bolsheviks were failing to challenge the Provisional government. Would the Bolsheviks have re-oriented themselves and begun the fight for a second, socialist revolution without Lenin? Trotsky’s argument is that they probably would have done, but not in time since:
the war and the revolution would not allow the party a long period for fulfilling its mission. Thus it is by no means excluded that a disoriented and split party might have let the revolutionary opportunity slip for many years. [39]
It was Lenin’s ‘personal influence’ which ‘shortened the crisis.’ Here, says Trotsky, ‘the role of the personality arises before us on a truly gigantic scale’ but we should have no difficulty accepting this since ‘dialectical materialism ... has nothing in common with fatalism.’ [40]
Trotsky’s account is hotly contested by Isaac Deutscher in The Prophet Outcast. Deutscher’s reaction is to claim that this analysis is one of Trotsky’s ‘least successful’. Deutscher accuses Trotsky of a ‘subjectivism’ which ‘goes strongly against the grain of the Marxist intellectual tradition.’ [41] In opposition to Trotsky Deutscher champions ‘Plekhanov’s essay The Role of the Individual in History’. Deutscher paraphrases Plekhanov in insisting, ‘the leader is merely the organ of an historic need or necessity, and that necessity creates its organ when it needs it. No great man is therefore “irreplacable”.’ And he quotes Plekhanov favourably when he says that if Robespierre had been killed in January 1793:
his place would, of course, have been taken by someone else; and although that other person might have been inferior to him in every respect, events would have nevertheless taken the same course. [42]
On this analysis ‘History’s’ carelessness in not replacing Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht in 1919 is inexplicable. But, not troubled by such details, Deutscher ploughs on, descending from the ridiculous to the idiotic:
Have not in our time the Chinese and the Yugoslav revolutions triumphed ... under leaders of smaller, even much smaller, stature? In each case the revolutionary trend found or created its organs in such human material as was available. [43]
Deutscher has obviously lost sight of the fact that Mao and Tito were not representatives of the working class, did not head revolutionary parties and were not leaders of working class revolutions. It is, therefore, hardly surprising to find that in these examples the role of the working class has been filled by a ‘revolutionary trend’ which is ‘creating’ what it requires without human intervention.
If we return to Trotsky’s analysis of Lenin’s role in the Russian Revolution we can see that rather than tearing the question of leadership free of its historical context, as both Deutscher and Plekhanov do, he roots it firmly in that context.
Trotsky insists that ‘Lenin was not a demiurge of the revolutionary process’, he ‘merely entered into a chain of objective historic forces.’ Lenin did not ‘oppose the party from the outside, but was himself its most complete expression. In educating it he had educated himself.’ Lenin guided the Bolsheviks, not because he was a solitary hero but because he had been created by the Bolshevik party. The endless struggle to build the party, the streams of letters stretching back over decades from Lenin to the workers and party members and from them to Lenin, the articles and speeches both given by Lenin and given by others to which Lenin had listened, these were what had formed Lenin. As Trotsky says:
Lenin was not an accidental element in the historic development, but a product of the whole of Russian history. He was embedded in it with the deepest roots. Along with the vanguard of the workers, he had lived through their struggle in the course of the preceeding quarter century. [44]
It was precisely what Lenin had in common with his party which made him able to speak with it, from ‘soul to soul’, thoughout 1917. His uniqueness was that he expressed this common tradition more accurately, more completely than his opponents. Trotsky spells this out most clearly in the notebooks on dialectics:
Lenin, at times, erred not only in minor but in major issues ... A whole row of persons can, with every justification, point to their correctness and Lenin’s errors in given, sometimes very important, issues. The group Bor’ba [The Struggle] was correct in its criticism of Lenin’s first agrarian programme ...; Plekhanov was right in his criticism of Lenin’s theory of socialism ‘from the outside’; the author of these lines was correct in his general prognosis of the character of the Russian Revolution. But in the struggle of tendencies, groups, persons, by far no one was able to yield an account with a credit like Lenin’s. In this lay the secret of his influence, his strength and ... not in a fraudulent infallibility, of the sort portrayed in the historiography of the epigones. [45]
This fact would have been more obvious, and Lenin’s individuality less striking, had it not been for the exceptional circumstance that he was a revolutionary leader returning from exile. This physical separation made for an easy, impressionistic counterposition of the ‘hero’ and the ‘mass’. Had Lenin not been in exile the ‘inner continuity of the party’s development’ would have been more readily discernible. [46]
From this account two things are clear. Firstly, such a leader forged by an organisation during decades of theoretical work and practical struggle cannot be simply ‘replaced’ on the eve of revolution by the ‘forces of history’. Secondly, the uniqueness of such a leader lies only in his or her ability to summarise the common experience of those with whom they have built such an organisation and the facility with which they bend that common tradition to meet new tasks. Without a revolutionary organisation they would have neither the means to understand the struggle, nor the capacity to direct it.
Any collective working class organisation, whether a revolutionary party, a trade union or even a reformist party, gives something of this power to change history to its members and its leaders. But how much power they have and whether they use it effectively depends on many things – the size of the organisation, its politics, its history, the economic situation in which it operates, the strength and organisation of the ruling class and so on.
When most social theorists examine the situation of the individual, however, they do not look at this collective context. Many of the difficult issues with which some socialists and feminists have become most concerned in recent years – rape, pornography, child abuse – are situations in which the individuals themselves are most cruelly separated from any collective power. To argue that such individuals, whether they are the victim or the perpetrator, exercise a choice in their individual destiny in the same way that the individual members and leaders of great social movements exercise power over their collective fate is wrong.
What gave Lenin or Cromwell or Robespierre the ability to make an individual contribution to history was the great power of the movements from which they rose. What crushes even the smallest element of real choice out of the lives of isolated individuals is their total separation from any such movement and their utter dependence, both economically and ideologically, on a system which is entirely hostile to their needs and aspirations. The more isolated and powerless the individual and the more brutal the circumstances he confronts the less chance he has of influencing his fate. As Trotsky put it:
To a tickle, people react differently, but to a red hot iron, alike. As a steamhammer converts a sphere and cube alike into sheet metal, so under the blow of too great and inexorable events resistances are smashed and the boundaries of ‘individuality’ are lost. [47]
 
The dialectic of permanent revolution
The theory of permanent revolution marked a important break with the determinism of the Second International. Later it became the cornerstone of Trotsky’s fight against Stalin’s fatalistic theory of ‘socialism in one country’. In both cases Trotsky argued that for a backward country to be ripe for socialist revolution it did not have to go through all the stages of capitalist development which characterised the advanced capitalist powers. Trotsky’s theory, the law of combined and uneven development, stressed that any analysis of the revolutionary potentiality of backward countries must start from the totality of capitalist development on a world scale. Here it was clear the material conditions for a socialist society existed, even if they did not exist in each part of the world system taken in isolation. But if a revolution was to be successful in a backward country then it must spread to other parts of the system and so tap their material wealth. Thus seeing the interconnectedness of the different parts of the totality was also key to Trotsky’s analysis. And to realise this potential the working class would have to consciously battle for the leadership of the revolution.
Even from this thumbnail sketch it is clear that Trotsky’s theory was a brilliant application of the dialectical method to new historical circumstances. He did not simply impose an abstract dialectical scheme on recalcitrant facts. From empirical research he built up a picture of the totality of class relations and formulated the law of combined and uneven development to trace the relationship between the different parts of that totality. It is a picture accurately described by the phrase that he later used in the notebooks on dialectic -differentiated unity. In answer to the Stalinists who accused him of ‘skipping over historical stages’ he spelt out this conception:
It is nonsense to say that stages cannot in general be skipped. The living historical process always leaps over isolated ‘stages’ which derive from theoretical breakdown into its component parts of the process of development in its entirety, that is, taken in its fullest scope ... It may be said that the first distinction between a revolutionist and a vulgar evolutionist lies in the capacity to recognise and exploit such moments. [48]
Trotsky gave equally short shrift to his opponents talk of historical inevitability:
One stage or another of the historical process can prove to be inevitable under certain conditions, although theoretically not inevitable. And conversely, theoretically ‘inevitable’ stages can be compressed to zero by the dynamics of development, especially during revolutions. [49]
Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution is a brilliant example of applied dialectics. It contains in a concrete analysis all the propositions that he later formulated as general principles in his writings on the dialectic.
We find the same principles at work when we look at Trotsky’s writing on art. Here he ties culture to its material roots, insists that the ‘class criteria’ is vital in art, but also argues that art must be ‘judged according to its own laws’. This sounds like a contradiction until we understand it as another example of a ‘differentiated unity’.
In Literature and Revolution Trotsky once again shows that neither idealism nor vulgar materialism are sufficient to analyse the role of art. Art, he argues, is neither a mirror which simply reflects society, nor a hammer which can shape society according to its own desires.
Trotsky dismisses ‘pre-October art’ which simply hankers nostalgically after the days of the Tsar. But he is far from uncritical of the Futurists and the practitioners of proletcult. He says that the Futurists call to break with the art of the past only ‘has a meaning insofar as the Futurists are busy cutting the cord which binds them to the priests of bourgeois literary tradition’. But for the working class this call means nothing since ‘the working class does not have to, and cannot break with literary tradition because the working class is not in the grip of such a tradition.’ [50]
Trotsky’s argument is that the working class must master the old culture as well as forge the new. In the course of this they will both create new artistic forms and revitalise old forms. This attitude is based on an appraisal of the development of culture as a whole, seeing both its continuity and discontinuity with the pre-revolutionary society. It is an attitude which stresses that a transformation of art can only be based on an understanding of the relationship between revolution and art which neither passively accepts art as an independent realm, nor reduces art to an immediate expression of society’s needs, to the level of propaganda:
One cannot turn the concept of culture into the small change of the individual daily living and determine the success of a class culture by the proletarian passports of individual inventors or poets. Culture is the organic sum of knowledge which characterises the entire society, or at least its ruling class. It embraces and penetrates all fields of human work and unifies them into a system. Individual achievements rise above this level and elevate it gradually. [51]
Individual artists can help remake culture, but not in isolation and not in conditions of their own choosing.
 
Conclusion
Trotsky’s philosophical writings are often short and their meaning compressed. Indeed some were notes not intended for publication. Perhaps their full significance is only clear against the background of the tradition of dialectical thought which began with Hegel and which passes down through the writing of Marx and Engels, Lenin, Lukacs and Gramsci. Trotsky obviously thought this was the case since his writings are partly a comment on Hegel’s writings and partly a preparation for studying Lenin’s Philosophical Notebooks. This is certainly the light in which I have interpreted Trotsky’s views. In this conclusion I simply want to spell out the positions to which I think this tradition commits us.
Firstly, it binds us to a view of the natural and social world as a single totality developing over time as a result of its internal contradictions. Any other position reduces the natural world to an unknowable realm, separate from society and developing according to alien principles. Moreover, since the social world grows out of the natural world (and is still shaped by constant interaction with it) there is every reason to believe that if one has a dialectical structure so will the other.
The reason why natural science seems to have less need of a dialectical method than the social sciences is because the compartmentalised and instrumental nature of much scientific research is sufficient for the purposes of the capitalist class. Nevertheless this scientific work, real though its fruits are, is necessarily limited in achievement and in method. The ends of science are pre-determined by the bourgeois nature of society and this closes off much discussion about the overall structure of the natural world and the purposes of science. The moment scientific research pushes beyond these boundaries – whether it be in the area of evolution, relativity, or in chaos theory or in the theories, like those of Stephen Hawking, that deal with the nature of the universe – questions of dialectics often arise. In many cases (Darwin is the example which Trotsky cites) these natural scientists develop quasi-dialectical theories. This is an indication both that the reality they study has a dialectical form of development and that they would find a dialectical framework the most useful in such study. This, of course, is an argument that can only be decisively proved by a detailed analysis of modern science. I have neither the opportunity nor the knowledge to undertake such an analysis here.
Nevertheless, there are a number of general reasons for supposing that nature is dialectical. We can clearly say that nature is an interconnected system which developed for millions of years before human beings walked the earth. It continues to develop now and would do so whether or not humans laboured upon it. It therefore has an internal dynamic. We can also confidently claim that nature did not develop randomly, but according to certain rationally comprehensible principles. Neither did it develop smoothly and evenly. It evolved through great transformations which, although prepared by small molecular changes, once they occurred, were to leave the world qualitatively and fundamentally different from what went before. Trotsky points to the development of human consciousness as one such moment of transformation.
Secondly, this view lays the basis for an argument which avoids the accusation that any conception of the dialectic which embraces both nature and society must run the danger of importing the objective laws of natural development into the social sphere, thus reducing Marxism to a determinism. Previously this has seemed, to me at least, a real difficulty for Marxism. Trotsky’s notebooks provide a solution to this problem. Trotsky’s point is not just that the ‘conscious rose out of the unconscious’ and thereby opened a qualitively new phase in history. He also argues that the structure of the dialectic in society is different to that in nature – the former must take account of the development of consciousness in a way that the later need not. The dialectic cannot remain some immutable substratum on top of which everything else changes but which is itself immune to change. The dialectic itself is transformed as the natural world and the social world develop. This is a fundamental feature of a materialist dialectic which is wholly missing from Hegel. Hegel dealt only with the timeless patterns of thought and therefore had no need of an articulated dialectic capable of moulding its form to meet the contours of the material world from which it rises.
In this view nature and society are ‘a unity’, but they are not identical. They are a ‘differentiated unity’ in which each particular sphere is still connected to every other, but in which each sphere also produces its own special processes, laws and so on. Trotsky had long used a similar distinction in his theoretical work. It was, I have tried to show, a guiding principle in his theory of permanent revolution, in his historical writing and in his analysis of art. Trotsky’s conception of ‘differentiated unity’, a philosophical equivalent of combined and uneven development, is an original formulation.
This is a Marxist analysis which stands in no need of being refined by notions such as ‘relative autonomy’, does not require that we relapse into dualism for the sake of maintaining that conscious human action plays a role in changing society and does not demand that we fall into idealism in order to explain the role of the individual in history.
It is, however, a method which needs defending. Many socialists in the advanced capitalist economies have experienced ten years or more where the genuine Marxist tradition has been in retreat. As Trotsky noted, ‘reactionary periods ... naturally become epochs of cheap evolutionism’ and, he might of added, of its dialectical opposite, rampant idealism. We have had plenty of both. Now it looks, in Britain at least, as if that period may be coming to an end. There could be no better time to reassert the genuine Marxist tradition and no better example than Trotsky’s writings.

Notes
My thanks to Duncan Blackie, Alex Callinicos, Sue Clegg, Tony Cliff, Lindsey German, Chris Harman and John Molyneux for their comments on the first draft.
1. Quoted in I Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast (OUP, 1963), p. 220.
2. See, for instance, John Molyneux’s Leon Trotsky’s Theory of Revolution (Harvester, 1981).
3. The first two phrases are Malcolm Povey’s, the second two Paul Jakubovic’s in, respectively, Socialist Worker Review, May and June 1988. Paul and Malcolm are far from alone in holding these views, as debates over the years at Marxism – the annual summer school organised by the SWP – have proved, they are merely unfortunate in having committed them to paper.
4. The American Socialist Workers Party, which has now abandoned Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution in favour of hero-worshipping Castro, was in the 1930s one of the more promising sections of Trotsky’s Fourth International.
5. See Steve Wright’s article on Hal Draper, particularly the appendix and for a wider perspective see Chris Harman’s From Trotsky to state capitalism, both in this journal [International Socialism 2 : 47].
6. I Deutscher, op. cit., p. 430.
7. Ibid., pp. 442–443.
8. Ibid., pp. 436–443.
9. J. Burnham, Science and Style, reproduced in L. Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism (New York 1973), pp. 190–191.
10. Ibid., p. 198.
11. Ibid., p. 196.
12. Ibid., p. 192.
13. L. Trotsky, ibid., pp. 43–44.
14. Ibid., p. 45.
15. Ibid. pp. 44–45. Although, of course. Trotsky realised that it would be ‘lifeless pedantry’ to demand that ‘every party member occupy himself with the philosophy  of dialectics.’
16. Ibid. p. 49.
17. Ibid., p. 52.
18. See L. Trotsky, Problems of Everyday Life (New York 1973), p. 233.
19. Dialectics and the Immutability of the Syllogism, in Writings of Leon Trotsky 1939–40 (New York 1973), pp. 400–401.
20. In Defence of Marxism, op. cit., p. 49.
21. Ibid. p. 50.
22. Ibid., p. 51.
23. Trotsky’s Notebooks 1933–35: Writings on Lenin, Dialectics and Evolutionism, translated by P. Pomper (New York 1986), p. 77.
24. Ibid., p. 87.
25. Ibid., p. 97.
26. Ibid., pp. 96–97.
27. L. Trotsky, Dialectical Materialism and Science, in Problems of Everyday Life, (New York 1973), pp. 212–214.
28. Notebooks ..., op. cit., p. 113.
29. Dialectical Materialism and Science, op. cit., p. 215.
30. Ibid., p. 214.
31. Ibid., p. 216.
32. Notebooks ..., op. cit., p. 102.
33. Ibid., pp. 101–102.
34. Ibid., p. 113.
35. Ibid., p. 90.
36. L. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (New York), pp. 59–60.
37. Ibid., p. 60.
38. L. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, quoted in G. Novack, Polemics in Marxist Philosophy (New York, 1978), pp. 281–282.
39. L. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution (London, 1977), p. 343.
40. Ibid.
41. I. Deutscher, op. cit., pp. 241, 242, 251.
42. Ibid., p. 243.
43. Ibid., pp. 245–246.
44. History ..., op. cit., p. 344.
45. Notebooks ..., op. cit., p. 84.
46. History ..., op. cit., p. 344.
47. L. Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, quoted in G. Novack, op. cit., p. 287. Trotsky is primarily talking of how great revolutions impel individuals of the same class location to behave in similar ways. But the analogy holds good for the purposes to which I am putting it here because the ‘normal’ oppressive relations of society hit the isolated individual with all the steam-hammer force that great revolutions hit whole classes. In both cases the force of circumstance mostly outweighs individual peculiarities. The difference between a revolutionary situation and the normal functioning of exploitation and oppression is that in the former workers through their collective power can alter their individual circumstance by altering their collective circumstances.
48. L. Trotsky, The Permanent Revolution (New York 1969), p. 240.
49. Ibid., p. 241.
50. Literature and Revolution, op. cit., p. 130.
51. Ibid., p. 200.
 



The bombing of Afghanistan in October 2001 marked the beginning of the third major war in a decade. The first of these conflicts, the Gulf War of 1991, left 100,000 Iraqi conscripts and civilians dead. The second, the Balkan conflict of 1999, brought war involving the great powers to mainland Europe for the first time since 1945. But the most recent conflict is the most threatening because it is truly global in its consequences. Afghanistan is an impoverished country a little smaller than the state of Texas with little industry, minuscule armed forces and no central government. But, once it became the object of an armed imperial crusade, it stands at the centre of a widening circle of instability.
Two of Afghanistan’s bordering states, Pakistan and India, are nuclear powers. Since the bombing of Afghanistan began their dispute over Kashmir has once again resulted in armed clashes. The Saudi ruling elite, the largest single recipient of US foreign aid, is distancing itself from its paymasters in fear of revolt from below. Israel has taken its war against the Palestinians to unprecedented lengths, threatening a general conflict in the Middle East. Such a conflict will become almost inevitable if US government hardliners get their way and the war widens to include a renewed attack on Iraq.
The 1990s saw a new peak for the last century in the annual number of wars – 34 in 1992. And in 1994 we saw the highest number of war-related deaths since 1971. Regional and civil wars in Iraq, Somalia, the Balkans, Rwanda, Liberia, Turkey, Chechnya, Angola and Algeria have produced these records and increased the number of refugees by 50 percent during the last ten years. [1] But if we want to understand why our world has become so much more unstable and violent we must examine the longer term economic and political processes that culminated in the wars of the last decade.
 
Globalisation
The huge extension of international trade, finance and production by multinational corporations is at the core of most people’s understanding of the term ‘globalisation’. And this meaning does indeed capture an important part of what has been happening to the world economy. But it is worth being more precise about the different pace of development in each of these three areas.
Capitalism has always been an international trading system, and as the system has grown the volume and extent of trade have grown with it. International trade tripled between 1870 and 1913, as Europe and America industrialised. The slump and protectionism in the inter-war period curtailed international trade, but US arms spending and its hegemony of the post Second World War global economy led to renewed growth. The value of world exports grew from $315 billion in 1950 to $3,447 billion in 1990. And post-war trade has been much more a trade in manufactured goods, and much more between industrialised nations, than the earlier period of exchange of manufactured goods from industrialised countries for the raw materials of less developed, peripheral economies. [2]
The growth in international financial transactions has been even more spectacular. The ratio of foreign exchange transactions to world trade was nine to one in 1973. By 1992 it had risen to 90 to one. International bank lending has also grown dramatically. As a proportion of world trade it was 7.8 percent in 1965, but by 1991 it had risen to 104.6 percent. There has also been a massive growth in the market for government debt. This has led to a huge expansion of government bonds held in the hands of ‘foreigners’. [3]
International production has been slower to develop than international trade and finance. Much of what is commonly thought to be new about globalisation refers to this process of creating international networks of production by means of foreign direct investment (FDI). The stock of FDI in the world economy increased from $68 billion in 1960 to $1,948 billion in 1992. This marked a percentage increase of FDI in world production from 4.4 percent to 8.4 percent over the same period. But over 90 percent of FDI is concentrated in ten developed countries, and about 66 percent originates in the US, Germany, Britain and Japan. [4]
This international extension of the capitalist system has undoubtedly enhanced the power of major multinational corporations. On one estimate, the top 300 transnational corporations account for 70 percent of FDI and 25 percent of the world’s capital. The sales of the largest 350 corporations account for one third of the combined gross national product of the advanced capitalist countries. [5] But we should be careful in attributing all the enhanced powers of these corporations to the growth of the world market, as the more economistic accounts of globalisation tend to suggest. There have been some crucial ‘political magnifiers’ that have enhanced the impression of an unstoppable growth in the power of multinational corporations.
The great cycle of defeats for the working class which began in the mid-1970s are at least as important in explaining the growing power of big business in the last 25 years. These defeats were central in undermining the welfare state consensus that had prevailed among governing elites since the 1950s. This in turn paved the way for the neo-liberal economic orthodoxy that has done so much to facilitate and legitimise globalisation. In particular this process helped transform the notion of the state from one in which government acted as a balance and corrective to market forces into an ideology of government as the handmaiden and advocate of big business. The reality was, of course, that the state remained the closest ally of big business.
And without the fall of the Berlin Wall and the advance of Western-style capitalism in Russia and Eastern Europe, the ideology of globalisation simply would not have had the purchase that it achieved in the last ten years. After all, what would globalisation be if half the industrial world had still been beyond its reach? But the Berlin Wall did fall, and the economies of Eastern Europe suffered the full force of the gale of ‘creative destruction’. The triumph of the market was shortlived, its consequences hard felt, and the instability it brought a major factor in the drive to war.
This is why it is important to record the failure of globalisation. The spread of neo-liberal doctrines and the deregulation they promote has led to disastrous economic consequences for much of the globe. The World Bank’s figures on poverty give us one important indicator:
These figures, rapidly becoming the most quoted economic figures in the world, show that about one quarter of the world’s population is below the lower poverty line ($1 a day) and about half below the upper poverty line ($2). The percentages have declined very slowly in the two poorest regions, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, and quite sharply in China and other parts of East Asia, but they have risen sharply in the countries of the former Soviet Union. Over the ten years covered by these estimates the total number of poor people in the world...has either stayed about the same or risen. [6]
These figures do not cover the period in which the South East Asian economies collapsed after the 1997 crash. And neither do they tell us about the growing inequality between rich and poor even in those societies, like China, where industrialisation is lifting the general standard of living. The cumulative effect of this process is to create economic turmoil, social dislocation and political conflict. And in this soil the seeds of war are sown.
 
The state and globalisation
The role of the state has certainly been significantly altered by globalisation, but it has not been weakened. Even in the area of direct government ‘interference’ in the economy, the devil supposedly banished by the Reagan-Thatcher years, the facts are at variance with the ideology. From the Savings and Loans rescue by the American Federal Reserve during the last recession to the handouts given to the ailing airline industry in the current recession, there is a lot more ‘Keynesianism’ around than the free market boosters would like to admit.
Neither have the international and domestic police functions of the state been at all diminished by the growth in international production. To give only one pertinent domestic example, the growth of international production has created, as it must, an international working class and therefore a global labour market. This in turn creates an international migration of labour, just as early industrialisation sucked labour from the land into the mill towns, northern cities and metropolis of 19th century Britain. The attempt to control this process to its own advantage has enormously increased the police powers of the state over immigration and asylum issues.
Internationally the state remains indispensable in underpinning the activities of multinationals. There are no proposals, even from the most hysterical free marketeers, to return to the infancy of the capitalist system, when corporations like the East India Company would employ their own troops. Armed action or the threat of armed action by the state remains the last resort for every capitalist corporation whose markets or production facilities are endangered by international rivals, be they states, other corporations or restive foreign populations unconvinced of the virtues of the free market.
This economic and military relationship with the state is one hallmark of capitalism in the 20th century. And although the fall of the Stalinist states and the privatisation policies of many governments give the impression that this relationship has weakened, this is in fact not the case. It has long been understood, for instance, that the US arms industry’s private firms are utterly dependent on the state underwriting their existence.
These, then, are the senses in which the role of the state remains consistent with its past. But globalisation has also set in train some contradictory trends. Crucially, globalisation has accelerated the trend for states to attempt to control the development of the system through international and intergovernmental organisations. The World Trade Organisation, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank are all US-led institutions designed to shape the global economy. The European Union seeks to make European capital an effective competitor in the world market. And NATO has long been the security arm of Western capital. These and a host of other similar bodies mostly predate the current phase of globalisation, but they have gained renewed prominence because of the growth of the system. None of the institutions can override the authority of the nation-states that compose them. They are as much the site of conflict and paralysis as they are the embryo of ‘international government’, but they do mark an attempt, particularly by the major states, to co-ordinate a response to the unruly powers unleashed by the growth of market forces. This then is the supranational trend enhanced by globalisation.
In reaction to this process a renewed nationalism is also being fuelled. This can take a number of forms. Those nations impoverished by globalisation and excluded from the elite clubs of the major powers can react by refurbishing a nationalist response. This has been a constant motif in Russian politics and in the politics of the Balkan successor states ever since the collapse of Stalinism, in China, in Iraq, and in Indonesia since the fall of Suharto. Even at the core of the system the fear and insecurity, the sense of powerlessness induced in ordinary people when they are confronted by private and state bureaucracies of international dimensions, find expression in the reactionary nationalism of, for instance, Haider and Berlusconi.
The search for a stable cultural identity in the midst of a changing and unpredictable world also fuels many nationalist movements that seek to break apart current nation-states. Scottish nationalism, Basque separatism and Palestinian nationalism have their more or less muscular, more or less progressive counterparts around the globe. The rise of Islam must also be seen in this context.
The dual process that is working its way through the system was first noticed by Lenin and Bukharin during the First World War. Modern capitalism involves two contradictory drives: the first is the centralisation of capital on a national scale and therefore its ever closer relationship with the state; the second is the internationalisation of the system, the growth of multinationals and international trade. It is the contradiction thrown up by this paradox that, again and again in the last century, had to be resolved by war or revolution.
There is one final response to the process of globalisation and the internationalisation of state power which has the greatest potential to express a real alternative to the global ruling elite – the revolt from below. This revolt stretches from the strikes and protests against privatisation, like the struggle against water privatisation in Bolivia, through the general strikes in Africa, to the near-insurrectionary movements that overthrew Milosevic and Suharto. It is a revolt that is far from homogeneous in methods or aims. Its subjects would not necessarily recognise each other as allies nor agree on strategy or tactics. But for all its variegation, this revolt has gradually taken on an increasingly widespread and self conscious form in the last ten years. The emergence of a global anti-capitalist movement since the great Seattle demonstration of 1999 has provided a common language and identified a common enemy in a way that has not been true of any international movement of revolt since the defeat of the last great upturn in struggle in the mid-1970s.
We will return to the prospects for this movement. But now we must look at how the process of globalisation, and the network of state and supra-state institutions, have given rise to war in the last ten years.
 
The wars of the ‘Soviet succession’
The collapse of the Stalinist states in Eastern Europe is one of the greatest political events in the lifetime of anyone born after the Second World War. Events of such great magnitude sometimes paralyse our thought. We simply assume that their consequences are so obvious that we do not need to draw them out. But this is an illusion. The shockwaves from the fall of the Berlin Wall are still reconfiguring the international landscape. The interaction between this crisis in the state system and globalisation is the key to understanding the drive to war in the contemporary capitalist system.
First, let us remind ourselves of the geographical extent of the collapse of the Stalinist Empire. Afghanistan defeated the Russian army in 1989, materially contributing to the decline of the regime. But it was the East European revolutions that sealed the fate of the ‘outer empire’. The ensuing crisis in Russia and the fall of Gorbachev then led more or less directly to the collapse of the ‘inner empire’. From Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia on the Baltic, through the Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia in the Caucasus, to Kazakhstan and the Central Asian states, former ‘Soviet republics’ gained their independence.
It was not clear at first how much of its former empire the remaining Russian state would be able to control. It was obvious that the most westerly parts of Eastern Europe had gone. German unification alone was enough to make sure that Poland, Hungary and what was still then Czechoslovakia would be under Western tutelage. But in the early 1990s the fate of Yugoslavia and the inner empire was by no means so clearly defined.
The break-up of Yugoslavia arose from the determination of the Western powers to dominate the region, to extend NATO into Eastern Europe, and to secure the southern flank of this newly expanded block. The newly unified Germany recognised Croatia and Slovenia, the nearest and most prosperous Balkan state, at a time when even the US was still formally in favour of a unified Yugoslavia. As the break-up of the Yugoslav federation became ever more likely, the Western powers, particularly Britain and the US, courted Serbia as the dominant power. In the Bosnian war Western intervention ensured partition between Serbia and Croatia. The consequent strengthening of Milosevic’s Serbia eventually led to opposition from the US and pointed the way to the Kosovo conflict.
The internal relations of the Balkan states themselves, however, do not explain the Balkan War of 1999. If this had been all that was at stake then Milosevic could probably have quite happily continued persecuting ‘Albanian terrorists’ with the blessing of the Western powers. Long before the Balkan War NATO strategists had been debating transforming the organisation from a ‘defensive alliance’ into one that could undertake ‘out of area operations’. Some two years before the Balkan conflict, for instance, former US Secretary of State Warren Christopher and former Secretary of State for Defence William Perry were arguing that ‘the danger to security ... is not primarily potential aggression to their collective [NATO] territory, but threats to their collective interests beyond their territory ... To deal with such threats alliance members need to have a way to rapidly form military coalitions that can accomplish goals beyond NATO territory’. [7]
In the very same month that the bombing of Serbia began, another longer term Western strategy came to fruition as Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic became part of NATO. This massive extension of the western military alliance transformed the strategic geography of Eastern Europe. NATO’s military border no longer ran between East and West Germany but thousands of miles to the east. It now ran from Poland in the north, down the border between the Czech and Slovak republics, coming to rest on the Balkan states. On the other side of the Balkans lay NATO’s southernmost members, Greece and Turkey. The Balkans pierced the newly enlarged NATO frontline at a crucial juncture. For this reason alone, ‘stability’ was more than an internal Balkan affair as far as the NATO powers were concerned.
President Clinton expressed NATO’s war aims clearly enough in an International Herald Tribune article at the time. Clinton insisted that to achieve ‘lasting stability’ in the Balkans, ‘the European Union and the United States must do for south eastern Europe what it did for Europe after World War Two and for Central Europe after the Cold War ... We can do that by rebuilding struggling economies, encouraging trade and investment, and helping the nations of the region to join NATO and the European Union.’ The nations of the area, Clinton continued, were already responding to ‘the pull of integration’ by sticking with their pro-market reforms and ‘supporting NATO’s campaign’. [8] Thus globalisation and war go hand in hand.
The new Iron Curtain between Western and Eastern Europe did not exhaust the Balkans’ strategic importance for the Western powers. The fate of this region is closely tied to another crucial area of post Cold War instability – the arc of oil states running up from the traditional spheres of Western interest in Iran and Iraq to the Caspian Sea and the newly independent states on Russia’s southern rim.
Almost nothing was known about the issue of Caspian oil and gas resources outside the oil industry and some specialist publications when the Balkan War began. Indeed, the then British foreign secretary, Robin Cook, thought that any link between the Balkan War and these resources was so astounding that he took the time to ridicule the idea in the New Statesman. [9] But during the course of the war and its aftermath information accumulated that proved the anti-war critics correct and the minister misinformed.
There can now be little doubt of the oil and gas reserves that lie in the Caspian and Central Asian region. For instance, Ahmed Rashid’s authoritative account argues:
The Caspian represented possibly the last unexplored and unexploited oil-bearing region in the world, and its opening up generated huge excitement amongst international oil companies. Western oil companies have shifted their interest first to Western Siberia in 1991–1992, then to Kazakstan in 1993–1994, Azerbaijan in 1995–1997 and finally Turkmenistan in 1997–1999. Between 1994–1998, 24 companies from 13 countries signed contracts in the Caspian region. [10]
One careful estimate of the oil reserves in the region records:
Most of the oil and gas reserves in the Caspian region have not been developed, and in many areas ... remain unexplored. Proven oil reserves for the entire Caspian Sea region ... are estimated at 15–29 billion barrels, comparable to those in Western Europe (22 billion barrels) or the North Sea (17 billion barrels).
Proven natural gas reserves are even larger ... comparable to North American reserves. The prospect of potentially huge hydrocarbon reserves is part of the allure of the region ... While this is not enough to create another Middle East, the region’s possible reserves could yield, if they become proven, a quarter of the Middle East’s total proven reserves. [11]
Robin Cook’s main objection to seeing a strategic importance for the oil lobby in the Balkan War was that the oilfields of the Caspian were thousands of miles away from the Balkans. But as playwright Harold Pinter responded, ‘To get oil from the Caspian Sea into the hands of the West you can’t use buckets. You need pipelines, and those pipelines have to be installed and protected’. [12] But Robin Cook need not have taken the word of a vociferous opponent of US imperialism like Pinter. He need only have asked his staff to supply him with the words, spoken only a year before the Balkan War, by US Energy Secretary Bill Richardson:
This is about America’s energy security ... It is also about preventing strategic inroads by those who don’t share our values. We are trying to move these newly independent countries toward the West. We would like to see them reliant on Western commercial and political interests rather than going another way. We’ve made a substantial political investment in the Caspian, and it’s very important to us that the pipeline map and the politics come out right. [13]
Or he might have taken the words, also spoken in 1998, of then Russian president Boris Yeltsin:
We cannot help seeing the uproar stirred up in some Western countries over the energy resources of the Caspian. Some seek to exclude Russia from the game and undermine its interests. The so-called pipeline war is part of this game. [14]
The US government was committed to finding a pipeline route that avoided both Russia and Iran. This point was first demonstrated in practice during the 1999 Balkan War, when plans were advanced for the pipeline from Baku to Ceyhan in Turkey, from where oil would be shipped westward through the southern Mediterranean and Aegean. The completion of the pipeline from Baku to Suspa on the Black Sea, from where oil would move onward through the Bosphorus Straits, made the point a second time. US Secretary of State on Caspian Basin Energy Issues, John Wolf, had announced on 9 July 1999 that the US Trade and Development Office (UTDO) would give between $600,000 to $800,000 for expansion of the Baku-Suspa line. But, as the US analysts Strategic Forecasts report, ‘this manoeuvre only completes half the picture’:
The US still wants to avoid a confrontation with Turkey about environmental issues in the Straits. Thus, in late June, the UTDO acknowledged that it was exploring other options regarding oil transport in the region, including a proposed Trans-Balkan pipeline from the Bulgarian port of Burgos through Macedonia to the Albanian ports on the Mediterranean. The UTDO said the construction of an additional pipeline out of the region was likely, although it stressed that it was ‘firmly committed’ to the Baku-Ceyhan pipeline project. As relations between Moscow and Washington continue to deteriorate on a strategic level, and as the situation in Chechnya becomes increasingly unstable on a tactical level, the prospect of eliminating Russia from the oil transport picture becomes more enticing to both the US government and Western oil companies ... There is a marked shift to make enlargement of the Baku-Suspa route and a Trans-Balkan pipeline an imperative, and to close this issue once and for all. [15]
And after the war the revival of plans for a Bulgarian-Balkan pipeline made the point a third and definitive time. On 2 June 1999 the US Trade and Development Agency (TDA) awarded:
... a $588,000 grant to the Bulgarian Ministry of Regional Development and Public Works to partially fund a feasibility study on the development of a trans-Balkan pipeline, which will cross Bulgaria, FYR Macedonia and Albania, ultimately linking the oil resources of the Black Sea and Caspian Sea region with Western Europe ... ‘The competition is fierce to tap energy resources in the Caspian region,’ said TDA Director J. Joseph Grandmaison. ‘Over the last year, TDA has been actively promoting the development of multiple pipelines to connect these vast resources with Western markets. This grant represents a significant step forward for this policy and for US business interests in the Caspian region’. [16]
Since this award was made the consortium involved has given a final completion date for the pipeline as 2005. No such project could have continued without a NATO victory in the Balkan War.
But the Balkan War was about much more than oil – it encouraged the imperial ambitions of the NATO powers in the Caspian region and beyond to Central Asia. There had already been military contacts with the former Soviet republics, but the Balkan War accelerated this process. At the same NATO summit in Washington where Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic became members there were informal discussions about the formation of a loose alliance of Caspian and Central Asian states. The name of this alliance was GUUAM, after the initials of Georgia, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Moldova. At the same Washington summit Javier Solana, the former defence minister in the Socialist Party government of Spain, secretary general of NATO during the Balkan War, and now European Union foreign policy chief and Middle East envoy, insisted that NATO could not be fully secure without bringing the Caucasus into its security zone. [17]
Even before the Balkan War the US ‘Partnership for Peace’ programme and Cenbat, the Central Asian peacekeeping battalion, were extending the diplomatic and military reach of the Western powers deep into this new zone of conflict. In one training mission in 1997 US paratroopers from the 82nd Airborne landed in Kazakhstan to join operations with local troops after a 23-hour flight from Fort Bragg. NATO advice had already been offered during military manoeuvres by Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Georgia designed to protect the Baku-Suspa oil pipeline. [18] The Strategic Research Development Report 5-96 of the US Centre for Naval Warfare Studies describes the Partnership for Peace as:
Activities of ... forces that provide dominant battlespace knowledge necessary to shape regional security environments. Multinational exercises, port visits, staff to staff coordination – all designed to increase force inter-operability and access to regional military facilities – along with intelligence and surveillance operations ... [So] forward deployed forces are backed up by those which can surge for rapid reinforcement and can be in place in seven to 30 days. [19]
What was happening was an opening up of the great swathe of the globe dominated by Eastern Europe, Russia, the Caspian and Central Asian states to Western multinationals and military strategists after their long Cold War exclusion. In many ways it marked a reversion to patterns of interstate conflict that predated the rise of the Stalinist states in Eastern Europe and, indeed, even the Russian Revolution. The Balkans were, of course, the arena in which the ‘Eastern Question’ was fought out in the second half of the 19th century. Then the major powers were fighting for advantage as another old empire, this time the Ottoman Empire, collapsed. Then, as now, the area represented a gateway to the east and the southern Mediterranean.
Part of what lay further east was the Caspian region. ‘Do you know how they pronounce Baku in the United States?’ the journalist John Reed asked his audience when he spoke in that city at the 1919 People’s Congress of the East. ‘Oil’ was the answer. And indeed the Caspian had long been the site of rivalry between British, Russian, French, Turkish and other imperial interests. It was again in the Second World War when Hitler drove east before running short of fuel and being defeated at Stalingrad. His plan was to take the saving prize of Caspian resources, and then to drive south for the even greater prize of Persia and Iraq.
Afghanistan, the current site of conflict, has a no less inglorious imperial past. Standing as the buffer between India, the jewel in Britain’s imperial crown, and Russia’s south eastern empire bordering China, and astride the old Silk Road east-west trading route, Afghanistan could not fail to find itself the battleground of empires. The very phrase ‘the Great Game’, coined to denote this rivalry, was first used here. So it is again today. The Russians are still players, but the British, long gone out of India, return only on the vapour trails of the United States.
There is unfolding across the whole of this region from the Balkans to Afghanistan a 21st century ‘Scramble for Africa’. Like the original, there are certainly enough economic motivations to fuel this enterprise – not just oil and gas, but some new markets for other commodities, new arms contracts, new sources of cheap labour. But, also like the original, the scramble for Asia does not solely involve proven economic advantages. Just the prospect, even the unproven prospect, of new materials and markets is enough for corporations and states to want to exclude their competitors. Diplomatic, strategic or military advantage, even where no immediate economic gain is likely, is enough to motivate governments.
In this respect the close links – geographical, economic and political – with the pivotal location of modern imperial rivalry, the Middle East, would be enough to make both the Caspian and Central Asia central to the concerns of the Western powers. The stability of Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf states, still a far greater reservoir of oil than anywhere else, has been a central concern for the imperial powers for more than a century. This is why the Gulf War was the first decisive episode of the new imperialism. But the fate of this area is now bound up with the larger zone of conflict.
Just consider two basic points. The whole debate about oil pipelines in the Caspian, the Balkans and Turkey is driven by the fact the Western states and corporations do not want to export through either Iran or Russia – despite the fact that both are favoured by the oil companies because they are cheaper than the options now being developed. And the search for alternative oil and gas reserves and alternative pipelines, the ‘multiple pipeline routes’ strategy that is now official US policy, is driven by fear of dependence on the Middle East alone. Finally, the course of the war in Afghanistan has demonstrated beyond doubt that the stability of Israel, Saudi Arabia and, perhaps, Egypt rests on the conduct and outcome of that conflict. As US ambassador Nathan Nimitz argued, ‘Pax NATO is the only logical regime to maintain security in the traditional sense ... [and] must recognise a need for expansion of its stabilising influence in adjacent areas, particularly in south eastern Europe, the Black Sea region (in concert of course with the regional powers ...) and in the Arabian/Persian Gulf. The United States must continue to play the major role in this security system’. [20]
 
United States policy and United States power
A strange thing happened during last year’s presidential election in the United States – there was a debate on foreign policy between the candidates, Democrat Al Gore and Republican George W. Bush. This was strange for two reasons. Firstly, there aren’t usually debates on any issue of substance, especially not foreign policy, between the candidates in US presidential elections. Secondly, very few people noticed.
If we recall this debate now it can begin to tell us a little about the thinking of the American elite, the people who have propelled us all into three major wars in a decade. Essentially, Bush and his team accused the Clinton White House of damaging the military by inadequate defence spending, of involving America in too many overseas commitments, and of pointless attempts at ‘nation building’ in the Balkans and elsewhere. As Bush’s soon-to-be National Security Advisor, Condoleezza Rice, put it, ‘We don’t need the 82nd Airborne escorting kids to kindergarten’. [21] Gore responded by accusing Bush of ‘isolationism’. He defended Clinton’s record of ‘humanitarian intervention’ by insisting that ‘nation building’ was exactly the task taken on by the US in Germany and Japan after the Second World War – precisely the theme of Clinton’s war aims article during the Balkan War, as we have seen.
The course of this debate is uninteresting. But what is interesting is that Bush has completely reverted to his opponents’ position within months of becoming president. Military leaders were startled to find Bush submitting Clinton’s 2002 defence spending plans to Congress virtually unaltered. Secretary of State Colin Powell rushed to tell the NATO meeting in Brussels in February 2001 that the US would not be pulling back from the Balkans: ‘The simple proposition is that we went in together, we will come out together’. [22] Finally, of course, Bush has now committed the US in Afghanistan to a far more extensive and dangerous ‘nation building’ task than Clinton ever considered.
If we look beyond the posturing of the presidential debate we can see the real physiognomy of the wider ruling elite, which by no means breaks down on party lines. Here we can see some of the real forces, and real divisions, in the policymaking structure of the US, particularly in regard to the area where the current war is being fought.
When the Clinton administration came to power in 1992 its main concern was to promote good relations with post-Stalinist Russia. Concern with the Caspian and Central Asian states was seen as a distraction or, worse, a provocation to Moscow. Clinton’s leading Russian adviser and later Deputy Secretary of State, Strobe Talbott, insisted that US support for the Yeltsin regime was a vital bulwark against the return of ‘Communism’. The Department of Defence was also keen to secure Russian co-operation over nuclear non-proliferation. Officials avoided criticising Russia’s internal policies as part of this ‘Russia first’ approach.
This approach began to change in the mid-1990s. One important issue was oil:
By mid-1994, however, the region’s energy potential ... had begun to attract renewed interest, and the ‘Caspian region’ enjoyed a remarkable vogue among a small, vocal group of policymakers. By the middle of the decade, there were conferences on the Caspian in Washington almost every week, new institutes were founded to study Central Eurasian history and politics, bilateral business councils created for every country in the region. Cabinet secretaries and members of Congress made numerous visits. In Baku and Tashkent in particular, expectations rose to the point of envisaging special relationships with the Americans comparable to those between the US and Saudi Arabia or Iran under the Shah. [23]
Out of all this a new strategic concept had emerged by the late 1990s – the New Silk Road. Promoted by the recently established Caspian inter-agency group at the National Security Council and a new presidential adviser on Caspian issues, this plan foresaw ‘a “corridor” of prosperous, stable and secular states more or less allied with Western interests and providing a balance to what were considered to be Russian, Iranian or Chinese regional ambitions’. In 1998 Congress first introduced a ‘Silk Road Strategy Act’ to establish multiple pipelines to bring Kazakh, Turkmen and Azeri oil and gas to market. [24]
The evolution of this policy was part of a wider shift in the Clinton administration’s foreign policy profile led by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and her mentor Zbigniew Brzezinski. Polish-born Brzezinski is a central figure in the American foreign policy elite, and to follow his career is to see the evolution of a central strand in US policy. Brzezinski was Jimmy Carter’s National Security Advisor, and he had considerable influence on the first Clinton administration through his ally and Clinton’s National Security Advisor, Anthony Lake. Brzezinski was an early advocate of NATO expansion and, through Lake, was instrumental in getting Clinton to commit himself to this course as early as 1994. Brzezinski’s influence continued in Clinton’s second administration, when his former pupil at Columbia University, Madeleine Albright, was made Secretary of State. Albright had also worked under Brzezinski in the Carter administration. [25]
Brzezinski’s ‘three grand imperatives of imperial geostrategy’ are ‘to prevent collusion and maintain security among the vassals, to keep tributaries pliant and protected, and to keep the barbarians from coming together’. And the most pressing task is to ‘consolidate and perpetuate the prevailing geopolitical pluralism on the map of Eurasia’ by ‘manoeuvre and manipulation in order to prevent the emergence of a hostile coalition that could eventually seek to challenge America’s primacy’. Those that must be divided and ruled are Germany, Russia, China, Iran and Japan. [26]
It was Brzezinski who infamously defended US support for the Taliban thus: ‘What is more important in the world view of history? The Taliban or the fall of the Soviet Empire? A few stirred-up Muslims or the liberation of Central Europe and the end of the Cold War?’ [27] And once this task was performed, and NATO expansion achieved, Brzezinski became a firm advocate of war in the Balkans. This was in part because he saw the Balkan War as a testing ground for US policy throughout the whole Caspian and Central Asian area: ‘In the Brzezinski scheme of things ... “Serbia” is Russia, and Croatia, Bosnia, Kosovo, etc., are the Ukraine, the Baltic states, Georgia and the former Soviet republics of “the Eurasian Balkans”.’ [28] And, of course:
… having become an advocate for American oil companies wishing to establish themselves in the former Soviet republics of the Caucasus and Central Asia, Brzezinski regards American predominance in this region ... as a prime objective. With this in mind, apart from alliances with China and Turkey, our champion of democracy takes a positive view both of the strengthening of relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan (with the Taliban acting as cement) and of the Islamic resurgence in Saudi Arabia as well as Iran (with which he favours an alliance). [29]
It does not take great perspicacity to see in this scenario the outlines of US diplomacy in the Afghan conflict, notwithstanding the small alteration that the ‘few stirred-up Muslims’ are giving the US elite more trouble than Brzezinski foresaw.
The Brzezinski strategy has not gone unopposed among America’s rulers. Some, like Clinton’s Secretary of State Warren Christopher, were ambivalent about NATO expansion. Some have seen Islam as a threat rather than a useful counter in the game of geopolitical realpolitik. Some, like Strobe Talbott, started out the 1990s with a more benign and inclusive attitude toward Russia, hoping that it could be brought into the Western camp as more of an ally than a competitor. But a combination of the catastrophic performance of the Russian and former Soviet republics’ economies, deeply authoritarian governments throughout the region, and the logic of two wars in three years have given the ‘expansionists’ ascendancy.
The Bush cabinet itself is a remarkable group of people. Vice-president Dick Cheney is an oil executive and the former Secretary of Defence. Condoleezza Rice is the director of a transnational oil corporation and a Russian scholar. Secretary of State Colin Powell has no diplomatic training but was, of course, chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Gulf War. Donald Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defence, is a former chief executive officer of Searle Pharmaceuticals and was, with Dick Cheney, the featured speaker at the Russian-American Business Leaders Forum in May 2000. Rumsfeld and his deputy, Paul Wolfowitz, argued passionately for action to overthrow Saddam Hussein in the late 1990s. It is safe to say that the central concerns of this group are oil, Russia and the military.
In any case, the real barrier to the ‘expansionists’ lies less in the internal divisions in the American ruling class and more in the limits of American power. And, for all that US power seems unassailable, the truth is that it has very real limitations.
The basic paradox underlying the US imperial project at the beginning of the 21st century is this – it has military capability beyond the reach of most of its competitors, but it does not have the economic capability to rebuild a world economy repeatedly suffering recession and slow growth at its core, and devastation in much of its periphery. This contrasts with the highpoint of American hegemony in the immediate post Second World War period. Then the proportion of American economic power in the world economy as a whole was much greater, underpinning its political and military reconstruction of Europe, and its inheritance of responsibility for those areas of the world left behind by the retreat of European colonialism. [30] Then arms spending by America could sustain the longest boom in the history of capitalism. Now, however much it may assist the US economy in the short term, arms spending is not capable of once more lifting the world economy into a period of expansion in which growth rates are once again double the current average for the industrialised economies.
This economic context has profound relevance to the fate of the Eurasian zone of conflict that we have been examining. Globalisation and the opening up of the Russian sphere of influence have ensured an economic and military rush into this area by the US and other Western powers. But the economic aspect of this has certainly been no new Marshall Plan capable of bringing the prosperity that so many assumed would follow the collapse of Stalinism. The Russian economy itself underwent a disastrous crisis in the 1990s, deepened by the South East Asian crash in 1997. In the former Soviet republics much investment has been promised but relatively little has been delivered, especially if we exclude oil and gas related resources. And in the period 1997-1999 Central Eurasia’s trade with the rest of the world declined by 40 percent. The consequence is that since 1997 life expectancy, literacy, and fertility and nutrition levels have fallen in nearly every country in the region. Population growth in Kyrgyzstan fell by 31 percent in 1999, in Armenia by 25 percent in 1998, and in Afghanistan by an average of 15 percent a year. [31]
All this is a long way from the ‘prosperous corridor’ dreamt of by the best and the brightest at the NSC in the mid-1990s. Now the US and the other major powers have a darker vision of their purpose in the region. As the 1990s progressed, they were inclined to see it as an extension of Afghanistan – described by one Indian expert as ‘the perpetual vortex of a storm that spews forth all manner of evil’. [32] Conveniently forgetting their own part in creating this storm, ‘all the major powers with interests in Central Eurasia regard maintaining stability there as the most important issue’. [33]
So where globalisation has failed, the military must step in. This is the pattern time and again in relation to the oil pipelines. The Baku-Ceyhan pipeline was delayed for a long period by the Turkish state’s inability to deal with the Kurdish revolt. The Baku-Suspa route was imperilled by Chechen separatists who, on one occasion, blew up an existing pipeline. The Bulgaria-Albania pipeline was impossible until NATO’s victory in the Balkans. The Afghan civil war eventually forced the cancellation of the Unacol pipeline from Tajikistan to Pakistan through Afghanistan. Thus geopolitical strategy both contradict and mutually reinforce each other.
 
Russia, China and the new imperialism
The major powers agree on the ‘need for stability’, but they do not agree on how this is to be achieved. One critical relationship, that between the US and Russia, has inevitably been worsened by the ‘expansionist’ policy that now guides America. Vladimir Putin may welcome the licence that the ‘war against terrorism’ gives him to pursue the war in Chechnya. He may even gain more leverage in the bargaining over the abandonment of the Anti Ballistic Missile Treaty because the US needs his support for operations in Afghanistan. But the fundamental direction of Russian foreign policy since the late 1990s, and especially since the Balkan War, has been to become more assertive of its interests in the ‘near abroad’.
The change began with the ‘Primakov doctrine’, named after Russia’s foreign minister from 1996 to 1998, which called for a strengthening of opposition to the influence of ‘outsiders’ in Russia’s ‘near abroad’. But it was in the late 1990s that this became a more serious approach. Russia released a new defence doctrine calling for stronger defence arrangements with the former Soviet states and a major increase in defence spending. At the January 2000 Confederation of Independent States summit Putin proposed, and for the first time the other CIS leaders accepted, a greater Russian role in co-ordinating defence ‘against terrorism’. Thus Putin’s coalition preceded Bush’s by more than a year and a half. Putin will be well aware that closer co-operation with the Soviet successor states over ‘terrorism’ can lead to greater co-operation in resisting US and NATO expansionism.
China has its own interests in ‘maintaining stability’ in its border province with Afghanistan. On the broader canvas it is the subject of overtures from both Russia and the US. The US, for instance, is both trying to assist China’s passage into the World Trade Organisation and override China’s objections to its ‘theatre missile defence’ strategy. China, in response, has been advocating the doctrine of a ‘multi-polar’ world designed to limit unilateral action by the US, undermine its commitment to the deployment of forces in the region, and unsettle those countries that host US bases. This approach was the subject of a joint Chinese-Russian communiqué when President Jiang Zemin visited Moscow in November 1999.
A Sino-Russian alliance is one development the US fears most, as Brzezinski made clear. There have been signs that some such understanding may develop, despite the fact that neither China nor Russia can, for the moment, afford to completely alienate the US. In the last five years a new regional organisation has been built up – the Shanghai Group. Its members are China, Russia, Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. The group co-operates on a range of trade, cultural, security and military affairs. The alliance has resulted in the sale of Russian C-30 fighters to China. And, of course, China and Russia are both opposed to US plans for missile defence.
Other lesser powers – Pakistan is the obvious current example – negotiate the treacherous waters between pleasing the major powers and sustaining their own interests.
This picture illustrates two fundamental aspects of the new imperialism that I recorded at its birth. The first is that the new imperialism is much more complex and unstable than the old bi-polar world of the Cold War:
… the central feature of the new imperialism is that even the greatest of the great powers is no longer so great that it has the same capacity to structure the world, or even particular regions of the world, that the two superpowers had at the height of the Cold War. They now try to control a less stable world while still competing with each other. Sometimes they will achieve this through mutual but unstable agreement, sometimes through economic competition, sometimes by war or the threat of war, and most often through a combination of all of these ... It [is] precisely in the combined and uneven competition that the instability of the system rest[s]. [34]
Secondly, the new fractured ‘multi-polar’ world inhibits the US from being able to act alone. As the Gulf War showed:
International co-ordination is not just a question of cloaking US power in multilateral clothes. The US found such multinational co-ordination necessary as well as desirable. Unilateral military action against Iraq was too dangerous and unilateral economic action was impossible. So the need for international action speaks of US weakness, not strength. [35]
These characteristics of the system have become more pronounced in the two major wars since the Gulf War. In the Afghan war the degree of bribery necessary to form an international ‘coalition’ reached epidemic proportions.
Pakistan was a ‘rogue state’ before the Afghan war because it fought a war with India over Kashmir and continued testing nuclear weapons, and because General Musharraf came to power in a military coup. Now the sanctions imposed are being lifted, debt is being rescheduled, aid and loans offered, and renewed fighting in Kashmir ignored by the US. In short, a new rogue state, much more dangerous than Afghanistan, is being created before our eyes.
The last, bloody edition of Russia’s war against Chechnya was conducted after NATO’s attack on the Balkans. This fact, as the Russian government clearly appreciated, nullified Western criticism. Now George Bush has given Putin’s ‘war on terrorism’ legitimacy. But US troop deployment in Uzbekistan, where the government already looks to reviving its pipeline projects with US oil companies, and other Central Asian states is sowing the seeds of future conflicts. China, the second great long term imperial competitor for the US, has won a partial lifting of sanctions on the sale of military equipment. These were first imposed after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989. [36]
In the Middle East the bribery involves increased instability at every turn. the ‘war against terrorism’ has unleashed the Israeli state’s armed forces on the Palestinians, inflamed Arab opinion and called into question the stability of pro-US governments in the region. In response the US is selling rockets to Egypt, even greater numbers of fighters and missiles to Oman, and has allowed Syria a place on the UN Security Council. There has even been a purely verbal US commitment to a Palestinian state. The arms will stay in the Middle East – the promise of a Palestinian state will not. Cynicism and anger about the ‘peace process’ will deepen as yet another imperial promise is broken.
America was created as a modern nation by white settlers who offered the native population of that continent weapons and commodities in return for the destruction of their society. More than three centuries later the seeds of future wars are being sown by the US government’s need to ply an unwilling world with arms and money in order to sustain its imperial dominance.
 
The left and imperialism
The fall of Stalinism has had a profound effect on the left. For the duration of the Cold War imperial rivalry was, by definition, a bi-polar affair. This was true despite the fact that the actual conflicts were mostly fought in the Third World, sometimes by proxy. The collapse of the USSR, which so many identified with socialism, led to a widespread pessimism on the left. For many it seemed as if the US was now the unchallenged ruler of the globe, no longer subject to challenge by other powers. A host of theorists have come forward to testify to this untrammelled power.
The trend began early in the 1990s with the popularisation of Francis Fukuyama’s thesis that the fall of Stalinism meant that there were no longer any serious challenges to the liberal democratic, free market model embodied by the US. The corollary was that no two states so constituted would ever fight a war. The common or garden version of this idea is that ‘no two states with a McDonald’s have ever gone to war’. In other more left wing accounts the US appears as an all-powerful ‘hegemon’, whose actions are accounted for simply in terms of its ability to oblige its allies and enemies to do its bidding. These accounts have a familiar feel because they reproduce some of the arguments first advanced by Karl Kautsky, the theoretician of the Second International.
Kautsky argued that the capitalist system in the early 20th century had entered an ‘ultra-imperialist’ era. The key characteristic of ultra-imperialism was that conflict between the major powers was now impossible because capitalist firms had become so large, and the economies of the major capitalist powers so integrated, that conflict between them would be too damaging to contemplate. Kautsky foresaw ‘a federation of the strongest imperial powers who renounce their arms race’ and therefore ‘the threat to world peace’. Modern accounts of the monolithic power of the US reach a similar conclusion. There may be ‘colonial’ wars, but no general conflict can result from them because the power of the US is so overwhelming.
There is of course a grain of truth in this argument. US military capacity is the greatest in the world. And the US economy has boomed in the 1990s while some of its post Cold War competitors have, like Japan, faltered. But what Kautsky ignored, and what the modern advocates of monolithic imperialism ignore, is that the imperialist system remains the site of conflict between the major powers. The US does have by far the greatest military arsenal in the world, but its ability to underwrite the economic stability of the system has declined greatly in the post-war period. And the social and political instability that results from this fact constantly throws up challenges to US power.
These challenges rarely begin with conflicts between major powers. More typically they involve, as they have done throughout the history of imperialism, minor powers – ‘rogue states’ in the modern parlance. But confrontations between the imperialist states and smaller nations frequently come to involve rivalries between the imperialist states themselves. The relative economic decline of the US, plus the fact that even militarily it is powerful but not all-powerful, means that the troubled business of coalition building is unavoidable. Equally unavoidable is the fact, greatly feared by US strategists, that other nations may build coalitions against the US. A succession of ‘colonial’ conflicts may be necessary before such divisions between the major powers threaten a major war – but the root causes of such a conflict exist in the new imperialism.
This situation is strongly reminiscent of the unstable and shifting alliances characteristic of the imperialist system before the Cold War. Then too there was a dominant power, Britain. But this did not prevent either colonial wars or the eventual emergence of the conditions for a war between the major powers. Indeed, it is arguable that the rivalries inherent in the modern world order make imperialism a much more war-prone system that the fearful stability of the bi-polar Cold War.
The fall of Stalinism has also had a second and equally profound effect on the left’s thinking. This concerns the struggle against imperialism. From the time of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution in the late 1920s much of the left internationally identified socialism with state control of the economy, no matter how authoritarian and undemocratic the regime. This identification was made significantly greater when the Stalinist model was extended to Eastern Europe, China, Cuba and a variety of other post-colonial regimes after the Second World War. For the Communist parties and their fellow travellers, including many in social democratic parties, this meant that regimes which found themselves in opposition to imperialism also had ‘progressive’ social structures. Cuba or North Vietnam, for instance, were not only to be supported because they had the right to national self determination, but also because they were in some way inherently progressive, even socialist.
The fall of Stalinism has thrown this worldview into confusion. In each of the major wars of the last decade a section of the left has effectively sided with imperialism because it equated undemocratic and authoritarian regimes that were the victims of imperialism with imperialism itself. For Fred Halliday, a longtime opponent of imperialism, for instance, Saddam Hussein’s Iraq was such an unacceptable regime that it justified the full onslaught of the greatest military powers in the world. For Mark Seddon, editor of Tribune, and many others on the left the nature of the Milosevic regime justified the imperialist bombing campaign against Serbia. And today many on the left found the Taliban such a uniquely reactionary regime that it justified the US and British war against Afghanistan.
The most elementary logical distinctions, if nothing else, seem to have been overridden in these arguments. For instance, one does not have to be a supporter of any of these regimes – indeed, one can be politically opposed to them all – and still maintain opposition to imperialist intervention. The basic principle of the rights of nations to self determination requires us to allow the exploited and oppressed people of these nations to settle accounts with their own tyrants. No one, either on the left or the right, suggested during the long and bloody history of the apartheid regime in South Africa that the appropriate response to such tyranny was to let loose the armed forces of America or Britain. Any imperial intervention, as long experience in Africa has taught us, would not help. Only the acts of the working people of South Africa, even if their struggle was long and pitted with setbacks, could ultimately bury the regime. The left internationally could and did aid this struggle, thus banishing the accusation that respecting the rights of nations to self determination is to abandon the local populations to the mercy of their dictators.
Neither, for most of the Stalinist-influenced left, were these criteria ever applied evenly. There is, for instance, a dictatorial regime ruled by an authoritarian figurehead with a well developed cult of the personality, that suppresses freedom of speech, exploits the workers and peasants, and puts into concentration camps individuals of whose sexual orientation it disapproves. The regime is Fidel Castro’s Cuba. None of this should detract from the left’s desire to oppose US imperialism’s attempt to overthrow the Cuban regime, but it should guide us in how we handle similarly authoritarian regimes that do not happen to adopt progressive rhetoric.
Such regimes are likely to multiply in number. The state capitalist model of development is much less common. Anti-colonial struggles have given rise to ruling classes of new nations who now increasingly try to carve their own space in the world system by striking deals with the major powers. Such arrangements are, of course, no guarantee that today’s imperial ally will not turn into tomorrow’s imperial victim – as Saddam Hussein, Slobodan Milosevic and Mullah Omar can all testify. But what this illustrates is that we cannot decide whether or not to oppose imperialism simply on whether or not we find the past or present behaviour of the regime to be progressive.
In the era before the rise of Stalinism this was more clearly understood, at least on the revolutionary left. Writing in the early 1920s Georg Lukács commented on the fact the 19th century ‘movements for unity of Germany and Italy were the last of these objectively revolutionary struggles’ for national liberation. The difference with modern struggles for national liberation, Lukács observed, is that they are now:
… no longer merely struggles against their own feudalism and feudal absolutism – that is to say only implicitly progressive – for they are forced into the context of imperialist rivalry between world powers. Their historical significance, their evaluation, therefore depends on what concrete part they play in the concrete whole. [37]
It follows that:
Forces that work towards revolution today may very well operate in the reverse direction tomorrow. And it is vital to note that these changes ... are determined decisively by the constantly changing relations of the totality of the historical situation and the social forces at work. So that it is no very great paradox to assert that, for instance, Kemel Pasha may represent a revolutionary constellation of forces in certain circumstances whilst a great ‘workers’ party’ may be counter-revolutionary. [38]
Lukács is generalising from positions developed by Lenin during the First World War. Lenin, for instance, was well aware of the shortcomings of the national bourgeoisie in the oppressed countries:
Not infrequently ... we find the bourgeoisie of the oppressed nations talking of national revolt, while in practice it enters into reactionary compacts with the bourgeoisie of the oppressor nation behind the backs of, and against, its own people. In such cases the criticism of revolutionary Marxists should be directed not against the national movement, but against its degradation, vulgarisation, against the tendency to reduce it to a petty squabble. [39]
Consequently Lenin was determinedly opposed to those on the left who qualified their opposition to imperialism on the basis that those facing imperialism did not hold progressive ideas:
To imagine that social revolution is conceivable ... without revolutionary outbursts by a section of the petty bourgeoisie with all its prejudices, without a movement of the politically non-conscious proletarian and semi-proletarian masses ... is to repudiate social revolution ... [which] cannot be anything other than an outburst of mass struggle on the part of all and sundry oppressed and discontented elements. Inevitably...they will bring into the movement their prejudices, their revolutionary fantasies, their weaknesses and errors. But objectively they will attack capital …
The dialectics of history are such that small nations, powerless as an independent factor in the struggle against imperialism, play a part as one of the ferments, one of the bacilli, which help the real anti-imperialist force, the socialist proletariat, to make its appearance on the scene. [40]
We do not live in the era of the Russian Revolution, but it is still true that whether or not we oppose imperialism is determined by the totality of relations in the system at any one point, and not only by the internal character of the regimes that find themselves, however ineffectively, opposed to imperialism.
 
Imperialism, anti-imperialism and socialism
Imperialism is an evolving system. Since the very earliest days of capitalism, international expansion has been written into its structure. The union with Scotland and the colonisation of Ireland formed one of the first capitalist states, Britain. Both events were decisively shaped by the revolution of the 17th century. And one of Britain’s first post-revolutionary wars was with the second major capitalist state of the day, the Dutch republic. Emerging capitalist states and declining pre-capitalist empires fought for dominance in America, Africa, Asia and the Far East. For two centuries British, Dutch, French, German, Italian and other major powers struggled to conquer the globe, and subdue indigenous populations and minor powers.
The apogee was reached in the 20th century as wholly capitalist powers clashed in two world wars, and again and again in countless colonial conflicts. At the beginning of the century Lenin and Bukharin outlined the two contradictory drives that still dominate the modern capitalist system. Bukharin wrote, ‘Together with the internationalisation of economy and the internationalisation of capital, there is going on a process of “national” intertwining of capital, a process of “nationalising” capital, fraught with the greatest consequences’. [41] Globalisation on the one hand and the massive military-industrial network of the modern state on the other are the modern form of this contradiction. The result is that economic competition and the inequality and instability it creates constantly reproduce military competition and war. The drive to war has broken apart and reconstituted the imperialist system throughout the 20th century.
Since the Second World War formal colonies have largely gained their independence. Oppressed nations have come and gone, fought their battle, and joined the international system of states in more or less subordinate ranks. This process began with the American colonies in the 1770s and ran through to the liberation of Ireland and India, among many others, in the 20th century. But that does not mean that the national question has disappeared – merely that it has, like imperialism itself, evolved new forms. The indigenous ruling classes that took the place of their colonial overlords have often struggled to suppress new nationalist forces within their, often artificial, boundaries. So it was, for instance, that the new post-independence Indonesian ruling class fought to suppress the East Timorese. Equally these new ruling classes have struggled with the still ever-present economic and military strength of the major powers. And this returns us to the need, as Lukács argued, to assess each anti-imperial struggle from the standpoint of the whole contemporary alignment of forces in the imperialist system.
There is, however, one relatively consistent social position from which this assessment can best be carried out. As their rulers and would-be rulers twist and turn between colonialism and independence, accommodation and belligerence, the inescapable power of the international economy and the weight of the great states bear down on the workers and peasants of these societies. It is here that we find the one great enduring force opposed to the imperial system throughout its long evolution. Whatever its changing shape – from the primitive accumulation of the slave trade, through the early colonies, to the great imperial wars of the 20th century – these classes have stood in opposition to the system. Their struggle has certainly not always been victorious. It has often lain dormant for great lengths of time. But it has, nevertheless, risen again and again to confront both the imperial powers and the capitalist system from which they grew.
Karl Marx made the essential point that no matter how much the spread of capitalist relations may transform the economic structure of what is now called the Third World, no matter how many nations attain independence, the fundamental task of human liberation still falls to working people. Writing of British rule in India he argued:
All the English bourgeoisie may be forced to do will neither emancipate nor materially mend the social condition of the mass of the people, depending not only on the development of the productive powers, but on their appropriation by the people. But what they will not fail to do is to lay down the material premises for both. Has the bourgeoisie ever done more? Has it ever effected a progress without dragging individuals and peoples through blood and dirt, through misery and degradation?
The Indians will not reap the fruits of the new elements of society scattered among them by the British bourgeoisie till in Great Britain itself the now ruling classes have been supplanted by the industrial proletariat, or till the Hindus themselves shall have grown strong enough to throw off the English yoke. [42]
The British were eventually driven from India, but the fundamental task that Marx outlined remains unfinished. Since Marx’s day the working class in India and elsewhere in the Third World has grown to be able to take a much more prominent role in dealing with the inheritors of imperial rule, be they indigenous bourgeoisies or new foreign powers. The growth of the international working class has, nevertheless, been a slow process. Workers are only now, perhaps, a majority of the world’s oppressed and exploited. Various forms of ‘extra-economic’ coercion over labour remained a feature of the system well into the 20th century. In the less industrialised economies the working class is more differentiated into agricultural and semi-proletarian layers than elsewhere. And peasants still form a very large proportion of the world’s oppressed and exploited. But for all this, as one important study shows, ‘as the colonial era gave way to post-colonialism after the Second World War, so the traditional division of labour began to change. A substantial, if uneven, industrial development began in many areas of the Third World which significantly altered the social and economic conditions of labour’. [43] This was a new international division of labour that:
… fundamentally restructured the relations of production in the Third World, with the emergence of a substantial manufacturing sector oriented on the world market. The ‘world market factories’ carried out super-exploitation of their mainly female workers, but created the conditions for the emergence of a ‘classical’ confrontation between labour and capital. [44]
We have seen this long term economic process of class formation begin to express itself, albeit unevenly, in class consciousness and class organisation. If we think of the unions in countries as distant as South Africa, South Korea, Brazil and Indonesia we can see the possibilities. And, as part of this process of class organisation, political consciousness and political, sometimes overtly socialist, organisations have begun to grow. These currents are by no means homogeneous, even among socialists, where reformist and revolutionary alternatives both exist. And socialism, however defined, is by no means the only or the major set of ideas contending to express resistance to the system. Nationalism and Islamic ideas, to mention only two of the most prominent trends, command the support of many millions of workers, peasants and the poor around the globe.
Nevertheless, socialists do have a better chance than for many generations to build support for their views. Globalisation has created an international working class bigger than at any time in the history of capitalism. But it has failed to create a system that can sustain an acceptable livelihood for millions of workers. One consequence of this is a renewed drive to war characteristic of the contemporary imperial structure. The fall of Stalinism means that there is no ideological enemy to blame. This situation has therefore created a crisis of confidence in the system. The physical expression of this crisis is the international anti-capitalist movement.
It is in this anti-capitalist movement, now arguing its way to also being an anti-imperialist movement, that socialists can begin to win a much wider audience for the idea that working people have the power to overthrow the rule of capitalism and imperialism. Moreover, they can begin to successfully advance the view that the system can be replaced with an international system of co-operative labour so organised that it meets the needs of those who produce social wealth. The alternative is that we to allow our rulers to continue the routine business of imperialism – the organisation of human misery.

Notes
1. R. Leger Sivard, World Social and Military Expenditures 1996 (Washington 1996), p. 17.
2. M. Parvizi Amineh, Towards the Control of Oil Resources in the Caspian Region (New York 1999), pp. 5–6.
3. Ibid., pp. 7–8.
4. Ibid., pp. 6–7.
5. Ibid., p. 11.
6. B. Sutcliffe, 100 Ways of Seeing an Unequal (London 2001), p. 14.
7. Quoted in A.G. Frank, Caspian Sea Oil, Still the Great Game for Central Eurasia, a review essay of M.P. Croissant and B. Aras (eds.), Oil and Geopolitics in the Caspian Sea Region (Westport, Conn. and London 1999), csf.colorado.edu/archive/agfrank. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
8. W.J. Clinton, On Track In Kosovo Toward Balkan Renaissance, International Herald Tribune, 24 May 1999.
9. ‘We have demonstrated that we were willing to undertake military action, not to seize territory, not for expansion, not for mineral resources. There is no oil in Kosovo ... there is only some dirty lignite.’ Robin Cook, interviewed by John Lloyd, New Statesman, 5 July 1999, p. 19.
10. A. Rashid, Taliban: Oil, Islam and the New Great Game in Central Asia (London 2000), p. 144.
11. M. Parvizi Amineh, op. cit., pp. 82–84.
12. H. Pinter, The NATO Action in Serbia, in T. Ali (ed.), Masters of the Universe? NATO’s Balkan Crusade (London 2000), p. 333.
13. Quoted in Caspian Pipeline Tug Of War: Washington Favours Geopolitics Over Economics, International Herald Tribune, 9 November 1998.
14. Quoted in A. Rashid, op. cit., p. 156.
15. Strategic Forecasts report, Ajerbaijan Forces Pipeline Issue (1999), www.stratfor.com. [Note by ETOL: This link has not been checked.]
16. US Trade and Development Agency press release, 2 June 1999.
17. See A.G. Frank, op. cit.
18. Racing For Arms, The Economist, 5 June 1999. For more detail see J. Rees, Oil, Gas and NATO’s New Frontier, New Political Economy, vol. 5, no. 1 (March 2000), pp. 100–104.
19. Quoted in A.G. Frank, op. cit.
20. Quoted ibid.
21. See International Institute for Strategic Studies, Strategic Survey 2000/2001 (London 2001), p. 63.
22. Ibid.
23. K. Weisbrode, Central Eurasia: Prize or Quicksand?, International Institute for Strategic Studies, Adelphi Paper 338 (London 2001), p. 23.
24. Ibid., p. 24.
25. See G. Achcar, Rasputin Plays at Chess: How the West Blundered Into a New Cold War, in T. Ali (ed.), op. cit., pp. 66–72.
26. Ibid., p. 72.
27. Quoted in A. Rashid, op. cit., p. 130.
28. D. Johnstone, Humanitarian War: Making the Crime Fit the Punishment, in T. Ali (ed.), op. cit., p. 154.
29. G. Achcar, op. cit., p. 74.
30. For a more elaborated account of this process, see J. Rees, The New Imperialism, in Marxism and the New Imperialism (London 1994), pp. 67–71.
31. See K. Weisbrode, op. cit., p. 19.
32. Ibid., pp. 19–20.
33. Ibid., p. 20.
34. J. Rees, The New Imperialism, op. cit., p. 117.
35. Ibid., p. 121.
36. J. Wilson, S. Goldenberg, E. MacAskill, J. Steele, New Brothers in Arms – Cans and Intelligence, The Guardian, 20 October 2001.
37. G. Lukács, Lenin: A Study in the Unity of his Thought (London 1977), p. 46.
38. G. Lukács, History and Class Consciousness (London 1971), p. 311.
39. V.I. Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 23 (Moscow 1964), p. 61.
40. Ibid., vol. 22, pp. 355–357.
41. N. Bukharin, quoted in A. Brewer, Marxist Theories of Imperialism: A Critical Survey (London 1980), p. 106.
42. K. Marx, quoted ibid., p. 58.
43. R. Munck, The New International Labour Studies (London 1988), p. 33.
44. Ibid.
 



This is a time of change. Old political patterns are being transformed. Ossified relationships are breaking up and new ones are taking their place. New forces are entering the line, revitalising the veterans. It is all long, long overdue.
For 20 years socialists and working class activists have seen trade unionism, welfare provision and left wing consciousness in retreat. We have fought, sometimes in battles on the epic scale of the 1984–1985 miners’ strike, but mostly we have lost. In the 1990s the tide began to turn, at first slowly, almost imperceptibly. Attitudes began to shift. The mania for the market subsided. The poll tax was defeated. Thatcher and Reagan passed into unbalanced retirement. The transformation in popular attitudes eventually registered in a massive electoral defeat for the Tories, part of a European-wide pattern.
Then, as so often happens, these small changes became a change in the look of the whole political landscape. The signal was Seattle. The tens of thousands who demonstrated against the World Trade Organisation in Seattle in November 1999 provided a public language in which it could all be summed up, the language of anti-capitalism. Seattle popularised and legitimised direct action in a way not seen since the 1970s. We have begun to move forward again. Many difficult decisions, many hard battles, and no doubt still some serious defeats, lie ahead. But, for all that, we have begun to move forward again. We have reached a turning point in the class struggle.
This article looks at three decisive sectors in which the struggle is reviving: the anti-capitalist mobilisations, the industrial struggle and the electoral battle. It examines the strategy, tactics and form of party organisation that is necessary for socialists to be effective in strengthening these movements.
 
Anti-capitalism
There has been no year since the 1970s when we could look back over a 12-month period and see an unbroken chain of international demonstrations like those which began in Seattle, and carried on through Washington and Los Angeles in the United States, Windsor in Canada, Melbourne in Australia, Millau and Nice in France, Prague in the Czech Republic, and Davos in Switzerland.
What is it about these demonstrations which mark a watershed? The first and most obvious point is that these demonstrations identify the capitalist system as the enemy. Even when the question which motivates a particular group of protesters seems like a single issue – whether it be genetically modified foods, destructive dam projects in Turkey or India, or ‘unfair’ labour laws – it often turns out that they see multinational corporations, the global market and the drive for profit as the source of the problem. Hence the most popular slogans of the movement: ‘People before profit’ and ‘Our world is not for sale’.
In a report which could have been written about any of the anti-capitalist demonstrations of the last year but was actually written about the protests at President Bush’s inauguration in January 2001, the Washington Post said:
The activists sometimes confound onlookers with the diversity of their concerns, from the environment and civil rights to Third World debt and corporate power. It’s all the same struggle, they say ... ‘We are all united behind a fear and loathing of corporate control in our country,’ says David Levy, 43, a think tank policy researcher ... ‘The government is for sale, and big business bought it.’
It is specifically the global capitalist system that these demonstrators have in their sights. The Washington Post report continues:
The international finance and trade bodies seek to make the world profitable for the same corporations that are running the show in US politics, the demonstrators say ... Framing the issues in this way has allowed disparate causes to unite against common enemies. Save the rainforest and anti-sweatshop activists, for example, stand against the same trade and development policies that might boost corporate investment in a poor country engaged in selling off its natural resources. Global capitalism is unjust and ineffective in these situations, the activists say. [1]
Where did these mobilisations come from? The long erosion of the pro-market consensus that reached its peak in the Reagan-Thatcher years was their period of gestation. This pro-market consensus was never absolute. A substantial section of the working class, often a majority, always rejected it. But a section of the working class, plus a majority of the middle class and the ruling class, made it hegemonic during the boom of the mid and late 1980s. On the international level the economic disaster which accompanied the introduction of Western-style capitalism into eastern Europe and Russia began to undermine this hegemony throughout the 1990s. The East Asian crash of 1997 and the subsequent crisis in Russia reinforced the growing ideological rejection of the market. The 1992 recession also eroded popular support for pro-market policies in the European and American heartland of the system, paving the way for social democratic and Democrat election victories – despite the fact that the social democrats and Democrats continued to pursue neo-liberal economic policies.
As powerful a dissolvent of neo-liberal ideology has been the domestic experience of privatisation. In hundreds of ways the individual lives of millions of people began to get worse because of the practical effects of neo-liberal economic policies. Work became harder, longer and less secure. The provision of health and education became visibly worse and, at the same time, equally visibly tied to market-style organisational structures. Transportation deteriorated in the hands of private companies. Public housing declined, private house prices soared and then collapsed, leaving many homeless or in negative equity. Then house prices soared again. Superstores so dominated the landscape, especially in medium-sized towns, that critical observers could be forgiven for thinking that the truck-shop system had found its contemporary form. Certainly credit card debt became the modern form of pawnbroking.
Moreover, the ‘public culture’ of the post-war boom, of Beveridge and the welfare state, however far short of its idealised form the reality may have been, was replaced with something much worse. The old reformist consensus of ‘Butskillism’ did at least admit that if there were something wrong with society it might be the system itself that was at fault. [2] If there was poverty, unemployment or poorly educated children, for instance, then it might be necessary to regulate the market or reform the law in order to address the problem. But the neo-liberal doctrine assumes that the market is a more or less perfect method of distributing goods and services. Any attempt to ‘interfere’ with the market must end in a less efficient system. Any ‘reform’ must be aimed at allowing the market greater freedom of operation. This is the rock on which the modern social democratic critique of both Stalinism and of ‘old Labour’ ideology stands, just as it was the rock on which Thatcher’s critique of the ‘wet’ one-nation Tories in her own party stood.
Consequently, for Tony Blair as much as for Margaret Thatcher, if there is poverty, unemployment or educational failure it cannot be the fault of the market. Indeed, failures like these can only have two sources. The first source is that the market is not yet free enough. If privatisation does not work, then more privatisation, more competition, must be the answer. The second source of failure is the individual. If someone is unemployed, and if the fault cannot lie with the market, then it must lie with the individual unemployed person. They must not have trained themselves ‘to fit the needs of the market’, or they must have become ‘welfare dependent’, or they must, more crudely and more commonly, be ‘a scrounger’. Equally, if our ‘reformed’ schools are failing it must be the fault of the teachers, the parents or the children for not making the system work. They should be ‘Ofsteded’, or closed down, or have more market-derived structures imposed on them, or simply have their schools handed over to private companies. [3]
Whatever the issue, this logic is one that systematically blames the victim for the crime. It promotes a culture of scapegoating. At its extreme this logic ends in demonising beggars or the homeless, asylum seekers or black people in general. But its effects are just as disgusting, if less obvious, among working people as a whole. This neo-liberal ‘market morality’ attempts to convince working people that they should blame one another for the failures of the system. The social services worker is encouraged to blame the unemployed worker, the parent to blame the teacher. And it attempts to convince us that as long as we can buy a little better education, healthcare or transport provision than our neighbour then we are ‘doing alright’ and they are ‘the problem’.
The great virtue of the anti-capitalist movement is that it expresses the pent-up anger that has consumed many working people for the last two decades. It says to them that they and their kind are not to blame. It says, as many had long suspected, that it is not they who are failing the system but the system that is failing them. Moreover, it tells them that here, right in the heart of the system, hundreds of thousands reject the priorities of the system. This is why the word ‘Seattle’ brings smiles to the faces of any trade union, campaign or radical audience.
Seattle and the demonstrations that have followed it were not just another crowd on the streets protesting about one more issue. Seattle was, in aspiration even more than in numbers, a response on an appropriate scale to what the system has been doing to us for 25 years. It is almost as if a movement has arrived that no longer wishes simply to fight pit closure by pit closure, redundancy by redundancy, welfare cut by welfare cut, and has suddenly decided to try and confront the cause as well as the effects of the system. In doing so it has given a tremendous boost, a whole new ideology of resistance, to every battle against job losses or cuts.
In this sense anti-capitalist movements are giving a particular coloration to every other movement of resistance against the system, no matter how partial. Campaigners against tube privatisation in London suddenly see Balfour Beatty, the likely beneficiaries, in the light of the campaign to stop the building of the Ilisu dam in Turkey by the same company. Trade unionists are now being thrust into a politicised world where environmental protesters and socialists are their allies, where the effects of imperialism and global capitalism on the Third World are being raised point blank, and where mass action is increasingly being seen as the accepted method of struggle.
This raises another qualitatively distinct aspect of the anti-capitalist mobilisations: labour movement involvement. In Seattle, in Millau and in Nice the labour movement participated on a massive scale. Many tens of thousands of organised workers marched in the most politicised environment of the last 20 years. This is a large claim, but it can be justified by comparing the current struggles to earlier movements. The miners’ demonstrations in Britain, especially in 1992, were bigger. But they were defeated and, however angry, were concerned with the single issue. The poll tax demonstration in 1990 was large, militant and victorious but contained no sizeable contingent of organised workers and was concerned with a single issue. The demonstrations and public sector general strikes in France in 1995 are the most obvious precursor. They were part of a rising tide of industrial struggle and highly politicised. But even they did not openly direct their anger against the capitalist system, and they were not part of an international movement in the way that the demonstrations of 2000 have been.
Of course there are real weaknesses with the anti-capitalist movement. It is a movement of a minority. The re-politicisation of even the core of the organised working class is still only at an embryonic stage. It is a movement that is clear what it is against, but less clear about why and what the alternative might be. Many in the movement are not clear about whether or how the organised working class fits in with their opposition to capitalism, despite the labour movement participation in the larger demonstrations.
Even as the demonstrations continue, the ruling class is shifting its positions to try and meet the challenge that these mobilisations represent. The use of the stick continues – the riot police, teargas, armoured cars and border blockades meet every protest. But in Prague and Nice in 2000, and in Davos in 2001 the leaders of the international capitalist institutions, aware of their isolation and unpopularity, have tried to engage in ‘dialogue’ so that they can ‘put the case for globalisation and free trade’. So it came to be that as the World Economic Forum elite met in Davos in January 2001, protected by the police and army inside a 30-kilometre exclusion zone, they offered to debate via a television link with delegates at the anti-capitalist ‘alternative Davos’ conference organised by the World Social Forum in the Brazilian city of Porto Alegre. Multi-millionaire speculator George Soros and former European commissioner for trade Pascal Lamy argued the case with Porto Alegre delegates José Bové and the leaders of Brazil’s Workers’ Party. [4] Different strategies are beginning to emerge within the movement in response to the challenge of incorporation. No doubt the two French junior government ministers and the former French cabinet minister who were delegates at Porto Alegre will favour ‘dialogue’ with George Soros. The majority of activists will see their job as building a mass movement of sufficient power to force the system onto the defensive. A debate is about to ensue.
The revolutionary left has a vital role to play in this discussion, so long as it does not ignore the movement or hector activists in a know-it-all tone. But first the organised left must analyse the new movements and examine how they can be deepened to involve more organised workers and how a strategy to confront the system can be developed. This article is a contribution to that discussion. One crucial issue confronting the new militants is how they should relate to the existing institutions of the labour movement, the Labour parties and the trade unions.
 
Anti-capitalism and modern Labourism
The modern social democratic parties are almost universally proponents of the neo-liberal economic orthodoxy. Their leaders are ‘pro-market’ and ‘business friendly’ to a degree that surprises even the most hardened right wing social democrats of the Cold War era. Consequently, there currently exists an enormous gap between the consciousness of most reformist workers and the policies of the social democratic leaders.
The onset of a period of relative economic stagnation and slow growth in the mid-1970s, followed by the Reagan-Thatcher ‘revolution’, pushed the entire establishment political spectrum to the right. Neo-liberal free market ideology became dominant, socialist ideas became marginalised. But once the boom of the mid to late 1980s collapsed, this right wing tide receded among those sections of the working class where it had taken hold. As it did so it revealed that the old Labour welfare consensus was largely intact, even if the unions and the Labour Party were now much less willing to defend it. The collapse of the Stalinist states, because they were widely associated with socialism, confirmed the prejudices of ruling class and social democratic commentators. It also demoralised the Stalinist-oriented left, which included many on the Labour left. But at just the same time revulsion at the ‘excesses’ of the 1980s was spilling over into a wholesale popular rejection of privatisation, and attacks on the welfare state in general and the NHS in particular.
The 1990s marked a general move to the left in popular consciousness, and therefore exposed the gap between the New Labour type of social democratic leader and the mass of their traditional supporters. This chasm exists over a number of central issues. The neo-liberal social democrats see the central role of the state as facilitating private capitalist corporations to compete more effectively in the market. Most Labour supporters see the role of the state as limiting the damage done to society by the unbridled pursuit of profit. The new social democrat leaders defend the pursuit of profit, the payment of huge salaries and bonuses, the appointment of corporate executives to positions in the state and the welfare state. Most workers oppose such moves. The New Labour ideologues are privatisers down to their bones. Most of the people who vote for them oppose it with increasing bitterness. The New Labour politicians think the welfare state is wasteful and needs cutting back. Most workers think it is underfunded. The neo-liberals are anti-union but most workers are not.
The passage of time since Labour’s 1997 election landslide has done nothing to diminish this gap between the government and its supporters. The government’s own survey, in a chapter titled The working class and New Labour: a parting of the ways?, has examined this divide. It shows that 83 percent of working class people think that ‘the gap between high and low incomes is too large’. Some 57 percent of workers think the ‘government should spend more on health, education and social benefits’. Some 40 percent of workers agree, with only 29 percent disagreeing – ‘even if it leads to higher taxes’. [5] Indeed, the main development noted is that the opinions of many middle class people now shadow the attitudes of workers on these issues. Years of privatisation and cuts are now driving sections of the middle class to draw the same conclusions that working class people reached long ago.
There have also been contrary indications that this disillusionment with the establishment political system could produce the threat of right wing reactions. The election of British National Party member Derek Beackon in London’s East End in 1993 was one such moment. The recent attacks on asylum seekers by the Labour government was another. In Europe the threat has been more substantial: the rise of Le Pen in France, Berlusconi in Italy, the Vlaams Blok in Belgium, the neo-Nazis in Germany and Haider in Austria underline the dangers. But in Britain, and to an even greater extent in France, it has been the left wing trajectory of popular consciousness that has been the dominant feature. This can change, of course. And part of maintaining this left trajectory is to vigorously meet and defeat such right wing threats as soon as they emerge. So far this has been the pattern.
A related fact is that on some social questions – ‘family’ issues, immigration, race, law and order – Labour leaders stand closer to the consciousness of the mass of workers. The British Social Attitudes survey argues, ‘There are in fact two types of class-related issues, and thus two potential sources of divergence between the working class and New Labour: traditional economic issues to do with redistribution, on which the working class are on “the left”, and social issues to do with tolerance, morality, traditionalism, prejudice and nationalism, on which the working class are on “the right”.’ [6] And at times various politicians, both Tory and Labour, have attempted to mobilise popular opinion on these issues to re-establish their support. Sometimes they have been at least partially successful. The initial stage of the Child Support Agency or Section 28, or the first phase of the recent scare over asylum seekers are examples. But resistance from the left, plus the obvious injustice of the measures themselves as they are put into practice, have often turned the ideological tables on the government and its supporters.
More fundamentally, the working class consensus over issues which are essential to the success of any social democratic government – the welfare state most obviously – has remained resolutely opposed to the neo-liberal agenda. And this is what has prevented any further closing of the gap between the policies of the social democrats and the consciousness of most workers.
This does not mean that most workers have a socialist consciousness, let alone a revolutionary consciousness. Nor does it mean they will desert Labour at the ballot box, especially when the Tories are the only viable national alternative capable of forming a government. In many ways working class reformist consciousness has remained remarkably consistent since the 1970s. But mainstream reformism can no longer deliver these aspirations. As a result ‘reformist’ consciousness now finds itself confronted with a crisis of political representation. No establishment politician will put forward a programme that represents these traditional working class needs. In a way this was always true. Labour always only partially represented these aspirations and was even more partial in realising them once in office. But there was some congruence. Now that area of congruity has been reduced to a bare minimum. Support for Labour now devolves more fully than ever to fear of the Tory alternative and less than ever on positive affirmation of Labour policies. Workers vote against the Tories, not for Labour. Or they simply don’t vote at all.
The by-elections and council elections during this Labour government have seen some of the lowest turnouts since the war. Hillary Benn won his Leeds seat in a by-election with just 19 percent bothering to vote. An ICM/Guardian poll shows only 60 percent intend to vote in the next general election compared to 64 percent at the same stage in 1997. The eventual turnout will probably be about 67 percent to 69 percent – the lowest level since 1945. Labour voters are less likely to turn out than Tories, and the lowest turnout of all is expected in the Labour heartland seats. [7]
So many workers vote Labour with a heavy heart, and many don’t vote at all. In both groups there are great numbers who have begun to question the democratic system. In a recent survey 58 percent thought that ‘government ministers putting interests of business before people’ was ‘a major problem’. Another 29 percent thought it ‘a minor problem’ but only 6 percent thought it ‘not a problem’. Financial sleaze in government is a major problem for 49 percent and a minor problem for another 39 percent. Again, only 6 percent think it is not a problem. But perhaps the most damning findings are the ones that show the lack of faith in the parliamentary system as a whole. Two years ago only 41 percent of people though the system of governing was working well. Today that proportion has fallen to 31 percent. [8] Further evidence of this mood is contained in table 1.



Table 1: LOSING FAITH IN DEMOCRACY




Do you think this country is getting more or less democratic?



 



Do you trust ministers and their advisory committees to tell the truth about each of the following?



 


This process is also reflected in the erosion of Labour’s core organisation. Labour’s membership has fallen during the course of its time in government. Fewer now attend ward or constituency meetings. Fewer canvass at election times. Councillors regularly defect not to the Liberals or the Tories, but to become Labour independents. A minority have begun to search for a new political home. As they do so, even though they start out from traditional reformist consciousness, the fact that the traditional organisational receptacle for this consciousness is no longer adequate forces them to begin to draw more left wing conclusions. They reconsider whether the old party was ever socialist. And if it was not, they ask themselves, why not? They consider allies to their left that they had previously rejected. And they re-evaluate other methods of struggle, from trade unionism and environmentalism, through direct action, to revolutionary organisation, which had previously not interested them.
This is why the rise of the anti-capitalist movement is of such central importance to the crisis of reformism. It provides an alternative ideology and an alternative political home for reformist activists. This home too may only be temporary, but it is at least a house where those breaking from reformism to the left and revolutionaries can co-operate to build a stronger movement. Here too they can debate the way forward. The same general point can be made about the Socialist Alliances that have tried to provide an electoral alternative to the left of New Labour.
This process of recomposition is more advanced than many on the left realise, but it still affects a minority in the labour movement. Many trade union leaders have accepted a version of the neo-liberal consensus only a couple of steps to the left of the Labour Party leaders themselves, though the evident contempt with which New Labour treats the unions has ruffled the feathers of even these chickens. But below the level of the union leaders, the fundamental strength of the unions and the strength of their ties with the Labour Party remain considerable. Talk of ‘Tory Blair’ indicates the depth of disillusionment with the New Labour project. It would be foolish of socialists not to share and express this bitterness. But error creeps in at the point where this rhetoric crosses over into a serious contention that the Labour Party has fundamentally changed its nature.
The arguments to support the contention that the Labour Party has become a second Tory party are as follows: (1) the leader, Tony Blair, is the most right wing the Labour Party has ever had; (2) the policies of New Labour are more right wing than ever before; and (3) Labour is now funded by big business and not by the unions. Let us examine these arguments in sequence. Tony Blair is certainly a right wing, pro-market politician. And Blair’s values are so at variance with those of most Labour Party members that it can easily be true that, as Peter Mandelson’s friend the author Robert Harris puts it, ‘Blair hates the Labour Party.’ But he has yet to split his party, as did a previous generation of Labour leaders – Roy Jenkins, Shirley Williams, William Rodgers and David Owen – when they formed the Social Democrats. Nor has he split his party and joined a Tory government, as Ramsay MacDonald did in the 1930s. It seems premature, therefore, to conclude that Blair is more right wing than all his political ancestors.
Neither are the policies of the Labour government more right wing than those of Jim Callaghan’s government in the 1970s. That Labour government still holds the distinction of being the only government in post-war British history which, through the Social Contract, forced down the real wages of employed workers. Its policy on immigration, including the introduction of virginity tests, was a match for New Labour’s, and it led directly to the rise of the National Front. Callaghan’s infamous ‘family values’ speech was the template around which all subsequent reactionary Tory and Labour social commentaries drew. And Denis Healey, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, introduced the IMF cuts package which set the tone for the whole Thatcher period, just as Labour’s strike-breaking during the Winter of Discontent paved the way for Thatcher’s anti-union drive. It is true, however, that Tony Blair has abandoned the ‘old Labour’ welfare state consensus. To find a full parallel for this kind of devotion to free market economics we would have to go back to pre-war leaders of the Labour Party like Ramsey MacDonald and Philip Snowden.
Finally, it is not true that union money is now irrelevant to the Labour Party. The £8 million which Labour fundraisers want from the unions for the party’s election fund is decisive in allowing the party to compete effectively with the Tories. It is true that there are more individual and business donations to the Labour Party than previously. It is also the case that some of these come from business people disaffected with the Tories at a time when that party is at a historic low in its electoral fortunes. It is certainly true that this development has encouraged New Labour’s pro-business stance, and that it has increased the level of sleaze in the Labour Party. But this is not the same thing as saying that the Labour Party has fundamentally changed it character. It is still the political expression of the trade union bureaucracy and it enjoys the support of most organised workers. It is, as Lenin described it, a ‘capitalist workers’ party’. That is, it is funded and supported by organised workers despite the fact that it supports the capitalist system.
The challenge for socialists is to act on this contradiction in a way that appeals to the class consciousness which encourages workers to support Labour rather than the Tories in order to detach them from their allegiance to the Labour Party. Asserting that they and their party are the same as the party of William Hague, Michael Portillo and Ann Widdecombe is not the best way to do this. It is far better to explain that, while we will always support the party of the trade unions against the open and unashamed party of the bosses, we want to build a real socialist alternative to both. Many workers already detest the Blair government for continuing Tory policies. They are right to do so. We share their anger. We and they can win many more workers to a socialist alternative. This is best done by showing that there is a better and more consistent way of fighting for the very things Labour supporters thought they would achieve by backing the Labour Party in the first place. Our approach in the coming election should be ‘vote Socialist where you can, vote Labour where you must’.
 
The crisis of reformism
Reformism will not crumble simply as a result of its current crisis. To understand why, we have to look at the fundamental reasons workers hold reformist ideas in the first place. This in turn requires us to pay some attention to the social position that workers occupy in capitalist society. This position is a contradictory one. On the one hand the collective labour of workers is the basis of production in society. At the birth of capitalism the steam engine could not function, nor the power loom weave, nor ships put to sea without the labour of workers. So today power stations do not function, nor cars and planes get built, nor supermarkets open without the labour of workers. This invests workers with a tremendous potential power to determine the fate of society.
On the other hand, workers today can no more gain access to the means of production than they could at the birth of capitalism. Just as the textile mills, the factories, the department stores of the past would only allow a worker access to the means of production if they agreed to the condition of wage labour, so it is in the car plants, the call centres, the supermarkets of today. As it was then, it is now: the hours, the type and conditions of work along with the rate of pay are still largely determined by employers. Having to sell their ability to work to employers encourages workers to believe that they are powerless in the face of the vagaries of the ‘labour market’, depriving them of the sense that they can shape their own destiny.
This is the root of contradictory consciousness among the working class. They are the wealth creators, potentially the most powerful class in capitalist society, the class on whose action, both economic and political, the fate of the society turns. But they are at the same time reminded on an hourly basis that they only work when the forces of the market permit, that their fate rests with this impersonal power, that they are subordinated by the very wealth they create.
The initial form in which this situation is reflected in the minds of workers is a consciousness that tries to bind together these contradictory impulses – on the one hand the impulse to transform capitalist society, on the other the feeling that such transformation must not exceed the limits stipulated by the ruling class. Reformism is one of the most characteristic forms that this consciousness takes. Reformism codifies and crystallises the notion that, although the society requires alteration, such transformation can only take place within the economic and political institutions provided by the system itself. Trade unionism, the desire to better the terms on which workers are exploited, is one expression of this process. But trade unionism, operating primarily at an economic level, raises the question of what sort of political organisation workers should build. Reformist political parties are only one possible alternative, though to many workers they initially seem the most plausible.
It is for this reason that reformist consciousness, sometimes of a more left wing variety and sometimes of a more right wing variety, dominates the thinking of the majority of the working class for long periods of time. Consequently, both revolutionary ideas and outright reactionary or conservative ideas are for equally long periods minority currents within the working class.
There is, however, a problem with this account of reformist consciousness. On this analysis we would be driven to the conclusion that reformism is the ‘natural’ home of the majority of workers. Yet we know that this is certainly not the historical experience. In decisive moments of historical change the majority of workers come to embrace the belief that they can transform the existing society by the direct use of their own power institutionalised in bodies of their own creation. Such was the situation in Russia in 1917, in Germany between 1918 and 1923, in Spain in 1936, in Hungary in 1956 and in Poland in 1980–1981, for instance. Such upheavals, along with many more minor crises that have disrupted the existence of a reformist compromise in workers’ ideology, grow out of the fundamental economic instability of the system. The assumption that we can get some of what we need by working inside the system is challenged by periods where capitalism fails to meet the economic, social and political aspirations of working class people. At such times the growth of a revolutionary minority into a majority becomes possible. That this revolutionary consciousness is not always fully formed, institutionally expressed and therefore ultimately successful in every previous revolution is exactly the issue it is now necessary to address.
Capitalism is so economically, socially and politically unstable that it periodically undermines the class compromise that underpins working class reformist consciousness. The Labour Party is currently caught in the coils of one such crisis. The capitalist system has been increasingly trying to shift the burden of the crisis onto the shoulders of working people for more than a quarter of a century. Economic growth is not only much slower than during the post-war boom, but lower in the 1990s than in the 1980s. As the Financial Times reports, ‘Remember that economic growth between successive cyclical peaks was 3.3 percent a year in the 1980s, against about 3.1 percent in the 1990s.’ [9]
Labour is grappling with the effects of this long cycle of attacks on workers. Its quick fixes fail, and the system does not have the resources for a work of more substantial reconstruction in key areas such as public transport, health and education. This leaves many Labour supporters in as dire straits as they were under Tory rule. Indeed, some are worse off. Between 1995–1996 and 1997–1998 the number of people on very low incomes (less than two fifths of the national average) grew by more than 1 million to a total of 8 million. In 1998 14 million people were below the government’s poverty line. This included some 4.4 million children compared with an estimated 1.7 million in 1979. The level of unemployment significantly affects poverty. And although Labour boasts that the official figure for unemployment is at a 25-year low, calculated by those claiming benefits, the real number of those who would like paid work but have none now stands at 4 million. [10]
Even the great good fortune of Labour’s first term coinciding with the upswing of the business cycle and buoyant government finances has not allowed Blair and his ministers to effectively deal with these structural issues. As Peter Kenway, co-director of the New Policy Institute, argues:
Time will tell if the measures announced in recent budgets can succeed in turning the tide of poverty and social exclusion. But these figures show that an improving economy and falling unemployment are not enough on their own. As the government’s policies for tackling these problems begin to bite, poverty is at levels close to the high-water mark reached in the early 1990s. [11]
Such a high-water mark was reached in the early 1990s not only because of the effects of long years of Tory government but also because the early 1990s were a time of serious recession. Labour has so far avoided having to govern through such a period, mainly because of the reflationary measures taken in the US to avoid the 1997 crash in South East Asia and Russia spreading to the Western industrialised countries. But Labour will not be able to avoid this conjuncture forever. Any recession will not only worsen the material conditions in which Labour voters live, it will also do great damage to some of the most cherished myths in the New Labour ideological lexicon.
One such myth was that the boom was the result of a ‘new economy’. New Labour bought the ‘new economy’ theory wholesale from American economic pundits and Clinton spin doctors. The belief was that the business cycle was at an end, and that new flexible markets and new technology firms would ensure it never returned. Gordon Brown seemed at times to be repeating word for word the speeches of Nigel Lawson in the late 1980s – just ahead of one of the severest recessions of the post-war period. Now, once again, previous cheerleaders for the new economy theory are voicing their doubts. The Financial Times argues:
The business cycle is decidedly alive. That should not surprise anybody...cycles can occur – and frequently have occurred – in flexible economies with credible monetary anchors. All that is needed is a big investment expansion fuelled by expanding credit and a strong stock market. Indeed, the firmer the belief that the business cycle is dead, the greater the confidence and the likelihood of business cycles. [12]
Neither has the Financial Times now got much time for that other economic icon of New Labour, the reviving powers of the dot.com revolution:
Internet mania looks like an only slightly less irrational version of the South Sea Bubble. The notion that information technology represents the greatest transformation since the industrial revolution is historically illiterate. The technological changes between 1880 and 1940 exceed, in both scope and intensity, all that has happened since.
Those changes included new sources of energy (electricity and petroleum), new industries (motor vehicles and pharmaceuticals) and new products (cars, washing machines, telephones, radio, television, penicillin). They profoundly altered what was produced and how. They also transformed the way people lived. Against all that, what are the personal computer and even the internet? [13]
The economic prospects for Labour’s second term do not look promising. The social, political and ideological impact of another recession is likely to deepen the crisis of reformism.
This crisis raises the question of what organisations and institutions inside the working class can accelerate or retard the development of a socialist alternative to New Labour. This is a vital question because no economic or social crisis is ever sufficient in itself to ensure the replacement of reformist consciousness with revolutionary consciousness. Reformist consciousness is always embodied in certain theories, ideologies, institutions and organisations. And so too must its revolutionary replacement. Ideologies and theories are always concretised and popularised by organisational forms. Some group must organise to disseminate by whatever means – speaking, broadcasting, e-mailing, phoning, printing and distributing – a common set of ideas. Effective action that corresponds to these ideas must be organised by co-ordinated networks of politically informed activists. In short, such action requires political organisation.
Reformism is weak when it is unorganised by trade union leaders and social democratic parties. Paradoxically, the underdeveloped level of reformist organisation, a product of Tsarist repression, ultimately undermined Tsarism in Russia in 1917. Nevertheless, reformist organisation can grow rapidly, even in a revolutionary situation, by battening onto workers’ desire to transform the system without confrontation, as did the Spanish and Portuguese social democrats after the fall of the fascist dictatorships in the 1970s. But so too can revolutionary organisations, especially in such times of flux, if they know how to exploit the cracks appearing in the reformist consciousness and reformist organisation.
One such prolonged period of transition appears to be under way in Britain today. The end of the post-war boom in the 1970s and the decades of slow economic growth that followed have restricted the reformists’ ability to grant meaningful reforms. The welfare state consensus and the toleration of some trade union influence on government are now greatly curtailed. Active participation in Labour Party organisation is at an all-time low. As a consequence popular scepticism about the political system as a whole is at historically high levels. The links between trade union activists and local campaigners on the one hand and Labourism on the other is weaker than at any point in the post-war period.
But for all this Labourism is far from dead. The 8 million workers in the unions can still be addressed and influenced by union leaders deeply committed to the reformist project. The repellent power of the Tories, despite the current weakness of the Tory party, is still a powerful call on the loyalty of class conscious workers. What is necessary to turn the crisis of Labourism into a step forward for the working class is to actively replace reformist organisation with an alternative. Reformism never simply disappears. It always has to be actively replaced by a superior set of ideas embodied in an alternative organisation. Reformist workers have to be sure that the things they thought could be fought for by joining the Labour Party can be better achieved by other methods before they will desert the Labour Party, even a Labour Party whose leaders have turned their backs on these workers’ most cherished aspirations.
This will not happen all at once. The erosion of reformism will be a long process. As workers reject their old leaders they will not immediately flock to revolutionary organisation. They may believe that ‘old Labour’, even in its more right wing forms, is what we need to recreate. Many will certainly believe that the ideas of Bennism at its high point in the early 1980s provide a model for reviving the Labour movement. Some will despair of parliamentary politics and believe that single issue activism is now all that can be done. Others will want to combine this with participation in the anti-capitalist movement, believing that movements rather than parties are now the best option for radicals. The 15 or 20 years of internal war by the right wing against the left wing in the Labour Party, from the defeat of Bennism, through the expulsion of Militant, to the resignation of Ken Livingstone, has produced a generation of exiled activists. The rise of Tony Blair has massively added to their number. The revival of the wider movement, crucially around anti-capitalism broadly conceived, has thrown them together with revolutionary socialists in common struggle. The issue that now confronts us is how to build the most effective socialist movement in these new circumstances.
 
The audience for socialism
To understand how to build the anti-capitalist, labour and socialist movement we need to clearly state its current composition. Its dominant element is the anti-capitalist element, but not because anti-capitalist activists are the most numerous part of the movement, certainly in Britain. The anti-capitalist element dominates because it gives a shape, a wider ideology to a host of other struggles. The anti-capitalist activists, among them revolutionary socialists, may be a minority of the movement, but their arguments find a profound echo among much wider layers of workers. These people, once they are in touch with such ideas, sometimes through direct contact with activists, sometimes simply through reading the books and journalism of anti-capitalist writers, become more consciously anti-capitalist themselves.
Single issue campaigners are, in formal terms, probably still the most numerous element of the new movement. The range of issues around which people are organising is almost dazzling in its diversity. There are international campaigns on issues of such general importance to the system that it makes little sense to simply refer to them as single issue campaigns. Drop the debt campaigners in Jubilee 2000, environmental campaigners in People and Planet or those campaigning against sweated labour in the Third World are confronting a ‘single issue’ of such enormity that its political ramifications demand a more general critique of the system. Many of these activists have such a critique, although it may not be a revolutionary or socialist critique. Nevertheless, it is not easily absorbed within the usual bounds of reformist politics either.
Then there are campaigns around national issues such as privatisation of public transport and the NHS, in opposition to neo-liberal education policies, the sell-off of council housing, and so on. These campaigns are also the most likely nexus where trade union action and general campaigning meet. The anti-capitalist movement lends a general critique of the system to these struggles in a way that was not available in the past even to much more numerous and militant campaigns, such as the anti poll tax movement. Not all the 75 percent of the population who were opposed to privatisation of the rail network would consider themselves anti-capitalist, but a significant minority are now open to a thorough-going critique of the market.
Beyond this there are a mass of local campaigns to save schools and hospitals, to stop landfill sites and incinerators, against runway developments at local airports, or the closure of swimming pools and libraries. These too have a political significance beyond their immediate goals, because the environment in which they now take place gives them a general political charge that they previously lacked. Now people say, however small our struggle, we are all against the privatisers and their corporations, against the fat cats in industry and government, against the spin doctors and their political masters, local and national.
Yet more people are beginning to enter this movement from trade union struggles. Trade union militants were hit hardest by the defeats of the Thatcher years. The recovery has been long and is by no means complete. But a radicalised consciousness already exists, as ballot after ballot in favour of strike action proves. And increasingly action is beginning to result. In the Post Office and, to a lesser extent, in the car industry in particular the tide of struggle continues to surge forward, only to fall back when it encounters the barrier of the trade union bureaucracy. But the rise in the general level of the movement, and the government’s hostility even to the trade union bureaucracy, is beginning to make it seem much more likely that one or another of these forward surges will begin to finally turn the tide on this front.
There have also been some important changes on the electoral front. Political discontent with New Labour has recently found expression in this least promising of all territory for socialists. Ken Livingstone’s decision to split from the Labour Party and run his own campaign for London mayor broke the mould. Livingstone’s actual campaign was both low key and by no means socialist. But the fact that someone still widely known as Red Ken, with a left wing past, could break from Labour and beat the Millbank machine in a highly publicised electoral battle was more significant than Livingstone’s middle of the road policies. Labour activists in London simply refused to fight for their candidate. Many of them supported Livingstone either openly or covertly, and some also supported the London Socialist Alliance candidates for the Greater London Assembly.
In many localities independent, socialist or local campaign candidates have taken on Labour and beaten it. This is most obviously true of the Scottish Socialist Party’s electoral success. But it is also true in Preston, Coventry, Burnley, Kidderminster and other places. These developments have coincided with a widespread questioning by trade unionists of political fund donations to the Labour Party. The postal union, the CWU, is due to debate this issue, and it has been a constant argument in the Fire Brigades Union. The election of Mark Serwotka in the PCS, the civil servants’ union, means that support for the Socialist Alliance will be raised here as well. In every union activists who raise this issue can be sure of the most sympathetic hearing they have received in decades.
This then is the composite nature of the audience for socialism. Some of these people are directly and immediately open to the ideas of revolutionary socialism. But many are not. They are not hostile to revolutionary politics, except in a small minority of cases. They want to work with revolutionaries in a common project of rebuilding the left, and are willing to discuss our ideas and theirs in the process. The crucial question, therefore, is what structures we can build together which allow us to rebuild the movement and continue this debate. The unions are clearly one vital forum, bequeathed to us by the history of the working class. But there are other, new organisations that we need to build afresh. The united front is clearly one formula on which we can draw in the arena of general campaigning. The electoral field provides fewer models from the past of the socialist movement, although there is some experience on which we can draw. Let us look at each of these in turn.
 
Socialists, the rank and file, and the unions
In the late 1960s and early 1970s the long post-war cycle of economic expansion began to falter and the first major crisis shook the Western economies. The stable conditions and full employment of the boom had allowed trade unions in Britain to expand their numbers, taking in many white collar workers as well as the traditional core of manufacturing workers. It had also allowed shop stewards’ organisation to take root in many workplaces. The shop stewards drew their strength from their ability, in a tight labour market, to determine working conditions and wage levels by the use or threat of strike action. Such strikes were often brief and limited in their demands. As such they did not need to appeal to the trade union bureaucracy for assistance and so were often unofficial.
When the economy began to falter this type of trade union organisation was identified by employers and government alike as the cause of the ‘British disease’. The Wilson government of the late 1960s first mooted legislation to curtail union power in the white paper In Place of Strife. A union revolt put paid to this project in the short term. But it was the parent of all the attempts to shackle the unions that followed. There were many children. Ted Heath’s Tory government’s Industrial Relations Act was one.
The combination of an economic crisis and a government and employer anti-union offensive clashed with the shop stewards’ organisation and the left which had grown out of the 1960s. The result was, at first, a stunning victory for the working class against the Tory government. The strikes of 1972 destroyed Heath’s industrial relations legislation and the miners’ strike of 1974 destroyed the government. But the coming to power of a Labour government exposed the fatal weakness of the working class movement – its political leadership. The shop stewards’ organisation was dominated by the political influence of the Labour Party itself and the Communist Party. The policy of both was to support the ‘social contract’ between the unions and the government. The effect was to politically behead the shop stewards’ movement. Real wages fell as the union leaders and the increasingly bureaucratised convenors and senior stewards policed the rank and file for the Labour government. Despite the late revolt of the Winter of Discontent the failure to provide an alternative political leadership inside the working class movement led to Thatcher’s election victory in 1979.
The 1980s were marked by a series of intense class battles. The steel workers’ strike of 1981, the miners’ strike of 1984–1985, the printers’ strikes in Warrington and Wapping, and the dockers’ and seafarers’ strikes were long, hard fought, defensive strikes characterised by a low level of rank and file initiative. Every one was defeated. It was one of the most sustained series of reverses for any working class movement in the industrialised world. The ruling class gained some of the most draconian anti-union legislation of any industrialised country. The union leaders buckled.
Despite this shocking series of defeats the British trade union movement remained remarkably resilient, even though its activists were deeply unconfident. At its height there were 12 million workers in the unions. The number is now 8 million. But the decline was mostly a result of high unemployment, peaking at over 3 million during the 1980s, and the changing structure of industry. The government’s own Social Trends survey reports that since its peak in 1979 ‘the largest fall in union membership occurred in 1992, a period of substantial job losses, and the unions have failed to recover membership loss as employment growth has recovered’. [14] This meant that people lost union jobs and, when they were re-employed, there was either a weaker union they did not join, or no union at all.



Graph 1: UK LABOUR DISPUTES – WORKING DAYS LOST






There is no evidence, however, that people left the unions because they were ideologically opposed to them as was often claimed in the Reagan-Thatcher years. In the US, where only 13 percent of the population are in unions, a full 65 percent approve of unions and 32 percent of workers say they want to join a union. [15] Opinion poll evidence in Britain also shows a high level of support for unions. This underlying fact has now registered in increasing union numbers in the last year. Union recognition has also increased substantially, partly as a result of Labour’s union recognition legislation. In 2000 there were 159 union recognition deals struck, twice as many as in 1999. These deals were mainly in private firms, where the union movement was most weakened in the 1980s.
What is happening here is quite clear. The generalised anti-capitalist mood, though still in its fully fledged form the property of a minority, is pulling up the mood of resistance in much wider layers of the class. This in turn is beginning to erode the mood of defeat in the unions, thus affecting their numbers and willingness to take action. This process was already observable in small ways during the 1990s, in the signal workers’ dispute of the early 1990s or the British Airways dispute in the first months of the Labour government, but it has become more pronounced in the last year. The 100,000-strong Rover demonstration, the ferment in Ford Dagenham and at Vauxhall in Luton, the repeated action in the Post Office and by the rail unions have all looked at one time or another as if they would spill over into a decisive struggle on the industrial front. So far the mood has rolled forward and then been rolled back by the union bureaucracy. But the expectation must now be that this process will create an industrial focus for the political discontent that is already the hallmark of the period.
However this may be, what is certain is that there already exists an increasingly politicised minority in every union that is beginning to see the opportunities to rebuild militant trade unionism. This is why it has been possible, despite the absence of a high level of industrial action that has been the usual precondition of such initiatives, to launch successful rank and file papers in the car industry and the Post Office.
The task of socialists is to increase the organisation and independence of action of the rank and file in relation to the employers. Such a task requires independence of action and organisation in relation to the trade union bureaucracy. And this requires a political independence from the Labour Party loyalties of the trade union leaders. It is for this reason that effective rank and file leadership cannot be created without the participation of revolutionary socialists. The critical weakness of the organisationally powerful shop stewards’ movement of the 1970s was its ideological dependence on the Communist Party. The strength of the new rank and file movement must be that socialists stand at its core. Some of these socialists will be revolutionaries, but those who are not must be won to the idea that independence of action, which means political independence from Labour and the Labour-supporting trade union leaders, is the keystone of any effective rank and file movement.
 
The united front
Thousands of new activists are moving into political activity. The issues on which they are doing so range from school privatisation to global warming, from the erection of telephone masts to the use of child labour in Third World countries, and from council housing sell-offs to genetically modified crop trials.
The majority of these activists are clearly not revolutionary socialists and would perhaps not even describe themselves as socialists of any variety. But neither are they convinced reformists in the sense that they are members of, or deeply committed to the values of, the Labour Party. They may be Labour voters, but they are likely to be so more out of a hatred of the Tory party than an ideological fervour for New Labour. They are likely to share many of the sentiments of more openly committed anti-capitalist activists, including a commitment to active campaigning, but they will not necessarily see the working class as the key agent of social change. Commitment to grassroots activism will go hand in hand with admiration for left wing Labour MPs like Tony Benn and Jeremy Corbyn, and journalist-activists like George Monbiot, Susan George, John Pilger, Naomi Klein, Mark Thomas and Paul Foot.
One central task for revolutionaries at the moment is to engage in joint work with these activists in order to rebuild the left. In each campaign the notion of the united front is essential if this task is to be accomplished successfully. The notion of the united front is as old as the working class movement. Its first national formulation was Chartism. Its basic premise is that whatever political differences there may be among different layers and currents in the working class movement, it is still essential to unite in action around common working class goals if we are to be effective against the ruling class. The basic principle of trade unionism – united we stand, divided we fall – is at heart the same as the basic principle of the united front. A trade union deliberately and rightly seeks to unite workers around fundamental issues of wages and conditions irrespective of their political allegiance be they revolutionary, Labour or even Tory. The united front differs in the sense that the point of unity is often a political demand – in defence of council housing or against immigration controls – but the principle remains the same. No worker or working class organisation that agrees with the purpose of the united front should be excluded.
That those bodies included in the united front are composed of workers, or at least not inimical to the interests of workers, is important. It should not be a condition of participation in a united front that everyone agrees on wider socialist values. But it would clearly not advance either the general struggle or the fight on the particular issue if, for instance, the Nazi British National Party, who were opposed to the poll tax, were welcomed into the anti poll tax campaign. Nor would it advance the struggle against the anti-union laws to include in it various right wing Tory ideologues who oppose the legislation because they are opposed to all ‘big government’ interference with the labour market. Various individuals from other classes may identify with the aims of the campaign – but that should be because they have deserted their traditional political stance to do so, and not because the campaign has weakened its standpoint in order to accommodate them.
A second and perhaps larger danger is that the united front becomes simply a talking shop. Of course any campaign needs discussion about its aims and methods. But the great virtue of uniting around a single issue is that the broad parameters of agreement should be decided by the demands of the campaign itself. After all, you are either for or against rail renationalisation, cuts in the NHS or selling off council houses. The real point of the campaign is to mount effective, united action to achieve its goal. Such action is precisely more effective because it brings together individuals and groups who would otherwise disagree but who find themselves united on the single issue. But such unity is only effective if it results in action. Unity in name only, unity in passivity, achieves precisely the same as disunity – nothing. A united front is only a united front when it acts, otherwise it is merely a discussion circle and, since everyone is united on the issue, not a very interesting discussion circle either.
Leon Trotsky provided a general outline of the united front:
… the Communist Party proves to the masses and their organisations its readiness in action to wage battle in common with them for aims, no matter how modest, so long as they lie on the road of the historical development of the proletariat; the Communist Party in this struggle takes into account the actual condition of the class at each given moment; it turns not only to the masses, but also to those organisations whose leadership is recognised by the masses; it confronts the reformist organisations before the eyes of the masses, with real problems of the class struggle. The policy of the united front hastens the revolutionary development of the class by revealing in the open that the common struggle is undermined not by the disruptive act of the Communist Party but by the conscious sabotage of the leaders of the Social Democracy. [16]
Trotsky was writing about mass Communist parties and mass reformist parties in the 1930s, but the same general approach can be applied by much smaller revolutionary organisations today. Mostly their small size will prevent them reaching agreement with national trade union leaders or the national leaders of reformist organisations. But with some union leaders, certainly with some local leaders and reformist MPs such unity is possible. And understanding that such an approach is desirable will prevent revolutionaries from erecting unnecessary barriers between themselves and rank and file reformist workers.
A second point that Trotsky makes here is also of great contemporary relevance: it is through joint struggle that the differences between revolutionaries and reformists become apparent to reformist workers. It is not, in the first instance, because revolutionaries differentiate themselves or counterpose themselves to the reformists inside the united front that reformist workers are drawn to them. It is rather because revolutionaries show in practice that their methods of struggle are superior, more consistent and effective in achieving the joint aims of the united front that reformist workers become open to more general revolutionary politics.
In any struggle, no matter how limited its goals or how ‘reformist’ its demands, the choice of the methods of struggle will reflect the wider politics of those involved. Reformists, especially reformist leaders, will generally favour more passive methods of struggle, be more concerned not to ‘offend public opinion’, depend more on the bureaucracy of the labour movement and less on its rank and file. They will be the first to want to retreat if the fight begins to have more far-reaching consequences. But many reformist workers will not share this approach. They will want to use the most effective methods – those that rely on mass mobilisation, rank and file action, and so on. This is what revolutionaries desire as a matter of principle. For revolutionaries the basic principle of Marxism, the self activity of the working class, is present in every small struggle just as it is in a revolution. It is this principle which binds them to reformist workers who, simply out of a desire for the most effective methods of struggle, come to the same conclusions.
This process can open up the possibility of winning reformist workers to revolutionary conclusions, but it cannot complete the process. For this, other factors must become operative. One is the impact of the wider world. The struggle itself can, more or less sharply depending on its scale and nature, raise issues far beyond the scope of the united front. The role of the police, the state and the media can all become issues of intense discussion during such struggles. International events, struggles in distant parts of the globe, can suddenly seem relevant to workers engaged in united front activity in a way they did not before. But to draw out the full meaning of such issues an organisation that brings to bear on contemporary struggles the whole experience of the working class movement, historical and theoretical, must be present. This is the crucial interface at which reformist workers can be won to revolutionary socialism.
The nature of any particular united front is of course shaped not just by the balance of forces between revolutionaries and reformists. The wider conditions of the class struggle profoundly affect the kind of united fronts that are possible as well as the demands they raise. In the late 1970s and again in the early 1990s the Anti Nazi League created a very effective united front with some reformist politicians, many activists who were broadly reformist in consciousness and a core of revolutionary socialists. But in both cases the wider balance of class forces did not make political generalisation easy. In the late 1970s the downturn in industrial struggle was under way and in the early 1990s its effects were still being felt. This limited the impact of the ANL on the wider struggle.
Many struggles today are still defensive in nature precisely because the neo-liberal inspired attacks on jobs, conditions, unions and the welfare state continue. However, because the political consciousness of many activists is rising the context of united front activity has changed. This makes it possible to initiate united front activity on a wider scale and with greater possibilities of political generalisation. And years of attacks on socialists within the Labour Party and its adoption of the neo-liberal policy agenda have weakened the purchase of reformist leaders and the strength of reformist ideology, resulting in increasing numbers of ‘old Labour’ and left Labour figures countenancing unity with the far left. The rightward trajectory of their own organisation makes it more difficult for New Labour supporters to win their own rank and file away from the influence of revolutionaries. The disappearance of the Communist Party also undermines the effectiveness of the Labour Party cadre that previously relied on it both for ideological guidance and to discipline the far left.
 
Elections and Socialist Alliances
The institutions of parliamentary democracy are inextricably tied to the bourgeois state machine. They cannot legislate a socialist society into being because the ruling class would not permit it and, as importantly, because the creation of a socialist society requires the active participation of the majority of workers. It thus demands new institutions, democratically elected workers’ councils, which embody this principle. Even when Trotsky was arguing against the ultra-left in the Communist International and in favour of electoral participation he was careful to restate this point of principle:
… parliament has been transformed into a tool of lies, deceit, violence and enervating drivel ... That is why it is the working class’s immediate historic task to wrest this apparatus from the ruling classes, smash and destroy it, and replace it with new organs of proletarian power. [17]
This is the very first letter of the revolutionary alphabet. But it is far from being the whole story of revolutionary strategy and tactics. Indeed, it is not even the whole story about parliamentary democracy.
In the first instance parliamentary democracy is a form of bourgeois state which, under certain circumstances, revolutionaries defend. In the face of a military coup or a fascist rising, for instance, revolutionaries would make common cause with reformists in defending parliamentary democracy even if, in the course of such a struggle, we would seek to increase the strength of the revolutionary forces to the point where parliamentary democracy could be replaced with a superior form of democratic institution. This is what happened in Russia in 1917 when the Kornilov coup against the Kerensky government was defeated by the workers’ councils which then went on in October to replace Kerensky’s government itself.
Secondly, parliamentary elections and the parliaments themselves may not be the decisive site of class struggle, but they are nevertheless a reflection of that struggle. In the debates in the Communist International on the question of electoralism Lenin argued:
It has been claimed here that we waste a great deal of time by participating in the parliamentary struggle. Can one conceive of any other institution that all classes participate in to the degree they do in parliament? This cannot be created artificially. If all classes are drawn into the parliamentary struggle, it is because class interests and class conflicts are reflected in parliament. If it were possible everywhere and immediately to bring about, let us say, a decisive general strike to overthrow capitalism at a single stroke, the revolution would already have happened in a number of countries. But we must reckon with the facts, and parliament is a scene of the class struggle. [18]
Thus participation in parliamentary elections by revolutionaries can be a method of increasing the consciousness and combativity of the working class – exactly the opposite of the effect desired by establishment defenders of the parliamentary system. For as long as workers look to parliamentary democracy to remedy their grievances with the capitalist system revolutionaries will find an audience for their views by standing in elections. The Bolsheviks were still standing in parliamentary elections, to the Constituent Assembly, after the October Revolution. The point of such a revolutionary election campaign is not to deepen the atomisation of workers by running candidates who claim that the parliamentary system can solve workers’ problems as long as voters return revolutionaries rather than their opponents to power. On the contrary, the aim is to give voice to working class demands which are normally excluded from mainstream political debate, to agitate for action from below, to support those workers who are already fighting, to make general socialist propaganda, and to criticise the ruling class and reformist parties.
In the Communist International discussions J.T. Murphy, the veteran of the shop stewards’ movement and early leader of the British Communist Party, made this point:
The problem before us is not one of keeping ourselves spotless before the world but of carrying the revolutionary struggle not just into the institutions of the working class but into the enemy camp as well ... These tactics are thrust upon a fighting movement by the varying situations in which workers find themselves from time to time. It is not always possible to carry out a strike, and no strike movement maintains itself at a constant pitch of enthusiasm. There are times when it is possible to ... make a frontal attack. But there are also times when ... it is necessary to rally every possible source of strength, to retreat, to make flanking attacks, protest here and there, in short to do everything to keep our forces together. It is on such occasions that we recognise the value of agitational forces inside parliament, and it is on such occasions that our movement has been forced to utilise them. [19]
Murphy went on to warn that if revolutionaries do not create their own leaders in the electoral sphere, be they MPs or, more commonly today, merely candidates recognised as local leaders, they are forced to rely on the reformist and establishment parties:
These situations and these experiences force us to realise the many-sided nature of our fight. To throw aside a weapon such as parliamentary representation of Communists and find ourselves in the ignominious position of having to appeal for aid to the Liberals and reformist Labour men would therefore be the height of folly. We must fight as revolutionaries ... who know how to meet the varying needs of the struggle and not be afraid to mix with the enemy when the occasion demands it. [20]
Such electoral campaigns are not always possible. Sometimes the forces of the revolutionary left are too weak to mount a credible campaign. Sometimes the general balance of class forces, or the balance of political forces in the electoral arena, is so unfavourable that even a sizeable revolutionary party cannot intervene successfully in an electoral campaign. In Britain in the 1970s the Socialist Workers Party, among others, stood candidates in elections. The SWP’s results were poor, but the vote obtained by other socialists was not qualitatively better. The fundamental problem was that the downturn in the class struggle had begun, the focus for many on the left was increasingly directed at the left of the Labour Party and, consequently, the space for a revolutionary electoral initiative was closing down.
Today conditions are different. Most importantly there is a popular mood which stands to the left of the leaders of the Labour Party on nearly all the fundamental issues which are the mainstay of reformist politics: unemployment, funding of the welfare state, pensions, transport and the regulation of big business. Neither is the left looking towards the Labour Party. Since the high tide of Bennism in the early 1980s the left has been all but eradicated from the Labour Party. There now exists a large floating population of left wingers, many of whom have already left or been driven out of the Labour Party, and others who remain members but keep their heads down, who are looking for a socialist alternative to Blairism. They are enthused by the new mood of resistance symbolised by the anti-capitalist demonstrations and share its values. Many are already activists in single issue campaigns. But they are increasingly looking for a broader political response to the failures of the government, for a socialist response that can help rebuild the left. It is in this context that another point made by J.T. Murphy is worth recalling:
Nor should it be forgotten that crises have their beginnings in centres other than those of the industrial organisations. Repeatedly we have witnessed proposals and measures being introduced into parliament that, when put into operation, would vitally affect the movement outside parliament ... without the slightest agitation in the industrial and social life of the masses. Had there been revolutionaries within parliament in living contact with the organised movement outside parliament ... these measures would have been the signal not only for protest within parliament but for rousing the masses and mobilising their forces for struggle outside parliament. [21]
The point that Murphy makes about the role of MPs can also be made generally about the relationship between electoral politics and direct struggle. Conducted by principled socialists, election campaigns can reinforce, even initiate, protests, demonstrations and strikes.
In the last year the far left in Britain has had some fresh experience of electoral politics. The recent by-election results for the Scottish Socialist Party and the Socialist Alliance have been described by electoral analyst John Curtice as ‘basically the best record for the left in post-war Britain’. The nature of the reviving movement and the crisis of reformism has given rise to the specific characteristics of the Socialist Alliance as an electoral intervention. It is clear, for instance, that the Socialist Alliance is not simply an electoral intervention by a revolutionary organisation in the way described by the Communist International or as practised by the Socialist Workers Party in the 1970s. Nor is it even an electoral intervention by an alliance of the revolutionary left, as the French Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire-Lutte Ouvrière list is, despite the desires of some far left groups in the Alliance. Certainly the participation of most of the revolutionary left in a united campaign has been an important precondition of success. This is partly because the British electoral system punishes division especially harshly. More importantly, the effect of a united campaign by the far left is to attract many more beyond their own ranks. Unity stands as an emblem of the seriousness of the enterprise, and as a guarantee that others who join will have the space to argue their own ideas and participate in a genuine discussion about the future of the Socialist Alliance. In this way a campaign initiated mainly by the far left is beginning to attract significant numbers of former Labour supporters to its ranks.
The Socialist Alliance is thus best seen as a united front of a particular kind applied to the electoral field. It seeks to unite left reformist activists and revolutionaries in a common campaign around a minimum programme. It seeks to provide a socialist alternative to the right wing dominated Labour Party on the basis of a series of fundamental working class demands which are common to those who come from the Labour Party and those who are revolutionaries. In formal programmatic terms there is not a very great distinction between the kinds of policies that would be advanced by a revolutionary organisation presenting an electoral platform and those of the Socialist Alliance. But the method of organisation is substantially different.
To begin with, the creation of Socialist Alliances of this kind requires more than asking reformist or left reformist workers and activists to vote for the minimum programme of a revolutionary organisation at an election. It requires building a joint and relatively stable organisation with them. After an election campaign by a revolutionary organisation its supporters either join the organisation or not, but they do not participate in the construction of the organisation if they have not decided to join it. In the Socialist Alliance they should be encouraged to do just this. The virtue of the Alliance structure, of the united front approach rather than declaring a new party, is that it allows this work to continue without posing immediately and point blank whether the supporters of this organisation see themselves as revolutionaries or reformists. The Socialist Alliance thus becomes a unique forum for participation between left reformists and revolutionaries at a high level of political generalisation, that is around a general socialist programme rather than a single issue.
The classical form of the united front is, of course, supposed to be about single issue campaigning. It is supposed to be the case that wider programmatic demands would raise issues on which left reformists and revolutionaries would divide, making agreement and activity impossible. The possibility of wider agreement and activity in the electoral field through a stable electoral organisation grows out of the specific characteristics of the period. The sharp rightward movement of the Labour Party leadership has left many Labour activists homeless and therefore more willing to co-operate with the revolutionary left. The rising mood of political generalisation has pushed together the minimum programme of revolutionaries, at least on some important issues, and the sentiments of a wide layer of activists in the labour movement. The growing mass of single issue campaigns raises the question of how such activists will be represented in the wider political sphere. The Labour Party is either directly encountered as the agency against which they are campaigning or, in a broader sense, opposed to their goals. Some of these activists will become revolutionaries as a result of this experience, many will not. However, for them political activity with revolutionaries will remain an attractive option if the revolutionaries construct a joint home in which such political co-operation can take place. This home must be relatively durable because electoral politics often requires the accumulation of support over successive contests.
There is of course a danger that lurks here. And the more successful the Socialist Alliance becomes the greater the danger will be. The danger is that the more former Labour supporters join the Socialist Alliance the more they are likely to bring with them attitudes, methods and policies that are characteristic of a reformist electoral project, not a revolutionary electoral project. In this joint work revolutionaries will not always find themselves in agreement with their allies. Combining direct action with electioneering will not always come naturally to those from a Labour Party background. On issues such as law and order, ‘family’ legislation, Ireland or the role of the trade union bureaucracy, revolutionaries may well find they have some sharp disagreements with others on the left. Not all of these will be easily resolved.
This danger is not peculiar to the Alliance structure. It existed in the Communist parties of Lenin’s day precisely because many of them were formed by splitting the existing reformist organisations. But it is not the main danger that we face today. The greater danger is sectarianism – that we will not reach out to sufficiently wide layers of reformist workers and activists. But to avoid the danger from the right becoming a threat in the future we need to understand now that patient political argument and discussion with those joining the Socialist Alliance from reformist backgrounds are necessary. The platform and policies of the Socialist Alliance are common ground, but the wider politics which inform them and the methods of struggle necessary to achieve them are not. They have to be won by revolutionaries within the context of joint work.
There is one other prospect ahead of us: a revival in the industrial struggle. How is this likely to affect the electoral project? It is tempting to think that electoral activity is always inversely related to the level of direct struggle on the streets and picket lines. But a moment’s consideration shows that this is frequently not the case. J.T. Murphy, having described how electoral activity can be effective when industrial struggle is low or when struggles erupt in other spheres than that of industry, also pointed out that the relationship is still important even when the industrial struggle is at its height:
No important struggle of the workers against the employing class can take place without having a powerful repercussion inside parliament. This has been well borne out by the experience of the shop stewards’ movement. Time and time again, when they launched into a big industrial fight, the state machinery operated against them, and, inevitably, even those who proclaimed themselves anti-parliamentarians found themselves working with Labour members of parliament and became part of the agitation conducted within the parliamentary institution. Time and time again the members of the industrial union movement, including anti-parliamentarians, waited upon Labour members and others in parliament to secure their services in undertaking protests and mounting agitation within that institution. [22]
Direct struggles will politicise wider layers of workers. Some, again, will immediately join revolutionary organisations. But many will still look to electoral politics to express concerns first raised in direct struggle. Revolutionaries would be foolish to lose the opportunity to address them and work alongside them in this context. Indeed, if revolutionaries abandon this ground we can be quite sure that other left formations, or eventually a revived Labour left, will take the opportunity we ignore.
The labour movement is reviving, and this poses more complex tasks for revolutionaries. During the downturn, especially after the defeat of the Labour left, the choice facing activists in the labour movement was stark: either move to the right, drop out or join the revolutionary left. The SWP tailored its approach accordingly, placing a high priority on insulating its members from the rightward drift in the movement, and stressing the virtues of the revolutionary tradition as a bulwark against pessimism and defeatism. But in a re-emerging left the choices for activists are more complex and more attractive: single issue activism, anti-capitalist activism, rebuilding the unions. In response to this situation it is not enough to proclaim the virtues of the Marxist tradition, although the continuing work of education and propaganda remain vital in any period. But now more is required. Constructive engagement with others in rebuilding the left and the working class movement on every front is what is demanded of revolutionaries. Only from such work can organic relationships with activists and campaigners, shop stewards and rank and file leaders, be developed. Only such joint work can create a large enough leadership within the working class to provide an alternative to trade union bureaucrats and Labour politicians. Only prolonged, serious joint work can create the conditions in which the influence of revolutionary politics can grow.
 
The revolutionary party
A reviving movement faces a revolutionary organisation with as many difficult challenges as a series of defeats. The Bolshevik Party, for instance, was not only wracked by an internal crisis after the failure of the 1905 Revolution. It had already been divided over the upsurge which led to the 1905 Revolution, and it was to suffer the most grave internal crises of its history between the successful February Revolution in 1917 and the October Revolution later that year. It may appear a paradox that an increasingly favourable objective situation for revolutionaries can cause them greater subjective problems, but in reality there is no paradox.
Revolutionary organisations do not adapt their principles according to the circumstances in which they find themselves, but they do and should adapt their perspectives, strategies, tactics, forms of organisation, habits of mind, and even turns of phrase. For a period, sometimes for a long period, such perspectives and methods of organising become almost synonymous with the revolutionary organisation. They may be all that many members know of the organisation. Members may never have shared in any other way of thinking and acting in the class struggle. Any sharp turn of events, for better or for worse, will throw these received notions into question. New conditions require new methods, new perspectives. Argument, discussion, experimentation will be necessary to replace the old ways of working. Not all the arguments in support of a good cause will themselves be good. Not all that is old will prove a failure in new circumstances. And not all experiments will be successful, nor will their results always be clear. As a result such periods of change in the balance of class forces are always periods of intense discussion in revolutionary organisations. Trotsky summarised this process:
Every party, even the most revolutionary party, must inevitably produce its own organisational conservatism; for otherwise it would be lacking in necessary stability. This is wholly a question of degree. In a revolutionary party the vitally necessary dose of conservatism must be combined with a complete freedom from routine, with initiative in orientation and daring in action. These qualities are put to the severest test during turning points in history. [23]
In the same passage Trotsky warns that such periods of change characteristically call forth two mistaken responses in some revolutionaries: ‘Some among them generally incline to see primarily difficulties and obstacles ... and to estimate every situation with a preconceived though not always conscious intention of avoiding any action.’ [24] This is a response conditioned by estimating the opportunities of today with the yardstick of yesterday’s more restricted possibilities. There were some arguments of this nature around the launch of the London Socialist Alliance campaign in the London-wide assembly elections in May 2000. The forces of the far left were too weak, the mood around the Livingstone break from Labour too right wing, to sustain a campaign across the capital, or so the argument ran. It was a plausible, but ultimately incorrect, assessment of the possibilities. Similar arguments have been heard about the significance of the protest at the closure of the Rover plant in Birmingham, and in general about the scale and radicalism of the anti-capitalist mood. It is not necessary to repeat the preceding analysis here to rebut these points. It is merely necessary to show that they are of a type with previous conservative estimations at previous historical turning points.
But Trotsky goes on to warn of a second danger among revolutionaries that is distinguished by a ‘superficial and agitational approach’. Revolutionaries with this approach ‘never see any difficulties until they come into head-on collision with them’. And, precisely as a result of this collision, ‘lofty optimism ... is inevitably transformed into its polar opposite when the hour for decisive action strikes’. [25] This response is much less pronounced on the British left for the time being, although it can quickly develop if the present recovery in the struggle is sustained. And it already exists in the international anti-capitalist movement among various anarchist and autonomist currents.
There are no guarantees that a revolutionary organisation can overcome its inertia and avoid these two dangers. Indeed, we can say with certainty that it is impossible to completely avoid these problems. But the possibilities of doing so to a degree that allows the organisation to play a key role in the emerging struggles depends to a large extent on revolutionaries possessing two sorts of roots.
One sort of rootedness relates to the depth of understanding of the Marxist tradition by the members of the party. The deeper this understanding, the more fully rooted the organisation is in the Marxist tradition, the more likely it is to be able to summon previous experience, at once theoretical and historical, in order to better understand the present. The united front is likely to be better understood by socialists who know about Chartism or the struggle against fascism in Germany. The difficulties faced by revolutionaries are likely to be more fully grasped against the backcloth of Lenin’s theory of the party. Of course, mere rote learning will not suffice. Rote learning merely encourages Marxists to react defensively to new developments in the class struggle. All theory, all historical experience, needs not only to be understood with as great a depth as possible but also to be applied creatively to new circumstances.
To achieve this creative application of theory a second type of rootedness is necessary. The members of the organisation need to be rooted in the class struggle. This is more than a question of active participation in the battles of the day, although this is absolutely essential. But to be fully rooted means more than this. It means to have a general sociological, economic and political picture of the balance of class forces, to study and interpret daily events in the press, the opinion polls and the government statistics. It means to be able to assess, to winnow the wheat from the chaff, in every direct and indirect experience of the state of mind of workers, activists and campaigners.
A vital part of this process is developing organic links with the best militants in the labour and anti-capitalist movement. To do this it is necessary to work alongside them, to organise with them, to discuss and debate with them, sometimes over considerable periods of time. The SWP has emerged from a prolonged period of propaganda politics. We were often reduced, much against our desire, to proclaiming the verities of socialist politics to relatively small audiences. That necessity is retreating. We now need to combine new ways of bringing socialist propaganda to the radicalising movement with an ability to agitate and organise on a wider scale.
We cannot do that without the party having an organic relationship to the best militants in the class, whether or not we expect them to become SWP members in the near future. Every member therefore has to become transformed into what the Italian revolutionary Antonio Gramsci called an ‘organic intellectual’.
Gramsci did not use the term intellectual in the way in which it is normally used. He did not simply mean a specialised and educated elite raised above the mass of the labouring population. Gramsci thought that all work required intellectual effort in some proportion. Moreover, intellectual work is not just about the mental capacities that one brings to labour in its narrow sense. It is, more importantly, about the way in which people see their social and political place in the world, about how they conceive their lives fitting in with the wider nature of society. Everyone has intellectual conceptions about this:
Each man, finally, outside his professional activity, carries on some form of intellectual activity, that is, he is a ‘philosopher’, an artist, a man of taste, he participates in a particular conception of the world, has a conscious line of moral conduct, and therefore contributes to sustain a conception of the world or to modify it, that is, to bring into being new modes of thought. [26]
It follows that ‘all men are intellectuals, one could therefore say: but not all men have in society the function of intellectuals... This means that, although one can speak of intellectuals, one cannot speak of non-intellectuals, because non-intellectuals do not exist.’ Consequently ‘the problem of creating a new stratum of intellectuals consists therefore in the critical elaboration of the intellectual activity that exists in everyone at a certain degree of development’. [27]
Gramsci also argued that different social classes do produce a specialised group of people who try to shape the intellectual conceptions of their class: ‘Every social group...in the world of economic production... creates together with itself, organically, one or more strata of intellectuals which give it homogeneity and an awareness of its own function not only in the economic but also in the social and political fields.’ [28] Political parties are vital to this process:
The political party for some social groups is nothing other than their specific way of elaborating their own category of organic intellectuals directly in the political and philosophical field, and not just in the field of productive technique. These intellectuals are formed in this way and cannot indeed be formed in any other way, given the character and the conditions of formation, life and development of this social group. [29]
Gramsci is well aware of the novelty of seeing a political party in this way: ‘That all members of a political party should be regarded as intellectuals is an affirmation that can easily lend itself to mockery and caricature. But if one thinks about it nothing could be more exact.’ [30] This is because a political party is precisely the place where individuals step beyond their predetermined economic role and begin to act politically:
A tradesman does not join a political party in order to do business, nor an industrialist in order to produce more at lower cost, nor a peasant to learn new methods of cultivation ... In a political party the elements of an economic social group get beyond the moment of their historical development and become agents of more general activities of a national and international character. [31]
But the way in which the members of a revolutionary party act as organic intellectuals is very different from traditional establishment notions of the intellectual:
The mode of being of the new intellectual can no longer consist in eloquence, which is an exterior and momentary mover of passions, but in the active participation in practical life, as constructor, organiser, ‘permanent persuader’ and not just simple orator ... from technique as work one proceeds to technique as science and the humanistic conception of history, without which one remains ‘specialised’ and does not become ‘directive’. [32]
It is this notion of a revolutionary that the new period of class struggle now demands. It is not an entirely new challenge. In the 1970s SWP members in Britain were not merely active in their party branches. They were activists in rank and file groups, anti-deportation committees, as shop stewards, in trade union branches and trades councils, pro-abortion campaigns and women’s groups, anti-racist and anti-immigration law organisations, tenants’ activities, the Right to Work campaign, the Anti Nazi League and many other organisations. And they participated in all these struggles as organisers of action, not merely as propagandists for socialism.
The SWP has never ceased to be an organiser of struggle, but for many years revolutionaries have only been able to carry out this role in a very restricted field. Most of what we had to do was to keep together a determined group of activists who, because they were steeped in the Marxist tradition, did not give up on the prospect that a new phase in class struggle would once again create conditions where we could lead and organise struggle on a much more significant scale. The anti-capitalist mood, the crisis of reformism, the embryo of industrial resistance requires revolutionaries who are deeply involved in the practical life of the movement, who are organisers, constructors and permanent persuaders connecting the revolutionary tradition to the needs of the day.

Notes
[Note by ETOL: The links from the original printed version of the article have not been checked to see if they still work.]
1. D. Montgomery, For many protesters, Bush isn’t the main issue, Washington Post, 20 January 2001, p. A14.
2. ‘Butskellism’, after Tory politician Rab Butler and Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell, designed to illustrate the cross-party, pro welfare state consensus of the post-war boom.
3. Ofsted is the acronym for the Office for Standards in Education, the watchdog organisation that enforces government education policy.
4. See G. de Jonquières and J. Lloyd, To have and have not, Financial Times, 27/28 January 2001, p. 11.
5. G. Evans, The working class and New Labour: a parting of the ways?, in British Social Attitudes, 17th Report, 2000–2001 (National Centre for Social Research 2000), pp. 52–56.
6. Ibid., p. 52.
7. Election turnout to slump, poll says, ICM/Guardian poll, 23 January 2001. See http://uk.news.yahoo.com/010123/11/axk43.html.
8. State of the Nation October 2000, ICM research poll conducted for the Joseph Rowntree Trust, reported in The Sunday Times, 21 November 2000, p. 10.
9. New economy: myths and reality, Financial Times, 13/14 January 2001.
10. Persisting inequalities underline the poverty challenge for Government, Joseph Rowntree Trust press release, 8 December 1999. See www.jrf.org.uk/pressroom/releases/081299.htm.
11. Quoted ibid.
12. New economy: myths and reality, Financial Times, op. cit.
13. Ibid.
14. Social Trends 30, (The Stationery Office 2000), p. 79.
15. Labour Day finds Strong Support for Unions, Gallup Opinion Poll, 2 September 1999. See www.gallup.com/poll/releases/pr990902.asp.
16. L. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Pelican 1975), pp. 156–157.
17. Theses on the Communist Parties and Parliamentarianism, in J. Riddell (ed.),The Communist International in Lenin’s Time, Vol. 1: Workers of the World and Oppressed People Unite! Proceedings and Documents of the Second Congress, 1920 (Pathfinder 1991), pp. 470–471. The first part of the theses, from which this quotation is taken, were written by Trotsky. The second and third sections were written by Bukharin and Zinoviev respectively.
18. Lenin, speaking in the debate on parliamentarianism at the Second Congress of the Communist International, 2 August 1920. See J. Riddell (ed.), ibid., p. 460.
19. J.T. Murphy speaking in the debate on parliamentarianism at the Second Congress of the Communist International, 2 August 1920. See J. Riddell (ed.), ibid., pp. 454–455.
20. Ibid., p. 455.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid., p. 454.
23. L. Trotsky, Lessons of October (New Park 1971), p. 62.
24. Ibid., p. 63.
25. Ibid.
26. A. Gramsci, The Intellectuals in Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London 1971), p. 9.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid., p. 5.
29. Ibid., p. 15.
30. Ibid., p. 16.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid., p. 10.
 

