


SIX MONTHS after announcing an austerity policy, the PASOK
(Socialist) government of Greece suddenly decided in mid-March to
invite the two Communist parties, as well as three small liberal
parties, to begin a “national dialogue” on foreign, economic and
social policies.
An invitation for discussions was also sent to two right-wing
parties, but this was immediately turned down.
The press hailed this as a brilliant move by Socialist prime
minister A. Papandreou to embarrass his opponents and regain the
initiative after the recent period of turmoil provoked by his
austerity measures.
In reality the last months have marked a decisive turn into a
new period of immense uncertainty and instability.
Behind this “initiative” lie the fears of PASOK’s leadership
about the catastrophic crisis of Greek capitalism and the bosses’
need for further unpopular measures, continuing opposition to those
measures, and the serious crisis in Pasok itself.
 
Serious struggles looming ahead
The drops in the price of oil, in interest rates and the value of
the dollar could save the Greek economy almost $1 billion in 1986,
and possibly offset the inflationary effects of devaluation.
However, the outlook is not at all rosy. Interest payments on the
enormous foreign debt of $12–$15 billion alone will cost $1 billion
this year. It is estimated that Gross National Product may drop by 4
per cent. Private and public investment will probably decrease by 26
per cent and 15 per cent respectively, and unemployment will grow
from 8.5 per cent to 11 per cent.
The government itself hopes for, at best, no growth, 18 per cent
inflation, and a balance of payments deficit of $1.7–2 billion. And
all this in a period of relative upswing in the world economy!
Such is the collapse of confidence of the Greek bourgeoisie that
the bourgeois ex-President Karamanlis recently blurted out: “Only
PASOK and A. Papandreou can now take the measures to modernise the
economy and re-establish normal relations with the USA”.
The power and determination of the working class to break with
capitalism was again the major factor influencing events in the last
period. Two near general strikes in the space of two weeks last
October, a semi-general strike in February, and major strikes in
March have so far been the workers’ answer to the government’s
austerity policy. (See Militant, 7 March)
In a period of deep crisis, workers realise that only major
struggles for major goals can change their lives. Small-scale or
isolated struggles, with limited aims, cannot enthuse the working
class. Even when such a strike is successful, the bosses quickly take
back with the right hand what they were forced to give with the left.
The workers’ leadership, however, do not want to understand
these simple facts. The Communist parties and left Socialist trade
union leaders have, again and again, had to be forced to fight by the
sheer pressure of their rank and file.
“We are not against private enterprise. We are not against
profits and even certain super-profits, but only against the
super-super-profits of the monopolies,” stated the leaders of the
pro-Moscow CP at the very moment that their members were calling for struggle.
As a result, the workers have had to fight not only without
leadership, but against it. So naturally after these battles and
without clear perspectives, some tiredness is creeping in among
certain sections of workers.
At the same time, new layers of the class, as well as the youth
and peasants, are joining the struggle.
Universities, technical colleges and high schools were closed down
in March with national, regional and local strikes against youth
unemployment and cuts in education.
Peasant associations are also mobilising. After three years of
almost continuous growth of their income through EEC and government
hand-outs, this year will be different.
The EEC decided on an average price increase of only 11 per cent
for Greek agricultural products, while inflation is around 20 per
cent. The government is also cutting back rapidly on subsidies.
 
Leadership
Even the employees of the Greek Secret Service threatened to go on
strike, demanding demilitarisation of the service! Members of the
riot police told the press that they do not want to be used any more
against strikes or demonstrations.
The mood of the workers was shown on 26 March when 50,000
demonstrated in Athens, at a moment’s notice, against the US attack
on Libya.
An important step forward was taken when Xekinima (Marxist
paper in PASOK) called a conference of union representatives from
“problematic factories” (many of which were nationalised by
PASOK, but are now on the verge of collapse under the burden of
enormous debts accumulated by the former owners).
Under the threat of “modernisation” by the government –
which will mean closures and redundancies – representatives of 40
factories employing 30,000 workers took part. They accepted the
programme and united action proposed by the Marxist trade union
leaders, and elected a committee.
On 27 March, a five-hour stoppage was organised, with tremendous
success throughout the country. There was 100 per cent participation
in all major “problematic” factories, and a militant rally in
Athens attracted about 10,000 workers.
The main slogans were: “The workers in the factories, the bosses
on the dole”; “Nationalisation is here to stay”, etc.
This success was only possible because a socialist programme
was adopted, calling for the nationalisation of all major branches of
industry under workers’ control. The workers were enthused because
united action was organised, with a campaign that took the issues to
every factory.
PASOK has been shaken again and again, from top to bottom, by the
struggles of the last few months.
A conference called by the recently expelled trade union leaders
of PASOK and former Central Committee members attracted 1,400 trade
unionists, youth and local party members, despite threats of expulsion.
At the meeting, the policies and undemocratic manoeuvres of the
leadership were decisively opposed by the rank and file, led by the
Marxists. A call for the formation of a new party was defeated, while
the formation of a trade union ‘broad left’ (to be called the
Socialist Workers’ Union Movement – SWUM) was overwhelmingly carried.
The struggle within PASOK is continuing, despite the expulsion of
leading left-wingers and the mistaken resignation of others. The
major forces of the left rank and file remain within the party.
In a recent conference of PASOK trade unionists the leadership was
decisively opposed and a few party hacks were shouted down. When the
bureaucrats attacked Xekinima, delegates shouted: “They have
done very well!”
At the same time, recent elections in the trade unions prove that
PASOK still enjoys tremendous support among the workers. This shows
that the Marxists were correct when campaigning against a new party,
in favour of fighting to win PASOK to a socialist programme.
Not only PASOK but both the CPs are in crisis. The leadership of
the pro-Moscow CP has been forced to expel whole sections of the
party in the Federation of Hospital Workers and in their youth section.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the only tendency in the
workers’ movement which is growing in influence and support is the
Marxist opposition in PASOK.
The leadership of PASOK is facing two major challenges in 1986.
One is the trade union conference, with the election of a new
leadership. The other is the local elections next autumn.
The strongly pro-government trade union leadership (appointed by
the court after the expulsion of their predecessors) is already
involved in secret deals to secure re-election. The government is
already trying to minimise the possibility of defeat in the local elections.
The bourgeois parties, on the other hand, are not at all eager to
challenge PASOK and risk stirring up the workers. However, the ruling
class has not abandoned the struggle. It is pressuring Papandreou to
do more dirty work for them, so that they can attack when the
workers’ movement weakens and bring the government down.
Papandreou, glimpsing the defeat which he himself is preparing,
hopes to play it like Mitterrand. He plans to move to the presidency
in 1989, or before and change to proportional representation so that
the right cannot form a majority government.
But the defeat of the ruling class will not be achieved by clever
parliamentary manoeuvres. Only united class struggle for power on a
socialist programme will smash the reaction. With Marxist leadership,
the rank and file of PASOK, the workers and youth can transform the
party into a fighting organisation that will carry through this task.
 







IN OUR second article marking forty years since the second
world war ended, NICOS REMOUNDOS, editor of Xekinima, the
paper of the Marxist tendency in PASOK, looks at the war in
Greece, and its aftermath.






THE BARBARITY of capitalism in Greece from 1941–1949 resulted
in 650,000 dead – approximately 10% of the population. 150,000 were
killed in ’40–’41 fighting the attacks of the German and
Italian armies; 250,000 died of starvation; about 100,000 were
executed by the Germans during the occupation, and a further 150,000
died in the civil war of ’46–’49.
After all this, Greece presented a picture of catastrophic
destruction. 1,600 villages out a total of 6,500 razed to the ground;
hundreds of thousands of families uprooted; industries, roads,
railways and telecommunications completely destroyed.
Following the liberation, hundreds of thousands were left
homeless. There was mass unemployment, hunger and malnutrition,
uncontrollable inflation, and tortures and concentration camps from
the “democratic” governments, plus the flight of 100,000 refugees
to Eastern Block countries by the end of the civil war.
Despite its pro-fascist leanings, the dictatorship of Metaxas
(1936–41) was forced in 1941 to reject the provocative ultimatum of
Mussolini, who, despite Hitler’s advice, demanded the immediate
surrender of Greece.
 
Heroic resistance
Mussolini hoped the occupation would be a walkover. However, the
threat of fascism aroused the Greek people, who, despite their
officers and because of their hatred of Metaxas, defeated Mussolini’s
attack at the Albanian border. After a series of victories, they
threatened to drive the Italian forces into the Adriatic Sea. Hitler
was forced to intervene to save his ally from humiliating defeat.
Because of the Greek generals’ desertion, and the enormous
military superiority of the German army, Greece was occupied in 1941,
after fierce battles, which eventually forced the German general
staff to delay their attack against the Soviet Union for three weeks.
Tens of thousands of heroic workers and peasants (men, women and
children) built the resistance movement. They formed an 80,000-strong
army (ELAS) from nothing with rank-and-file officers (the Capetani)
who proved themselves in battle, and EAM, a popular movement of 1.5
million members, its youth section alone (EPON) numbering 150,000. By
1944 they had occupied all the countryside, and forced German high
command to tie up nine divisions of 150,000 men in Greece.
The heroic resistance in the mountains was strengthened by mass
mobilisations and strikes in the cities. In February 1943, a mass
demonstration in Athens against plans to send Greek workers to labour
camps in Germany overran the police, and forced the German army to
intervene, killing 100 people.
EAM called a general strike for 5 March. 200,000 unarmed men and
women, a quarter of Athens’ population fought for a whole day
against tanks, machine guns and hand grenades. After killing dozens
of soldiers and policemen with their bare hands, they forced them to
retreat, and burned down the hated Ministry of Labour. Next day the
German command announced that no Greek would be sent to labour camps.
This victory was unique throughout occupied Europe.
As a result of these heroic struggles, when the German army
evacuated Greece in October 1944, power rested in the hands of the
armed fighters of ELAS. All the hopes of the workers and peasants
could not be realised peacefully.
Following the defeat of the Greek army by Nazi Germany, the Greek
bourgeois either fled with the king to comfortable exile in Cairo,
along with the British forces, or collaborated with the Nazis against
the Greek workers and resistance. Workers and peasants and the CP
rank and file started the resistance as early as 1941.
The capitalists and the right wing officers were terrified of the
consequences of a mass resistance movement, so they tried initially
to discourage it as “premature” and “illegal”. After the
first successes of EAM-ELAS, however, they began to set up some
resistance groups (EKKA-EDES), with the guidance of the more
far-sighted British ruling class, to try to check the rapidly
expanding influence of EAM, and make sure that after the defeat of
Germany they would have a strong military presence in the country,
ready for use against ELAS.
These groups not only avoided engaging the Germans, they
co-operated with the Greek collaborators and the German high command
to ensure a ‘safe’ transfer of power to their hands.
Nevertheless, despite enormous material support from the British
Army, by 1944 they had minimal influence, and were tolerated by ELAS
only because the Communist Party leaders insisted that the
“democratic “ Allies should not be upset.
From 1945–49 to establish ‘democracy’ and ‘freedom’ in
Greece, the British and American imperialists assisted their Greek
brothers in drowning EAM-ELAS in blood. The quickly rehabilitated
collaborators with the Nazis. Together they executed and murdered
tens of thousands of resistance fighters; tortured, raped and maimed
over a hundred thousand more, and set up concentration camps.
“The Greek government”, writes an American reporter
in 1949, “offered lucrative contracts to rich industrialists who
had collaborated with the Germans. They bought from it the food
parcels sent by UNRA for the starving children and sold them on the
black market, making enormous profits.” (C.Tsoukalas: The Greek
Tragedy)
The Minister of Merchant Navy gave 109 US liberty ships, part of
the reparation aid programme, to 23 Greek Ship-owning families. It
was estimated that in 1947 one thousand families (0.3% of the
population) ‘earned’ half of the national income.
 
“Spheres of influence”
The tremendous heroism of the workers and peasants did not deter
Stalin from selling out the Greek revolution to the imperialists in
October 1944 in Moscow, when he accepted Churchill’s proposal that
Britain and the USA retained a 90% ‘interest’ in Greece in return
for 90% Russian influence in Rumania.
As a result, the leadership of the Communist Party, instead of
consolidating the power it already controlled, gave it up to the
capitalists. It joined a “national government of liberation”,
accepted a few ministries, subordinated to ELAS to the British Gen.
Scobie, and allowed the British expeditionary forces to land in
Athens.
The CP leadership had learned nothing from the disastrous
consequences of their policies in 1936, when they supported the
liberal capitalists to “save democracy”. The liberals in turn had
then handed over power to Metaxas.
Once more their attempt to complete the so-called “democratic
revolution” led them to dampen down the socialist aspirations of
the workers, and to look desperately to Churchill and Roosevelt as
allies. That is why the CP, while holding power, asked initially for
50% of the ministries in a national government, was prepared to
accept 25%, and in the end settled for none, provided it could stay
legal. It also explains why the CP daily paper hailed Churchill as “a
protagonist in the war for the liberation of the people”, on the
very day of Scobie’s ultimatum ordering ELAS to evacuate Athens.
Despite their leaders, the resistance fighters would not accept
defeat. After the December massacres, led by the collaborator police
with the support of the “national” government, EAM-ELAS, with the
assistance of thousands of women and children, fought against the
invading British army, and re-occupied Athens, except for one square
mile in the centre of the richer part of the city.
Instead of calling reinforcements, however, and arousing the
people and taking over the cities, the CP leadership sent Gen.
Sarafis (chief of staff of ELAS) and Aris Velouchiotis (the brilliant
and heroic leader of the Capetani), and strong forces, on a “special”
mission far away from Athens and Salonika. For a fortnight they
restrained ELAS from taking over Athens, hoping for a compromise,
until Scobie received reinforcements to drive the resistance army out
of the city.
The British Ambassador in Athens, Sir R. Leeper, wrote:
“During the first days of battle British forces were
outnumbered, and concentrated only in the central part of the city.
If ELAS had shown greater resolution, and attacked the centre they
would probably have succeeded.”
 
Bankrupt government
Even after 1946, in spite of the defeats and confusion, and the
strengthening of reaction, a victory of EAM-ELAS would still have
been possible. The Greek government was totally bankrupt in the eyes
of the people. Chruchill had lost the elections. The British soldiers
were exhausted by the war, demoralised by the crimes against the
Greek people their only desire was to go home.
Nevertheless, the CP leaders and the USSR were using the
sacrifices of EAM-ELAS not to take power, but to put pressure on the
Greek capitalists and the Imperialists to accept them as junior
partners in a parliamentary democracy, and accommodate Russia’s
regional strategic interests.
When the Capetani and the fighters were told that their leaders
had agreed that ELAS would give up its arms, and “go peacefully”
to their homes, they gave up only old weapons, and hid the best to
protect themselves.
And how right they were. The collaborators and the fascist gangs,
with the support of the British army, began a massive bloody campaign
against EAM-ELAS. From February 1945 until 1 March 1946, 1,300 people
were murdered, 6,600 injured, 31,600 tortured, 18,800 imprisoned and
85,000 arrested.
As if this was not enough, CP leaders attacked and liquidated as
Trotskyist or Titoist every ELAS officer or militant who disagreed
with their criminal policies. Velouchiotis himself was denounced as a
traitor, isolated and left to be murdered by fascist gangs. So it
took two counter-revolutions to break the spirit and the stamina of
the heroes of the resistance.
 




Nicos Remoundos, editor of Xekinima, the
Greek Marxist paper, spoke to Roger Shrives
THE ENORMOUS polarisation of society during the crisis is
pushing the two opposing classes in Greece into struggle.
After the election of the left-wing PASOK in 1981, the ruling
class until recently used a tactic of “wait and see”, of
pressuring the government behind the scenes to try and make it move
to the right.
But in the last three weeks the capitalists, in a co-ordinated
campaign, have begun to play all their cards against the government.
First of all President Karamanlis, who had been trying to appear
‘neutral’ in the previous period issued a declaration to the
people a few days before the elections asking them to vote for the
EEC, in essence for the right wing New Democracy, the only party
which favours the Common Market in Greece. This caused uproar even in
“liberal” capitalist circles.
The Greek equivalent of the CBI, which previously pressurised the
government in the background, suddenly at its Congress a few weeks
ago, elected a “militant” new leadership for business. They not
only booed the Minister of the Economy who wanted to speak to them,
but co-ordinated a campaign of unity of all “private enterprise”
people, creating for the first time In Greece something of a
“patronat” of industrialists, big hoteliers, large scale
merchants, major importers, etc.
 
Right wing hooligans
A week ago this body called a public meeting in central Athens.
Compared to their expectation, it was a failure with only about 2,000
to 3,000 people turning up, mostly paid up hooligans of New Democracy.
But most significantly in the last few weeks the right have
mobilised street gangs of hooligans to terrorise people in the
streets. This was shown to be co-ordinated behind the scenes by
former officers in the forces and police.
They attacked selected working class neighbourhoods, 200 or 300 of
them with chains, iron bars and dogs, trying to intimidate the youth,
party workers and workers in general in Athens and Salonika.
The front pages of the papers were filled with pictures of Pasok
supporters with bloody faces. Even the director of Police in Athens
was forced to say these were the result of the New Democracy campaign
and accused former ministers and MPs of that party at their rallies,
who were actually pushing these hooligans to attack Pasok and
Communist Party supporters.
The ruling class have decided they cannot afford this government
any more because of the dire crisis of Greek capitalism, two thirds
of industry is near bankruptcy and the other third is not far off. An
estimated 80% of the assets of industry are loaned from the banks and
only about 20% is their own capital.
So when interest rates went up two or three years ago industry had
to borrow far more money just to repay interest. Huge concerns of the
traditional big bourgeois families have begun to collapse one after
another and the government was forced to intervene and take them
over, “socialise” them as Pasok calls it.
Also since joining the EEC when tariff barriers went down, EEC
products started flooding into the Greek market while Greek products
were less successful. This meant further exacerbation of the crisis.
Traditionally Greece imported more industrial goods and exported
more agricultural goods. Now it imports more of both. Also the
balance of payments used to be more or less balanced because of
remittances from seamen, immigrants in Germany etc. These are going
down, with the crisis in shipping and with immigrants leaving Germany
as unemployment grows.
 
“Moratorium”
The enormous devaluation of the drachma has also affected tourism.
The Greek ruling class has an immediate need for a hard
Thatcherite government to try to break the will of the workers and
take back all their past gains.
At the beginning of 1984 the government, under pressure from the
workers was forced to give workers back the sliding scale which it
had watered down in 1983. They have also manoeuvred with the Greek
TUC, controlled by Pasok since the last congress, to compromise with
the industrialists and quickly settle the question of the national
wage agreement to avoid mobilisation from workers. They also had an
agreement with the “Communist” Party leaders, the “moratorium”
where the CP accepted the role of helping to hold down workers’ struggles.
 
General strike threatened
Despite this, we saw an enormous spontaneous movement of workers
and a large strike wave with an estimated 1,700,000 workers striking
in the first four months of this year in comparison to 800,000 in the
whole of 1982 and 1.7 million in the whole of 1983. The Greek working
class is only 1.6 million in number!
Greek workers have had battles without stop since the collapse of
the dictatorship in 1974. It is estimated that from 1974 to 1984, 16
million workers have been on strike.
The New Democracy’s use of fascist bands made the workers angry.
The same TUC which sabotaged the earlier struggle was forced to call
an extraordinary meeting and threaten a 24-hour general strike.
Also unions, particularly those sections controlled by PASOK,
issued very hard statements to move much faster towards socialism.
When the provocations started the ranks of the PASOK and the
Communist Party were taken by surprise as were the people in the
neighbourhoods. But quickly when they saw the dangers they began t
organise. When the attacks happened again they found a mass response
by the party ranks. The population were coming out from flats and
houses to encourage the workers fighting the battle in the streets
telling them “Kill the bloody fascists, smash them”.
The government has been trying in the past 2½ years to appease
the ruling class, trying to balance between the capitalists and the
workers. Particularly in the last four or five months it has taken a
very rapid rightward turn, calling on the people to be very patient,
not to polarise the situation or provoke actions, started talking
about “good” industrialists and “bad” industrialists implying
there is a wing of the ruling class that wants to invest and
co-operate with the government.
 
PASOK revolt
They reached such a level of bankruptcy that Papandreou himself
said that in the past two and a half years, Karamanlis had been so
neutral and democratic that PASOK will be considering voting for him
in Presidential elections next May!
The Minister of the Economy gave an interview to a capitalist
economic paper where he explained that the government does not want
to socialise any industries but they are forced to take over some
concerns because they are bankrupt. When these industries are made
healthy again by the government paying their huge debts then, he
said, private enterprise would be allowed to take them back again!
All this had begun to create tremendous confusion in the ranks of
the party and the working class. But after the workers began to see
the government was not willing to work towards socialism they knew
they had to take their destiny into their own hands.
The PASOK leadership called a Congress in May, the first since the
party formed in 1974! They thought just one month before the
elections, that the leaders would just be clapped by the rank and
file. But four weeks before the Congress, in branches which have been
half dead in recent years, discussions have taken an explosive
character. 90% of the area committees throughout the country are
estimated to have voted down the document of the Central Committee in
pre-conference discussions.
Members counterposed books which Papandreou himself had written in
1974–75, in essence calling for a return to the left traditions and
socialist policies of its early years. One older worker who took part
in the resistance against Nazi occupation and civil war said “in
1944 reaction raised its head and began to massacre us only after we
gave up the guns. Now our leadership is giving up socialist policies
and the reaction is again raising its head. Can’t you see what’s happening?”
A young worker said to the leadership “you have forgotten our
policy of socialising the strategic parts of the economy. You have
put these ideas on the museum shelves. Are you keeping the shelves
warm, until Britain gives us back the Elgin Marbles?”
That was the kind of climate in party branches and conferences
throughout the pre-conference period.
The Congress ended with Papandreou pushing through most of his
policies for two basic reasons, one, the leadership rigged the
conference by having at least one-third of delegates already
appointed before hand, secondly because this revolution within the
party ranks was not organised. In effect most delegates elected were
careerists, who jumped on the bandwagon, spoke left in order to win
the rank and file votes but then went on to congress and did nothing.
So the leadership who are really terrified by this enormous revolt
controlled conference but theirs is a Pyrrhic victory. The policies
voted for by Congress will be voted down by the workers every day
in their struggles.
Despite the confusion and disorientation caused by the
leadership’s policies, workers see the bosses’ reaction and see
the danger of New Democracy being re-elected. They suddenly feel the
whip of counter-revolution and are starting to gather around PASOK
the biggest workers’ party to stop a right wing comeback. This was
revealed by Papandreou’s huge rallies in the cities of Greece,
thought to be even bigger than those in 1981 before PASOK’s victory.
PASOK lost fewer votes in the European elections than would have
seemed likely a month or two ago, going down from 42% from 48%. The
total left vote was still 57% compared to 60% in 1981. The loss was
mainly in urban middle class areas, the workers and peasants were
solid. In the coming general elections too PASOK will most probably
be re-elected in 1985 with a majority enough for government on its own.
But this renewed support is not unconditional. The leaders should
not assume this means support for their right-wing policies. Workers’
struggles will prove that.
 
New society
Workers in Greece have shown many times in history their capacity
to take power in their own hands. In 1923 after the rout in Asia
Minor, workers, peasants and soldiers arose. In 1936 in the
panhellenic general strike, in the civil war of 1941–49, in the
period of 1958 to 1967 and again since the junta tumbled a decade ago.
Enormous opportunities will come the way of the working class and
PASOK. Capitalism can offer us nothing. We must create a party of
power which can be the means by which the working class can build a
new society.
 




The narrow electoral accession of Karamanlis to the Presidency
reflects the growing polarisation of Greek society. Only 183 MPs
voted for him in the final ballot. As his own party had 174 MPs, this
means he only got 9 voted from the smaller opposition parties.
Since last autumn, Greek capitalists have been faced with a
serious economic crisis, and a growing radicalisation of the working
class, the peasants and the youth, resulting in further erosion of
ND’s social support. This, combined with the threat that the left
party PASOK could win the next election forced the ruling class to
begin ‘preparing’ Karamanlis for the presidency.
The result of the Presidential election reflects, in a distorted
way, the deep polarisation of society, the serious weakening of ‘New
Democracy’ and the collapse of the ‘national image’ of
Karamanlis himself. It is an expression of the radicalisation of the
working class, the peasants and all oppressed layers of society, who,
despite the lack of unity in their own ranks and despite temporary
defeats, still represent today an enormous potential power.
Despite the demand of both PASOK and pro-Moscow Communist Party
(KKE) for elections, so that the new President could be voted in by a
representative parliament, the capitalists worked to elect Karamanlis
to the presidency and to maintain ND in office. This was made
possible because the leaders of the workers’ parties gave no lead
to the working class militants, and for months refrained from even
recognising the importance of this election for future developments.
No attempt was made to connect the struggle of workers and
peasants against wage restraint and the cuts in social expenditure
with the question of the Presidency and the semi-bonapartist
constitution, or to prepare a national struggle to oust the
right-wing government.
On the contrary, in the first three months of the year when the
workers, peasant youth, and even shopkeepers and local councils were
taking actions against the policies of ND, the leaders of the left
split these mobilisations into unco-ordinated attacks which, despite
the determination of the strikes, led them eventually into
frustration and temporary defeat.
The Bank workers’ strike, the most important of these
mobilisations, defied the courts and terrified the government and
ended after 35 days of national struggle with a compromise, because
the workers’ parties supported it only with “messages of solidarity”.
As a result, after making a few concessions on the side to the
most powerful unions, the government has managed, albeit with
difficulty, to impose its wages policy of 11–15% increases. This,
when inflation is increasing at a rate of 24%. It also refused to
give in to the demands of the peasants or the local councils.
The KKE leaders maintained that all the hue and cry in the
capitalist press about the Presidential election was intended to
distract the workers from their immediate problems and demands. So it
was not until a few days before the vote that the KKE daily paper
suddenly called for parliamentary elections on the grounds that the
constitution gives the President autocratic powers.
Andreas Papandreou (leader of PASOK) did not make clear his
party’s position, and even allowed leading members of its central
committee to maintain publicly that Karamanlis in the Presidency
would only be a tame figurehead. Not until March did PASOK’s
leadership decide to oppose Karamanlis, stating that this parliament
should not elect the new President because it was no longer
representative, and demanded new elections. PASOK mentioned that in
1975 they did not vote for the constitution and had called for a
constituent assembly.
These decisions created fury among the capitalists, who were
counting on the support of the right-wing of PASOK. However, even
then no action was taken in order to actually mobilise the workers
and force the government to hold elections.
Both PASOK and the KKE once again limited their opposition to
within parliament. Eventually they simply abstained, without even
proposing any alternative candidate. This was at a time when a common
candidate of the left could have been a symbol of unity in action,
and a starting point for a co-ordinated campaign to oust the
right-wing government and to prepare the way for a government of
PASOK-KKE, and for a constituent assembly to vote in a socialist constitution.
The Greek economy is already in the middle of a new crisis. The
GNP is expected to have zero growth this year (3.5% in ’79),
industrial production is declining fast (6% increase in ’79), and
agricultural production has remained stagnant for the last five years.
Investment in industry is at the same level as in 1973. The
balance of payments problem has reached critical proportions as the
deficit in 1980 is expected to be between $2.5–3 billion, whilst
the real value of the drachma is falling lower and lower, with a 15%
drop in the last four months alone.
The government, under pressure from the capitalists and the IMF
and EEC, is trying hard to deflate the economy further, hoping to
lower inflation and cut imports. The bankers are asking for higher
interest rates, the industrialists for more grants and concessions,
and both of them demand wage restraint and reductions in state
expenditure. The capitalists are now facing a serious dilemma; how to
impose harsher policies with an even weaker government.
The most probable course they will now follow is to reshuffle the
government and try to stick it out, hoping for the best. They will
try and take advantage of the wait-or-see policies of the workers
leaders to manoeuvre, using the carrot and stick methods to cling to
office for as long as possible.
However, every attack made by the “new” ND government on
standards of living will create more resistance by the workers, who
now sense its weakness, and will push their leaders to take action.
In effect, the longer this government of crisis lasts the worse will
be the outcome for the capitalists.
This is why the ruling class has now promoted Karamanlis to the
Presidency and is also thinking of introducing proportional
representation at the next elections, so to make sure that PASOK will
not get a working majority. Their intention is that Karamanlis, will
be able in a ‘constitutional’ way to block any attempt by a left
government, under the pressure of the workers, to take socialist
measures that could put in danger the control of the monopolies over
the economy and the state.
The deep crisis of capitalism, which has shown the disparity
between the high sounding promises and the actual centrist and
reformist policies of the leaders of PASOK and KKE has already begun
to cause concern among the rank-and-file of both parties.
This is particularly so in PASOK, where the issues of taking
power, socialisation of the means of production, workers’
management and how to fight the reaction of the imperialists against
a socialist government, are becoming more and more subjects of
discussion in the local branches.
In the party, which at present claims a total of 65,000 members,
the left s now composed of fresh and young elements, who, despite the
fact that they are not as yet organised and conscious of their
strength, represent the majority in the local branches and even the
area committees of the party.
This development, which is of course a reflection of the processes
taking place in society today, is also a vindication of the
perspectives of the Marxists in PASOK, who, even during the dark days
of mass expulsions and defeat of the left, predicted its rebirth and
increased power. The fight for a Marxist programme has begun again in
the ranks of PASOK because the battle for power tomorrow means
Marxist policies today:

Wage increases tied to inflation; a 40-hour week; abolition
of all anti-union laws; lower taxes for workers’ families; work
for the unemployed.
 
Unite the struggle of poor peasants, youth and local
government with the workers in a common fight to oust the right-wing government.
 
Build a mass socialist party, based on the organisations of
workers, peasants and youth.
 
Organise against the new President and the semi-bonapartist
constitution, for a constituent assembly and a socialist constitution.
 
Fight for the nationalisation of the banks and all the
major industries under workers control and management; the monopoly
of foreign trade; a socialist plan of production.
 
Campaign for a left government of PASOK-KKE that can open
up the way to workers’ power and the socialist transformation of society.

 







Xekinima Reporters
(CWI Greece)
On the afternoon of Tuesday, 4 September, Comrade Nicos
Remoundos, founding member of Xekinima (CWI Greece), and its
General Secretary until the late 1980’s, passed away at the age
of 71. On Friday, 7 September, Xekinima comrades organized an
excellent political funeral for Nicos Remoundos, with chants,
revolutionary songs, red flags and speeches by friends and
comrades. Among the speakers were Peter Taaffe, General Secretary
of the Socialist Party (CWI in England and Wales) and also
representing the International Secretariat of the CWI. Peter first
met Nicos in 1974 during the period of the overthrow of the
military dictatorship in Greece. Nicos and other comrades
subsequently joined the CWI. As well as Peter, other speakers at
the funeral included Doros Michael, from the Cyprus section of the
CWI, and other old comrades from the 1970’s, and Andros
Payiatsos, General Secretary of Xekinima.
Nicos’s coffin was draped by a huge CWI flag as it was
lowered into the ground, while his comrades and friends sung the
Internationale. When the coffin was finally lowered, the
call, “Comrade Nicos Remoundos – Present!” was made by
members of Xekinima and echoed throughout the First Cemetery of
Athens.
The following short obituary appeared in the last issue of
the Xekinima newspaper and on the website of
the Greek section of the CWI the day after Nicos’ death. Much
more commentary and videos of the funeral of Nicos can be seen
here.






Nicos, our comrade, our friend, our brother, is no longer among
us. He lost the battle against his ill health and particularly from
Parkinson’s Disease from which Nicos suffered during the course of
the last decade. Although we all were aware of his health problems,
Niko’s death was a shock to all of us who knew him. Nicos was a
fighter and until his last moments had a vivid interest in political
developments, the struggles of the working class and the activities
of our organization.
Nicos will always be with us. This is not just a figure of
speech. Nicos’ contribution to the development of Xekinima
has been historic. In the course of the 1970s Nicos had a crucial
role in Xekinima’s first steps. As its General Secretary, until the
late 1980’s, Nicos played a major role in laying the foundations
that allowed Xekinima to be one of the most sizeable and important
organizations of the revolutionary socialist left in Greece today.
Nicos started his political contribution in the period of the
Greek military junta, playing a leading role in a small, clandestine
group, fighting against the military dictatorship, called the
‘Workers’ Group’. This group, which took part in the
revolutionary revolt at Athens Polytechnic in 1973, a prelude to the
collapse of the Junta in 1974, searched for the ideas and methods
required by the Left to answer the dead end of capitalism and
imperialism, based, among other things, on the experiences of the
1960’s. Thus, rejecting the barbaric one-party dictatorships of the
Stalinist regimes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and having
lived through the betrayals of the Stalinist Communist Party of
Greece, Nicos and his group moved towards the ideas of Leon Trotsky.
Nicos was always part of the mass working class movement and
strong opponent of any kind of sectarianism. Because of that he
decided, along with his small group of comrades, to participate in
PASOK from its inception in 1974. PASOK (The Panhellenic Socialist
Movement) was, at that time, a party with a working class base and a
radical left platform.
The newspaper Xekinima was founded one year later, in 1975,
and developed as a left opposition against the bureaucratic
leadership of the PASOK party and its policies. Soon after its
foundation, Xekinima played a key role in the creation of the
‘Horizontal Connection’, a network of rank and file workers,
party branches and activists, in favor of a revolutionary socialist
programme for PASOK and for real party democracy. Because of this
call, Xekinima was expelled shortly afterwards from PASOK.
The years that followed were difficult. Xekinima was to a large
extent isolated in a very small group. People’s huge illusions in
the populist PASOK leader, Andreas Papandreou, and the Stalinist
politics of KKE (Greek communist party) allowed very little room for
efforts to build a strong base for the revolutionary Left. The space
for the left parties and organizations seemed to be entirely covered
by the huge illusions in social democray and Stalinism. During this
time, Xekinima was struggling to clarify its political, ideological
and organizational methods – a process whereby the Committee for a
Workers’ International (CWI), in which Xekinima participated,
played a key role.
 
Deeply internationalist
After the fall of the military dictatorship in 1974, Nicos and his
group had their first contacts with CWI. For Nicos, internationalism
was not just a “good idea” or to follow what was happening around
the world. Nicos’s internationalism reflected his keen
understanding of the necessity for co-ordinated struggles with
revolutionary socialists of other countries, based on the common
organization of an international revolutionary party. This was the
legacy of revolutionaries over the last two centuries and Nicos
followed in their footsteps. Nicos was deeply internationalist and
his internationalism characterized every aspect of his political
intervention. He remained a loyal supporter of the CWI, following its
steps forward and its development with extreme interest until his
last days.
At the beginning of the 1990s, Xekinima came to a turning
point. PASOK had fully transformed into a party of the establishment
and big capital and the collapse of the Soviet Union caused a
tremendous crisis in the Left worldwide. This made it necessary to
re-evaluate revolutionary tactics. Nicos supported the tactical
changes of the CWI and stood by the new generation of fighters who
struggled to put them into practice.
During the last decade, Xekinima was able to become one of the
better known and sizeable organizations of the revolutionary Left in
Greece. This achievement is also a vindication of Nicos’ political efforts.
Xekinima will always honour Nicos’ political contribution to the
building of revolutionary Left in Greece. Besides that, we will
remember Nicos for two additional reasons. The first was his deep
connection and loyalty to the working class and his strong belief in
its ability to emancipate itself. The second was Nicos’s genuine
humanism and closeness to his friends and comrades. Nicos would
always assist in any way he could other comrades who were in need.
That was part of his humanism. For Nicos, socialism was not only a
correct social, political and economical model but also a way of
life, to the extent that the capitalist system, of course, allows.
Nicos we will miss you! But we will always remember you and honour you!
 

