chardson: Review - "James P. Cannon and the Early Years of American Communism" (1993)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: James P. Cannon and
the Early Years of American Communism
(1993)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 1, 1993.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

James P. Cannon and the Early Years of American Communism: Selected Writings and Speeches, 1920–1928
Prometheus Research Library, New York 1991, pp. 624, $22.50
When Pathfinder Press, the publishing house of the American Socialist Workers Party, put up the prices of Trotsky’s books in order to finance propaganda for Fidel Castro, they also stopped printing the half-completed works of James P. Cannon, and even threw some of his old library into a rubbish skip (Sweep Jack Barnes into the Dumpster of History, Workers Vanguard, 1 January 1983). Fortunately the Spartacists, among others, continue the cult of his memory, and one of the results is this volume. It fills a real gap in his career only partly touched upon in his Speeches for Socialism and Notebook of an Agitator, though the principles of selection are not the same, as we shall see, for this is a much more dull book.
For whereas the Notebook was vigorous and popular, the introduction to this collection reveals the preoccupations of the Spartacists right from the start by admitting that ‘our selection of Cannon’s writings and speeches is heavily weighted toward internal factional material’ (pp. 2–3). This is a shame, for Cannon had a lively agitational style. His strengths flowed from the fact that he was a genuine workers’ leader, and were not at all on the theoretical side. But our Spartacists love a good old faction fight, for their concept of revolutionary struggle is of an activity of permanent factioneering, tracing their origins to Cannon’s involvement in what they call the ‘vitality’ of the American Communist Party, which they are pleased to note was ‘totally lacking’ in the Communist Party of Great Britain. They have managed to convince themselves that the latter organisation was ‘left with only former members of H.M. Hyndman’s sterile British Socialist Party’ (p. 10). William Paul, Arthur MacManus, Tom Bell, J.T. Murphy and Willie Gallacher apparently never existed. But in fact, the origins of the CPGB were little different from those of their American cousins, both being amalgams of ‘dogmatic, syndicalist and more or less exotic groups’ that were marginal to the labour movements of their respective countries. The only difference was that the heterogeneity of the early American party (upper-class radicals, Syndicalists, foreign and native social democrats, but in particular the large semi-autonomous language federations) preserved its factional groupings throughout in their pristine condition, whereas the greater homogeneity of the British working class broke down the previous factional barriers in the CPGB almost as soon as functional unity had been achieved.
But to get back to the point. Now accepted as the hallmark of the Spartacists on four continents, it is fascinating to discover from this book just how far back into American communist history this obsessive factional meddling goes. Sam Bornstein once asked Sam Gordon why the American SWP constantly intrigued within the other sections of the Fourth International, creating factions that had never existed before over issues that had never previously disturbed anybody. ‘To separate the sheep from the goats’, was his reply. ‘That’s all very well’, Sam Bornstein shot back, ‘but how can you tell which is which?’
Apart from having ‘the bag of tricks of the typical American politician’, as Claude McKay put it (p. 15), Cannon was also an unashamed admirer of Zinoviev (p. 16), who provided the international dimension to the politics of manipulation. Cannon trooped off to Moscow with the rest of them, obediently accepted its verdicts, and came back parroting its denunciations. ‘The practice of the Central Executive Committee in turning to the Communist International for advice and guidance and for the solution of various disputed questions apparently does not commend itself to Comrade Askeli’ (p. 334), he replies acidly to someone who had the temerity to question the endless procession of bitter opponents forever tittle-tattling to the boss. Cannon, like all the rest, tried to gain Moscow’s support by associating his opponents in the American party with one or other of the factions that had already fallen under the censure of the Comintern. Ludwig Lore, for example, is denounced for supporting Brandler ‘against the Left Wing’ (p. 313). Cannon’s admiration for the Comintern at this time is evidently shared by the editors, who clearly want to be the Zinoviev of the pocket chess set. Since Trotsky’s distaste for such practices, either in the original or in microcosm, is well documented, they are obliged to express the opinion that ‘Lore’s public complaints about the zigzags of Zinoviev had more in common with Levi than with Trotsky’ (p. 35), despite the fact that Lore offered a good deal more support to Trotsky during this period than Cannon ever did. As for Paul Levi, who first published and wrote the preface to Trotsky’s Lessons of October in Germany, he is simply dismissed as an ‘expelled rightist’ (p. 35).
Coming on to Trotsky himself, the material gathered here (especially pp. 286–87) in every way endorses the verdict of the preface that until his expulsion ‘Cannon certainly voted for all the ritual anti-Trotsky resolutions’ (p. 54). This lends further support to the theory that during this period Cannon was not a supporter of the left at all, but a partisan of Zinoviev. He only took up Trotskyism after his faction had been reduced to being the smallest of all by the defection of Foster, while his last pilgrimage to Moscow had shown that he would never get the endorsement of the Comintern. The famous tale that Cannon underwent a road to Damascus-style conversion upon reading Trotsky’s Critique of the Draft Programme of the Comintern is repeated (pp. 61–64), although, as Irving Howe pointed out long ago, the controversy was hardly new, and ‘Cannon had been to Moscow several times before and had shown no interest in these documents, which had all the while been available’ (Howe and Coser, The American Communist Party: A Critical History (1919–1957), p. 162). Far from being assimilated at the time, when the first issue of the American Militant began to serialise Trotsky’s criticism, it was printed along with The Right Danger in the American Party, the Cannon–Foster–Bittelman factional document written for the Sixth Congress of the Comintern, which was the purest distillation of Third Period bilge. Whilst listed in the bibliography on page 610, this document is significantly absent from the text. And the editors are still reluctant to accept the fact that the Critique in question was smuggled out of Moscow, not by Cannon, but by George Weston (p. 64), although this is fully confirmed by Harry Wicks’ recently published memoirs (Keeping My Head, p. 158).
Another fascinating thing to emerge in view of the utter incomprehension of the Labor Party slogan today by all the SWP split-offs, as regards both the sectarianism of the Spartacists and the Workers League, and the Popular Front enthusiasms of the others for black and women’s ‘progressive’ third parties, is the fact that whilst Lore understood what Trotsky was driving at (pp. 196–206), Cannon never did. First he fell back upon the argument drawn from American exceptionalism: ‘The attempt to transfer European Labor Party analogies to America is bound to lead us astray for the simple reason that there is no real analogy.’ (p. 171) Next he progressed to the position still held by our editors, that of the classic ‘united front from below’: ‘Neither do we expect the reactionary leaders to form the Labor Party. It has to be done by a bloc of the radical and progressive workers in which the communists are the driving force.’ (p. 173)
Then he gave his support to the LaFollette ‘Third Party’ progressives, holding ‘this step of supporting the candidates of a petty-bourgeois liberal third party’ to be ‘correct’, mistakenly believing it to be ‘in accord with the general strategy of the CI [Communist International] (as manifested in its attitude to the British Labour Party’ (p. 202). When he finally accepted the slogan of a Labor Party, he was glad to drop it again as quickly as he could. Even Cannon’s tendency to accommodate to the ‘progressives’ inside the trade unions, for which Trotsky later sharply criticised the SWP (Writings of Leon Trotsky 1939–40, pp. 263–73), appears here as early as 1923 (pp. 158, 159, 170).
By now it should have become clear that the peculiar features of American Trotskyism, which so sharply distinguish it from the movement in the rest of the world — its factionalism and sectarianism, its manipulative approach, the weakness of its grasp of united front politics — all lie deep in the origins of the Communist Party of the USA, and were brought over into the new movement by the unfortunate predominance of its American section. Thus no serious inquirer into the history of Trotskyism can afford to neglect this book, which explains so much that would be otherwise incomprehensible in international left-wing politics.
 

chardson: Review - Robert J. Alexander, "International Trotskyism 1929-1985" (1993)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Robert J. Alexander,
International Trotskyism 1929–1985
(1993)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 4 No. 4, 1993.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Robert J. Alexander
International Trotskyism 1929–1985: A Documented Analysis of the Movement,
Duke University Press, Durham NC, 1991, pp. 1125, $165.00
This massive tome is the result of an astonishing amount of labour. It begins with a clear and surprisingly objective historical introduction to Trotskyism, and then goes through its various international alignments and the histories of the movement in different countries. A picture emerges of a movement that assumes protean forms depending on its national settings, casting considerable doubts on its being a unitary international movement at all. An honest and in many ways a valuable attempt is made to summarise key political statements, and to sketch out a few of the main forms of activity of their supporters. That makes it a considerable advance upon Pierre Frank’s book The Fourth International, once parodied by Ken Coates as ‘resolutionary socialism’, eliciting the comment that if Frank’s description was anything to go by, most of ‘the Long March of the Trotskyists’ had been spent on their backsides in some conference or other. So this reviewer can only repeat Joseph Hansen’s verdict on Alexander’s previous book, that ‘for a social democrat, he’s done a pretty good job’. But in the end, Trotskyism’s complex history can only be understood from inside, for only in this way can obvious mistakes be avoided (even if bias can create others). Examples of this appear when he talks about the criticism of the USFI by ‘the Morenoist tendency’ without being aware that the ‘Darioush Karim’ whose book he quotes at such length is Nahuel Moreno himself (pp. 19–20), or about the ‘Icelandic section’ (p. 14), a longstanding joke in the movement.
That does not mean that some parts of the book are not of considerable value. As was to be expected, the section on the movement in the USA is one of the best. From it we learn officially for the first time on the authority of Emmanuel Geltman that despite the repeated disclaimers of Burnham and Shachtman, ‘the SWP leaders were aware’ of Bruno Rizzi’s ‘new class’ views on the Soviet Union (p. 795; see Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 2, Summer 1989, p. 37; Vol. 4 No. 3, Summer 1992, pp. 90–92). On the lighter side, the long piece on Lynn Marcus (pp. 944–52) makes up in entertainment value what it lacks in relevancy. The Vietnamese section is considerably more honest than anything produced by the ‘official’ Trotskyists, and the British and French entries are worthwhile attempts, given the complexity of the material involved. If the book is less successful than it deserves to be, this is probably because writing the history of international Trotskyism is beyond the powers of any single man.
For the sheer hard work of bringing together and making a synthesis of so much material has meant inevitable errors. Apart from incidental slips (such as Mussolini’s invasion of Albania in ‘1938’, or Bert Cochran’s expulsion from the SWP in ‘1963’) and the uneven quality of the name spelling, the author also had to depend on correspondents in each country to read through his chapters. Where there have been a number of them, such as in Britain or the USA, it has been possible to check their statements against each other and arrive at an approximation to reality. But where he has only one or two in a given country this is a dangerous method to use, given the faction-ridden world of the Trotskyist movement. Many of the obvious economies with the truth are due to his informants, and should not be laid to Alexander’s charge at all. In this category we might place Mandel’s statement that his group in Bolivia is at present ‘a force in the political life of the country’ (p. 23), John Archer’s opinion that in Britain the intervention of ‘the Club’ into the fight between the ‘Blue’ and ‘White’ unions was ‘a success’ (p. 473), and John Callaghan’s remark that ‘from its origin in the mid-1960s to the end of the 1970s no factions were expelled from the IMG’ (p. 496).
Quite the worst examples of all occur in the Irish chapter, where the narrative is largely dependent upon O’Connor Lysaght. First we are told that Bob Armstrong went to Ireland with the 1939 WIL delegation, and that Johnny Byrne stayed in Ireland after the delegation had recruited him (p. 568). Then follows a sanitised account of modern Irish Trotskyism which does not even mention that Peter Graham, one of the IMG’s major activists, was horribly murdered by one of the extreme terrorist factions at the time his group was supporting nationalist terrorism as a method of struggle, apart from the fact that an account that does not even mention Matty Merrigan and Liam Daltoun hardly qualifies as a description of Trotskyism in Ireland at all.
Remarks such as ‘what remained of the Revolutionary Communist Group seems to have disappeared’ (p. 498) can probably be put down to wish fulfilment rather than any intent to mislead, but other errors must be ascribed to factional bias, or to the paucity of information. In this category belong such remarks as that the British Militant in the 1980s ‘had no international affiliation’ (p. 21), that Pablo thought that ‘entrism might be a matter of centuries-long duration’ (p. 28), that José Aguirre Gainsborg was killed in ‘an auto accident’ (p. 118), or that the Bolivian POR regarded Paz Estenssoro as ‘the Bolivian Kerensky’ (p. 120) (would that they had!). Alexander’s informants did not tell him that Bracegirdle (p. 164) was probably operating in Ceylon for the Comintern to pull into line the LSSP’s leaders, whose orthodoxy was already under suspicion, that the minutes of the founding conference of the Fourth International have been tampered with to exclude the Austrian delegation, which opposed its formation along with the Poles and Craipeau (pp. 271–72), that Haston and Goffe attended the 1946 Paris pre-conference (pp. 305–06), that Charlie Van Gelderen had never been in the WIL, nor had John Lawrence supported the RCP majority in 1945 (p. 470). Similarly, Ajit Roy could hardly have gone to Britain ‘to maintain liaison with the FI’ during the war (p. 518), since he was in the WIL for the whole of that time.
There is less excuse, however, for Alexander’s failure to make a closer inspection of the Greek movement, where at least five separate groups exist today (p. 509), or for the poor quality of his sections on Turkey (p. 739) and Japan (pp. 599–601), especially when we remember that Larry Moyes’ account of the Japanese movement came out in California as long ago as 1971. He does not even appear to know that Trotskyist groups existed in Egypt in the 1940s and in Yugoslavia since the early 1970s. And I can only account for his extraordinary remark that Indalecio Prieto was the leader of the ‘centre’ of Spanish socialism (p. 680) by the relatively far-right position occupied by American social democracy itself in the political spectrum.
Some of these types of mistakes could easily have been avoided if Alexander had checked his material for internal consistency. Here I will restrict myself to two examples. On page 496 Alexander quotes Callaghan’s British Trotskyism (a very bad book) about the IMG having ‘no expulsions’, that its ‘political culture is genuinely democratic’, and then tells us only three pages later that this reviewer ‘broke away’ from it ‘over the issue of its abandonment of entrism in the Labour Party’ (p. 499). By what criteria of ‘democracy’ an opposition amounting to a third of the group, and a majority of its London membership, can be expelled from a Trotskyist organisation for suggesting its members join trades unions (!) and working-class parties, where conference votes are fiddled when they don’t turn out the way they should, and purge trials are held in snowbound conditions, remains a mystery to me. A similar conflict of evidence involves the International Communist League, which is described on page 496 as having been ‘expelled’ from the International Socialists, an event that had already been covered 11 pages earlier with the polite euphemism of ‘each went its own way’ (p. 485).
Other infelicities probably stem from a lack of understanding of the thought world the writer is trying to interpret. Over and over again Trotskyism is discussed as if it were a religious, not a political, phenomenon, and different factions within it are measured against some supposed ‘orthodoxy’, often with ludicrous results. After five pages describing Healy’s antics in the 1970s and 1980s, Callaghan is quoted as saying that ‘the WRP really does defend orthodox Trotskyism’ (p. 480). The United Secretariat is defined as ‘orthodox’ (p. 21), yet less than a hundred pages later its Senegalese leader is quoted as rejecting ‘a certain scholastic understanding of Marxism or of a Trotskyism centred primarily on the proletariat’ (pp. 115–16). As an introduction to a period in which the USFI deliberately turned its back on the working class and advocated ‘Red Bases in the Universities’ and foquismo in Latin America, we are solemnly informed that ‘in the realm of ideas it tended to stick closer to the basic notions put forward by Trotsky than did most of its rivals’ (p. 755). The inability to apply class criteria to a supposedly Marxist movement becomes quite exasperating, at times seriously affecting the focus of the entries. Thus eight pages (pp. 53–60) cover the pre-war period when Australian Trotskyism gained a vital following within the working class, and 18 pages the history of the middle-class sectlets since the mid-1960s (pp. 62–79), an imbalance that also affects the British and other entries, but not to the same glaring extent.
This absence of Marxist philosophical methodology is also reflected in the sources and structure of the book. The heavy use of secondary material, the concentration upon official statements, and the scant attention to what the rank and file were actually doing, gives this history a top-heavy aspect, apart from the fact that Trotskyist internal documents have always been a lot more revealing about what was really going on than official literature. Added to that there is the arrangement of the book, which is most confusing, listing its subjects mechanically by alphabetic progression. Grandizo Munis’ ‘FOR’ appears before the Fourth International of which it was an offshoot, the OCRFI between Norway and Panama, and Posadas between Portugal and Puerto Rico. It would have been far better if all the general material dealing with the various ‘Fourth Internationals’ had been grouped in some sort of chronological order at the beginning, leaving the countries to follow in their alphabetical order. As it is, both text and index are very difficult to follow.
But the main reason that this book fails in its brave endeavour is surely that it is premature, attempting a task that is still impossible. The plain fact of the matter is that sufficient material does not yet exist of the quality required to write it. A few examples that have lately come to light are sufficient to establish this. Although the book bears the publisher’s imprint of 1991, it left the writer’s hand as long ago as 1986, and work that has been done since has already rendered large parts of it obsolete. Apart from the Irish chapter, the most unsatisfactory section of all is that on Greece (pp. 500–09), where the entire period of 1946 to 1967 is missed. It would have been so much better if Stinas’ memoirs and the multi-volume history of Loukas Karliaftis (whose name appears reversed on page 504) had been consulted (see Revolutionary History, Vol. 3 No. 3, Spring 1991). At least Alexander would then have been spared such remarks as that Bartzotas’ boast that he had killed ‘600’ Trotskyists is ‘manifestly exaggerated’ (p. 506), for we know that the KKE regarded Archeiomarxists and any other dissidents as ‘Trotskyists’, making the figure a very plausible one indeed. A perusal of the newly published history of Swiss Trotskyism, David Vogelsanger’s Trotskismus in der Schweiz, a very serious work, would have similarly transformed his Swiss section out of all recognition. None of Lora’s full-length historical works on the Bolivian crisis of 1952 appear to have been consulted, the books of Craipeau and Roussell were not used in the French chapters, nor Leslie Goonewardene’s The History of the LSSP in Perspective in the Sri Lankan. Sam Bornstein’s and my Against the Stream is listed in the bibliography on page 1057, but has evidently not been used in the text, and Alexander appears not to know of the following War and the International at all. The work of this magazine has rendered outmoded several other sections, such as those on Albania (pp. 32–33), where he is evidently dependent on Rene Dazy’s book alone (see Revolutionary History, Vol. 3 No. 1, Summer 1990, pp. 21–26; Vol. 3 No. 4, Autumn 1991, pp. 37–39), and on Spain, where the oft-quoted Pravda declaration about the intention to murder Trotskyists and anarchists (p. 700) would now seem to be apocryphal (Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 1, Spring, 1989, p. 47). Worse still, Vereeken’s suspicion that ‘the new Spanish Trotskyist group during the Civil War had in all likelihood been heavily infiltrated by the GPU’, dismissed by Alexander on page 104 as having ‘little basis’, now seems all too true with the evidence at our disposal (Revolutionary History, Vol. 4 Nos. 1–2).
So much that is inferior that is written on the history of Trotskyism obviously intends to be inferior, so it is a cause for real disappointment that a scholarly work that sets out in all honesty to attempt such a mammoth task should fail so disastrously. All we can do is to shrug our shoulders, recalling Cervantes’ remark that ‘heaven favours good intentions’, while reminding ourselves that the road to Hell is paved with them.
 

chardson: Review - Richard Brenner, "Trotsky" (1999)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Richard Brenner, Trotsky
(1999)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 7 No. 2, 1999.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Richard Brenner
Trotsky: An Introduction
LRCI publications, London 1997, pp. 51, £1.50
This handy pamphlet aims at being a young people’s introduction to the life and contribution of Leon Trotsky, and as such should be welcomed. It is organised around a number of well-chosen sections, followed by short but useful bibliographies. It touches upon most of the main aspects of Trotsky’s contribution to Marxism. Unfortunately, it has been written with less care than it should have been. Because a publication aims at an elementary explanation, that does not mean that it has to be cavalier with the facts.
Apart from sloppy formulations that can easily give the wrong impression – such as that ‘the Left Opposition was based on the revolutionary working class’ but ‘the Bukharinites’ class basis was amongst the richest peasants’ (p. 24), there are a large number of straight factual bloomers. Orwell’s Animal Farm, for example, takes the form of an animal fable, not a ‘fairy story’ (p. 24); Trotsky was not the only former Bolshevik leader not to capitulate to Stalin (p. 25); it is not true that the Chinese Communist Party made no attempt to win over soldiers in the Guomindang army (p. 31) – several of its future generals came from there; the Freikorps were set up in December 1918, not ‘1919’ (p. 33); it was impossible for Stalin to negotiate with the Nazis in 1924 (p. 37). (Even if this is a misprint for 1934, the Treaty of Berlin had been signed the year before, in May 1933.) The well-known quotation originating in Mexico claiming to come from Pravda describing the GPU’s activity in Spain (p. 39) was proved to be apocryphal some years ago. And if Comrade Brenner has been told ‘little of the great slave rebellion led by Spartacus’ (p. 1), then perhaps he should apply himself again to his books, for on this topic there have been enough of them. Similarly, he might be ‘left ignorant’ (p. 1) of the strikes of the tomb workmen of ancient Egypt (so ignorant, indeed, that he seems to think that they were paid in gold), but they have been known to modern scholarship for over a century (the best more recent account for those who do not read in Late Egyptian is in the Journal of Near Eastern Studies, Vol. 10 No. 3, July 1951, pp 137–45).
Moreover, some of the particular positions of Workers Power have been fathered upon Trotsky without any attempt to distinguish between them. Now Marxism is a creative methodology, and there is, of course, nothing at all wrong in principle for the theorists of our own day to disagree, alter or revise the points of view of the giants of the past, though in this case it has to be admitted that Mr Brenner is rather full of himself. But if this is to take place, the least we should require is that it be recognised in the text. For example, Trotsky resolutely refused to side with any one national group struggling against the others in his reportage of the Balkan wars, whilst Workers Power on the whole sides with the Bosnians; this deep difference is covered up with the seemingly innocuous remark that ‘he distinguished at all times between reactionary wars fought for profit and the justified resistance of nations whose fundamental freedoms were being denied’ (p. 7). Similarly, whatever the reasons for forming the Fourth International in 1938, the argument that each national party should operate ‘as an integral part of a democratic centralist international movement’ (p. 45) was hardly one of them, for the International Communist League had never operated on any other basis until then. And readers of such statements as ‘Trotskyists are not disillusioned by Stalinism’s collapse because we have been proved right’ (p. 21) might be forgiven for assuming that Workers Power had foreseen this outcome, which is certainly not the case.
It is a great shame that this carelessness should have marred so excellent an undertaking, for there is a deep need for such a basic introduction. Let us hope that such Workers Power veterans as Dave Stocking or Keith Hassell are allowed to correct the text before it is reissued in a second edition.
 

chardson: Review: Karen Olsen Bruhns, "Ancient South America" (1997)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Karen Olsen Bruhns, Ancient South America
(1995)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 6 No. 1, 1995.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Karen Olsen Bruhns
Ancient South America
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1994, pp. 424, £17.95
At present New World archaeology is in great excitement over the decipherment of the Maya script, since the possibility of reconstructing the history of that civilisation in some detail will reduce the scope for speculation within manageable limits for the first time. But because none of the cultures of South America produced written records, its archaeology continues to give full rein to scholarly debate. A clash between North American academe, just emerging from the Cold War and using politically correct language (‘supernumerary genders’, p. 223), and what this writer describes as ‘the Marxist orientation of numbers of scholars and their students’ in South America (p. 9), is one of the more predictable lines of controversy. Equally predictable is her approach to it:
As to whether South America’s past really shows the existence of a utopia now ruined by degenerate man, progress towards a truly egalitarian state of being (similarly now ruined by degenerate man), or even just the variety of the human response to life, I leave the reader to decide. (p. 6)
To help him make up his mind the author of this fascinating book appears to have abandoned the attempt to identify or periodise phases in human development at all: ‘Culture history is, or tries to be, a factual statement of what did happen as best we know, laying a basis for further discussion of meaning and pattern from the archaeological record.’ (p. 6) She objects most strongly to the fact that ‘much archaeological interpretation of time has been done on the basis of stages, the idea that on the world scene cultures pass through the same sequence of development in terms of economy, social and political organisation, etc.’, which according to her ‘have never been proved anywhere in the world’. Thus, in spite of his repeated denials of linear development, Marx, who had the misfortune to be ‘working and writing during the heyday of social/cultural evolution theories’ (p. 9), produced a Eurocentred ‘stage theory’ (p. 6), quite inapplicable to South America, where ‘the historical sequence of subsistence and craft technologies’ was ‘considerably different from that observed in Eurasia, and the definitions of civilisation and the way it develops based solely upon Eurasian models are clearly inadequate’ (p. 115). Dr Bruhns obviously has a point here, for stages theory, with its terminology of horizon, cultist, experimental, pre- and post-classical, city builder, formative, etc., has certainly run riot when applied to Andean development. Moreover, the ‘Marxism’ prevalent in Latin America bears the heavy stamp of the notorious automatic stages theory of the Short Course history of the CPSU. But surely only a pre-historian would deny that feudalism was a stage observably followed by capitalism, in Japan as well as in Europe.
It is therefore of some importance to the argument in this book to question anything that looks like parallel development, to argue against any diffusion of craft or technology, even within the New World itself, and to minimise anything that appears to suggest a logical progress from one stage of social organisation to another.
Of course, some parallels can hardly be denied. She accepts the good old Marxist maxim that ‘evident surpluses ... would have been needed to finance large structures’ (p. 112), but is at some pains to argue that these surpluses were not at all based upon the same grain cultivation as those of the civilisations of the old world (pp. 89, 112, etc.). There is nothing, of course, in Marxist or any other ‘stages’ theories to suggest that cereal production is the only way of assuring a surplus upon which ordered society can be erected. Certainly in Peru tuber and root crops are ‘demonstrably important in the ancient economies, more important, in fact, than any grains until circa AD 500’, and it might even be the case that here the earliest civilisation was ‘founded on a maritime economy in which agriculture and other domesticates were not particularly important’ (p. 112). The enormous wealth and power of Tiahuanaco, on the other hand, may rest upon ‘the possession of extensive pasture and abundant herds’ of cameloids, along with the reclamation of ‘low-lying lands by constructing huge systems of raised fields’ (p. 239), and Chimu society upon ‘elaborate irrigation systems’ (p. 299).
Dr Bruhns’ concentration upon the particularities of each society also makes her reluctant to accept that diffusion, whether from outside the continent or within it, played any significant role in the development of the various cultures at all. ‘Archaeological evidence suggests how weak the theories of a single origin and deliberate introduction of maize into other regions are’ (p. 96), ‘the very diversity of the earliest ceramics on the continent ... is most parsimoniously explained as the result of multiple inventions of ceramic technology’ (p. 121), the metallurgical system was ‘totally independent’ (p. 184), and much the same thesis is defended for stone working, textiles, animal husbandry, and so on. Surely Occam’s razor comes into play at some point here! And even if these things were all independently invented, does that not assume that at a certain point in the development of human society comparable technological innovation takes place?
Moreover, anxious as she is to deny stages of development, she cannot avoid introducing them: ‘During the first half of the first millennium AD ... large states were coming into being throughout the Andes ... the stage was being set for the first conquest states, multinational empires whose interest was in controlling land and resources as much as in obtaining booty or prisoners for sacrifice’ (pp. 221–22), so that ‘by the tenth century AD the central Andes had produced its first conquest states ... away from the Andean regions growing populations resulted in the development of large-scale hydraulic works’ (p. 276).
Did I hear the name of Wittfogel mentioned?
 

chardson: Review - Inga Clendinnen, "Aztecs: An Interpretation" (1996)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Inga Clendinnen, Aztecs – An Interpretation
(1996)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 6 No. 2, 1996.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Inga Clendinnen
Aztecs: An Interpretation
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995, pp. 398, £7.95
The five-hundredth anniversary of Columbus’ voyage to the new world unleashed a flood of left-wing nostalgia, a stream in which anti-imperialist feeling merged with utopian sentimentality about the societies swept away by the Spanish conquest. This book should bring us back to dry land again with its cool appraisal of one of the most spectacular of these civilisations, that of the Aztecs, probing the structure of their society, and unlocking the driving forces of its development.
The author points out that the capital, Tenochtitlan, was ‘a beautiful parasite, feeding on the lives and labour of other peoples’ (p. 8), emphasising how it took less than a century for ‘a miserable collection of mud huts scraped together on a swampy island by a clutch of miserable refugees’ to develop the ‘imperial splendour and the massive elaboration of the vision of the city’ (p. 37). This naturally involved a move ‘from the relative egalitarianism and known neighbourliness of the early days of settlement and struggle to the inequalities and social distances of the city in its maturity’ (pp. 37–38). The social gap between beggar and noble was enforced by differential law codes, sumptuary regulations and tribute obligations, underpinned by the plundering of other communities of wealth and sacrificial victims by a protection racket that could have taught Al Capone a thing or two.
Whilst developing her analysis the writer deals damaging blows to the naive assumption that capitalism alone is a society built on competition, and the fiercely competitive mechanism of Aztec society had the added unpleasantness that it centred around obtaining human sacrificial victims. Socialists who have for so long accepted Lewis Henry Morgan’s analysis of it as some sort of ‘democracy’ in Ancient Society and Montezuma’s Dinner should take a good hard look at this book. So however we may regret the loss of so much beautiful art, which can be sampled by a visit to the British Museum’s new Mexican gallery, it was not the least of Spanish imperialism’s achievements during its ‘golden century’ to have swept this appalling system away, whatever we may feel about what replaced it.
Of course, the Aztecs were not the first civilisation in the Valley of Mexico to develop so spectacularly, or to fall so completely. Whilst the author has an acute sense of the rapidity with which Aztec society developed, she does not agree that it was bound for a collapse that could be just as rapid. Here she departs from the view held previously that this society had already overreached itself by the time of the Spanish conquest, describing the idea that ‘any polity has “inevitable limits”,’ to be an underestimation of ‘the flexibility of human arrangements and invention’ (p. 309, n41). This has probably more to do with the self-confidence of American capitalism during its own ‘golden century’ than with any generalisation about society based upon history, which has always passed its own verdict on imperial splendour. But be that as it may, it does not alter the fact that this book is useful, informative and enjoyable.
 

chardson: Exchange with D.R. O'Connor Lysaght (1996)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Exchange with D.R. O’Connor Lysaght
(1996)

The following exchange between D.R. O’Connor Lysaght and Al Richardson was published in Revolutionary History, Vol. 6 No. 2, 1996.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Dear Editor
Recently, I received a copy of your magazine’s back number Vol. 4 No. 4. Reading your review of Robert Alexander’s International Trotskyism, I saw that his chapter on Ireland is held to include ‘quite the worst examples of ... economies with the truth’, and that by implication this is because ‘the narrative is largely dependent upon O’Connor Lysaght’. Such a statement verges on libel, with this author being given the same treatment as a source that might be given The Short History of the CPSU. As I am the only independently-published Trotskyist historian in Ireland, I think I deserve better.
However, what is more important is the paucity of your criticisms. Yes, I was wrong, I know now that Johnny Byrne went to England in the early 1940s and was subsequently deported back to Ireland. However, despite long talks with him in the early 1980s, this was still a secret to my generation in 1985. As for not mentioning Mattie Merrigan and Liam Daltun disqualifying the chapter ‘as a description of Trotskyism in Ireland’, this is no more than your opinion. For my part, I am aware of Mattie’s services to the Irish left (the more so having read his typescript memoirs), yet of his 40 militant years, his Trotskyist period was very short and comparatively uneventful; most of his achievements were done outside the movement proper. Liam Daltun was different. He was a man of great charm and knowledge, whom I found in the last years of his life to be unable to live up to the promise of his abilities. What is more, you are the first to imply that he deserves mention.
However, the worst piece of writing in your review deals with the murder of Peter Graham. Quite apart from the fact that on his death he was not a member of the International Marxist Group, but of the Socialist Discussion Group that would become the Revolutionary Marxist Group (Irish Section of the Fourth International), you imply that he died because ‘his group was supporting nationalist terrorism as a method of struggle’. This is pure Gerry Healyism. It is not even clear that Peter was murdered ‘by an extreme terrorist faction’. Certainly, I can state that he did not die because ‘his group was supporting nationalist terrorism’ (whatever you mean by that).
In your previous edition, you allow your anti-Stalinism to guide you in publishing a laudatory review of Lee’s The Rape of Serbia, without asking whether Lee’s hero, Mihailović, had anything political to offer beyond the sterile nostra of greater Serb chauvinist militarist royalism. Before attacking others for bias, you should examine the beam, or beams, in your own eye.



 


Sincerely
D.R. O’Connor Lysaght




The Editor Replies
Paragraph one: It is a new experience for me to be accused of libel for pointing out obvious gaps in the record. You are going over the top a bit. And I think your status as ‘the only independently-published Trotskyist historian in Ireland’ might be in for a bit of a knock in this issue of the journal. Sorry about that.
Paragraph two: Johnny Byrne’s past was hardly a ‘secret’ amongst the left in Britain or in Ireland. Perhaps independently-published Trotskyist historians should look at files of Socialist Appeal before sitting down to write, or even talk to those involved whilst they are still in the land of the living. An interview with Johnny exists in the files of Socialist Platform if you want to read it. You never know, you might learn something.
And as one of the proponents of Shachtman’s theories along with Bob Armstrong in In Defence of Revisionism, I would have thought that Mattie’s Trotskyist career was anything but ‘uneventful’. Perhaps we are not talking about the same bloke.
All who knew him are able to say that Liam Daltun’s contribution to spreading the ideas of Trotskyism extends to a bit more than ‘charm and knowledge’. A bit of attention to the files of Irish Trotskyist journals might be a help here, too.
Paragraph three: We both know how Peter was killed, and I do not think it can be set aside by means of bluster. This is also the case with the slogan of your Fourth International at the time, which was ‘Victory to the IRA!’. Stating this is not ‘Gerry Healyism’, but simply fidelity to the record. Nor does it imply that your comrades went in for such activities themselves — the left tends to get its ideological kicks by cheering this sort of thing on from the sidelines rather than taking the risks involved by indulging in it.
Paragraph four: The fire in your last paragraph is misdirected. Revolutionary History is a democratic magazine, inviting the participation of all on the left. I am not a ‘supremo’ who dictates everything that goes into it, nor would I want to be. Perhaps you are assuming something of the sort that happens with the editorial practices of your own tendency’s journals. But for what it is worth, I did not write the review to which you refer in your remarks about Mihailović. Unlike your Fourth International at present, I have never taken the side of any of the national groups in conflict in the Balkans, since along with Lenin and Trotsky I do not believe that a solution to the problems of the Balkan peoples is possible along the lines of bourgeois nation states.
 

chardson: Review - Keith Bradley, "Slavery and Society at Rome" (1995)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Keith Bradley, Slavery and Society at Rome
(1995)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 4, 1995.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Keith Bradley
Slavery and Society at Rome
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1994, pp. 202, £12.95
The extent to which classical civilisation can truly be defined as ‘slave society’ continues to vex ancient historians, and this contribution helps to take us a little deeper into the problem.
On the question as to whether Roman society can be correctly described as based upon slavery, the author of this book is of the opinion that if we restrict this definition to those societies in which slaves amounted to over 20 per cent of the population, then historically there have only ever been five that fit the bill – Brazil, the Caribbean, the USA, Athens and Roman Italy (p. 12). He quotes M.I. Finley approvingly that in Italy ‘slaves dominated, and virtually monopolised, large-scale production in both the countryside and the urban sector’ (p. 13). But even if Italy itself does so qualify, the number of its slaves being some two or three million during the reign of Augustus, or between 33 and 40 per cent of the population (pp. 12, 30), this high figure is certainly not true of the richer and more densely inhabited parts of the empire further east. Even so, he believes that ‘a pattern of slave ownership is apparent in fact which suggests that in the central period of its history Rome should properly be termed a slave society’ (p. 12).
‘But what does it mean to describe Rome this way?’, he asks. ‘In what sense was Rome a slave society?’ (p. 12) By concentrating on the general impact of slavery on society, and on what it felt like to be a slave, he moves the argument on from where it stands at the moment, bogged down in purely legal and economic definitions:
Once Roman slavery is approached as a social institution in which the economic aspect, though important, was subsidiary, it becomes possible to appreciate the vast amount of time and space in which the Romans were conscious of the presence of slavery among them and of the impact slavery made upon their culture. (p. 16)
There is material a-plenty illustrating the attitudes of the possessing classes, and it is well marshalled and coherently organised here. But for the other side of the story ‘the historian of Roman slavery is at a special disadvantage’, comments Dr Bradley, ‘for although a great volume of information is on hand it is all subject to the fundamental flaw that there is no surviving record, if indeed any existed, of what life in slavery was like from a slave’s point of view’ (p. 7). Whether he does succeed in his task of reconstructing this by drawing analogies from the experience of slavery in modern times in the American south, the Caribbean or Brazil, I leave to others to judge. Certainly it is a worthwhile exercise, but doubt must remain as to whether it is a valid one. For example, he notes that in the ancient world ‘the fundamental distinction between slavery and freedom affected everyone’ (p. 72), but modern slavery in the new world was a secondary outgrowth of capitalism, in which the predominant mode of production was wage labour, and this tension must have had a massive impact upon slave consciousness in the Americas by calling into question the legitimacy of the institution as a whole. Similarly, capitalism’s drive to maximise production for a world market gives it a far more dynamic thrust than the operations of even the largest latifundia, which must also have had its impact upon work organisation, as well as upon consciousness. So that although Dr Bradley is to be congratulated on his endeavour, we must continue to be on our guard about accepting parallels drawn from other times, other places, and other social systems.
And although the book well catalogues the resentment of what it was to be a slave, and accepts that ‘exploitation was resisted in a variety of ways’, it denies the existence of class struggle as such because ‘there never developed among the slave population a sense of common identity – or class consciousness – that led to an ideological impulse to produce radical change in society’ (p. 72), and Ste Croix’s contention that ‘class consciousness’ is ‘not necessarily a requirement of class struggle’ is curtly dismissed (n20, p. 73). We can only answer to this from a Marxist standpoint that whilst exploitative societies are as old as civilisation itself, of these only capitalism is a total entity that produces that acute polarisation between the classes that leads to generalised class consciousness in any case. In that sense class society, and class consciousness along with it, themselves undergo development in history. Capitalism alone is a worldwide system that destroys, undermines and incorporates all other class formations completely into its structure, whereas previous societies – feudal, slave or Asiatic – are less polarised, less dynamic, more restricted geographically, and can coexist for centuries along with other forms of social organisation. We can hardly expect peasants or slaves to have the class consciousness of the industrial proletariat. Moreover, however little its victims are aware of it, class conflict certainly goes on in our society, and the same may well be true of previous ones.
But whatever unease we may feel about the assumptions behind it, this book is a thoroughly worthwhile undertaking, and richly deserves the close consideration of those who are serious about understanding the broad lines of historical development.
 

chardson: Exchange with Ian Birchall (1995)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Exchange with Ian Birchall
(1995)

The following exchange between Ian Birchall and Al Richardson was published in Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 4, 1995.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Dear Comrades
Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3 contains a hostile review by Al Richardson of Tony Cliff’s book Trotsky: The Darker the Night, the Brighter the Star (Bookmarks, 1994). Since this follows similarly hostile reviews of earlier volumes of the same work, and since it raises questions of substance, methodology and tone which are relevant to the whole project of Revolutionary History, I should like to respond to some of the points raised.
Richardson’s basic complaint is that Cliff has harnessed history to ‘current factional concerns’. (This echoes the suggestion by Ted Crawford (Revolutionary History, Vol. 4 No. 2, p. 100) that the second volume of this series related to an ‘internal dispute’ in the Socialist Workers Party; an internal dispute none of the members seem to have noticed.) Richardson graciously concedes that Cliff is not guilty of ‘anything like the scale of Stalinism’s monstrous distortions’, neatly implying that Cliff’s affinity with Stalinism is qualitative rather than quantitative.
This is a serious charge, but what does it in fact relate to? That Cliff sees his work as an historian as inextricably bound up with his involvement in building a revolutionary organisation in the 1990s. I thought that the whole point of Revolutionary History was that we should learn from the past in order to shape the future. Of course, if we don’t tell the truth about the past, we can’t learn from it; but in fact the only ‘monstrous distortion’ Richardson has found in Cliff’s work is that he disagrees with Richardson’s interpretation on certain questions.
In an earlier review, Richardson refers to the ‘painful impression’ caused by a comparison between Cliff’s work and Pierre Broué’s Trotsky (Paris 1988) (Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 3, p. 46). Broué’s book is certainly an important piece of historical scholarship. But in its final section, it evades the central issues of Trotsky’s perspective in the late 1930s, and in particular the question of the founding of the Fourth International. One gets the impression that Broué is not prepared to defend the detailed political perspective that lay behind the founding of the Fourth International, but that he is also not willing to subject it to rigorous criticism. Since he has been arguing that the building of the Fourth International was the central task of Trotsky’s life, this produces a bizarre inconclusiveness. Cliff, on the other hand, makes no attempt to evade the difficult questions raised by Trotsky’s strengths and weaknesses.
Richardson touches only in passing on what is one of the most important themes in the volume, the ‘gaping abyss’ between Trotsky’s ideas and the tiny organisations that tried to put them into practice. The question of size is discussed in relation to Stalinist infiltration, to the tendency for organisations to be dominated by internal discussion, and to the appropriateness of organisational forms to different sizes of grouping. This discussion of the relation of theory to practice is rich in lessons; much of the history of the Trotskyist movement has consisted of heated debates about the ‘correct line’ when there was nobody there to implement the line even if it was correct. Of course, Richardson would be quite right to relate this discussion to Cliff’s belief in the importance of building a substantial revolutionary organisation over the next few years. But no apology need be made for that.
Richardson chooses instead to focus on Cliff’s alleged shortcomings on the question of ‘entry’. He laments Cliff’s ‘strange omission’ of any discussion of the question of entry in relation to the British labour movement. Perhaps it is a pity that Cliff did not discuss this question. But his omission is scarcely ‘connected with the SWP’s self-proclamation as a revolutionary party’. For whatever Trotsky might have said, it has no immediate relevance to strategy in the 1990s.
The question of revolutionary entry is a concrete one, to be judged in terms of the size of the revolutionary nucleus, the nature, organisation and base of the party to be entered, and the historical conjuncture. (Richardson concedes that entry is a question of tactics and not principle when he points out that Trotsky would have preferred entry into the French Communist Party, but recognised that it was impossible in practice.) We cannot simply quote Engels, Lenin or Trotsky, and apply their words directly to the Blair-led Labour Party of today. If learning from history were that simple, we could all do it. What is needed is a concrete study of the past combined with an equally concrete evaluation of the present. (To take one example among very many, the Pivertist left in the SFIO in 1935 had armed anti-fascist squads; when my local branch of the Campaign Group organises armed patrols against the BNP, I’ll rethink my position on entry.)
Richardson condemns Cliff for suggesting that it is an ‘eternal truth’ that ‘if entry were not seen as a short-term tactic it must lead to opportunism’. But as Richardson himself points out, all Trotsky’s strategy was directed towards the impending war; he certainly never envisaged the case of entry extended over a period of several decades. Now that we can evaluate the impact of such long-term entry, and see its effect on political strategy and on the education and training of cadre, we don’t need quotations from Trotsky to tell us that long-term entry leads to opportunism.
Entry is in fact only a minor theme in Cliff’s book; it is Richardson who elevates it to such central importance. There is an obvious reason for this. Richardson is a man with a key to history. Already in 1989 he told the world:
On this question the verdict of history is universal and conclusive. Except in countries where there was no working-class parties of any sort already in existence, there has never been a revolutionary party created by recruitment in ones or twos to a sect. All the mass parties of the Third International – not excepting the Russian – issued from splits inside previously existing working-class parties. (Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 3, p. 49)
Would that life could be so simple! Outside Russia there were at least half a dozen ‘mass parties’ in the Communist International – France, Germany, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Italy, Bulgaria. Moreover, in the case of the French Communist Party, the people whom both Lenin and Trotsky thought should be the leadership were precisely those – the revolutionary syndicalists – who had refused to enter the mass working-class parties before 1920. At no other time than the historically unique conjuncture of 1919–22 have mass revolutionary parties been formed in this way. That’s rather a shaky basis for the establishment of a ‘universal and conclusive’ verdict. In this concern to teach the left the correct methods of party building, Richardson rather reminds me of those people who publish books advising us how to win the lottery. One wonders why they don’t just go ahead and win.
Richardson also complains at Cliff’s state capitalist analysis of Russia. It is a well-rehearsed argument, and not one, I suspect, that will cause much anguish to a new generation of revolutionaries. But again it must be related to the question of party building. If I ask Richardson whether in the Russian workers’ state under Stalin, the actual workers in factory, mine, dock and office controlled the state machine, he will answer ‘of course not’. As he points out in his reply to Willie Thompson, the state that jailed the Guildford Four is rather more favourable to workers than the state which conducted the Moscow Trials (Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, p. 277). And he is on record as saying that ‘the very term “workers’ state” is a dialectical contradiction’ (Revolutionary History, Vol. 3 No. 4, p. 34).
Now this is all very well if one spends one’s entire life talking to veterans of the Trotskyist movement. Most workers do not speak Richardson’s esoteric dialectical language, and want to know who is on their side and who is the enemy. If I tell Socialist Worker buyers at Edmonton Green Shopping Centre that Russia under Stalin was a workers’ state, they will assume that I mean that people like them controlled the state. An organisation with the workers’ state position must either stay condemned to isolation or capitulate to Stalinism.
Richardson also muddies the water by alleging that Cliff’s position is the same as that of the Socialist Party of Great Britain. This is not a mere slip – he has made the same accusation in the past (Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 3, p. 46; Vol. 3 No. 4, p. 36, in the latter case twice on the same page!). Now the SPGB’s position is that ‘the Bolshevik Revolution ... was not and could not have been a proletarian revolution’ (The Russian Revolution: Its Origin and Outcome, Socialist Party of Canada, distributed by the SPGB, p. 12). Cliff’s position is that there was a proletarian conquest of power, but that this was followed by a counter-revolution. The SPGB repudiates Bolshevism, Cliff endorses Bolshevism. Richardson is entitled to criticise and reject both positions, but he cannot refuse to admit that they are different. A vegetarian may refuse both beef and mutton, but he would be singularly obtuse if he couldn’t tell a cow from a sheep. This looks remarkably like what Richardson describes as the ‘time-honoured Stalinist tactic of the amalgam’ (Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, p. 278).
Two other smaller points call for comment. Firstly, Richardson claims that Cliff ‘told his followers that with another few thousand on their section of the last miners’ demonstration they could have made a bid for power’. What Cliff actually said is rather different:
Imagine if we had 15,000 members of the SWP and 30,000 supporters: the 21 October miners’ demonstration could have been different. Instead of marching round Hyde Park, socialists could have taken 40 or 50,000 people to parliament. If that had happened, the Tory MPs wouldn’t have dared vote with Michael Heseltine. The government would have collapsed. (Socialist Worker, 23 January 1993)
Cliff used virtually the same words at a number of public rallies.
Nothing about a ‘bid for power’. The collapse of the government would, presumably, have led to a Labour success in the ensuing general election. I assume that Richardson is not so warped by years of entry that he can’t tell the difference between a Labour election victory and an SWP ‘bid for power’. Richardson has a justified reputation for his works on British Trotskyism, but he seriously imperils his reputation as an historian with misrepresentations of this sort.
Secondly, there is the fantasy about the footnotes. From the fact that Cliff follows the fairly standard scholarly practice of footnoting original texts rather than translations, Richardson deduces a conspiracy to prevent SWP members ‘reading more widely in the contributions of others’. I can assure Richardson that no such totalitarian regime exists in the SWP, and that Cliff does not attempt to limit anybody’s readings. (Does Richardson imagine that the bands that played at the ANL Carnival were Tony Cliff’s personal favourites?) In fact, quite a lot of SWP members read Revolutionary History, and more would do so if the editor could curb a regrettable tendency towards sectarianism.
For these last points can only be explained by sectarianism, a sectarianism so entrenched that it finds the recognition that Edward Thompson was a first-rate historian ‘embarrassing’ (Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, p. 287). And it is a sectarianism that does not even have the excuse of a sect to justify it.
Twice in the most recent issue, Richardson rejoices that ‘our movement’ greatly outnumbers the remnants of Stalinism (Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, pp. 234, 277). But while wishing to ride on the success of the revolutionary left, Richardson cannot resist a contemptuous dismissal of its various components, describing the largest British revolutionary organisation as ‘a couple of thousand or so students, civil service clerks and team leaders on job creation schemes’ (Revolutionary History, Vol. 2 No. 3, p. 49). He can’t have it both ways.
I am not asking the editor of Revolutionary History to abandon his political independence. I am not against vigorous polemic, and I am certainly not against humour. I am against a style of unsubstantiated sniping that prejudices the credibility of the journal.
There is an old American song about a character called ‘Bill Bailey, the ultimate sectarian’. Having refused all recruits to his organisation on the grounds of political inadequacy, Bill finally dies and goes to heaven. But when Karl Marx himself comes to open the gates, Bill slams them in his face, saying:



You may be a friend of Karl Kautsky, and a pal of Ferd Lassalle,
You may get along with Wilhelm Liebknecht and the First International,
You may have inspired every radical movement from the Hudson to the Rhine,
Yes, you may be a comrade to all of those folks, but you ain’t no comrade of mine.



If Revolutionary History plays its role as a serious historical journal, respecting the facts of past and present, if it exercises a role of independent but constructive criticism, it can make a real contribution to the development of the British left. If it becomes a journal of Bill Baileys, I see no future for it.



 


Fraternally
Ian Birchall




The Editor replies
Paragraphs 2–3: Did I accuse Cliff of ‘monstrous distortions’? Please read my review again. Are polemics against ‘squadism’, for example, a strategic concern for the construction of a revolutionary party? Were Islington street politics really a topic of burning interest to Trotsky while Hitler was rising to power?
Paragraph 4: Broué and Trotsky support the formation of the Fourth International. Cliff, having built a peculiarly British organisation, tries to clone it into other countries, with less than startling success. Which of them has the ‘strengths’ and which the ‘weaknesses’ on this point?
Paragraphs 6–8: Come off it, Ian! Don’t the facts that Cliff’s reference to your organisation’s 16 years in the Labour Party occupies part of a tiny footnote in his 426-page book about it, and entrism in Britain is wholly omitted in his Trotsky book, remind you just a teeny weeny bit of the historical methods of the notorious Short Course? And if learning from history were so ‘simple’ for your comrades as you make out, why do they describe the formation of the Independent Labour Party as a result of a ‘defeat’ for the movement, when Engels applauded it and became a card-carrying member? And would they have succeeded quite so easily in blacking out from their historical memories the fact that during the whole period of Trotsky’s last exile the Trotskyist groups in Britain were supposed to be entrist organisations, first of all in the Communist Party, then in the ILP, and finally in the Labour Party, a foresight that was so dramatically confirmed in 1945? You are quite right, learning from history can be ‘simple’ – providing you are allowed to get to know about it in the first place. As for size being a criterion for judging the viability of entry, I wouldn’t be so quick to invoke it if I were you. Trotsky called the ILP and the POUM sects when they had tens of thousands of members, the overwhelming majority of them workers, and were far better implanted in the class than you are. Where are they now?
Paragraph 9: Have mass revolutionary parties been founded at any other time than in 1917–22? Well, perhaps. In Vietnam and Ceylon the Trotskyist parties were formed precisely in the same circumstances – from splits inside previously undifferentiated organisations. The possible exception of Bolivia obviously does not count against this historic pattern, since before the rise of the POR there was no real working-class party in that country at all. Should serious revolutionaries utterly disregard this whole history, as well as the entire theory of the united front applied to the mass organisations, the essence of the revolutionary experience of Lenin and Trotsky?
Paragraph 10: Obviously myself and Sam Bornstein should not have spent 13 years researching the material for our books on the movement’s history, or wasting the time since in doing the work for this magazine. We should have contributed to the revolutionary movement in more concrete ways – promoting feminism, black power and political correctness, attacking Jewish student clubs for racism, apologising for Islamic fundamentalism, selling Socialist Worker on Edmonton Green, or assaulting the odd seller of Socialist Organiser.
Paragraph 12: I am sorry that you find Lenin’s definition of a workers’ state as ‘a bourgeois state without a bourgeoisie’ to be ‘esoteric dialectical language’. If you don’t understand it, of course I can’t expect any better of your Edmonton Green revolutionaries. Perhaps when you have read Lenin’s full argument about this in the book In Defence of the Russian Revolution that is about to go to the printers, we can have a real discussion about it. But be that as it may, whilst rejecting self-mystifying pseudo ‘dialectics’ of the Healy variety, I do not think in general that revolutionaries should hold its theory of contradiction up to ridicule, for it is vital for us to understand the difference between its contradictions and those of formal logic. A contradiction of this type in formal logic is an error in reasoning; in dialectics, a necessary aid to understanding. If, for example, I were to say ‘I have seen Cliff lie and manipulate in a quite outrageous fashion, but I have accepted it because I am totally convinced of his absolute revolutionary integrity’, that would be a straight logical absurdity. But if I said ‘I support the formation of a particular type of state, because in the long run I am against all states and want them to wither away’, that would be a perfectly acceptable dialectical contradiction. I am pleased to note that your comrade Paul McGarr takes a very different attitude to this question than you do.
Paragraphs 13–14: Again, a bit of reading is required before we can discuss this topic, too. The first theory of state capitalism applied to the Soviet Union within the British Trotskyist movement was worked out by Jock Haston, who learned his Marxism from the Socialist Party of Great Britain, and Cliff was put up to counter this from the workers’ state position by Mandel and Pablo. In the course of the discussion they changed sides. When you have read Haston’s argument in the Internal Bulletin of the RCP and in the series of articles in Socialist Appeal, I feel sure that you will see immediately the stamp of the SPGB’s reasoning. They certainly recognise the affinity between their views and yours, for they have reprinted my previous remarks about this in the Socialist Standard. If you haven’t the time to look all this up, at least read the little summary in War and the International, pp 182–85.
Paragraph 15: Can the government of a bourgeois democracy collapse as a result of one demonstration? Did Cliff call for a Labour government in the event of a collapse of the Tories, or is it something you have tacked on yourself? From the remarks you made at our AGM that the Labour Party constitutes the same sort of problem for revolutionaries as do the Tories, I find this dialectical reasoning a bit mystifying – too esoteric for me to cope with.
Paragraph 16: I am not a lecturer in foreign languages, so I will have to take your word for this. But I would have thought that systematically avoiding a mention of English translations where they do exist, and quoting from a German quotation of something written originally in French (of which an English version had been around for a year or two) was a bit on the tortuous side. Why otherwise was it done? Perhaps there is a simple explanation for it. You tell me.
Paragraph 17: Of course E.P. Thompson was a superb historian. So were Thucydides and Gibbon, but we would not dream of taking our politics from them. And I do not think that Marxists and internationalists should add to the mass media’s fawning on Thompson’s memory at this time, especially as his political legacy includes an openly expressed hostility to Trotskyism, support for respectable Popular Front-style pacifism in END, and a cosy little English radical tradition contrasted with horrible foreign innovations. Moreover, this is by no means the first time your comrades have gone out of their way lately to praise the traditions, not only of the Communist Party historians’ group, but even of the party itself. In the last few years your party has promoted the myth of Cable Street in its paper, and one of your high-profile comrades has even written to the national press in praise of that gruesome old Stalinist (and suspected GPU man) Bert Ramelson. Isn’t this an odd posture to be taken up by a state-capitalist tendency? And as for Stalinist and Stalinist-derived historiography in general, I think that we have to admit that its usefulness for revolutionaries today is rather limited. It does, after all, diminish in truthfulness the closer we get to the present.
Paragraph 18: Obviously I am proud of the success of the British Trotskyists in replacing Stalinism as the main force to the left of the Labour Party. But if I wanted to ‘ride on the success’ of the SWP, I might be in for a bit of a steeplechase. I would certainly not like to crash against such a fence as you did in 1975, when your group purged a whole layer of seasoned industrial militants, including entire committees of convenors and shop stewards, along with some impressive second-rank cadre that included one of the founding fathers of British Trotskyism. And while your horse’s energy and grit are to be applauded, I don’t think much of its staying power. The turnover of your members is proverbial. And with your numbers, shouldn’t you by now have a higher working-class content (not to mention a firmer implantation in the institutions of the industrial working class)? So why shouldn’t I be allowed to celebrate the fact that we Trotskyists are at least back in the race again, even if I have my doubts about the quality of some of our trainers?
PS: I am not against humour either. I like your little song. Sectarianism, as you know, is defined by our attitudes to the mass movement. Which of your comrades was Bill Bailey? Did I ever meet him?
 

chardson: Review - Monty Johnstone, "Trotsky Reassessed", and Tony Cliff, "Trotsky: The Darker the Night, The Brighter the Star" (1994)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Monty Johnstone, Trotsky Reassessed, and
Tony Cliff, Trotsky: The Darker the Night,
The Brighter the Star
(1994)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, 1994.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Monty Johnstone
Trotsky Reassessed
‘Our History’ Pamphlet No. 87, Socialist History Society, London 1992, pp. 37, £2.50
Tony Cliff,
Trotsky: The Darker the Night, The Brighter the Star
Bookmarks, London 1993, pp. 427, £6.95
Dealing with world-historic figures often induces the writer to create a mirror of himself and the problems he faces in his own age, and those who concern themselves with Leon Trotsky are especially susceptible to it.
Our first item is the text of a lecture delivered in May 1991, and when we compare it with the speaker’s previous essays in Cogito and Marxism Today it is fascinating to see the light it throws on the changing needs of the Communist Party and its successor, the Democratic Left, over a quarter of a century.
We may well doubt whether any more would have been heard of Trotsky in the Stalinist movement without the changes in the Soviet Union that led to Khrushchev’s Secret Speech, and our speaker admits to have been ‘helped, of course, by the reassessment taking place in the Soviet Union’ (p. 3). Nonetheless, he is well within his rights to remind us that already in 1968 he had rejected the more vulgar slanders that were current in other communist parties, and had maintained that an ‘assessment of Trotsky can only be made on the basis of a Marxist assessment of his political ideas’ (p. 1). But 1968 is in itself a significant date, for it was in that year that the mass Vietnam movement led by Trotskyists of one hue or another completely bypassed the British Communist Party, leading in the following decade to the unprecedented situation of a European communist party outnumbered on its left by a Trotskyist movement. The more advanced position taken up by the British Communist Party about Trotsky’s history had a real material basis, for slanders and gangsterism such as French Stalinism continued to employ until relatively recently simply would not work over here.
This presentation similarly allows us to measure the impact of the real material changes involved in the collapse of the Soviet Union over these last few years. Trotsky is now held to be in the right in his critique of ‘substitutionism’ in Our Political Tasks (p. 6), his attack upon Stalin’s economic policy (p. 17), and his view that the bureaucracy could move to ‘bourgeois restoration’ (p. 18, and postscript, p. 37). The contention that Trotsky wanted to spread the revolution by means of the sword is admitted to be the very reverse of the truth (p. 14), and ‘the kind of allegations which are made by a number of present Soviet writers that Stalin got his ideas for collectivisation from Trotsky are at best only partial truths’ (p. 33). Some interesting details of current publications by or about Trotsky in the former Soviet Union are given, and in this connection it is important to note that some of the speeches and letters from 1923 published in Izvestia TsK KPSS (nos. 5–7, 1990) referred to on page 14 can be consulted in their first full English translations in The International Workers Bulletin and The International Communist of David North’s ‘Fourth International’.
Johnstone’s judgement as to what is valid and what is not in Trotsky’s worldview is also influenced by the present position of the Democratic Left on the extreme right of the spectrum of the labour movement, where it persists in its pernicious policy of arguing for a system of proportional representation and a Popular Front-style alliance between the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats. So Trotsky ‘wrote many excellent things and certainly had right on his side’ in his critique of the ‘Third Period’ disaster in Germany that led to Hitler’s rise to power (pp. 20–23), whereas he ‘overestimated the revolutionary possibilities’ of France and Spain in 1936–37, and was ‘particularly wrong’ on the Popular Front and the nature of the Second World War (p. 23). Johnstone evidently feels he can still ignore the evidence accumulated by this magazine, amongst others, about the real activities of the communists during the Spanish Civil War, even if one of his audience, Mick King, expresses some doubt about it in his contribution to the discussion afterwards (p. 29). It is also interesting to observe how Johnstone’s lack of any dialectical theory of the changes going on so rapidly has caught him with analyses that can only be described as half-formed:
The Russian proletariat could seize power, he [Trotsky] argued, but, without the direct state support of the European proletariat, the Soviet state could not maintain itself for any length of time in an imperialist environment. History has confirmed the former but refuted the latter proposition. (p. 15)
And some Stalinist myths persist unaltered. In spite of the fact that the Provisional Government was set up, not by any bourgeois democratic assembly, but by the ex-Tsarist Duma, February 1917 is described as ‘a successful bourgeois democratic revolution’ (p. 9), and Johnstone still prefers the peculiar formulation of ‘a deformed form of socialism’ to Trotsky’s deformed workers’ state (p. 16). At one point, in the mistaken belief that he is taking Trotsky to task, he even argues against Marx’s contention that every revolution serves to perfect the state apparatus (p. 19).
Since a bit more of the truth is always better than less of it, this pamphlet is certainly to be welcomed, even if in the end it does tell us rather more about the Democratic Left than it does about Leon Trotsky.
The main beneficiary of the collapse of the Communist Party on the left is the Socialist Workers Party, and since barely a month goes by without a favourable reference to the Communist Party’s History Group in one or other of its magazines, it is plain in what direction its ambitions lie. And whilst it would be quite wrong to suggest that the SWP is involved in anything like the scale of Stalinism’s monstrous distortions, it shares the same assumption that history must be tightly harnessed to current factional concerns. Our second item, the fourth and final volume of Tony Cliff’s biography of Trotsky, shows us a number of clear examples.
Let us begin, as Cliff does, with the theory of state capitalism. Fulsome praise is heaped upon The Revolution Betrayed (pp. 16–17) without informing us that its preface sets the framework of its analysis by reminding us of Lenin’s definition of a workers’ state as ‘a bourgeois state without a bourgeoisie’, making the whole argument about whether Russia is a capitalist state or a workers’ state redundant and undialectical. ‘It is necessary to defend the spirit of Trotskyism while rejecting some of his words’ (p. 338), Cliff informs us, for Trotsky’s analysis of Stalinism as a degenerated workers’ state was ‘a conservative attachment to formalism’ (p. 329), and ‘with hindsight this development is far clearer to us than to those who participated in the events’ (p. 14). Much is made of Trotsky’s frequent adjustments to his analyses of Thermidor and Bonapartism during the period of forced collectivisation and industrialisation (pp. 61–67), in which he was ‘repeatedly disorientated and wrong-footed’, and this is held to be a major contribution to the ideological disintegration of the Left Opposition in the face of Stalin’s terror. This may well be the case, but whether it is due to Trotsky’s failure to adopt Tony Cliff’s more far-sighted analysis may well be doubted, for oppositional tendencies that had adopted this theory both inside and outside the USSR (Bordiga, the Socialist Party of Great Britain, Korsch, etc.) fared no better, apart from the fact that a Marxist analysis of the regime’s degeneration which is being elaborated in the course of a living struggle against it of necessity has to be a changing one.
Nor is Cliff on firmer ground when he tries to turn the analysis around and argue from the end of the process to its beginning. ‘If the regime in Eastern Europe and [the] USSR was post-capitalist and in 1989 there was a restoration of capitalism, how was the restoration achieved with such astonishing ease?’, he asks. ‘The events do not square with Trotsky’s assertion that the transition from one social order to another must be accompanied by civil war.’ (p. 335) But if this argument really holds water, it is equally valid for the creation of a capitalist regime some 65 years earlier on Cliff’s own theory. Has history ever witnessed one class society change itself into another by means of a policy decision within its own state? According to him, a bureaucracy that had achieved state power without any such civil war years before now transformed itself into a new class simply by a change in domestic policy, ‘a state capitalist way out of the impasse’ (p. 13). ‘It was with the inauguration of the Five-Year Plan that Stalinism was transformed from a stratum mediating between the proletariat and peasantry into a ruling class’ (p. 50), he writes, so that ‘by using brute force, to impose a series of ad hoc measures, it found a state capitalist way out of the crisis’ (p. 44).
All sorts of mental gymnastics are displayed in an attempt to justify this self-contradictory stance. Since Cliff holds that Stalin’s regime after 1928 was bourgeois, but that Bukharin still represented a working-class tendency, he is obliged to argue that ‘because of his new social position’ Stalin’s collectivisation and industrialisation (accompanied, need we add, by the ‘Third Period’ policy in foreign policy), was ‘far to the right’ of Bukharin’s policy of continuing the NEP (p. 51). What he must make of the class nature of the Stalinist parties abroad is anybody’s guess, for ‘we must be clear that Stalin’s ultra-leftism was qualitatively different from what is usually regarded in the Marxist movement as ultra-leftism, that is, the extremism of newly-radicalised and impatient workers who lacked training in revolutionary strategy and tactics’. ‘Stalin’s ultra-leftism’, on the other hand, ‘was a manipulation of the party and the workers by the leadership.’ (p. 109) Is this the same Cliff who told his followers that with another few thousand on their section of the last miners’ demonstration they could have made a bid for power? Not much above this level are remarks such as that on page 54, where Trotsky is laughed at for calling the working class ‘still the ruling class of the country’ in 1930 ‘when real wages in Russia were cut by half’. This had, of course, already happened to them during the Civil War in the lifetime of Lenin, when on Cliff’s own admission they still were the ruling class (see Volume 2 of this series, pp. 158–60).
When we move on to the question of party building, we similarly see how Cliff’s failure to understand Trotsky’s theory of revolutionary entry is likewise connected with the SWP’s self-proclamation as a revolutionary party. True enough, a summary is provided of the results of this policy as practised in France, the USA, Belgium and elsewhere (pp. 211–34), but the only hint that it might also apply to Britain is the odd remark that, apart from the British delegation at the Comintern’s Second Congress, Lenin was ‘the only person to speak on the subject’ of the Communist Party’s affiliation to the Labour Party (p. 301). This is a strange omission to make, since Trotsky’s forecast that a rising tide of trade-union militancy would reflect itself in a turn to the left in the Labour Party, making entry a necessity, was brilliantly confirmed in 1945. Cliff can hardly plead ignorance of the account of this in my and Sam Bornstein’s Against the Stream (p. 250, etc.), since he elsewhere quotes from the previous chapter of the same book (p. 364). In the context of France we are told that ‘if entry were not seen as a short-term tactic it must lead to opportunism’ (p. 217), leaving the reader with the impression that this statement has the status of an eternal truth. But once we understand that in France Trotsky would have preferred entry into the Communist Party, rapidly becoming the mass party of the working class, and that the Trotskyists entered the PSOP not long afterwards, this remark falls immediately into context. And nowhere does Cliff refer to Trotsky’s basic definition of what entrism is, an ‘organic place in the ranks of the united front’ where the revolutionary group is ‘too weak to claim an independent place’. Indeed, we are given several indications that Cliff does not understand the connection between entry and the united front policy at all. Speaking of Germany before the rise of Hitler, he asks himself, ‘how could 50 members of the Left Opposition in Berlin pressurise the KPD with its 34,000 members?’, as ‘the very existence of a small organisation calling for a united front seemed a contradiction in terms’ (p. 160). It might seem a contradiction in Cliff’s terms, but it was certainly not one in Trotsky’s, for in the very letter he quotes (Writings 1929, p. 337) Trotsky makes his meaning abundantly clear: ‘The Leninbund should feel and function like a faction within German communism and not like an independent party.’ (original emphasis)
The same confusion applies to the transitional method and the founding of the Fourth International, which, as I have argued elsewhere (Workers News, October–November 1990), cannot be understood at all outside the context of the coming war. The proclamation of the International in 1938 is held to be a mistake (p. 306), for ‘under conditions of a massive expansion of capitalism, as took place after the Second World War’, the demands in its programme for a sliding scale of hours and wages ‘were at best meaningless, and at worst reactionary’, and ‘other demands in Trotsky’s Transitional Programme, such as the establishment of “workers’ defence guards”, “workers’ militia”, and “the arming of the proletariat” certainly did not fit a non-revolutionary situation’ (p. 300). Exactly. For the Fourth International and the Transitional Programme were not founded for conditions of massive expansion of capitalism after the Second World War, but for the political crisis that would inevitably emerge towards the end of it. And dual power actually was posed at the time – in parts of Italy and France the communist-dominated resistance actually did wield quasi-state functions until disarmed by Moscow’s directives, not to mention the civil wars that broke out in Yugoslavia and Greece during the war, or in Vietnam and China after the end of it. The fact that the Trotskyists were able to play so small a part in these events was only partly due to their tiny size, for an examination of their politics at the time shows that, like Tony Cliff, they had by then abandoned the transitional method (that is, assuming that they had ever understood it).
That brings us on to an interesting feature of this book, the light it casts on the postwar ideological confusion of the Trotskyist movement that gave rise to the Socialist Review Group, the ancestors of the modern SWP. For contrary to the legend spread by the late Gerry Healy of unblessed memory, and given credence by the majority of Trotskyists since, this group did not emerge out of a cowardly refusal to oppose the Korean War in 1950, but as a result of the inability of the Trotskyist movement to explain the expansion of Stalinist state forms in Eastern Europe after 1945. And the present book shows that Cliff still shares their logic:
If state property, planning, and a monopoly of foreign trade defined a country as a workers’ state, then without doubt Russia as well as her satellites were workers’ states. This presumes that proletarian revolutions had taken place in Eastern Europe.
But of course, it assumes nothing of the sort. What it shows is what Marxists have always understood about the outcome of a war between states of a different class character, that the victor imposes his class forms upon the vanquished by armed force. With regard to Russia this almost happened during the 1919–20 war with Poland, and actually did happen in the case of Georgia during Lenin’s lifetime.
Finally, a couple of minor points suggest that we are not too far off the mark in placing this book in the context of the particular needs of Cliff’s own organisation. One is the reference to the ‘squaddist practice’ of the German Red Front in its combats with the SA (p. 149). Another is the method by which quotations are made. For example, the only references to the work of this magazine are to an article written in it by one of Cliff’s own comrades (p. 405). Oskar Hippe’s autobiography is quoted from the German (p. 397), with no indication that an English translation put out by a rival organisation exists at all. Citations are made from sections of the German of Wolfgang Alles’ book (pp. 145, 154), which we published long ago in English in this magazine (Vol. 2 No. 3, Autumn 1989, pp. 29–30), and Pierre Broué‘s views on the German left which were published in full in the same issue are even quoted second-hand from a German book by another author (p. 150). This suggests that Comrade Cliff is by no means happy with his members following up his references by reading more widely in the contributions of others. The same unpleasant trait is shared by some of his followers, for example, when a reference is made to the same article by Andy Durgan cited by Cliff without even mentioning the name of the magazine of which it forms part (International Socialism, No. 62, Spring 1994, p. 88, n8). I hope that this does not indicate that the SWP is trying to step into the CPGB’s shoes in their less attractive fittings, though to be fair to them we must point out that this habit is not to be found among some other leading members, such as Alex Callinicos.
Saying this, of course, does not detract from the book’s value otherwise. Whilst less detailed and less well researched than Broué’s biography, it does allow Trotsky to emerge as a political figure in a clear and coherent fashion, even if his personal fortunes tend to fade into the background a bit. It is a real contribution to the political debate about Trotsky, now that so much more material is becoming available. And the reader would have to range over a very wide field indeed to encounter the material collected together and arranged so well here.
 

chardson: Review - Anita Burdman Feferman, "Politics, Logic and Love" (1994)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Anita Burdman Feferman,
Politics, Logic and Love
(1994)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 3, 1994.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Anita Burdman Feferman
Politics, Logic and Love: The Life of Jean Van Heijenoort
AK Peters, Wellesly 1993, pp. 415, £29.95
This is a book about a most complex and interesting man, who for some years played a central role in the Trotskyist movement, and yet it somehow manages to avoid the point, written as it is in the language of sub-Freudian popular psychology, in which father figures, guilt complexes and love triangles float back and forth, skilfully washing the politics off the page. Thus Trotsky was a ‘prima donna’ (p. 143) and Van Heijenoort ‘would complain with a certain bitterness that the Old Man did not care deeply about him personally’ (pp. 133–34), but when he accepts Trotsky’s arguments ‘an emptiness was filled and a father resurrected’ (p. 117). And again: ‘Although the Gaby–Van–Trotsky triangle was somewhat different from the situation between Jeanne, Lyova and Raymond, the passions and tensions surrounding their entanglements were very much the same’ (p. 115). ‘It is difficult to resist the thought that when Comrade Gaby spoke with the voice of those who differed with Trotsky, at least some part of what moved her was personal’, she writes (p. 106). It certainly is difficult for the writer to resist such thoughts, but after the reader has encountered them page after page he begins to wish that she had.
Without such self-indulgence we might have learned a little more about the man and his ideas as opposed to her own, for a mass of personal ephemera crowds in, effectively obscuring them. We are told about the soup he drank in the Collège de Clermont, but not the name of the young man who first recruited him to Trotskyism (p. 39). Less effort than we could have hoped is invested into understanding the nature of the movement to which Van Heijenoort belonged, described as ‘serious young people with Marxist-utopian ideals’ (p. 54), whose ‘passions ran high in the name of “isms” but bubbling and boiling beneath the surface were the ordinary human passions, the love triangles and the personality conflicts that added fuel to the fire’ (p. 117).
Certainly political analysis is not her strong point, for she believes that among ‘the dreams the Trotskyists hoped to activate’ were that ‘someone might assassinate Stalin’ (p. 86), and that Trotsky and his French supporters ‘decided to call themselves the Fourth International’ in 1933 (p. 112, a mistake repeated on pages 93 and 123). It is treated as a great revelation that when he was International Secretary Van Heijenoort used US sailors as couriers abroad (p. 189), a fact that has appeared in several books by now and has been open knowledge for many years. Quite unaware of the scope and outcome of the conflict inside the US Socialist Workers Party over the ending of the Second World War, she even takes as good coin Van Heijenoort’s alibi when leaving the movement that his first doubts about Marxism came from the flaws in Engels’ mathematics in Anti-Dühring (p. 215).
However, there are indications that this superficiality is not wholly to be blamed upon the writer, for by the time she interviewed Van Heijenoort a lifetime of mathematical logic had destroyed his grasp of the political and dialectical sort, even to the extent of his no longer understanding such kindergarten Marxist propositions as the role of the individual in history and the critique of individual terrorism. Thus, speaking of the monstrous accusations made in the Moscow Trials, Feferman notes that ‘what is most interesting in this connection is that Van faulted Trotsky and his followers for having done too little in the way of conspiracy’ (p. 142):
Why wouldn’t Trotsky, the ex-Commissar for War, have plotted a return? Why wouldn’t there have been many plots against Stalin by those who, early on, were keenly and painfully aware of his diabolical cruelty and single-mindedness?
Fifty years after the Moscow Trials, Van Heijenoort’s response to such a question was an excited and emphatic: ‘... it would have made sense to kill Stalin personally. But Trotsky always said “We are against personal terrorism.” Of course Stalin should have been eliminated.’ (p. 140)
But we must not assume from this that the book does not contain material of considerable value, some of it quite disturbing. An authentic note is struck when Feferman comments upon Van Heijenoort’s activity as Secretary of the Fourth International during the War:
His concerns were global, whereas those of the Socialist Workers [Party], in his opinion, were narrow and parochial ... Since he had no financial support for his projects, he was in the demeaning position of having to swallow his anger and ask for aid from an unsympathetic boss. Describing his situation later, he said: ‘I would go to Cannon and plead for money to buy the stamps and stationery necessary to maintain my contacts abroad ... Grudgingly, Cannon doled out small amounts of cash.’ (pp. 186–87)
The disturbing material towards the end concerns his collaboration with the FBI and the Immigration and Naturalisation Service, the extent of which only became known when his file was declassified in 1988. It transpires that J. Edgar Hoover ordered him to be investigated as early as August 1942, and that when he was interviewed ‘by 1948’ he ‘agreed to tell them what he knew’, which ‘seems to have been one of the factors that finally opened the door to citizenship’ (pp. 230–34). Although it is implied that this full cooperation only took place after he left the movement, I for one remain unconvinced, for it is obvious that his ostensible break with the movement over Engels’ faulty mathematics conceals a rationalisation for something else.
Whatever the truth of the matter, all who take a serious interest in the history of Trotskyism must attempt an assessment of the career of this brilliant if somewhat narcissistic figure, a flawed genius if ever there was one, for which the account in this book is indispensable.
 

chardson: Review - Yodage Ranjith Amarasinghe, "Revolutionary Idealism and Parliamentary Politics", and Regi Siriwardena, "Working Underground" (2001)



Al Richardson Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Al Richardson
Review: Yodage Ranjith Amarasinghe, Revolutionary
Idealism and Parliamentary Politics,
and Regi Siriwardena, Working Underground
(2001)

Source: Revolutionary History, Vol. 7 No. 4, 2001.
Prepared for the Marxists’ Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Yodage Ranjith Amarasinghe
Revolutionary Idealism and Parliamentary Politics: A Study of Trotskyism in Sri Lanka
Social Scientists’ Association, Colombo 1998, pp. 341
Regi Siriwardena
Working Underground: The LSSP in Wartime, A Memoir of Happenings and Personalities
International Centre for Ethnic Studies, Colombo 1999, pp. 75
Several full-length articles that have recently appeared in the popular press in Sri Lanka testify to the growing interest in the history of that country’s Trotskyist movement. Nobody is better qualified to respond to it with an overall treatment than the author of our first book, some of whose preliminary results appeared in a previous issue of this magazine (Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 100–12 and 180-208). But here for the first time is a full analysis of the party’s significance in the country’s overall development, and of the LSSP’s place within it. There are, inevitably, some omissions. The book obviously went to press before the appearance of Wesley Muthiah and Sydney Wanasinghe’s two documentary collections (The Bracegirdle Affair and Britain, World War Two, and the Sama Samajists), and the special issue of our magazine, but apart from the absence of Edmund Samarakkody’s classic analysis in Spartacist (No. 22, Winter 1973–74), the documentation of the party’s history is admirable throughout. A coherent picture is given of the basis of the party’s support, its policy during the major turning points of the island’s history, its adaptation to parliamentary politics, and the tension set up between this and its stated ideology and aims. The present unhappy situation in Sri Lanka cannot at all be understood without reading it.
At the same time, it has to be said that it suffers from the limitations of its academic origins, a PhD submitted from the Institute of Commonwealth Studies to the University of London in 1974. Its analysis is therefore couched in terms of the model worked out for ‘Asian radical parties’ by Franda, John Kautsky and Scalapino (pp 310, 313–14), which displays no more than a rudimentary knowledge of Trotskyism in general, or in Asia in particular. And it is precisely in this area that its limitations emerge, for it is not possible to make sense of an internationalist party without a clear understanding of its ideological and organisational parallels and links abroad.
Thus the International Executive Committee is first identified with the United Secretariat as a whole (p. 196), and then even with the International Committee (pp. 262–63). Nor is there any account of the LSSP’s conciliatory role during the split between the International Secretariat and the International Committee in 1953. Amarasinghe’s perplexity when dealing with the ‘T’ group shows that he is clearly unacquainted with the practice of creating broad working-class parties around a Marxist core (pp. 213-–21), precisely the method recommended by Marx himself (see What Next?, No. 9, 1998, pp. 3–5; Workers Fight, Winter 1998–99). The discussion of the party’s attitude towards the nationalist movement on pp. 218–20 shows no acquaintance with the debates on the Anti-Imperialist United Front, either in the Comintern to begin with or among the Trotskyists afterwards. And in view of the facts that Bracegirdle had previously been the acting secretary of a Stalinist front organisation in Australia (p. 24), and joined the Communist Party when he got back to London, where he was closely associated with S.A. Wickremasinghe (p. 224), it is a matter for regret that so little consideration is given to the opinion of Philip Gunawardena, Vernon Gunasekera and Edmund Samarakkody that Bracegirdle had been sent to bring the Ceylonese party into line with the Comintern (p. 45, n97, p. 224, n45, p. 270).
So little is generally known of the histories of Cuba, Chile, Bolivia or the Argentine that Amarasinghe might well be forgiven such statements as that the LSSP is ‘unique in being a Trotskyist party with much influence, outside the confines of western Europe’ (p. 1), but it is less excusable when the predominance of Trotskyism over Stalinism in Sri Lanka is described as ‘the only instance in the whole of Asia’ (pp. 2, 6; see Revolutionary History, Vol. 3 No. 2). Amarasinghe’s knowledge of the movement in Vietnam is encapsulated in the remark that:
... there were a handful of Trotskyist supporters among the radical intellectuals in some Asian countries, particularly in the French colonial territories, in the 1930s ... It has also been claimed that Trotskyist groups existed in Indo-China as well. It is not possible to discard these claims off-hand, but it can be said that in none of these countries did a noteworthy Trotskyist movement exist. (p. 240)
It is thus unfortunate that he appears to be unaware of Stelio Marchese’s argument (Storia e Politica, No. 4, December 1977, pp. 664–83) that some of the influence of Trotskyism among the working classes of both Sri Lanka and Vietnam might be accounted for by the dialectical ferment previously laid down by Buddhism, for whilst admitting that ‘the LSSP never became successful in winning over more than a handful of Buddhist monks’ (p. 180), he does note that that there was ‘a significant positive correlation of the Marxist vote with Sinhalese and Buddhist populations’ (p. 290).
More serious is Amarasinghe’s ignorance of the party’s ideological roots in Britain, in part due to the neglect of oral evidence until quite recently in academic circles. Assuming that Trotskyism here ‘was not to develop to any significant proportion until the late 1930s’, and that ‘most of the students who came to lead the LSSP had left England by 1933 or 1934’ (p. 241), he believes that ‘there is evidence pointing to various nationalist and orthodox communist influences on the young students, who later became founders of the LSSP, yet not to any Trotskyist influences as such’ (p. 241; repeated on p. 242). The most he is willing to concede is that Philip’s move towards Trotskyism ‘may have been due to the influences he received while in the United States and Britain’ (p. 243). He therefore mentions Philip’s contacts with Palme Dutt, Harry Pollitt and Krishna Menon, but not his and Colvin’s contacts with Aggarwalla, Frank Ridley or Reg Groves during the same period (p. 11). A stroll from the LSE Library round the corner to Frank Ridley’s flat in Herbrand Street, or a chat with Reg Groves in Wandsworth, would soon have put him right on Philip’s activity as a Trotskyist within the Communist Party here. If this failed to convince him, even though the very detailed secret service reports now on deposit in the British Library were not open to inspection while he was over here, Amarasinghe could still have found out from Philip’s daughter how he had been stopped in Bulgaria on a journey to see Trotsky in Prinkipo (Lakmali Gunawardena, Philip: The Early Years, March 1996, pp. 16–17).
Lack of acquaintance with the history of the British movement (which Amarasinghe appears to think was called the Revolutionary Communist League in 1939 [p. 251]), badly affects his discussion of the covert Trotskyism of the leadership of the early LSSP. Whilst he does admit that the ‘T’ group did exist (p. 224), he carries on a vigorous polemic against Lerski’s view that the inner core of the LSSP was Trotskyist from the very beginning (pp. 217–19), claiming that ‘the programme of the LSSP during the first few years of its existence reflects nothing more than moderate welfare-socialism which falls far short of revolutionary Trotskyism’ (p. 218), and that the resolution of December 1939 ‘marks the beginning of the take-over of the LSSP by the tendency opposing the Third International’ (p. 225). When we recall Marx’s methods of building a working-class party, and the theory of the Anti-Imperialist United Front mentioned above, his contention that ‘it would be difficult to maintain the view that the party itself followed a Trotskyist policy in its early years’ (p. 217) falls to the ground. He does makes up for it by a good discussion of how the party strengthened its links with the Fourth International during the Second World War (pp. 249–53), but even here, whilst admitting that ‘it is possible that the British Trotskyist group ... was instrumental in bringing the LSSP and SWP [Socialist Workers Party] closer to each other’ (p. 251), he does not appear to know of the invaluable services rendered to it by Workers International League members in the armed forces such as Douglas Garbutt and Fred Bunby. Nor does he mention the deeper immersion of the party’s leaders in Trotskyist literature at this time which resulted in Colvin’s duplicated version of Harold Isaac’s book on China put out during the war, his Whither the Soviet Union?, and Leslie’s summary of Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution and study of C.L.R. James’ World Revolution (later published over the pseudonym of K. Tilak in Bombay).
So once again we are brought face to face with one of the major problems of Trotskyist historiography: no matter how painstaking may be our examination in a particular country (and this book is a splendid example of it), without a full investigation of the complicated dynamic of the relationship between that and the rest of the international movement, the full richness of the picture will continue to elude us.
* * *
Our second book, whilst no less interesting, is of a very different character. It is a series of personal memories from the time of the Second World War, which, ‘although no longer a Trotskyist ... nor a Marxist of any persuasion today’ (p. x), the writer feels he has to justify on the grounds that an ‘accident of excessive and undesired longevity’ has left him ‘the last survivor of certain events who can speak of them with direct, first-hand knowledge’ (p. viii). No such excuse is needed, for his narrative is vivid and true to life, and bears the stamp of honesty throughout. His adventures in illegality included fraternising with British soldiers, two of whom were converted to Trotskyism (p. 43), until he was finally betrayed to the authorities along with Edmund and the others by the operator of their underground print-shop (pp. 55–59). His literary skill sketches out some very fine pen portraits of Lorensz Perera (pp. 18–20), Doric de Souza (pp. 21–25), Colvin R. de Silva (pp. 44–45) and Philip Gunawardena (pp. 48–50).
He is also the first modern writer on the history of the LSSP to give Phillip his real due in the development of the party at this time:
‘I am convinced that it was mainly Philip, who had then an enormous intellectual ascendancy over the party, as the most deeply read Marxist and most experienced political activist ... who pushed the party into that clean break with Stalinism’ (p. 10; see p. 48).
Whilst making it clear that he does not intend to compete with Amarasinghe’s account (pp. viii–ix), he does offer two interesting corrections to it. He disagrees that the famous jailbreak of the LSSP leaders in 1942 was largely the work of Robert Gunawardena, for it was planned by the whole of the party’s Central Committee (p. 43; Amarasinghe, p. 57), and he places Philip’s accusation that Doric was a police spy during the first secret Central Committee meeting after their escape in May 1942, and not during the public polemic of 1945 (pp. 51–54; Amarasinghe, p. 69, and n69, p. 87).
The writer also has some interesting theories of his own on the development of the party during the time he was a member, which he describes as ‘the years when the party was transformed from the open, radical mass party it had been before the war to a committedly Trotskyist party with a cadre organisation’ (p. viii). He believes that this was partly due to the exclusion of the party’s working-class supporters from its theoretical discussions, which were conducted in English, but also because ‘the semi-legality, and later the complete illegality, into which the wartime colonial state forced the LSSP certainly accelerated the party’s movement away from the loose, open, radical mass party it had been before the war’ (p. 34). For once legality returned, along with independence, ‘the vanguard party had no viability once the LSSP moved into the period of open mass politics’ (p. 75). He even hints that if Philip, who continued to feel the need to make a wider appeal long after he had left the Trotskyists, had retained his ascendancy in the party, this would never have happened, for as early as 1942 he was already interested in the difference between Rosa Luxemburg’s concept of party organisation and that of Lenin (pp. 49–50).
These are only two of the books to emerge from the present keen interest in Sri Lanka’s revolutionary past. We at Revolutionary History can take pride if the publication of Blows Against the Empire has made any contribution to sparking it off.
 

