lestial Visitor (The Flying Virgin And Space Age Astronomy). Francis Ambrose Ridley. Early 1980s


Francis Ambrose Ridley
Our Celestial Visitor (The Flying Virgin And Space Age Astronomy)
Source: Undated pamphlet published in the early 1980s by the London Secular Group, 11 Glengall Road, London NW6. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
Dedicated to the memory of Joseph McCabe, historian of Catholic dogma and author of Twelve Years in a Monastery.
The Hebrew patriarchs in their adversity were comforted by the thought of the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God.  –  Pope Pius X, 1903 – 14.
Introduction
The visit to England of Pope John-Paul II in the summer of 1982 has naturally aroused much interest. It is actually the first visit ever paid by a reigning Pope to these islands during the fourteen centuries (597 – 1982) during which Christianity has been established in this country.
The present writer, with several publications on the Papacy to his credit, does not propose, however, to add to their number here. Instead, the author proposes to devote the following pages to the most recent dogma promulgated by an earlier Pope (Pius XII, 1935-58): the Assumption of the Virgin Mary bodily into heaven and some of the more remarkable consequences of that notable event.
For the Virgin Mary is obviously nostalgic to revisit the planet that she formerly inhabited, at least if we are to judge by the frequency of her appearances. The three most notable of such reappearances seem to have been respectively Guadalupe (1531), Lourdes (1858) and Fatima (1917). In reviewing the circumstances of these celestial reappearances, the author will seek to draw attention to contemporary trends in Vatican policy which the appearances of the Virgin so opportunely supported. It has frequently been remarked that the Roman Catholic Church represents a totalitarian organisation of extraordinary intelligence and comprehension. If its views of the next world may be legitimately questioned, nobody can reasonably doubt its comprehensive knowledge of this terrestrial planet on which it actually operates. In which connection the author seeks to establish the fact that our ‘celestial visitor’ has frequently acted as a powerful auxiliary to contemporary Papal policy.
However, by a curious coincidence and one which poses grave doubts on the alleged infallibility of the Papacy, within the self-same decade (1949 – 59) that witnessed the promulgation of the dogma of the bodily ascension of the Virgin Mary, another and more terrestrial kind of ascension took place  –  the first Sputniks left the atmosphere behind and began to penetrate the infinite gulfs of the universe. The space age had begun!
Our final section accordingly shall be devoted to some of the peculiar consequences of Mary’s bodily ascension into heaven and her repeated returns to Earth, features that the author hopes to survey both from the standpoint of Catholic theology and of contemporary space age astronomy.
With the coming of the space age, universal history has entered a new era. It is time to review the latest dogma of religion from the standpoint of contemporary science. This the author hopes to do in the ensuing pages.
Prologue: The Assumption of the Virgin
According to the doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the second person in the Blessed Trinity, was born of a virgin, a surprising fact only noted in two of our four Gospels, respectively the Gospels of Matthew and Luke. Never, however, has any doctrine ever appeared to be established on weaker evidence. Of the four canonical Gospels that alone record the life of Christ, two (Mark and John) say nothing about any virgin birth (John, in fact, goes out of his way to talk of Joseph and Mary as father and mother of Jesus!). Whilst the two Gospels which alone record the miraculous birth are immediately followed by genealogies, in the one case from Adam and in the other from Abraham, both of which trace the ancestry of Jesus through his father Joseph, from which fact it would appear to be indisputable that the stories of a miraculous birth represents late interpellations and were entirely unknown to the original authors of the Gospels. Assuming, at least for present purposes, that Jesus was an historical character, it appears to be reasonably clear that his earliest disciples did not regard him as literally the Son of God (though they may have used the term metaphorically in accordance with Hebrew usage), but regarded him as a Jewish messiah, a prophet raised up by God, and the son of Joseph, who though a humble village carpenter appears to have claimed descent from the national hero King David (the word Christ represents a Greek translation of the Jewish term Messiah).
Amongst the Jews virgin births of deities were unknown. But in the Græco – Roman pagan world of the Roman Empire they were extremely common. For example, the god Mars was born of a virgin, as was Romulus, the founder of Rome, and the same story was told of Alexander the Great and other heroes of antiquity who were deified after death. How then did the virgin birth become interpolated into the Christian legend?
The answer to this question is fairly simple. Christianity did not start as an independent religion but as an heretical sect on the fringe of Judaism. Its earliest followers were Jews, but this state of things did not long continue. With the spread of the new religion throughout the Roman Empire, an expansion usually ascribed to St Paul and his followers, pagan converts began to enter the Church and by the end of the second century at least, had probably become the majority. Such converts brought up in pagan households were accustomed to worshipping miraculously conceived and born gods. Virgin god and goddesses were two-a-penny! By about the middle of the second century, as far as we can judge from the scanty records available, the belief that Christ was born of a virgin began to make its appearance in Christian circles, and, as we noted above, eventually entered the Gospels of Matthew and Luke themselves. By the fourth century, when under Constantine and his successors Christianity became the state religion of the Roman Empire, the idea of the virgin birth appears to have become universal and only flagrant heretics denied it. The Mother of God became the most important figure after Christ himself in the celestial hierarchy! The victory of Christianity was soon followed by the fall of the Roman Empire and the inauguration of the Middle Ages. Throughout this period (c 500 – 1500) it is now common knowledge that an ‘age of faith’ ensued during which the Christian Church became the dominant social and economic force in medieval Europe. During this period also, the Bishops of Rome rose from being of merely provincial status to the rank of universal bishop and ruler of the Western Church. Similarly, the Virgin Mary was steadily promoted in the celestial hierarchy. Successively she was declared to be sinless, a perpetual virgin and eventually to have been not only the Mother of God but also to have been herself immaculately conceived. [1] Finally, in 1950, Pope Pius XII (1939 – 58) proclaimed the bodily Assumption of the Virgin to be a dogma and an article of faith. It is now firm Catholic doctrine not to be doubted except under the mortal guilt of heresy that the Virgin Mary ascended bodily into heaven, at some still unknown date, presumably in the first century of the Christian era.
So far so good! But probably this celestial promotion is not yet finished. Already there is a growing demand in Catholic theological circles to declare the Virgin ‘co-redemptoris’ with Christ of the human race, from which it would appear only a short step to proclaim her an actual goddess  –  the fourth person of the Trinity!
This last promotion, however, has not yet occurred. At present the Virgin Mary is still a saint  –  though a most exalted one. She has been bodily transplanted from Earth to heaven in a miraculous flight, but evidently still feels nostalgic longings for her original habitation for, as already noted, she has repeatedly descended from heaven to Earth and given her worshippers a brief glance of her dazzling brilliance. The three most important of such visitations are Guadalupe, Lourdes and Fatima. The author will accordingly now turn his attention to these celestial visits, to the circumstances that surrounded them, and also to certain contemporary developments of Papal policy that appear to have been powerfully assisted by these opportune arrivals.
I: Celestial Visits
I am the Immaculate Conception.  –  Mary to Bernadette at Lourdes (1858)
Introductory Note: As the author has noted above, after the Virgin Mary had been enthroned as Queen of Heaven, to which she had ascended by Papal decree, she has not rested on her laurels. On the contrary, at least if we are to believe Catholic accounts, she has returned to this Earth many times. The evidence of these successive appearances varies in strength, and up to the present at least none of them has been declared a canonical dogma in the sense of the earlier Papal decrees about, successively, her perpetual virginity, her immaculate conception, and, finally, her bodily assumption into heaven. As far, again, as the author is aware, none of these celestial visits, not even Lourdes and Fatima, have so far been elevated to the rank of ‘an article of faith’, though, as a recent historian remarked, it is very unlikely that any theological work denying, or even calling into question at least, her appearances at Lourdes and Fatima would be granted official recognition. Discounting, for the moment, merely local appearances, commemorated in merely local stories, we may note three principal appearances of our celestial visitor at, respectively, Guadalupe (Mexico), Lourdes (Pyrenean France) and Fatima (northern Portugal). All these three visits are now commemorated by magnificent shrines and attract international pilgrimages. [2]
The author will defer his brief consideration of the reality of these celestial phenomena until a later stage in this pamphlet. Here we are not so much concerned with the subjective validity of these visions as and when they appeared to their recipients as to the remarkable way in which they fitted in with the contemporary policies of the Roman Catholic Church. Accordingly, we turn to these three major occurrences.
Guadalupe: In 1492, the Italian mariner Christopher Columbus, flying the flag of the Spanish King of Castile, arrived in the West Indies and thus discovered a new continent, a ‘new world’ shortly to be denominated America. The following year, the then Pope Alexander VI (Rodrigo Borgia, 1492 – 1503) officially divided the new world between the Iberian empires of Castile and Portugal. During the following century, with the military assistance of iron, horses and gunpowder, not to mention the blessing of the Papacy and the spiritual blessing of the Roman Catholic Church, the European conquerors made good their claim to the southern half of the newly-discovered continent. In 1521, a band of Spanish conquerors, led by Hernándo Cortéz, succeeded in overcoming the ferocious resistance of the aborigines and in conquering the Aztec Empire of Mexico  –  a conquest that was soon followed by others in South America, notably that of the Incas of Peru. In the case of Mexico, the Spanish conquest against heavy numerical odds was considerably facilitated by the Aztec tradition that a white god, Quetzalcatal, had formerly ruled over Mexico and had predicted that his descendants would return. [3]
In December 1531, ten years after the completion of the conquest, the Virgin Mary put in an appearance at Guadalupe in Mexico, where she appeared to a group of Indian converts. Without, for the moment, discussing the details of her appearance, the author would draw attention to its extraordinary congruency with the current policy of the Papacy and of the Spanish colonial empire. A white god had once ruled Mexico, his white descendants had returned and now a white goddess appeared to legitimise the conquest. The time and place were so opportune that it is difficult to acquit the Virgin Mary of conscious collusion with the Vatican and the Spanish conquerors. It is accordingly hardly surprising that the grateful Spaniards built a magnificent shrine in honour of the Virgin, and that ‘Our Lady of Guadalupe’ has now become a figure of international significance throughout the Americas, attracting vast crowds of pilgrims, not least among them the present Pope, an ardent devotee of the cult of Mary, John Paul II. [4]
Accordingly, this early sixteenth-century manifestation of the Mother of God may be said to have cemented the decree of the Papacy handing over the Catholic Empires of Spain and Portugal. In the worldwide policy of the Vatican, her celestial allies also play their part, including the greatest of all, ‘Our Celestial Visitor’. 
Lourdes: We now turn to the Old World, to which our celestial visitor, perhaps naturally, appears to be especially partial as a large majority of her visits have been in this area. The most famous of such celestial visits is still probably that which occurred in 1858 when the Virgin Mary is alleged to have appeared as a dazzling apparition to a young shepherd girl, Bernadette Soubirous, aged 14, in a grotto at the Pyrenean town of Lourdes, not far from the Franco – Spanish border. Subsequently, the Virgin appeared several times and declared categorically to the young shepherd girl, ‘I am the Immaculate Conception.’ Since that date, 16 July, Lourdes has become the centre of a miraculous cult in which miracles, chiefly of healing, are recorded over the last century. The grotto in which the Virgin appeared to Bernadette is now a place of universal pilgrimage to such an extent, indeed, that it would hardly be an exaggeration to compare Lourdes as a place of international pilgrimage with such renowned sanctuaries as Mecca and Jerusalem. At this time of writing, it is still the most famous scene at which the Virgin appeared, and might also be described as a Marian metropolis  –  the GHQ of the worldwide cult of Mary. Again deferring any examination of the subjective occurrence when Bernadette allegedly encountered Mary, we must point to the remarkable manner in which the vision collaborated with and confirmed the current policy of the Vatican. At the time of the original vision, the reigning Pope Pius IX (1846 – 78), an ardent devotee of Mary, was engaged in an ambitious policy for enlarging the powers of the Papacy in order to deal with the wave of scepticism unloosed by the French Revolution of 1789. In 1858, the infallibility of the Pope was not yet an ‘article of faith’, and new doctrines can only be formulated officially by a General Council of all Catholic bishops. A few years earlier, in 1854, the Pope had boldly proclaimed the Immaculate Conception of Mary as a canonical doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church  –  an implicit assertion of infallibility. It was accordingly highly agreeable to the Vatican when the apparition of Lourdes explicitly stated to Bernadette: ‘I am the Immaculate Conception.’ Could there be any doubt after this that the Pope was indeed infallible when so soon after his decree his action in proclaiming the Immaculate Conception of Mary was personally authenticated by the divine person concerned?
Consequently, when the Pope, in 1869-70, convened the First Vatican Council, an overwhelming majority endorsed the Papal claim to infallibility, since when the personal infallibility of the Pope has been a major dogma of the Roman Catholic Church. (The dogma was officially proclaimed on 18 July 1870.) We are again impressed at Lourdes, as previously at Guadalupe, by the remarkable congruency between the visitation of the Virgin and the policy of the Papacy. It seems impossible to avoid the conclusion that throughout the chequered career of the Roman See, the recurring visits of the Mother of God here represent a most valuable auxiliary.
Fatima: The most recent, and in the author’s opinion the most interesting and ultimately the most important, of the visits of the Virgin occurred at Fatima in Northern Portugal in the year 1917. Upon this occasion, the glorious apparition appeared to three young shepherds (male and female) as formerly to Bernadette at Lourdes. Between the first of October and the following first of April 1917 successive visions took place on the first day of each month. What the Virgin said on that occasion will be discussed a little further on when we turn our attention to its possible effects on Papal policy. Here we will merely note that the Virgin appeared to three young children, two of whom died shortly afterwards, but the third, Lúcia dos Santos, subsequently retired to a convent from which she later emerged with startling tidings.
At the times of the vision Portugal had recently overthrown its Catholic monarchy and was regarded at the Vatican as a secular Masonic republic. However, a few years later, Dr Salazar, a pupil of the Jesuits, succeeded in transforming Portugal into a clerical fascist state in which the Church of Rome recovered its lost privileges, and no doubt the growing fame of the Virgin’s appearance at Fatima indirectly but effectively assisted this process. However, the real drama of Fatima only began later when, in 1929, the Bishop of Leira, the diocesan Bishop of Fatima, instructed Lúcia, the last survivor of the vision, to publish, for the Church and the world, what the Mother of God had actually said to her. The result was extremely startling! For Lúcia revealed that the celestial apparition had warned the world and the Church against the dire effects of the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia in the year that she appeared, 1917. The purpose of Fatima, therefore, was to issue a celestial warning against the Russian Revolution and its possible outcome in world war and the ruin of Christianity. It is again necessary to note how exactly this prediction fitted in with Papal policy of the time when Lúcia gave her message to the world in 1929. For, by this time, Russian communism had become public enemy number one and the bugbear of the Vatican. It was the arch heresy of the twentieth century, and its survival posed a menace not only to the power but to the very existence of the Church. However, at this point the author suggests that there is a certain ambiguity, for while the Vatican’s denunciation of Bolshevism in 1929 accurately reflected the current policy at the Vatican, which even since the accession of Pope Pius XI (1922-39) had regarded Russia as its mortal enemy, the actual policy of the Church in 1917, when the Virgin allegedly appeared at Fatima, was still a long way from having reached this point of view. As the author has pointed out elsewhere, the Vatican at first showed a marked tendency actually to welcome the Russian Revolution which had deposed the Czar, the former ‘Anti-Pope’ of the Russian ‘Orthodox’ Church which was a traditional rival of Roman Catholicism. In the author’s earlier book Pope John and the Cold War (1962), contemporary evidence was cited to the above effect. When, accordingly, in 1929, Lúcia recorded the stern warning given in 1917 in Fatima by our celestial visitor, either her memory must have played her a trick or else the Virgin must have antedated her remark by several years. We leave it to the theologians to sort out this divine mystery!
The author has expressed the opinion above that though not quite as famous as Lourdes, Fatima is actually, on a long-term view, the most important, at least for terrestrial purposes, of the Virgin’s visits to this planet. For it not only refers to the past, but also points to new developments in the future. To observe what these are it is necessary to recapitulate a little in the history of Portugal.
For the name Fatima is not the name of any Christian saint, nor has it any association with Christianity. It is the name, in fact, of the daughter of the great rival of traditional Christianity, Mohammed, the founder of Islam. Fatima was the daughter of the prophet and in some Islamic sects holds an elevated position somewhat similar even to that of the Virgin Mary in Catholic theology. Certainly she is the most famous woman in the Muslim hierarchy. Furthermore, the name Fatima may quite possibly denote an earlier Muslim cult long prior to 1917. For between 711 when the Moors conquered Spain and about 1000 when Portugal was liberated from their dominion, the whole Iberian peninsula, including Spain and Portugal, was dominated by the Moorish Empire and the Muslim religion. It would appear to be probable therefore that if the Muslim conquerors of Portugal named a place after the prophet’s daughter Fatima, that there was some kind of Muslim cult in existence there long before the Virgin appeared. It would appear to the author that the existence of Fatima may be future as well as past. It is even possible that from the present ecumenical movement designed to form an alliance of the Christian Churches under Vatican leadership against the growing forces of atheism and scepticism, may ultimately emerge a unity of religions embracing the two most powerful: Catholicism and Islam. In which not impossible case, Fatima may eventually far outshine Lourdes and even perhaps become the HQ of a united religious front named after the most famous woman in the annals of Islam and visited by Christianity’s most celebrated saint, if indeed the Virgin Mary has not been elevated to the full rank of divinity.
II: Our Celestial Visitor: A Critical View
According to the Roman Catholic Church, the apparitions of the Virgin at Lourdes, Fatima, etc, etc, represented the actual bodily appearance of a semi-divine personage, Mary the Mother of God. They were also corporeal visions in which she appeared in flesh and blood (a very important point which we shall see later when we come to consider contemporary astronomy). People outside the Roman Catholic Church, who probably greatly outnumber those within it, will take a more sceptical view. What kind of view? The following brief analysis endeavours to establish some possibilities regarding it.
In the first place, it must be remarked that all these apparitions of Lourdes, Guadalupe, Fatima, Knock, etc, etc, appeared to illiterate or semi-literate people, and people, at that, brought up in a religious atmosphere probably heavily charged with superstition. There is no example known to the writer of any scholar or even reasonably well-educated person having witnessed these apparitions. The recipients of these visions were all peasants and mostly shepherds, since our celestial visitors seem to have a predilection for shepherds and sheep. There is no need, in the author’s opinion at least, to accuse the recipients of Lourdes and Fatima, etc (Bernadette, Lúcia, etc) of deliberate deception. In a primitive religious atmosphere untempered by knowledge and unaffected by criticism, such visions would appear to be nothing abnormal  –  any more than, to take a rather crude analogy, the appearance of a blue elephant to a confirmed alcoholic. None could doubt his sincerity! What, however, are we to make of a practically universal acceptance of celestial occurrences based upon such meagre evidence  –  particularly as we have noted that, whether miracles or not, these apparitions corresponded with the urgent needs of Papal policy in an almost miraculous way!
It is difficult, I suggest, to believe that the hard-headed men of affairs with nineteen centuries of world-wide experience behind them, the people once humorously described as ‘the backroom boys of the Vatican’, were really as credulous as, say, Bernadette and Lúcia who formed the audience of celestial apparitions at Lourdes and Fatima. One could perhaps suggest that in dealing with the visitations of the Virgin, the Church of Rome has adopted a selective policy. It has chosen those, and only those, for acceptance which were useful to its policy at a particular time. As we have noted above, Guadalupe, Lourdes and Fatima, the three most celebrated of the Virgin’s visits, all conformed admirably with the current policy of the Papacy and of Catholic imperialism. Be that as it may, the historical and theological problems associated with these apparitions are further exacerbated by astronomical problems, particularity as these have taken on quite new forms since the Virgin’s last visitation in 1917. 
If we turn from the visitations themselves to their fundamental cause, to the dogma which explains and presumably justifies them, the Assumption of the Virgin, we will find that this also confronts us with problems of an intricate and bizarre character. For within the same decade that witnessed the most canonical propagation of the doctrine of the Assumption, a new era commenced for astronomic science  –  an era that can hardly be considered irrelevant to the bodily assumption of the Virgin Mary or her subsequent journeys through outer space to and from this planet. Accordingly, we propose to conclude this pamphlet by reviewing the whole question of the Assumption of the Virgin and her visits from outer space in relation to the astronomy of the space age and the galactic universe that the astronomy of the space age discloses.
Epilogue: The Flying Virgin and Space Age Astronomy
I saw no angels.  –  Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space
The last occasion upon which our celestial visitor is alleged to have visited this planet was at Fatima in 1917. Since then no further ‘sighting’ of the Virgin there has been reported  –  at least as far as the author knows. However, as we noted above, the cult of the Virgin continued to evolve until the final declaration by Pope Pius XII in 1950 of the Assumption of the Virgin, the feast of which is annually celebrated on 15 August. In the course of the long ascent of the wife of the village carpenter of Nazareth to the exalted rank of Queen of Heaven, the cult of the Virgin has borrowed heavily from earlier pagan divinities. In particular, from the cult of the Egyptian goddess Isis, the honorific title of whom, Star of the Sea, has now been appropriated by the Christian Queen of Heaven!
For centuries past the Assumption of the Virgin has been a prominent feature of Catholic art, including such masters as Velázquez, etc.
Up to the present time, again as far as the author is aware, the return visits made by the celestial visitor to Lourdes, Fatima, etc, have not been officially proclaimed as canonical dogmas of the Catholic religion. But since the Assumption of the Virgin was officially recognised, it would probably be heresy to deny them, and it would certainly be heresy to doubt their possibility. As Catholic dogma is irrevocable, we must presumably conclude that Lourdes, Fatima, etc, are here to stay.
Meanwhile, however, since the proclamation of the Assumption as an article of faith, a new scientific era was inaugurated when in 1957 the pioneer Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin penetrated the Earth’s atmosphere and followed the Virgin into outer space. [5] Since then the space age has got into its stride. Today a large number of man-made objects are hurtling around space. Most of the planets of the solar system have already been visited by unmanned spacecraft, and it appears a reasonable conjecture that by the end of the present century every sizeable object in the solar system, whether planet or satellite, will have been visited by unmanned spacecraft. The ultimate landing by human beings on several of these celestial bodies may probably be regarded as a reasonable assumption.
Traditionally, since the famous case of Galileo in 1633, when Copernicus’ astronomy was officially banned by the Papacy, repeated clashes have taken place between religion and science. The doctrine of the Assumption, proclaimed immediately before the inauguration of the space age in the 1950s, probably heralds another collision. In order to consider this objectively, one must briefly consider the character of the latest dogma of the Roman Catholic Church.
Since the thirteenth century when, under the influence of St Thomas Aquinas, the Church officially adopted the Aristotelean philosophy, the reality of matter has been a dogma of the Catholic Church. Theologically speaking, it is obvious why this is so. Since, if Bishop Berkeley and other idealistic philosophers are correct in denying the reality of material substances, the central doctrine of the Catholic mass, the real transformation of the body and blood of Christ into bread and wine, could not possibly take place. Philosophical idealism, that is the doctrine that matter is only apparent and not real, is consequently a heresy in the Catholic Church. Actually, a contemporary Pope, Clement XIV, denounced Berkeley as a ‘brilliant lunatic’.
Let us accordingly turn to the doctrine of the Assumption. According to this, the Virgin Mary at some unspecified date ascended bodily into heaven. Her body being, presumably, a material substance. This clearly implies that she must have ascended at no greater than the speed of light (186,000 miles per second) since it is an astronomical fact that no material substance can exceed this velocity without disintegrating. Accordingly, when the Virgin returned to Earth on several occasions such as Lourdes, Fatima, etc, her celestial path must have proceeded at no greater velocity. A new problem has therefore been added to the contemporary space age, for somewhere among the stars the Virgin Mary must be travelling! It is not even impossible that as the space age gets into its stride and more sophisticated aircraft plunge further into the vast recesses of the universe, a fantastic ‘encounter of the third kind’ might actually take place!
Be that as it may, we are now faced with the intriguing certainty of Catholic astronomers crouching behind the powerful telescopes of the Vatican observatory, sweeping the skies with their optical instruments, seeking to catch a glimpse of the flying Virgin as she glides from galaxy to galaxy. Certainly, the Assumption of the Virgin and her celestial returns to Earth appear to have added a new and exciting dimension to the present and future astronomy of the space age.
Notes
1. The Immaculate Conception does not imply, as some critics seem to imagine, that the Virgin herself was born of another virgin, but merely that God, by miraculous interposition, removed the state of ‘original sin’ which, according to Catholic theology, all mortals inherit from the Fall of their principal ancestors, Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden.
2. One of the more local celestial visits, to Knock in Ireland, has recently attracted a good deal of attention from a visit of the present Pope, John Paul II, upon its centenary in 1979. On this occasion, the Virgin Mary is alleged to have appeared accompanied by her ‘husband’ St Joseph and the Evangelist St John. However, so far at least, Knock has not attained international status comparable with the visits of the Virgin enunciated above.
3. It seems to be possible that this religion embodied an authentic reminiscence of a Viking raid in the Caribbean, since it is now known that Norse settlers actually reached the eastern seaboard of North America.
4. Not only did the decree of Pope Alexander VI legitimise the Spanish conquest of the Americas, but the Catholic Church actively supported the Spanish invasions and subsequent conquests. For example, when the most powerful aboriginal dynasty in South America, the Incas of Peru, was finally conquered, the last Inca, Tupac Amaru, was actually captured by a Spanish captain, García Loyola, a nephew of Ignatius Loyola, the founder of what still remains the most powerful religious order in the Roman Catholic Church, the ‘Company of Jesus’, usually described as Jesuits. At a later stage, the Jesuits ruled the state in Paraguay for at least 150 years, circa 1610 – 1760.
5. Ridley made an error here: Yuri Gagarin’s pioneering space flight took place in 1961; it was the Soviet Sputnik unmanned satellite that was launched in 1957  –  MIA.
 


F A Ridley Archive




ture of the British Monarchy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1982


Francis Ambrose Ridley 1982
The Future of the British Monarchy
Source: Undated pamphlet published by the Leicester Secular Society, 75 Humberstone Gate, Leicester. Internal evidence suggests that it was published in 1982. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
Dedicated to the memory of Charles Bradlaugh, author of The Impeachment of the House of Brunswick.
Sovereign and subject are clean different.  –  Charles I on the scaffold at Whitehall
Introduction 
FA Ridley, secularist, socialist and dialectical historian, was born in the year of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee, 1897. Now 85 years old, he still annually entertains and instructs the Leicester Secular Society with one of his fascinating talks, usually on the historic significance for Secularism of some current event such as the Pope’s visit to Britain. Mr Ridley’s fundamental assumptions recall those of August Bebel, the great German Social-Democrat  –  religiously agnostic, economically socialist and politically republican. The present pamphlet has been inspired by the last of these.
Some people might therefore suppose it to be a propaganda tract. They would be quite wrong. If Mr Ridley were able to perceive the likelihood of a dazzling and meaningful future for our monarchy, then none would be more capable than he of depicting such a prospect in colourful language. That his conclusions are otherwise is the outcome, not of his personal hopes or fears, but of a cool and forcefully reasoned historical analysis. He would think it a betrayal of his own position were he not objective in regard to that of others.
Largeness and generosity of mind are qualities which he has in common with Charles Bradlaugh, the Victorian secularist whose portrait adorns Leicester’s Secular Hall and whose voice and pen set forth the case for a British republic 110 years ago, just before the last hectic orgy of Victorian imperialism drowned out even the faintest echo of any such proposal and elevated Queen Victoria herself to the status of a quasi-divinity.
Perhaps Bradlaugh had not sufficiently allowed for the unexpected and the irrational in human affairs. Disraeli, the Conservative imperialist who was soon to confer the title ‘Empress of India’ on his queen, cynically remarked that: ‘The unexpected always happens.’ And Edmund Burke, the great defender of our traditional constitution, tended to look upon the prejudices or irrationality of the people as one of the nation’s safeguards. In upholding what had been handed down to us by our forefathers, he believed we were showing an inherited and inexplicable wisdom which it would be dangerous to tamper with.
Such may indeed be the case with our monarchy, even today. However strongly or frequently its apparent irrelevance be reasonably demonstrated, all the more may the British people revere and defend it.
For we are a deeply conservative people, much attached to ancient habits of thought. Not surprisingly therefore, some foreign observers see in us an archaism of society which they link to our exceedingly feeble postwar economic performance. The greater part of the world, they imply, is passing through vast social and economic upsets more rapid and fierce in their impact than all the accumulated shocks of the preceding 2000 years. Psychologically we in Britain are not believed to be geared to the attainment of the best possible social and economic achievements of the late twentieth century.
In that context Bradlaugh’s opinions take on a new relevance and Mr Ridley’s pamphlet expresses it.
John J O'Higgins, Former Vice-President, Leicester Secular Society
I: The Monarchical Tradition
The recent royal wedding of the present heir to the throne, Charles Prince of Wales, and the then Lady Diana Spencer, has focused attention both here and abroad upon an ancient but nowadays senile and apparently crumbling institution, the English or British monarchy.
An institution that, with only one brief period excepted (1649 – 60), has existed uninterruptedly since the Norman Conquest of 1066, and even earlier in Anglo-Saxon times.
What today are the current and future prospects of this institution? In the ensuing pages the author makes a critical examination of this problem.
Like all other terrestrial organisations including, and perhaps very specially, those institutions that belong to the political domain, the English monarchy has undergone an evolutionary process in both space and time.
In the first of these dimensions, it has evolved by methods in which aggression was characteristic and violence predominant, a spectacular expansion from the relatively insignificant status of the monarchy of a mere off-shore Atlantic island to the elevated rank of ruler of the most powerful empire in the world; perhaps even altogether in recorded human annals. The British Empire of the past two centuries, ‘over which the Sun never set’.
Whilst equally in the related domain of the time-process, the English monarchy, first English then British, has evolved through several successive stages; stages characterised by distinctive social and political features.
Consequently, before surveying the present and future prospects of this monarchy throughout the present century and if necessary beyond, it will be convenient, indeed necessary, to glance briefly at the historically successive stages through which the English monarchy has passed since its effective inception at the Norman Conquest of 1066.
It will not, or so the author suggests, be necessary to extend this survey so as to trace the origins of the preceding Anglo-Saxon monarchy right back through the Dark Ages to the end of Roman rule in Britain (AD 410).
The present English monarchy, rather paradoxically, is actually only ‘English’ in name and location. By an ironic historic paradox the throne of England has never been occupied by an English man or woman! Successively Norman (1066 – 1154), French (Plantagenet, 1154 – 1485), Welsh (Tudor, 1485 – 1603), Scottish (Stuart, 1603 – 1714) and most recently German (Guelf-Wettin, 1714 – 1981 et seq), have successfully occupied the English throne. Even the brief English Republic (1649 – 60) was directed by Oliver Cromwell, himself of Welsh descent (whose family name was Williams).
Individual kings may come and go, as the Vicar of Bray, that shrewd analyst of his contemporary monarchy, duly noted; but the underlying causes that give permanence and stability to their dynasties are of a more permanent character. No social institution, and, least of all perhaps, no political institution, can maintain itself securely, or even exist initially, without some adequate cause.
To this permanent law of historical existence, there can be few exceptions, and certainly the monarchy of Great Britain is not one of them. For its sequential evolution can be definitely ascribed to its also successive underlying causes; causes that gave it its reason for existence and effective functioning; and by so doing, emphasised and prolonged its existence.
Throughout the near-millennium during which this monarchy has existed, since the Norman Conquest of 1066, the careful observer can clearly trace and discern three immediately successive phases in the evolution of the British monarchy.
These three sequential phases were, chronologically:
a) The absolute monarchy (1066 – 1649): William I to Charles I.
b) The constitutional (bourgeois) monarchy (1660 – 1837): Charles II to William IV.
c) The imperialist monarchy (1837 to present day): Victoria to Elizabeth II.
The effective evolution of the British monarchy is comprised within these three successive stages between 1066 and this present year, 1981 – 82.
As has been aptly noted, nothing is intrinsically good or bad under any and all circumstances, for they are only consequences of previous actions! In which connection, an institution, any institution, and very particularly one that has lasted a long time, must have some basic function in order to act effectively, for ‘nature abhors a vacuum’.
This fundamental truth inevitably applies to an historical institution like the present British monarchy. For without an appropriate function to perform and represent, it will inevitably become senile and eventually decay.
As the author will seek to demonstrate in the following pages, the British monarchy now appears to be approaching this state of things as the present century draws towards its close.
As we shall presently note, the British monarchy throughout these three successive stages that we have noted above, both possessed and performed such basic functions.
For the absolute monarchy that began with William I and ended with Charles I, governed England uninterruptedly, even if with varied fortunes.
Whilst the succeeding bourgeois monarchy installed by a Stuart restoration of 1660 after the English Revolution, also fulfilled, even if without conspicuous success, its basic function as a symbolic figurehead of the rising bourgeois society.
Similarly, the upheaval represented by the industrial revolution brought the Hanoverian dynasty, then represented by the ‘Four Georges’ (1714 – 1830), to the verge of dissolution.
At this critical stage, the arrival of the imperialist era, pre-eminently represented by Queen Victoria, who gave her name to an entire historic epoch (1837 – 1901), supplied the monarchy with a new function, that of an effective symbol for the epoch of England’s world empire. This transformation of an Atlantic off-shore island into a worldwide empire gave the monarchy an unprecedented revival as the unifying symbol of the English world domination.
This era reached its zenith in the glittering pageantry of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee, 20 June 1897.
For as long as ‘the empire on which the Sun never sets’ remained in existence, the primary symbolic function of the monarchy as the centre and unique symbol of Britain’s worldwide empire continued to assure its existence for another century.
With one brief exception  –  the enforced abdication of Edward VIII (1936)  –  the successive British monarchs of the twentieth century, from Victoria to the present Queen (Elizabeth II), have continued to enact the not too exacting roles of titular head and official rubber stamp of an imperialist society, with at least moderate competence. [1]
However, and least of all in the twentieth century of ‘perpetual motion’, society does not remain static. This process also leads to an abrupt shortening of duration of empires.
This truth of universal application has displayed itself in a particularly spectacular manner in the decline and fall of the old Victorian British Empire. Whereas the decline of previous empires, such as the Roman or Spanish Empires, represented a long, drawn-out decline measured in centuries  –  ‘an era of slow and inglorious decay’, as Karl Marx described the decline of the Spanish Empire  –  the succeeding decline of the English Empire, far from taking a century, was compressed within the period of a generation. Between the end of the second Anglo – German war (1939 – 45) and this present year (1982), the ‘decline and fall of the British Empire’ has proceeded at a dizzy tempo and is today effectively completed. The ominous warning of a Victorian prophet of doom  –  Rudyard Kipling (1865 – 1935)  –  that his then contemporary British Empire would be ‘one with Nineveh and Tyre’ has now been totally fulfilled. The Victorian Empire is now only an august memory.
In this twentieth century Great Britain has abandoned her former colonies with the same speed with which she formerly annexed them. The period of aggrandizement in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries has been followed by ignominious collapse in the twentieth.
This imperialist ‘retreat from Moscow’ was carried out actually under a façade of a democracy which resulted in the substitution of a ‘British Commonwealth’ for the former Victorian Empire. However, words are no substitute for things!
How will this political reincarnation affect its titular figurehead, the British monarchy, now reduced to its rather nebulous role of ‘Head of the Commonwealth'? Surely a sorry come-down for the former British Empire?
The empire is now gone but the monarchy remains! No longer Emperor of India, etc, etc, but still King of Great Britain, but for how long? What is now the future of the British monarchy, or  –  perhaps to put it more accurately  –  has the British monarchy got any future?
Chronologically, and with regard to individuals and also institutions, the Future arises out of the Present; just as the Present arises out of the Past! We can apply this law of universal application to the present British monarchy. ‘To be or not to be?’ To obtain an accurate perspective on this problematic future, we may direct a preliminary glance at the historic evolution that has led up to this present ambiguous situation.
II: The Evolution of the British Monarchy
Up to this present time, the historic evolution of the British monarchy can be accurately divided into three epochs defined by basically different characteristics.
In its early aboriginal phase, the monarchy established with William the Conqueror in 1066, after his decisive victory of Senlac (Hastings), and subsequently consolidated by the Doomsday Book (1087), did not differ, except perhaps in the direction of a somewhat greater degree of efficiency, from either that of its Anglo-Saxon predecessors or contemporary monarchs upon the European continent.
Successive English kings from 1066 when the English monarchy (not yet Welsh or Scottish) was established in the form that it still externally retained up to the English Revolution of the mid-seventeenth century, which resulted in the deposition and execution of Charles I (30 January 1649), the king had reigned theoretically and simultaneously actively governed. Throughout this period, the monarchy possessed an authority that was always absolute in theory and often in practice. Throughout the medieval and early modern epoch (1066 – 1649), the monarchy was virtually absolute even if some weak or negligent rulers eventually proved unequal to the harsh requirements of the age of iron.
In the monarchical annals of this country, as in other departments of human development, the basic principle of the ‘survival of the fittest’ held good. Kings who could not effectively cope with the often ruthless requirements of their age were summarily deposed and more often than not subsequently murdered by legal process or by assassination.
However, despite individual misfortunes, the monarchy itself continued uninterruptedly from 1066 to 1649, from William the Conqueror to Charles the Conquered! During this fairly long period there was always a reigning monarch in England. The monarchy was part of the social scene and no one seems to have thought of abolishing it. [2]
However, despite individual misfortunes, the monarchy continued uninterruptedly throughout this period. There was always a reigning monarch who ruled more or less efficiently. He or she was king or queen ‘by the grace of God’ or by divine right, not popular election.
Appropriately enough, it was the last of the kings by divine right, Charles I, who tersely summarised the character of the English monarch, and no doubt the personal opinions of his predecessors since 1066, when he told the assembled crowd in Whitehall immediately before his execution that ‘sovereign and subject are clean different’.
It was perhaps appropriate that this affirmation of the English absolute monarchy should also be its epitaph! An epitaph uttered upon the scaffold by the last absolute king of England by divine right, only a few minutes before the axe of the executioner extinguished the life of the king, along with the absolute monarchy itself (30 January 1649).
Previous absolute monarchs had perished at the hands of unruly barons as a result of aristocratic intrigues. For example, the ‘War of the Roses’ (1450 – 85), which decimated the English feudal nobility during the second half of the fifteenth century, was responsible for the deaths of three monarchs during this originally dynastic dispute. Despite its picturesque name, the War of the Roses appear to have more in common with homicide than horticulture! But it took the rise of a new class to destroy the traditionally absolute English monarchy.
For unlike previous dynastic or merely baronial conflicts, the English Revolution of the seventeenth century which brought Charles I to the scaffold and subsequently (1689) exiled his descendants of the House of Stuart, represented in Marxist terminology the victorious conclusion of a class war, one that eventuated in the victory of the then revolutionary bourgeois class over the absolute monarchy and over the feudal nobility of medieval society that it represented.
This old social order ended in 1649 with the execution of Charles Stuart and the establishment of the bourgeois-dominated ‘Commonwealth’, the English Republic that followed the end of the English Civil War (1649 – 60).
That the English Revolution of the mid-seventeenth century represented a major watershed in English history has often been commented upon by subsequent historians. But in relation to our special subject matter, the English monarchy, this historic watershed took a peculiarly zigzag course.
For unlike all earlier English revolts, the bourgeois revolution not only killed the individual king, Charles I (there was nothing new in such a procedure!), but it went on to abolish the institutional monarchy itself, the traditional monarchy gave way to a republic or ‘commonwealth’.
A detached observer upon 30 January 1649 (the date of Charles’s execution) would probably have concluded that the English monarchy was definitely a thing of the past and that England, like such contemporary bourgeois states as Holland and Venice, would henceforth figure as a republic or ‘commonwealth’.
However, history came to a different conclusion! For the contemporary circumstances came to the rescue of the English monarchy, which was restored in 1660 by the Restoration of Charles II (1660 – 85), the more adaptable son of the ‘Royal Martyr’, Charles I.
That this transformation came about was, again in Marxist terminology, due to the inherent contradictions of a class-divided social order.
To summarise briefly: as a result of its victorious revolution which had liquidated the traditional medieval order along with the monarchy itself, the bourgeois class in whose interests the revolution had been made had superseded the old feudal nobility as the dominant force in their current social order. But they had only been able to secure this end with the active support and military assistance of the ‘lower’ and non-propertied classes of seventeenth-century England. For example, Cromwell’s ‘Ironsides’, his crack troops that actually won the civil war, were drawn mostly from the poorer class of English society. 
Consequently, no sooner had the bourgeoisie disposed of the king and the old ruling class than they found themselves menaced by the upsurge of the ‘lower’ (poorer) classes represented by such then radical movements as the ‘Diggers’, ‘Levellers’ and ‘Fifth Monarchy Men’, etc, all revolutionary sects who in the then contemporary society were as much opposed to the new bourgeois ruling class as to its monarchical predecessor.
The ‘Bare Bones’ Parliament (1652 – 54) represented the first and perhaps still the most radical democracy in modern England. Had it continued indefinitely, and had men like the contemporary ‘Levellers’ and ‘Diggers’ succeeded in their egalitarian aims, all propertied classes in England would have been overthrown, including, incidentally, any revival of the monarchy. [3]
However, the Republican interregnum only proved to be temporary. For the threat represented by the ‘lower’ classes getting out of hand and making a second revolution by their demands for an egalitarian republic, terrified the propertied bourgeoisie into looking for some alternative means of preserving the social order based upon their own property and prestige. Their earlier efforts to effect a compromise with a royal power during the lifetime of Charles I had broken down due to Charles’ intransigent advocacy of divine right and absolute power of the monarchy. Eventually, the ‘Royal Martyr’ preferred mounting the Whitehall scaffold to any compromise with the Revolution. Again ‘sovereign and subject are clean different’.
However, this mood of intransigent defiance was not hereditary, for Charles II compromise was preferable to permanent exile (he did not, he explained, ‘wish to go on his travels again’). In 1660, the monarchy was restored on terms, henceforth it was reduced to the more modest role of a ‘constitutional’ monarchy; that is, a permanent figurehead of modern bourgeois society  –  a fundamental role that has continued down to the present day. As the contemporary French ambassador informed his master, King Louis XIV, henceforth the King of England was no longer a king as they understood it on the continent, where the absolute monarchy still prevailed.
In Shakespearean phraseology, the former absolute monarchy had ‘suffered a sea-change’ into the merely symbolic figurehead of the then still revolutionary bourgeois society.
This transformation was finalised by the second revolution of 1689, described by its protagonists as the ‘Glorious Revolution’, which overthrew King James II when he repudiated the 1660 compromise and tried to restore the absolute prerogatives of the pre-revolutionary monarchy. [4]
During this modern era of constitutional monarchy, an era broadly contemporary with the present Hanoverian dynasty (1714 – 1982), whilst the monarchy has still retained its external pomp and dignity, as is exemplified at the opening of Parliament and other ceremonial occasions, it has virtually abandoned any power of a directly political character.
One would probably be correct in stating that the influence of the House of Hanover on the political and economic evolution of modern England has been virtually negligible. Whilst ‘God Save the King’ (composed in 1745) has remained the official national anthem, the really effective anthem of modern England has been that anthem of maritime supremacy, ‘Rule Britannia’.
As the political importance of the British monarchy declined so too did its personal status. During the earlier epoch of absolute monarchy, the personal stature and political ability of the individual monarch was always important and often decisive. A strong ruler like Edward I (1272 – 1307), or Henry VIII (1509 – 47) actually dominated his contemporary social scene, whilst a weak or incompetent king, like, say, Edward II (1307 – 27) or Henry VI (1422 – 60) made heavy weather and then perished violently at the hands of rebellious barons or hired assassins. 
Actually, in the modern era of the constitutional monarchy ever since the ‘Glorious Revolution’ (1689), the personal character and political attributes of the individual monarch were of little consequence and made only a negligible impact on the contemporary social and political scene.
Again, the personal characteristics of the present Hanoverian dynasty has been mediocrity and personal insignificance.
The scathing lampoon which served as the obituary of one eighteenth-century heir to the throne, Frederick Prince of Wales, father of George III (1760 – 1820), who was accidentally killed by a cricket or tennis ball before actually succeeding to the throne, would probably have applied equally well to most of the English monarchs throughout the last three centuries:
Here lies Fred
Who was alive and is dead. 
Had it been his father 
I had much rather.
Were it his mother
Would it were another. 
But since it’s only Fred 
Who was alive and is dead 
There’s no more to be said.
One could in fact summarise the majority of modern English monarchs, especially the ‘Four Georges’ (1714 – 1830), who successively inherited the thrones of these islands, by comprehensively dubbing them ‘the apotheosis of mediocrity’. As one nineteenth-century republican, Charles Bradlaugh, writing in the heyday of the Victorian era sarcastically noted in The Impeachment of the House of Brunswick, ‘when George IV invented the shoe-buckle the inventive genius of the House of Hanover was exhausted’.
One might also add relevantly that Bradlaugh’s own titular sovereign, Queen Victoria (1837 – 1901), owed her popularity largely to her advancing years. The altitude of her personal reputation was measured by the altitude of her years! For it was really only in her old age that the ‘Widow of Windsor’, as Rudyard Kipling irreverently described her, became a universally respected figure and gave her name to an entire era in human annals, ‘the Victorian era’.
Victoria, who was not really ‘great’, for she probably would have made an excellent ‘Victorian’ landlady in Bournemouth or Torquay, became at least and at last eventually respectable for reasons which will shortly appear. But even this modest epithet was generally lacking in the case of most of the earlier and perhaps some of the later members of the still-reigning dynasty.
When, for example, George IV, probably the most absolutely despicable individual who ever occupied the throne of Great Britain, from ‘earth descended’, The Times newspaper recorded this scarcely flattering obituary upon the late king: ‘If there is in these islands a single man or single woman who had a good word to say of the late king, his or her name has not yet reached us.’
From the standpoint of the political evolution of Great Britain, the role of the monarchy was not really important. The only exceptions were the Dutch leader of the revolution of 1689, William III (1689 – 1702) and perhaps for a short period George III (1760 – 1820), who by devious parliamentary intrigues briefly acquired a temporary authority. When, however, George and his satellites failed to reconquer the revolting American colonists (1773 – 83), the political power of the House of Hanover finally collapsed.
However, two almost simultaneous revolutions, both occurring at the end of the eighteenth century, shook traditional British society to its foundations. These two upheavals were represented by the French Revolution (1789 – 94) and that British industrial transformation commonly known as the Industrial Revolution.
Both these transformations profoundly affected the current British social order, both political and parliamentary. In relation to our present theme, the British monarchy, the French Revolution set in motion a tidal wave of political democracy as expressed by such contemporary radical writers as Thomas Paine and Charles Bradlaugh (respectively 1732 – 1809 and 1834 – 1891), that threatened to subvert the contemporary and still predominantly aristocratic social order and transform it into a ‘red’ republic on the model supplied by the French Revolution.
When George IV concluded his ignominious reign, not only was the King himself universally detested, but the monarchy itself appeared about to disappear upon a wave of revolution based after the French model. The Victorian novelist William Thackeray pungently summarised the era of the ‘Four Georges’ in the following lines:
George the First, you know, was vile. 
Viler, George the Second.
Has anyone ever heard
Of anyone like George the Third?
When George IV from earth descended 
Then God be praised, the Georges ended.
When the young Victoria ascended to the throne formerly occupied by her ‘wicked uncles’, George IV (1820 – 30) and William IV (1830 – 37), the monarchy appeared to be upon the verge of extinction. Even the then Russian ambassador, the then representative of Tsar Nicholas I (1825 – 55), the most reactionary ruler in contemporary Europe, predicted that this attractive young lady would probably conclude the long succession of English monarchs; the sunset of the British monarchy appeared to be close at hand.
At first indeed it looked as if this melancholy prediction would be fulfilled to the letter. For the first half of Victoria’s long reign (1837 – 1901) gave every promise of impending disaster.
This was particularly so when, after the premature death of her German husband, Albert, ‘the Prince Consort’ (1861), Victoria, without formally abdicating, retired into virtual seclusion in her new and deeply regretted role as the ‘Widow of Windsor’.
For a couple of decades or so Victoria was virtually an absentee monarch, a state of things that powerfully stimulated the contemporary growth of a republican movement. Two notable and widely influential publications, The Impeachment of the House of Brunswick (1879) by the republican secularist Charles Bradlaugh, and an anonymous publication entitled What Does She Do With It?, focused this wave of discontent.
Bradlaugh’s powerful analysis brought into glaring relief the corruption and incompetence of Victoria’s predecessors in ‘The House of Brunswick’. Whilst What Does She Do With It? asked the pertinent question, what her subjects were getting in return for the vast revenues that Parliament annually voted to Victoria and her numerous descendants.
In protest the following verse was added to the National Anthem:
Grandchildren not a few,
With great-grandchildren too
She blessed has been.
We've been their sureties,
Paid them gratuities, pensions, annuities, 
God save the Queen.
As no answer was forthcoming to these searching and relevant questions, the prospective extinction of the British monarchy, already at rock-bottom after the ‘Four Georges’, appeared to be close at hand.
Round about 1870 – 80 percipient pamphlets were again predicting the speedy demise of the monarchy. As the Russian diplomat had already predicted, Victoria showed every sign of being the last British monarch. After her, the deluge!
A British Republic with, by no means impossibly, that formidable republican orator Charles Bradlaugh, author of The Impeachment of the House of Brunswick, as its first elected president?
We repeat: such a prediction was neither utopian nor improbable. However, it remained unfulfilled! Why? The answer to this question is to be found in the astonishing contemporary expansion of the British Empire that reached its zenith during the second half of the nineteenth century; and in the imperialist ideology that accompanied it.
This powerful combination of territorial expansion and political ideology prolonged the British monarchy for another century (1881 – 1981). 
During this century five monarchs have come and gone, and the sixth, Elizabeth II, is still with us. For how long?
The imperialist cult of Britain’s far-flung Empire can of course be dated back beyond the early nineteenth century. Without going back as far as King Alfred and his perhaps mythical navy or the medieval expansion that led to the English invasion of France which culminated in the victories of Crecy and Agincourt (1346 and 1415), one can trace the origins of continuous English expansion overseas to the days of Sir Walter Raleigh, who colonised Virginia, named after Elizabeth ‘the Virgin Queen’, and Oliver Cromwell (1599 – 1658), who may perhaps be styled as the effective founder of the Empire ‘over which the Sun never set’. But it was not until the end of the long, drawn-out Napoleonic Wars in 1815 that England acquired worldwide maritime supremacy and simultaneously received the ‘green light’ which beckoned her towards the creation of a literally world-wide Empire, the most ubiquitous and perhaps the most powerful empire in recorded human annals.
This Empire reached its political zenith concurrently with its maximum territorial expansion during the second half of the nineteenth century under the political leadership of statesmen like Palmerston and Disraeli (respectively 1784 – 1865 and 1804 – 1881).
While the self-conscious and aggressive cult of imperialism was violently propagated by an influential group of writers under the leadership of the vastly popular Rudyard Kipling.
During this half century the British Raj was finally established in India by the ruthless suppression of the Indian rebellion commonly known as the Indian Mutiny (1857 – 59), while later in the century Cecil Rhodes gave his name to an African empire (Rhodesia), and Joseph Chamberlain precipitated the Boer War (1899 – 1902) which painted the southern half of Africa red. (NB: the colour red at that time had not yet assumed its revolutionary significance!)
Between 1814 (the fall of Napoleon) and 1914 (the outbreak of the first Anglo – German war) the British Empire expanded on a scale such as had never previously been known, whilst along with it the creed and cult of imperialism acquired an almost religious intensity.
This startling development transpired in the reign of Victoria, one of the last political acts of whom was to inaugurate the ‘Commonwealth of Australia’ at the other end of the world (1 January 1901).
In 1876 she had already been solemnly installed by Disraeli as ‘Empress of India’, in itself an empire of continental dimensions. The descendent of petty German princelings now sat on the ‘Peacock Throne’ of the Great Mogul  –  a peripatetic breed which Bradlaugh himself comprehensively described as ‘small breast-bestarred wanderers’.
The effects of this startling expansion, and of the impressive imperialist creed that accompanied and justified it, upon British society were incalculable, and nowhere more so than in relation to the British monarchy. From the then uncertain standpoint of this institution, the earlier evolution of which we traced in the preceding pages, the arrival of the imperialist cult at this point in its chequered career postponed for at least a century the end of the British monarchy. For the earlier monarchy under Victoria’s predecessors, George IV, et al, had sunk to the lowest ebb. [5]
Again we recall the obituary notice of Victoria’s ‘wicked uncle’ and, in point of fact, the obituary notice of his successor was not much more flattering, nor had Victoria’s own virtual abandonment of her royal functions after the death of her beloved Albert done much to restore the institution.
By the middle years of Victoria’s long reign (1837-1901), the British monarchy appeared definitely on the way out.
By the 1880s, when Charles Bradlaugh wrote his scathing attack upon the monarchy entitled The Impeachment of the House of Brunswick, not only was the ‘inventive genius of the House of Brunswick’ exhausted, but even its lifespan appeared to be at an end. Queen Victoria herself appeared destined to conclude both her own dynasty and British monarchy itself.
‘The Empire on which the Sun never sets’ and, along with it, the imperialist cult of Empire, may be said to have begun with the aggressively imperialist Prime Ministers Palmerston and Disraeli (respectively 1855-65 and 1874-80) and to have lasted, along with the Empire itself, for about a century down to the final spectacular collapse of the old Victorian Empire between the end of the second Anglo – German war (1939 – 45) and the present year of grace, 1982.
The high-watermarks of this imperialist century (c 1850 – 1950) were represented by Queen Victoria’s ‘Diamond Jubilee’ (20 June 1897), and the Imperial Durbar in Delhi (1912), when Victoria’s grandson, George V (1910-36), in his imperial capacity as Emperor of India, a title previously assumed by Victoria in 1876, visited Delhi, the old capital of the Mughals, and in his imperial capacity as their successor received the homage of the princes and peoples of India, then and thereafter the ‘brightest jewel’ of the British Empire.
Fifteen years earlier, in 1897, the aged Victoria, the life and reign of whom had been reinvigorated by imperialism in her old age, had driven to St Paul’s Cathedral through streets packed with cheering crowds to give thanks to divine providence for its almost miraculous transformation of an off-shore Atlantic island into the metropolis of a world Empire, and of the descendant of petty German princes into a monarch of worldwide stature.
Throughout this imperialist century, the British monarchy underwent what may perhaps be termed a ‘second spring’, for it had acquired a new and indispensable function as the unique and common symbol of an Empire embracing every species of race, culture, religion and civilisation. It was a unique function, and under the prevailing circumstances, no English republican, no elected president as envisaged by contemporary republicans such as Charles Bradlaugh, could conceivably have performed it. The British monarchy had acquired a new and indispensable function that had prolonged its life for at least a century.
It was due primarily to imperialism, to the cult of Empire, that not only did the ‘impeachment of the House of Brunswick’ fail, but the moribund monarchy of the early Hanoverians was prolonged for another century and, in Shakespearean phraseology, ‘suffered a sea-change’ into a popular and world-famous institution.
The functionless monarchy of George IV had been ‘translated’ into the active and globe-trotting monarchy of George V and his present successors. The medieval autocracy of William I (the Conqueror) and the succeeding bourgeois ‘constitutional’ monarchy, founded by William III after the ‘Glorious Revolution’ of 1689, had now been succeeded by the imperialist monarchy of Victoria and her descendants.
However, empires, like other less exalted institutions, have their day and cease to be. Rome, Assyria and now England! Already in the heyday of Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee (1897), the unofficial poet laureate Rudyard Kipling sounded a warning note in his ‘Recessional’, published upon that glorious occasion:
Far-called, our navies melt away; 
On dune and headland sinks the fire: 
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre.
Rudyard Kipling, himself the imperialist author of this solemn warning, did not survive to witness the fulfilment of his Cassandra-like prophecy. For the Empire briefly survived its poet laureate.
However, the ‘decline and fall’ of the Empire under modern conditions proved to be a much faster business than that of its classical predecessors had been. It was crowded into decades, not centuries. For this decline began at the end of England’s ‘Thirty Year’s War’ with rival German imperialism (1914 – 45).
Today, half a century later, this process of imperial decline is virtually concluded. Beginning with its ‘brightest jewel’, India, in 1947, the once mighty Empire ‘on which the Sun never set’ has simply disappeared. [6]
Like the famous ‘Snark’ of Edward Lear, the Victorian Empire has ‘softly and suddenly vanished away'!
The British imperial anthem no longer appears to be ‘Rule Britannia’ but rather that melancholy dirge ‘Oh God Our Help in Ages Past’.
However, one aspect of continuity still continues. For the official national anthem is still ‘God Save the King’. Queen Elizabeth II is still Queen of Great Britain, even though she is no longer Empress of India. Great Britain is still a monarchy. It is still at least nominally ruled in the name of an hereditary monarch and a descendant of the ‘Four Georges’. The self-same dynasty which came over in 1714 when ‘George in pudding time came o'er’, as the contemporary Vicar of Bray so picturesquely described it.
In this post-imperial age, an age that really began after the second Anglo – German war (1939 – 45), and as the twentieth century draws to its close, the British monarchy still continues, but for how long? What nowadays is the future of the British monarchy?
Epilogue: Has the British Monarchy a Future? 
(Charles the Last or What the Stars Foretell)
Up to the present day and age, as we have already noted, the British monarchy has pursued a chequered career. The old medieval monarchy ‘by divine right’ perished on the scaffold with Charles I (30 January 1649). Since the Restoration in 1660 (to quote a contemporary) when ‘not his own strength but our divisions’ brought back Charles II, the monarch became by and large little more than a ceremonial figurehead for bourgeois society. When the attempt of the restored Stuart monarchy to revive its medieval status finally failed after the revolution of 1689, the modern monarchy abandoned any attempt to recover the autocratic status it had enjoyed under the masterful Tudor monarchs Henry VIII and Elizabeth I and became effectively (as noted above) a figurehead for successive Tory and Whig bourgeois rulers of Britain itself and the then fast-expanding British Empire ‘on which the Sun never set’.
As already noted, the British monarchy has thus passed through several stages: monarchy by divine right, figureheads of bourgeois society, symbols of Empire. But today all those reincarnations of the monarchy have been consigned to the irrevocable past, divine right passed with Charles I, bourgeois society is rapidly losing its position as the dominant social force and its place is being taken by the British proletariat, while Britain’s Victorian Empire is now as dead as the proverbial dodo. How long its rather nebulous successor, the British Commonwealth, will last is anybody’s guess. Mine is, not long!
The only useful service the present-day monarchy may seem to perform is to boost the tourist trade, for, as the hullabaloo over the recent royal wedding demonstrates, this branch of royal advertising is quite profitable. But is this a sufficient basis for the indefinite continuation of a now senile institution? For, after all ‘Christmas comes but once a year’, and royal weddings are still more infrequent. Queen Elizabeth II will probably last out her reign, but will her successor Charles III also prove to be Charles the Last? The last of his name and the last British monarch?
It is difficult, perhaps impossible, to foretell the future, so perhaps we had better leave the delicate art of prophesying to the professional prophets. But here the traditional ‘royal art’ of astrology comes to our aid, for naturally this ‘royal art’ takes a lively interest in royalty!
Recently the soothsayers have got busy on Charles. The eminent French astrologist ‘Arcturus’, a pupil of the world-famous French astrologer ‘Madame Soleil’, has categorically predicted that the reign of Charles III will be ‘brief, disastrous and beset with terrible problems’, while his English opposite number, Roger Elliott, writing in that world-famous journal, the News of the World, is equally gloomy. In his book Astrology and the Royals he becomes more precise, and announces that in the early 1990s the stellar map will repeat the exact pattern of the skies as 1649, the year Charles I was executed, and that this presages dire trouble for Charles and the royal family, if not actual revolution.
Evidently the stars take a dim view of the future of the British monarchy. The ‘royal art’ has become republican!
The author will merely add his own terrestrial conclusion based upon the analysis set out in the previous pages, that all the present signs point unmistakably in the same direction. Presumably, some form of republican government will eventually succeed the British monarchy. We can perhaps hope that this will take the form of a federal republic embracing England, Scotland and Wales, and perhaps Ireland and Cornwall, as autonomous entities. (The present growth of nationalist movements in these areas will also probably become contributory causes for the eventual fall of the monarchy.) Such a Federal Republic of Great Britain might well become part of a larger European Republic, of a United States of Europe.
The present century, ‘the century of the common man’, has witnessed the progressive disappearance of the hereditary principle  –  a process that will ultimately, or so one may hope, lead eventually to a classless society from which all political and economic privilege will have completely disappeared. Amongst the last survivors today are the British House of Lords and its culminating symbol, the British monarchy. All present signs point to the perhaps early disappearance of these and other functionless relics of the bygone feudal age by, or at least soon after, the expiration of our ‘century of the common man’.
Notes
1. After the abdication of Edward VIII, a rather mysterious event which has never been adequately explained, an American journalist stated that henceforth only a ‘rubber stamp’ could perform the duties of an English monarch.
2. During this fairly lengthy era, 1066 – 1649, nine English monarchs perished violently: William II (1087 – 1100), Richard I (1189 – 99), Edward II (1307 – 27), Henry VI (1421 – 71), Edward V (1483), Richard III (1483 – 85), Lady Jane Grey (briefly queen in 1553) and Charles I (1625 – 49). All these monarchs perished by violent means.
3. The sects mentioned in the text, Levellers, etc, openly advocated economic democracy and political republicanism. Winstanley, the Digger, went so far as advocating agrarian socialism. The same percipient writer was also the first to point out that the Stuart monarchy derived ultimately from the Norman Conquest of 1066.
4. Somewhat later, a French writer, contemporary with the French Revolution, summarised the English constitutional monarchy in these apt terms, ‘a constitutional monarchy resembles a monarchy in form but a republic in substance’.
5. Queen Victoria once asked Liberal politician Sir William Harcourt: ‘Do you think, Sir William, subjects are ever justified in taking up arms against their sovereign?’ Harcourt replied: ‘Madam, I am a too good a subject of the House of Hanover to say “Never"!’
6. The famous expression ‘on which the Sun never set’ was originally coined not about the British Empire but about its Spanish predecessor.
 


F A Ridley Archive




ture of the British Monarchy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1982


V S Anand and F A Ridley 1970
James Maxton and British Socialism
Source: Pamphlet published in 1970 by the Medusa Press, 32 Paul Street, London EC2. The many typographical errors in the original text have been corrected. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
For Ellis S Hillman
With the coming of socialism universally, the struggle for existence disappears. Then in a certain sense mankind will come out of the animal kingdom, and will for the first time attain conditions that are truly human.  –  Frederick Engels
Prologue
In the ensuing pages we present to a generation to whom he is fast becoming merely a name, the portrait of one of the most colourful figures ever thrown up by the British labour movement. Or perhaps we should say, annexed by that movement. James Maxton was actually a good deal more than the ‘beloved rebel’, as his official biographer styled him. For he represented, particularly in his later years, after the break between the Independent Labour Party and the Labour Party (1932), the nearest approach to the leader of an indigenous socialist movement in Britain since the era of Chartism. Had the political evolution of the ‘Hungry Thirties’ in Great Britain taken a slightly different course, James Maxton, as the acknowledged leader of militant socialism in Britain, might have played a more spectacular role. As things turned out, he is remembered today, if at all, as perhaps the last, and certainly as one of the most eloquent and colourful figures, produced by what we may term the ‘heroic age’ of socialism in Britain.
That age is surely over. The age of colourful agitators has now given way to the more drab, though no doubt equally indispensable, age of the administrators and the technocrats.
Accordingly, we present the portrait of a rebel, of James Maxton, as one of the Clydeside Tribunes. We present the figure in the context of his age; an age in which he was one of the most eloquent spokesmen.
His biographer Gilbert MacAlister has well said, ‘Maxton was the conscience of British labour movement'; and the express function of the conscience, apart from making ‘cowards of us all’, is surely to move others to action. This indispensable task was fulfilled for the British labour movement for a generation more by James Maxton than by anybody else. His capacities in this and in other respects are sufficient to assure him a permanent place in the annals of the labour movement in Britain.
I: James Maxton: A Personal and Political Study
James Maxton was born in 1885 in Pollokshaw, today a southern suburb of Glasgow, of Scottish middle-class parents. His romantic appearance stemmed greatly from this; and, together with the rolling Scottish lilt that made his oratory so irresistible, it helps to explain much in his personal character and in his political career.
A Scotland uneasily united with its traditional enemy and southern neighbour, England, has represented throughout the industrial epoch the spearhead of radicalism in the British Isles. In the slums of Glasgow and Edinburgh, in the filthy dens and foul hovels of the Gorbals and Cannongate, the prevailing squalor began, towards the end of the nineteenth century, to be transformed by the logic  –  a logic which three centuries of the Calvinist theology had made second nature for Scotsmen since the time of John Knox  –  into modern secular theories of social protest and revolt. First radicalism, then socialism, not excluding its extreme manifestations in Marxism and similar philosophies of continental origin, made their disturbing appearances. Socialism, both in its appeal to Scottish logic and as a practical protest against a poverty which made the slums of Glasgow rival those of Marseilles as the worst in Europe, combined to foster the spirit of revolt. One can even suggest that the organised British labour movement was born in Scotland at the turn of the century.
It was a Scotsman, James Keir Hardie, an ex-miner, reared in poverty from his youth, who founded the British Labour Party, and made socialism a living issue in British politics. It was another Scot, James Ramsay MacDonald, who became the first Labour Prime Minister of Great Britain in 1924.
The Scots, unlike the English, are essentially a democratic people. Three centuries of the ‘democratic theocracy’ of Calvinism, as a Scottish historian has termed it, has taught Scotsmen to be so. The Scots are a people who believe in the equality of man: they have made a ploughman, Robert Burns, their national hero and god. In this, they are unlike the English, who have great respect for their betters. The doctrine of social equality, inherent in socialism, comes to Scotland from the highest sources: it is taught on divine authority in the Shorter Catechism of the Calvinist Presbyterian Church, and has been illustrated in practice by the democratic organisation of the Scottish Church, which, centuries before the Russian Revolution of 1917, embodied in its Presbyterian organisation the leading features of what since 1917 we have learnt to call the Soviet system.
Keir Hardie and the ILP: The Labour Party, however, represents the political conclusion rather than the beginning of the organisation of labour upon a professedly socialist basis. It came into existence as the culmination of a whole series of small groupings and sects: the ILP, SLP, BSP, SDF and so on; in a brief essay like this, we must refer the reader to more voluminous sources to cast light on these matters. One, however, the ILP, still exists in the year 1970, and must be mentioned in more detail. Its spectacular career and chequered fortunes are inseparable from our ‘portrait of a rebel’, it is both personal propaganda and the political career of James Maxton that we shall seek to present. For the Independent Labour Party was for forty years (1893 – 1932) the avowedly ‘extremist left’ of the organised British labour movement. Even more to this point of view, the ILP was the party with which both the personal and political career of James Maxton were inseparably associated for over forty years (1904 – 46). If socialism was the political philosophy of which James Maxton was one of the most eloquent advocates, the ILP, no less, was the organisation in which exclusively this life-long propaganda was conducted.
Had the ILP perished stillborn, like so many polysyllabic contemporaries, Maxton’s dramatic personality and irresistible oratorical charm would have found some other outlet. As it is, to seek to present even the briefest assessment of the character and propaganda of James Maxton apart from the party which he led for so long  –  would surely be to present Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark himself. The Independent Labour Party, the ILP, was not a specifically Scottish, but an all-British party. As such, it was founded at Bradford at a special delegates conference held in 1893. At this conference, at which Keir Hardie and George Bernard Shaw were present, it was finally decided to found an ‘Independent Labour Party’ in order to represent organised labour upon the political field. The founders of the ILP did not, of course, intend to establish a party ‘independent’ of the Labour Party, which did not exist at that time. The term ‘Independent Labour Party’ implied a Labour Party ‘independent’ of the then bourgeois Tory and Liberal Parties, both of whom, in particular Gladstone’s Liberal Party, were seeking and actually receiving the votes of a large section of the politically-interested British workers. In fact, the ILP was originally created with the aim of becoming the mass party of the British working class, independent of both Tories and Liberals. The ILP, however, never succeeded in occupying this role, which was filled by the Labour Party at the turn of the century.
ILP and the Labour Party: It would take us beyond the scope of this modest essay to seek to enquire why it was that the ILP, despite all its energy and devotion, not to mention many talented personalities whom it enlisted in its service, failed in its major objective of becoming the mass party of the British workers. Nonetheless, one may mention as a contributory cause its uncompromisingly socialist policy and its refusal to truck with what it regarded as merely reformist ideas. The success of the Labour Party, of course, has been due to a whole succession of social and political compromises which have ended by fully integrating it into the framework of the bourgeois state and bourgeois society.
Keir Hardie, from the start the leader and the inspirator of the ILP, and both his English and the Scottish colleagues, were socialists to a man. At the start the ILP received expert advice from the greatest living socialist thinker, Frederick Engels, but the ILP never became a one hundred per cent Marxist party.
Thus British socialists succeeded in forming an ‘Independent Labour Party’ that was henceforth to carry on a vigorous campaign in all parts of the United Kingdom with such signal success that its influence soon became out of all proportions to its comparatively small number. With the turn of the century, labour agitation multiplied upon every hand. The ILP, recognising its failure to become the mass party of the British workers, applied for affiliation to the new Labour Party, a party beginning in 1900 under the title of the ‘Labour Representation Committee’ and backed by the trade unions. As the left wing of the new Labour Party, in which the then leaders of the ILP Keir Hardie and Ramsay MacDonald soon assumed leadership, the ILP continued its nationwide propaganda on behalf of socialism. It represented the militant spearhead as well as the propaganda arm of socialism.
In Scotland, their efforts met with conspicuous success from the start; and it was in Glasgow  –  ‘the most dangerous city’ in the British Empire, as a contemporary Tory journalist described the Clyde metropolis  –  that in 1904 the ILP received its most eloquent recruit, a student of Glasgow University, James Maxton.
II: James Maxton: A Life of an Agitator
The ILP had always drawn a substantial section of its membership from the more idealistic section of what an orthodox Marxist would probably describe as the petty bourgeois. With his flowing hair, usually uncut, lean aesthetic appearance, Maxton never looked at all like a typical proletarian; or for that matter like a typical bourgeois either. In fact he never looked at all anyone but ‘Jimmy’ Maxton.
Maxton in his youth pursued the normal scholastic career of his class, without either exemplary success or conspicuous failure. It was at Glasgow University that he first became interested in politics as a Tory; in which capacity he debated with the local Fabian Society, one of whose members, Walter Elliot, was to become a Tory cabinet minister. On finally quitting the ranks of Toryism, which he did while still at the university in 1904, Maxton did not join the Fabians. Their brand of one-step-at-a-time socialism was, in any case, hardly suited to his ardent temperament. Nor did his Scottish logic respond to their ‘biological’ theory of ‘inevitability of gradualness’, as taught by the archpriest of Fabianism, Sydney Webb.
In the course of his later propaganda, Maxton often brilliantly refuted this Fabian analogy between political and biological progress, particularly dear to Maxton’s former colleague and later political chief James Ramsay MacDonald. As was no doubt inevitable under the circumstances, when Maxton did make the leap for socialism in 1904, he joined the ILP, then 11 years old and in the full flush of its propaganda activity as the ultra-socialist ‘left’ of the then nascent labour movement.
James Maxton was to remain in the ILP for the rest of his life, and it is with the ILP that his name and fame were and are inevitably linked, both in his own lifetime and in the eyes of posterity. In every respect, both personal and political, there was complete congruity between Maxton and the ILP. Not only did the political programme, Socialism In Our Time, and not in some remote paradise of Fabian ‘planners’, appeal to Maxton’s ardent temperament, but also he was himself both personally and politically a typical socialist of the ILP vintage, a vintage that he himself was so largely to mould. In that vintage, a revolution and reform were not antagonistic objectives, as in the more doctrinaire groups (SPGB, SLP, etc) on the extreme left. Since the ILP never allowed itself to obscure or finally to eliminate the final objective of the party summarised as the international cooperative commonwealth of socialism.
Towards the Cooperative Commonwealth: Similarly, in his own personal approach, James Maxton shared and continued to share for the rest of his active political career what we may perhaps term both the scientific and the ethical approach. In his repeated controversies with the right-wing Labour protagonists of ‘gradualness’, Maxton brilliantly refuted their superficial analogies between human progress and that of the animal kingdom, with arguments that were essentially revolutionary and even Marxist in character. But perhaps the main and most urgent driving force behind his impassioned agitation was ethical rather than directly scientific in character. In this respect, Maxton personally and the ILP in general perhaps derived essentially their fundamental philosophy from William Morris rather than from Karl Marx. From the Morris of News From Nowhere and The Dream Of John Ball inspiring example of the cooperative commonwealth realised through concrete human cooperation rather than through scientific analysis. This empirical approach to social evolution, and even the socialism propounded by the Englishman Morris, had perhaps a more direct appeal to an essentially empirical people like the English than had the theories so widely adopted upon the European continent under the inspiration of Karl Marx and his disciples.
Maxton and in general the ILP were ‘Marxists’ in the general sense that they accepted the fundamental social theories advanced by the master of continental socialism. But it would be true to affirm that the main driving force behind that practical agitation came rather from the sources indigenous to these islands; from William Morris and from Robert Burns (particularly of course in Scotland), and farther back, from the long pre-Marxist English and Scottish revolutionary tradition that extends from Magna Carta (1215) in England and the ‘Declaration of Arbroath’ in Scotland (1320), by such egalitarian movements as the Levellers of the Commonwealth and the Chartists of the early industrial era. The same can probably also be said for James Maxton himself.
James Maxton and the ILP: But we anticipate. When Maxton first joined the ILP in 1904, all this lay in the future. A democratic party like the ILP had no ‘favourite sons'; he who would be in it, must be of it. Such a one must prove his worth in practice, which as far as the ILP was concerned meant chiefly political propaganda. The time was very propitious for this kind of work. At that time, near the end of a long era of Tory aristocratic rule (the then Prime Minister, AJ Balfour, was a scion of the noble House of Cecil), the country was approaching the election of 1906 which returned the Liberal government with the biggest majority of modern times; creating incidentally the Parliamentary Labour Party on route.
After this date, the then leaders of the ILP, Keir Hardie, Ramsay MacDonald, etc, mostly became MPs (Hardie had already been one since 1891), and more and more of their time was taken by the parliamentary business of the House of Commons. But the ILP still remained primarily a party of agitators, propaganda remained their life-sap. In this field, their new recruit, who had taken up school-teaching for a profession after graduation, soon made his mark and no common mark either. For James Maxton was the ideal agitator, both physically, politically and psychologically. His appearance, his intonation, his oratory, and last, his sincerity and whole-hearted devotion to the socialist cause, made him perhaps the outstanding agitator in what was probably the greatest generation of agitators this island has known.
Maxton became, whether in Parliament or outside it, an agitator, a propagandist of socialism. And what an agitator! Keir Hardie may have given an even more dynamic personality and impassioned sincerity to the labour movement which he did so much to create and inspire; Ramsay MacDonald in his prime, with his ‘organ voice’ and princely bearing, may have surpassed Maxton in sheer oratorical powers. Philip Snowden, with his razor-edged tongue, probably surpassed Maxton as the parliamentary debater, and there were not a few self-taught Marxist scholars (Walton Newbold and Fred Casey, etc) who were Maxton’s superiors in learning and industry. But nowhere was there that unique combination of romantic aestheticism, rolling eloquence, and inspired sincerity. There was, and there remained for the rest of his life, only one ‘Jimmy’ Maxton. Naturally the arrival of such an outstanding recruit did not go unnoticed. Soon Maxton was spending his leisure in propaganda trips all over, first Scotland, then as his fame grew, over the whole of Great Britain. He soon became a recognised ‘emperor of the soap-box’ throughout the length and the breadth of the land. His gift of eloquence was backed by a caustic wit. He himself in later days used to tell how when apparently ‘stumped’ for an answer by a knowledgeable heckler (there are many such, in Scotland particularly), he blandly assured his audience that he was indeed impaled upon the ‘horns of dilemma’, but that he felt so comfortable in that position that he proposed to stay there indefinitely. His gifts met their natural reward, generally with the public at large, specifically with his own party, the ILP, now expanding rapidly after 1906, along with the rapid growth of the labour movement in general. Socialist propaganda was ‘in the air’, and here was a master propagandist in both appearance and in reality. ‘Jimmy’ Maxton was elected to the Scottish Divisional Council of the ILP, the vanguard of the ILP. Then in 1912, as an already nationally known figure, Maxton was elected to the National Administrative Council of the party, the supreme authority of the ILP in Great Britain. Maxton was already known as one of the most eloquent and quite the most colourful of the younger leaders of the British labour movement.
War and Revolution: The ILP opposed the first Anglo – German war (1914 – 18) upon the grounds since abundantly justified by subsequent historical research that it was only superficially an ideological war fought to preserve ‘Western “democracy” against Prussian militarism’. The real factors notably arose from the then political rivalry upon a world scale between the by now declining British Empire and its rival, the rising imperialism in Germany. In so doing, the ILP was only continuing its prewar policy which had always opposed militarism and imperialism both British and any other. James Maxton himself fully concurred with this view, and along with other spokesmen of the British left such as John Maclean, Emmanuel Shinwell, Willy Gallagher, conducted active propaganda for a negotiated peace and for a speedy end to hostilities.
In reply, the British government displayed its ‘tolerance’ by imprisoning its most outspoken and influential critics. Among these, Maxton did six months in Glasgow jail. However, the ILP continued its anti-war propaganda and welcomed with enthusiasm the outbreak of the Russian Revolution (March – November 1917), the first successful socialist revolution in history. Glasgow, the spiritual headquarters of the ILP, was the first city in Britain officially to recognise the Russian Bolshevik regime.
So great was the enthusiasm aroused by this titanic event that at the end of the war, the ILP even opened negotiations with the new Communist International founded by Lenin in 1918 in order to expand the Russian Revolution upon the world scale. These negotiations, however, eventually broke down on account of the doctrinaire insistence of the Comintern that an armed insurrection on the Russian model was the only road to socialism.
The ILP, however, in which a strong pacifist element has always been present, rejected this condition, and, in return, were fiercely denounced by the Bolsheviks, by Trotsky in particular in his famous pamphlet Where Is Britain Going?. Rather ironically, the present-day Communist Parties including the British one in The British Road To Socialism, have now apparently accepted a line identical to that then put forward by the ILP.
With the end of the first Anglo – German War, Great Britain and, along with it, the British labour movement found itself confronted by an entirely changed situation in both the political, economic and psychological fields. The Liberal Party, the traditional British party of the left, virtually collapsed overnight, and its place as the official opposition and in time alternative government was then taken by the Labour Party. Simultaneously, Britain lost her former Victorian monopoly as the headquarters of the industrial revolution; a change reflected in a spectacular growth of poverty and of mass unemployment. The ‘Hungry Thirties’ were just round the corner.
An early result of this cataclysmic change was the advent of the first Labour government in 1924 (January to October). Another result was the rapid growth in membership of Labour’s avowedly socialist left, the ILP, which around 1924 obtained its maximum numerical strength of some 30,000.
Another and very spectacular result was the election in 1922 in ‘Red Glasgow’ of an entire group of the ILP members: Maxton, Wheatley and others soon to be nationally famous as the ‘Clydeside group’. Maxton himself was elected for the Bridgeton division of Glasgow, for which he continued to sit for the rest of his life. This group soon made itself ‘infamous’ by its outspoken attacks upon the then Tory government; an attack that brought a note of reality into ‘the best social club’ in London, as the House of Commons under Tory rule has been often described. Maxton’s own oratory soon established him as the undisputed parliamentary spokesman of the ‘Clydeside group’, and in time even Tory MPs referred to him as the universally recognised ‘biggest draw in the House of Commons’.
Maxton used to tell an amusing story of those early parliamentary days. On one occasion after delivering a fierce attack on the callous indifference of the Tory government to the suffering of the unemployed, he was accosted in the lobby by the minister concerned: ‘Surely, Jimmy’, he protested, ‘you did not really mean all those dreadful things that you just have been saying about me. Come to the bar and have a drink!’ Maxton often used to cite this anecdote as a revealing comment upon the unreality that characterised the proceedings of a still predominantly bourgeois Parliament to the harsh realities outside Westminster. Meanwhile, Labour, along with its Clydeside contingent, was making itself felt in that select rendezvous with the British governing classes before Keir Hardie had first arrived in his cloth cap to introduce proletarian realities. The first proof that, if we may so, paraphrase the Latin tag, ‘the Clyde had flowed into the Thames’, was to be found in the substitution of Scottish ILP leader and self-proclaimed Socialist Leader James Ramsay MacDonald as leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party. The change was due largely to Maxton and his Clydeside colleagues. It was a change that they lived to regret. But at that time, MacDonald remained the leader of the Labour Party right down to 1931, when the ILP was on the eve of breaking away. For it was under the at least titular leadership of this ‘magnificent imitation described MacDonald’ that the final breach between the ILP and the Labour Party came to a head.
Labour Party at the Crossroad: The two years between 1924 and 1926, the years that witnessed the first Labour government and the General Strike (2-12 May 1926), may be said to have marked the decisive turning-point both generally in the world outlook and practical policy of the British labour movement, and specifically, for the political fortunes of the ILP and of its outstanding representative, James Maxton. For the first Labour government did not perform the miracle of socialist transformation that their more ardent supporters in the ILP in particular had expected from them. Instead, it soon became evident that it would need a microscope, and a pretty powerful one, to find any major difference between the Labour government of MacDonald and any average capitalist administration. To add to the disappointment of the ILP, this was a predominantly ILP government, since both the Prime Minister MacDonald himself and his chief lieutenants Philip Snowden and Clydesider John Wheatley had all won their initial spurs in the ILP. When as a result of that fabrication, the so-called Zinoviev Letter (October 1924), the Labour government ignominiously concluded its inglorious career, it left unanswered questions for future discussion throughout the labour movement.
The first and the most urgent of these questions was soon summarily answered in a negative. Put briefly, it was: since the Labour Party even in power was unable or unwilling to make any substantial progress towards socialism by constitutional parliamentary means, was any alternative and quicker route available? A general strike, say, as advocated by the continental syndicalists? Or as the Communist Party (founded in Britain in 1920) then advocated, an armed insurrection on the Russian model? An armed insurrection in England was eloquently advocated by Trotsky in his book Where Is Britain Going?, translated during the General Strike. Incidentally, in this fiery polemic, the famous Russian revolutionary poured scorn upon the ILP for refusing to accept the inevitability of an armed insurrection in Britain.
In May 1926, the long-advocated General Strike occurred but collapsed in 11 days; proving surely that solidarity without adequate leadership and preparation, both of which were conspicuously lacking in May 1926, is not sufficient. As for the armed insurrection, it remained on paper  –  and upon Russian paper at that!
Successive failures of Parliament during the first Labour government; a failure to be even more glaringly repeated by Ramsay MacDonald’s second administration between May 1929 and August 1931; and an even more summary failure of extra-parliamentary socialism, in the General Strike in 1926, left a huge question mark hanging over the entire British left.
James Maxton, by now the acknowledged leader of the ILP, of which he had been elected Chairman in 1925, and as the outstanding personality of the British left, spent the remaining 20 years of his life trying to find a definitive answer to this urgent question: how to find a viable British road to socialism? Had he succeeded in finding one, he would have gone down in history; he would have ranked in that selected band who have succeeded in changing the face of universal history, in a band which includes Robespierre and Lenin.
That he did not do so can scarcely be blamed or ascribed to any individual failure upon his part. As an observer of human affairs long since noted: ‘There is a tide in the affairs of men, that, taken at the flood, lead on to fortune.’ Or as a radical contemporary of Maxton himself  –  George Clemenceau  –  summarised the same thought with Gallic conciseness: ‘There are no great men; since men are only as great as circumstances permit them to be.’ Between 1926 and Maxton’s death in 1946, he and the ILP wandered in the political wilderness. True, Lenin and his Bolshevik Party had also wandered in the wilderness for a decade till its final victory in 1917. But in their case, omnipotent ‘circumstances’ eventually favoured them; the Shakespearian ‘tide’ came their way at last. But James Maxton and the ILP had no such luck.
For this reason, the critical historian has no option but to pronounce Maxton as an ultimate failure, a brilliant and attractive failure, but a failure all the same. Thus, we present ‘the portrait of a rebel'; but a rebel who never came off. However, the failures of life and in politics in particular are often more interesting than the successes. James Maxton conspicuously confirmed this adage. As he had already noted at the start of his career, he was to remain upon the horns of the dilemma indefinitely, in fact for the rest of his life.
On the Horns of a Dilemma: The last 20 years of Maxton’s life (1926 – 46) were exclusively devoted to the increasingly uphill task of trying to revive the declining fortunes of British socialism; inside the Labour Party up to 1932; afterwards outside, and in open opposition to the mass Labour Party from which the ILP disaffiliated in 1932. During the first period inside the Labour Party, Maxton made several attempts to galvanise the labour movement into some semblance of socialist militancy and to arrest the growing drift towards the policy of reformism and compromise with imperialism. His most publicised effort in this direction is to be found in the ‘Maxton – Cook Manifesto’ (1928) entitled A Case for a Socialist Revival, which he wrote with the then militant miners’ General Secretary AJ Cook (one of the most remarkable men ever to be produced by the British trade-union movement). Their campaign, prolific in eloquence, ultimately produced little. Ramsay MacDonald, who had now quitted the ILP and the Parliamentary Labour Party, continued to move steadily towards the right, towards permanent respectability as custodian of the British Empire. This drift towards the right was conducted with sublime disregard of the fact that the term ‘His Majesty’ in Great Britain, ever since Charles Stuart had lost his head in 1649, has been merely a convenient synonym for the British bourgeoisie and for the capitalist state.
This fact was abundantly proved by the second Labour regime of MacDonald between 1929 and 1931. It was ‘the last straw which broke the camel’s back’: the ‘camel’ being in this case British socialism in general and the ILP in particular. For this time, unlike 1924, it was not merely that the Labour government did nothing at all to realise socialism in a concrete way: to be sure, even the Fabian Bernard Shaw, that staunch champion of parliamentary ‘gradualness’, had to admit that a government exclusively composed of Tory bankers and their stockbrokers would not have acted differently from the Labour government in any essential way. But this time ‘circumstances’ took a hand, a decisive one at that, by implementing a world slump in 1929, a world-wide depression that compelled the Labour government to come to the rescue of capitalism by drastic measures, without any ‘gradualness’ at all! When in the autumn of 1931, the miserable pittances of the fast-increasing army of unemployed had to be slashed by a Labour government in order to keep the banks solvent, there was obviously no place for a socialist party like the ILP in this ignominious scheme. In 1932, the special delegate conference of the ILP voted decisively to disaffiliate from the Labour Party. Henceforth, James Maxton, now and for the remainder of his life, was the undisputed leader of His Majesty’s ‘disloyal’ and socialist opposition.
This decisive move eventually turned out to be a decisive political failure, since Maxton and the ILP remained in the political void for the rest of his life. The ILP itself survived both the split in 1932 and Maxton’s own death in 1946, and still exists as a propaganda organisation. Its political future today now appears to be dependent upon a future political revival of socialism. In view of the apparent elements of disintegration at present at work in the Labour Party, such a revival appears to be increasingly possible. In such an event, the long experience accumulated by the ILP should be of great value to such a socialist revival, towards the achievement of which the ILP may still make an outstanding contribution.
In view of its ultimate failure, this ‘breakaway’ of the ILP from the Labour Party aroused much scornful criticism both at the time and subsequently. Actually, all that Maxton & Co did in 1932 was to claim for the ILP the political role for which it had been originally founded as ‘the Independent Labour Party’: ‘independent’, we repeat, not of the Labour Party, which did not exist yet in 1893 when the ILP was founded, but of the bourgeois Liberal and Tory Parties. Now in 1932, under Maxton as under Keir Hardie, the ILP again claimed to be the authentic political representative and mass party of the both British socialism and of the British workers, ‘independent’ of the Labour Party as well as of the orthodox bourgeois parties.
Nor was such a claim inherently absurd, as its Labour Party critics reiterated in chorus, any more than Keir Hardie’s claim had been absurd in 1893. Since the 1929 – 31 Labour administration of Ramsay MacDonald had finally betrayed the hopes of the workers, and its most important leaders MacDonald, Snowden and Thomas had actually gone over to the Tories, it was quite reasonable to expect that the British workers, or at least a good many of them, would turn towards the ILP, the more so since the ILP had not only done none of the these things, but had consistently forewarned the workers of the imminence of such a betrayal.
Unfortunately for Maxton and for his colleagues in the ILP, hard Caledonian logic is not the strong point of the British working class. The working class is a conservative class. It again proved this fact in 1931; since even when the workers’ own Labour Party blatantly betrayed them, the British workers remained too conservative to vote for the Conservatives  –  or for the ILP!
By so doing, they deprived the ILP of any chance of putting into effect its declared policy of ‘socialism in our time'; and incidentally they denied to James Maxton personally any chance of proving himself in the world historical role of a Scottish ‘Lenin’. Though perhaps Maxton was a genius perhaps unequal to the onerous task of leading the first authentic socialist government in Britain. Maxton had been in opposition too long to discharge such a role effectively; he was too much ‘agin’ the government probably to make a successful head of a government himself. It is true that he once wrote a book entitled If I Were a Dictator; but it is difficult to imagine ‘Jimmy’ Maxton as a successful dictator. Dictators pre-eminently require ruthlessness, and ‘Jimmy’ was the mildest of men who would not hurt the proverbial fly. It is difficult to imagine him declaring that ‘heads will roll’, still more ordering defaulting capitalists wholesale to the guillotine!
The final years of Maxton’s life were spent in the political wilderness. Naturally, he adorned this as he adorned all phases of his career with elegance and eloquence. He continued to lead the ILP up to his death in 1946 through all the chequered vicissitudes between Munich and the end of the Second World War. The ILP opposed the Second World War for fundamentally the same reasons that it had opposed the First World War: because fundamentally they regarded it as an imperialist war. Naturally they did not approve of Hitler. But they found it difficult to believe that a government led by Winston Churchill, that arch-reactionary who had fought every progressive cause in his lifetime, from England to India, could be relied upon to lead a democratic crusade. Hitler would never have actually come to power in the first place but for the active support of the Western capitalism, including Britain capitalism, and incidentally Winston Churchill, who publicly expressed the hope that if Britain ever found herself in a similar predicament to Germany in 1933, she would find a British ‘Hitler’ to lead her! Had the British Tory government intervened against Hitler when he first came into power in the early 1930s, they could have eliminated the Nazi menace without difficulty and probably even without bloodshed. Maxton’s own parliamentary speeches throughout the successive crises between Munich and the end of the Second World War were often gems of eloquence and of his own unique charm.
Last Years: James Maxton survived the war and lived long enough to witness the advent of the first majority government of the Labour Party, the Attlee administration, elected in July 1945 with an overwhelming majority. In one of his last parliamentary speeches, Maxton wished them more luck than their predecessors had enjoyed. Would we be wrong in detecting here a note of Swiftian irony, ‘that showed by one satiric touch, no party needed it so much'? Maxton did not live long enough to witness the rapid disintegration of the British Empire which began on the morrow of the Second World War with the independence of India in 1947. Had he survived to witness this epoch-making transformation, Maxton would have undoubtedly hailed with enthusiasm the liberation of India and subsequently of Britain’s Asiatic and African colonies. Ever since its foundation in 1893, the ILP had fought strenuously against imperialism in all its forms, and naturally, since ‘charity begins at home’, against the most powerful empire of the day: the British Empire. Maxton himself had fought for this objective for a generation.
James Maxton died on 23 July 1946, and a huge crowd turned out in Glasgow for the passing of the funeral cortege of a great man, a great Scot and a great socialist: a deserved tribute to a unique personality and a lifelong fighter for political, social and economic emancipation. In so doing, they also honoured the end of a great epoch, the ‘heroic’ age of British socialism, of which James Maxton was perhaps the last outstanding representative.
‘The Beloved Rebel’: In the foregoing pages, we have treated the career of James Maxton primarily as a political figure representing a particular epoch, and a special phase in the evolution of British socialism and the British labour movement. This is, at least in our submission, the only way in which a great man, and perhaps in particular a great socialist, can and ought to be treated by anyone who does not subscribe, as we certainly do not so subscribe, to what is sometimes termed ‘the great man theory of history’, as illustrated say by Maxton’s own countryman Thomas Carlyle. Unlike Carlyle, socialists do not interpret history as solely the work of an outstanding individual. But Maxton was also a major participant in the eventful political struggle that marked his era, that eventful era which marked the emergence of socialism as a world force, and, along with it, the dramatic appearance of a new class in universal history, the proletariat or the working class. ‘Jimmy’ Maxton’s powerful propaganda played no mean part in arousing the latent political consciousness of the working class and thus in introducing a new and dynamic force on to the stage of world history, in that century which has been so aptly referred to as ‘the century of the common man’.
It has been perhaps Maxton’s misfortune that his biographers have been so charmed by his personality and romantic appearance as generally to do much less than justice to his undoubted political importance in and for his age in general and in particular for the socialist movement. Even if we were to accept the harsh judgement  –  ascribed to one of Maxton’s political contemporaries, Lloyd George  –  to the effect that he was ‘an orator and nothing more’  –  presumably a free translation of ‘Vox et Preaterea Nihil’ [1]  –  yet it should not be forgotten that Maxton’s age was still the pre-television era of the spoken word, the rostrum and of the now often unjustly denigrated ‘soap-box'; as also that the socialist movement in Britain and elsewhere was still in the propaganda phase of its activity. In such an age, Maxton, that Prince of Propagandists, exercised a correspondingly great influence, one that stamped him as a creative force in moulding his contemporary historical progress. For we must not forget that criticism at the right time and place can also be a creative force. As an orator, as an acknowledged master of ‘the harlot of the arts’, it is difficult to compare ‘Jimmy’ Maxton to his contemporaries since his oratory was of such an intimately personal character, and was so inseparably bound up with, and depended upon, his striking personality and unique delivery. It was said of his countryman James Ramsay MacDonald that he had only to enter a room for everyone to turn around and look at him. The same could no doubt be said about Maxton. Not the least part of ‘Jimmy’ Maxton’s political as well as personal make-up lay in that extraordinary charm that endeared him to men of all parties, friend or foe alike; and that made him, despite the uncompromising character of his socialist opinion, the most popular and sought-after member of the House of Commons. His popularity vied with his eloquence.
To be sure, the descriptive phrase given to him by his official biographer John MacNair, ‘the beloved rebel’, adequately refers to this permanent constituent of an altogether unique character.
James Maxton was a highly intelligent man, widely read, and far from being merely the eloquent demagogue that he is sometime represented as being. All who took part in the discussions in which he participated were confirmed that he left little for his colleagues to add. Maxton was not, it is true, a particular original or profound thinker or scholar; and like most natural orators, did not display the same facility for the written as for the spoken word. Unlike his socialist contemporaries Lenin and Trotsky, Maxton cannot be said to have added anything of special significance to the vast corpus of socialist theory: to be sure, the primarily empirical and pragmatic British socialist movement, unlike its continental contemporaries, has never specialised in socialist theory, or even set much store by or paid much respect to the theoretical tradition. Maxton’s own perhaps most ambitious publication, his study of Lenin, was naturally interesting as the considered opinion of one famous socialist about another and still more famous one, but adds little to either our personal or political understanding of the great Russian revolutionary.
In any case, Lenin’s highly ideological approach to the entire problem of socialism and social evolution was quite foreign to Maxton’s own largely ethical and empirical approach. In general, as we have already noted, he, like the ILP, owed more to indigenous British socialist tradition, whether personified by William Morris in England or by Keir Hardie in Scotland.
The Conscience of the British Labour Movement: If, however, James Maxton was scarcely an intellectual giant, he was certainly a man of outstanding moral calibre: as the years wore on, they brought him fame, first national, then international in character. In his last years, ‘Jimmy’ Maxton was probably the most famous of living Scotsmen: in public estimation perhaps his only equal was that Scottish monarch of the music hall, Sir Harry Lauder. Though some critical minds, more perceptive to the more enduring values of the human condition, might rank Hugh MacDiarmid (CM Grieve) the greatest of Scottish poets since Burns himself, as Maxton’s superior in a permanent sense.
Sir Harry Lauder, perhaps Maxton’s best-known countryman and equally famous contemporary, used to adjure his audience with one of his most famous songs, ‘to keep right on to the end of the road’. James Maxton just did that. As one of his biographers has justly remarked, he ‘was the conscience of the British labour movement’. His personal genius was primarily moral, and he remained an incorruptible champion, the stern and unbending champion of socialism in his time. This most famous Scotsman was also the most modest in his personal relations, but remained adamant where and when the integrity of his socialist principles was concerned. To personal wealth and to ephemeral honours that appeal to a smaller man, he remained entirely indifferent, and presented to his contemporaries the face of one in whom, as with his predecessor Keir Hardie, the prophet always coexisted with the politician. James Maxton’s whole life was unswervingly devoted, not to personal aggrandisement, but to eventual attainment of the international cooperative commonwealth. Perhaps the finest as well as the fittest tribute that can be paid to James Maxton is that he lived consistently as the citizen of that commonwealth, a commonwealth still to seek. We are of the opinion that James Maxton also would have regarded this as the finest and fittest tribute that posterity could pay him.
III: British Socialism
In the foregoing pages we have sought to present the character and career of James Maxton, both as an important figure in the evolution of the British socialist movement and as in his personal character, the individual realisation of a citizen of the still future cooperative commonwealth. However, before terminating our assessment of the personal and political career of ‘Jimmy’ Maxton, there is still yet another additional factor to consider: the nature of the contribution made by Maxton and by the ILP under his leadership during the generation in which it was operative.
Continental and British Socialism: In approaching the problem raised by the initial appearance and growth of socialism in this island, one has to note in the first instance the sharp distinction between the contemporary growth of socialism upon the European continent and that which evolved more or less spontaneously in Great Britain. Upon the European continent, socialism, and this applies particularly to the German socialism, was primarily a highly theoretical and abstract affair that stemmed directly from the teachings of the individual master endowed with the special talent for social investigation and its discussion. British socialism, contrarily, stemmed primarily from the practical reactions of the British workers to the remorseless exploitation to which the individual industrial workers were subjected. A class drawn at the time of the industrial revolution from the expropriated peasantry of the medieval times. In its nineteenth-century heyday, British capitalism indulged in ruthless repression, and the labour movement arose directly out of this repression and was but little affected by abstract theory. Continental socialism, contrarily, can be neatly assorted under conventional labels derived from the names and teachings of exponents of socialism, facile princepes [2] of course, Karl Marx. In the nineteenth century, by such men as Proudhon, Blanqui, Bakunin, Kropotkin; in our own age, Lenin, Stalin, Trotsky, Mao Tse Tung, Che Guevara. All these various continental socialist schools, both past and present, were highly abstract and theoretical in their approach; and were consequently marked by strong insistence upon doctrinal purity and equally by sharp divergence in their positive assessment of the nature of the coming socialist society. All, however, were marked by a firm conviction that socialism was something capable of being precisely defined. All of them also were marked by deep respect for the intellectual tradition of the socialist theory; a trait particularly notable in the various schools often at loggerheads with each other that professed to derive from Karl Marx.
Origin of British Socialism: Nothing similar to this is to be found in the course of the evolution of British socialism, at least as a mass movement. Since here there are no quasi-inspired masters, no canonical socialist scriptures like Das Kapital (1867) or The Communist Manifesto (1848), despite the rather ironic fact that both these epoch-making works were actually written in Britain. Perhaps still more ironically, though Karl Marx spent most of his working life in the library of the British Museum, yet there is probably no other advanced industrial land where the ideas of the brilliant author of Das Kapital have had so little influence as in Britain. In point of fact, socialist theory in Britain has been generally conspicuous by its absence! That weighty saying of Lenin, re-echoed in all continental socialist schools, ‘without socialist theory there can be no socialist practice’, strikes no echo in British socialist tradition. Here pragmatism and a purely empirical approach represents the virtually unvarying rule. While as for theory, the British approach, in socialism as elsewhere, is aptly and accurately summarised in that typically British proverb, ‘an ounce of practice is worth a ton of theory’. Incidentally, a most un-Marxist remark calculated to make the great theoretical master of continental socialism turn over sharply in his Highgate tomb.
It is no accident that the most influential ‘theory’ in the modern British labour movement is the unformulated but nonetheless effective contention of the Fabian Society: their confident assertion that the only valid theory for the British labour movement is that all theory is irrelevant, if not completely useless.
When construed in its original sense, socialism in Britain is pre-industrial in its origin. As a German historian, Edward Bernstein, first effectively demonstrated, it actually originated in what would nowadays be termed the ‘left-wing’ religious sects in Cromwell’s army during the English Civil War in the mid-seventeenth century. That spectacular military event was also a bona-fide social revolution, a predominantly bourgeois revolution against feudalism, clericalism and absolute monarchy. This revolution threw up the ‘left wing’ in the course of its political advocacy, of ‘the Levellers’ and ‘the Diggers’, and in the egalitarian theory of Gerard Winstanley. For Winstanley’s brand of utopian socialism may perhaps be best described as advocating a species of agrarian socialism in a still predominantly agricultural England. In this restricted sense of the term, Winstanley may perhaps be described as the first English socialist.
But the Stuart Restoration in 1660 and the completion of the bourgeois revolution in 1689 put a stop to this idealistic evolution. In England, radicalism lay dormant until the end of the eighteenth century, when the French Revolution produced fresh social upheavals. This wave of unrest culminated in the Chartist movement (1837 – 50). Chartism marked the first mass labour movement anywhere during the capitalist epoch. It was during this period, incidentally, that the descriptive term ‘socialist’ first made its appearance. However, as a political theory, the advocacy of socialism was mainly confined to Karl Marx and his fellow continental refugees after the failure of the European revolution of 1848. It was not until the 1880s that the continental socialism became acclimatised upon the British soil. The birth of James Maxton in 1885 was almost contemporary with the dawn of a new era in British politics: ‘the century of the common man’ was just round the corner.
Socialism and the British Labour Movement: The 1880s that witnessed both the death of Karl Marx and the birth of James Maxton (1883 and 1885) saw, as already noted, the birth also of many usually [3] labour groups, notably the SDF (Social Democratic Federation), founded by HM Hyndman; the SLP (Socialist Labour Party), founded by the American Marxist Daniel De Leon, a still more rigidly Marxist group; and, most rigid of all, the still existing SPGB (Socialist Party of Great Britain). As also the non-Marxist: the Fabian Society (1884), presently to be followed by the ILP (Independent Labour Party) in 1893. As also noted, the ILP marked the first, though ultimately unsuccessful, attempt to create a mass Labour Party ‘independent’ of the bourgeois Tory and Liberal Parties who then alternatively held the monopoly of the ‘corridors of power’ in the British Parliament and state. However, the explicitly socialist programme of the ILP, defined as ‘the socialisation of the means of production, distribution and exchange’  –  that is, of land and capital, and consequent total expropriation of the owners of land and capital  –  was too advanced for the non-socialist working class at the turn of this century. Their concrete aspirations took a practical shape, the ‘Labour Representative Committee’ (1900), destined to form the eventual nucleus of the modern Labour Party. The Parliamentary Labour Party was subsequently created in 1906 on the morrow of the sweeping Liberal victory at the general election of that year. The Labour Party then made its modest entry into politics as an auxiliary of the Liberal Party and government.
Labour Versus Socialism: Down to 1918, as noted above, the Labour Party was a purely federal organisation without individual membership. It consisted of affiliated trade unions and of a number of affiliated autonomous left-wing groups, of which the ILP and the Fabian Society were the most important. The Marxist SDF held aloof, and eventually became the most implacable critic of the reformist Labour Party: a role in which they have been followed, and even surpassed, by their successors, the even more rigid SPGB, founded as a breakaway from the SDF in 1904, the ‘Plymouth Brethren’, as they have been aptly described, of the British labour movement. Since the formation of the Labour Party in 1906, a continuous war of attrition has been in invisible but effective progress within the heterogeneous ranks of the Labour Party between what we may perhaps term its ‘socialist’ and ‘labour’ constituents. Broadly speaking, the socialist ILP versus the more or less explicitly non-socialist trade unions, both bodies simultaneously affiliated to the Labour Party. Again speaking in general terms, the ILP stood for the entirely collectivist social order, but one which (unlike the later Communist Parties after the Russian Revolution of 1917) was to be run on democratic lines, since the ‘one-party state’ was a later discovery of the Bolsheviks, or perhaps the result of purely local Russian circumstances. But at any rate it never formed any part of ILP political philosophy.
Conversely, the trade unions were reformist by their very nature as an economic bargaining organisation competitive under capitalism, besides being mostly non-socialist. Their individual membership had but little desire for a complete socialist takeover by the working class. Their more modest ambitions were confined to a continual demand for social reforms leading to eventual social security, to be paid for ultimately by the capitalists out of their surplus profits, thus leaving the foundations of capitalism intact.
Lenin on Trade Unionism: This trade-union mental attitude, not only in Britain but universally, was trenchantly defined by Lenin during his period, when that master realist noted that the trade-union mentality is only concerned with day-to-day struggles; whereas to become a bona fide socialist, some species of philosophy with regard to society as a whole is a primary necessity. Nowhere, we add, was this dictum of the great Russian socialist more relevant than in Britain! From 1900, the date of the Labour Representation Committee, to 1932, when the ILP finally disaffiliated from the Labour Party, a continual struggle for existence and for political supremacy within the federal ranks of the Labour Party raged between these two rival and obviously incompatible conceptions of the role and destiny of the British labour movement. When in 1918, towards the end of the First World War, the Labour Party established individual membership, the ILP as an affiliated party really became superfluous.
The Rejoicing Third: At the time, as usually happens, the ultimate issues did not appear at all clear to the actual participants in the struggle. Particularly since the Labour Party as a whole, however reformist in practice, still continues to describe itself as a socialist party. However, from the formation of the first Labour government under Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, down to the present regime of Harold Wilson in 1970, the Labour Party has moved steadily to the right. Or more accurately to the right-centre. In the generation-long conflict for the ‘soul’ of the Labour Party between the socialist ILP and other affiliated socialists, and the reformist trade unions, the final victory lay with the ‘centrist’ Fabian Society; socialist in name but reformist in substance. Today in 1970, the Labour government, and Britain under its guidance, is moving with ever accelerating speed towards that sub-species of ‘planned’ state capitalism that the Fabians have always passed off as genuine socialism. The Fabian Britain of today is coming more and more to look like a state-capitalist regime, equally remote alike from the idealistic socialism of the ILP and from the ‘free’ bargaining of the trade unions. In fact, perhaps the most conspicuous feature of the present-day Labour Party is that it is apparently breaking away definitely from its trade-union origins. Since state capitalism of the Fabian type has equally little use either for egalitarian socialism as represented in the past pre-eminently in Britain by the ILP, or for the ‘free’ bargaining, undeterred by government restraint, traditional in the trade-union movement. In a technocracy, such as Britain is fast becoming, there is no place for equality, while the present ‘Labour’ version of the ‘corporate state’ has equally no time or place either for ‘free’ bargaining or for trade-union movements independent of the state. The near head-on clash between the Labour government under Harold Wilson and Barbara Castle and the trade-union movement appears to indicate the end of the historical trade-union movement and perhaps, eventually, of the Labour Party itself.
A Balance Sheet: When we look back in retrospect over the political and economic evolution of the British labour movement since its recognisable beginnings in the 1880s, it becomes possible, so to speak, to draw up an objective balance sheet of its activities. By and large, the Labour Party can be pronounced to have been a highly successful reformist party, but a complete failure as a revolutionary movement aiming ultimately at the creation of an essentially new and higher social system than is competitive capitalism: the egalitarian cooperative commonwealth as envisaged by the great nineteenth-century British socialists from Robert Owen to William Morris. From the purely reformist standpoint, no one at all acquainted with what ‘the good old times’ were really like for the mass of the British people in the heyday of capitalism could possibly deny that the present regime, with its social services and its ‘welfare’ state, is vastly superior. Since no one in their senses could deny that the mass of the British people, the working class, is vastly more comfortable materially and socially secure than it was in, say, the heyday of Victorian capitalism and of the old British Empire ‘upon which the Sun never set’, ‘and in which wages never rose’, an England so luridly described by Jack London in his People of the Abyss.
In sociology as in elsewhere, values are comparative. As and when judged by such a standard, the Labour Britain in 1970 is undoubtedly superior to, say, the Victorian laissez-faire capitalism in 1870 when, as Fredrick Engels phrased it, ‘the Darwinian struggle for existence was transferred from nature to society with redoubled violence. Whosoever falls is remorselessly cast aside.’
But while this is incontestable so, it still remains true that the reforms for which the labour movement is mainly responsible are reforms in degree and not in kind: the cooperative commonwealth is still to seek, and international socialism seems very much at a discount at the present moment. Summarised briefly, an objective and thorough balance-sheet of the British labour movement throughout the past century impels us to the conclusion that the success of the labour movement as a reforming movement is in directly inverse proportion to its equally undoubted failure as a socialist movement. That is, as a movement aiming at universally egalitarian socialism, at the classless new social order, radically different from any form of class society, and one that aims to ‘cast the kingdoms old into another mould’. Here, the contrast is sharp and complete.
Towards a Socialist Revival: Under the concrete circumstances which confront us today, it is clear that while ‘we are all socialist now’ in the reformist sense of the term, yet notwithstanding this free egalitarian socialism in its old integral sense is still to seek. Since such an idealistic and classless social order without rich or poor is as foreign to the current Fabian technocracy as it was to the jungle society of Victorian capitalism. Socialism, the cooperative commonwealth, is still round the corner, as far as the Western world including Britain is concerned. How far such an ideal conception has actually been realised already in the self-styled ‘communist’ East; and if so, how far such a social order, conceived under conditions that were often radically different from those that existed in the industrial West, can serve as a practical working model for Western socialism is a moot point that lies outside the compass of this small work.
Real socialism implies not only action, but equally thought. Without socialist theory, and without ultimately a socialist movement to embody that theory and to translate it into effective action, there never will be an integrated international socialist society, as imagined, for example, scientifically in the Communist Manifesto and imaginatively in William Morris’ News From Nowhere. A society that includes economic democracy, without which political democracy is merely a convenient fig-leaf for the rule of money. Since as Anatole France once so aptly remarked about bourgeois democracy, ‘in all countries, money rules, but in democracy nothing else does’. Today Britain stands at the social crossroads; the old labour movement has ended in a Fabian blind alley; the times surely seem ripe for a socialist revival. For the revival of the march towards the ideal, towards to the international cooperative commonwealth.
The Relevance of James Maxton: Under the circumstances suggested above, there is surely no more need to apologise for the appearance of this small work celebrating the past phase in the evolution of the socialist movement and an individual Scottish socialist now dead these twenty-odd years, who was perhaps its most brilliant and certainly its most colourful embodiment. We stand today upon the threshold of a new era; as well, or so hope, of a new socialist movement that will take up again, and at a higher point in social evolution, that legacy of which in Great Britain James Maxton and the ILP represented the most vigorous and consistent manifestation. It is, we believe, in no way irrelevant to recall today by the now historic memory of a man and of a movement of the past generation; since ‘Jimmy’ Maxton and his heroic band of ILP pioneers were never more relevant than today, or will be, we may surely hope, for the coming generation. A generation that may well embody a triumphant resumption of the historic march towards the socialist commonwealth.
Unlike his continental predecessors Marx and Kropotkin, Maxton was no theorist. But he was the most integrated as well as perhaps the most influential socialist of his era. In his own day and generation, he and the movement that he led represented the ideal perhaps better than any contemporary man or institution. In devoting this small work to the name and fame of this man and movement, we do so accordingly not only as an historic epoch already passed, but as a guide to the future, and as a forecast for the eventual attainment of the socialist idea.
Postscript
At the time that this small work goes to press, its fundamental thesis is sharply underlined by the recent defeat of the Labour Party in the general election. A former member of Mr Wilson’s outgoing government has stated: ‘Labour lost the election because it had become the party of status quo and had lost its initial vision.’
At such a time the left urgently requires a new ideal and a new dynamic. Such an ideal can only be provided by the revival of idealistic socialism.
The Labour Party must realise in future that it is a labour movement and must make it clear by words and action to its potential supporters that, if and when returned to power, it will not again merely administer capitalism and pursue policies which have their roots ultimately in Tory philosophy.
Notes
1. Vox et Preaterea Nihil  –  A voice and nothing more  –  MIA.
2. Facile princepes  –  Easily the first  –  MIA. 
3. The text is completely garbled at this point; judging by some subsequent comments, it is possible that the authors were referring to the sectarian and doctrinaire nature of the left-wing groups which they are introducing.
 


F A Ridley Archive




m, History and a Fourth Internationa by FA Ridley 1932


FA Ridley 1932
Marxism, History and a Fourth International
Source: The Adelphi, May 1932. Prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
It seems to be true that periods of culture-time do not, as a rule, coincide with time as measured by the calendar. The sixteenth century died with Shakespeare, not with the year 1600. The eighteenth century ended in 1789, not in 1800. The ‘Victorian’ age did not commence its smug and prosperous course until the ‘hungry forties’ had come and gone.
Similarly the twentieth century did not begin in 1900. The ‘Edwardians’ were hybrids, and, subconsciously, knew themselves to be such. The nineteenth century ended in 1914, with the gunpowder plot which slew Victorian optimism; and, as the optimism was immense, it took an immense amount of gunpowder to slay it.
The twentieth century is only just beginning now, and its problems are only beginning to be apparent. Very few people live in their own century, and the twentieth century in this respect is no exception. It is beginning to dawn on a few of the most intelligent people what the problems of the twentieth century are. The rest, the ruck of mankind, the ‘enlightened democracy’ as they call themselves, the ‘sheep and beasts of the field’ (as a cynical Jesuit once described them) are still scattered down the ages from the Stone Age upward! The twentieth century is just beginning its course.
What is the essential problem of the twentieth century? That of the sixteenth century was the creation of the world market and the capitalist culture based upon it (an essentially new birth which fondly imagined itself to be a rebirth, a Renaissance). That of the seventeenth was to lay the foundations of modern science and the inductive method based upon it, by means of technical inventions such as the telescope and the microscope, and the writings of such men as Galileo, Bacon, Campanella, Descartes and Newton. The eighteenth century saw the victory of toleration, the ideological counterpart of free trade in economics, and democracy in politics. Its representative men were the type of Voltaire, Rousseau and Adam Smith.
The nineteenth century solved successfully the vast problem of power production, and with partial success that of popular education. It gave man the mastery of nature and attempted to make him the master of himself, that is, of society. Its ‘culture heroes’ were Darwin and Karl Marx, but as science is less individual and more collective in its achievements than art, literature and philosophy, it was an age whose real creator was the unknown inventor, the most revolutionary figure in human history.
The twentieth century is not an isolated period. It is not an emanation from the skies. It mounts on the shoulders of its predecessors and carries on its work from the point at which they left off, and with the materials that they provided. The problem of the nineteenth century was, we repeat, to create ‘mastery of nature’, of the production of inanimate power, of the raw materials (so to speak) of human emancipation from the age-long thraldom of the struggle for existence.
The problem of the twentieth century is to recreate the social world in accordance with the new material world which science and technical mastery have created.
The epoch-making voyages of Columbus and Diaz, Da Gama and Magellan, at the end of the fifteenth century, created (or rather discovered) a New World unknown to earlier ages. The succeeding centuries slowly and painfully liquidated their obsolete political and economic arrangements and eventually clambered into congruity with the New World civilisation which had become inevitable. In consequence, the Mediterranean empires of Antiquity, ‘world empires’ only in name, were succeeded by world empires that really deserved the name.
The problem of the twentieth century is to liquidate the social and political systems which were the inevitable consequence of the age of ‘scarcity’ and economic subservience to blind natural forces; and to create a regime of human freedom based on economic mastery and a super-abundance of material wealth, the change constituting what Engels described pithily as ‘the leap from the realm of necessity to that of freedom’.
This change constitutes the most gigantic revolution since the appearance of man upon the earth. It means nothing else than the freeing of human society from the bondage to nature expressed in the struggle for existence, which has made the life of the masses in every age fundamentally identical with that of the brute creation.
This is the gigantic task which the twentieth century must solve under pain of social chaos and possible extinction in war, and it must solve it quickly, in accordance with the Kantian law of progress, by which the epochs get progressively shorter as they mount in the cultural ladder. If slavery and the civilisation based upon it took millennia and capitalist civilisation centuries for their creation, the achievement of socialist civilisation must only take decades, and it will, probably, be a matter of years for the still higher anarchist – communist culture that is yet to come.
This stupendous act of emancipation is now beginning to press with irresistible urgency under the pressure of the monstrous and growing contradictions between the scientific forces that are mastering nature on an ever-growing scale, and the pre-scientific politics and economics of the Stone Age that human conservatism still preserves. That we are living in the past is becoming increasingly obvious.
The twentieth century, under the lash of necessity, is just beginning its revolt against the ‘dead hand’ of the nineteenth. It is not merely a case of ‘doddering old men’ and superannuated politicians, as the superficial criticism of Sir Oswald Mosley and his Noah’s Ark of (political) Bright Young Things would have us believe.
No. The old men are merely the reflex of the old ideas, and these, in their turn, do but reflect the superannuated and pre-scientific institutions built by the men of old before the scientific flood which our inertia and timidity allows us to preserve. It is not a Westminster Comedy that we witness! It is something far deeper and more fundamental. It is the clash between two worlds.
It cannot be denied that this domination of the new by the old reflects itself also in the labour movement; this is so internationally; and very especially so in Great Britain. Just as the British ruling class has always prided itself on its uncanny faculty for ‘blundering through’, so the British labour movement has been insular and narrow in its outlook; it has derided the scientific method and has scoffed at social science as utopian and only fit for armchair philosophers.
While patronisingly adopting the name ‘socialism’, its ‘socialism’ has been in practice merely a demand for an increased share in the super-profit wrung by imperialism from Africa and the Eastern countries.
The politics of ‘socialism’ have, in practice, been merely the cast-off clothes of liberalism, and its jingoistic insularity forbade as blasphemous any suggestion that British capitalism would not always be able to grant reforms or might cease to dominate the world market and pay big wages in the West because it was paying small ones in the East!
The events of the last few years have shown that that time has now come. Whatever may be the length of time during which world capitalism is destined to survive, no realistic observer can deny that in addition to the fundamental disharmony between capitalism and civilisation, the position of the British economy in the competitive world market must get smaller and smaller. As Britain soared the highest so she must now fall the heaviest! The special advantages that gave her the world monopoly in the past have now gone for ever. But this fact is still veiled from the vast majority whom tradition has blinded to fact.
These two causes  –  the decline of world capitalist civilisation and the decline of Britain  –  are separate causes, and should not be confused. But they are both operative in this country. That is why the problem of social revolution is for Britain the most urgent of all problems; and especially (though not exclusively) for Britain. It is this fact that makes the situation tragic and the anti-revolutionary Labour Party an obsolete comedy ‘signifying nothing’.
At the moment we are, consequently, between two epochs. The epoch of reform is dead. That of revolution is yet to be born. Whilst the socialist objective is not a political but a social and cultural revolution, the era of politics is not yet closed, and social revolution can only pass through the floodgates of political revolution. Human poverty has given us a series of class civilisations in which civilisation and all its products were the exclusive fruits of a ruling minority. These minority civilisations were historically justifiable as the only alternative possible, not as sentimentalists imagine, to a human civilisation, but to barbarism.
Civilisation is the fruit of the human surplus wealth. Where such a surplus was only partial, only a partial civilisation was possible. That is, a civilisation for the minority and the slavery of the majority was the necessary alternative to the barbarism of majority and minority alike. ‘Justice’, said Lenin, ‘cannot be in advance of the economic conditions.’
But politics is the necessary expression of a class-ruled society. It is the means by which the ruling class dispossesses its rivals, and rivets its yoke on the subject masses. A political revolution is necessary because politics is the continuation of economics by other means, as ‘war is the continuation of politics by other means’. By a similar logic revolution is the continuation (or rather creation) of the politics of an oppressed class by ‘other means’, which are also generally, though not invariably, violent.
The revolutionary movement in Western Europe, including Great Britain, still awaits its scientific formulation. While Marxism and Leninism command their millions of adherents, these dialectical philosophies of revolution, born of the scientific method and particular historical experiences, are becoming increasingly sterile.
As a contemporary has wittily expressed it: ‘The proletariat is armed with two weapons  –  the social democracy, a gun that refuses to go off, and the Third International, a gun that fires blank cartridges.’
It is our submission that revolutionary socialism can only proceed on Marxian lines, but that in fact neither the Second nor the Third Internationals are really Marxian at all. They have degenerated into cast iron dogmas based upon a one-sided and largely obsolete experience.
It is our contention that dialectics must be rescued from the dialecticians! It must be recognised that much truth was contained in the aphorism of G Sorel that ‘the worst day in the life of Marx was the day on which he fell into the hands of the Marxists’. Dogma must wait on history: not history on dogma. Marxism was made for man: not man for Marxism (cf G Sorel, Reflections on Violence).
The ‘Marxism’ of the Second and Third Internationals is based not on history, but on particular historical moments, and it is a fundamental truth of dialectics, and therefore of Marxism, that history never repeats itself exactly.
We must prevent the creation of a new Catholic dogma. And, indeed, the hostility of the Roman Catholic Church towards the Third International is fully understandable, since these are the only two dogmatic religions left in the Western world, and competition for souls is always the most ferocious form of competition!
The ‘socialism’ of the Second International was a trade-union, a parliamentary socialism; it was based on an ascending capitalism, and it was able to multiply its reforms out of the spoils of ascending imperialism, with which it accordingly identified itself in 1914, and in other crises. It had got so many crumbs from the rich man’s table that it believed that with sufficient pertinacity it might get the whole loaf! It never understood that a social system only concedes non-essentials.
It believed, moreover, that it had plenty of time in which to effect its changes. It did not foresee that imperialism might be compelled to make a catastrophic turn to the rear. Its prophet really was not Marx, but Tennyson, since it believed in ‘broadening down from precedent to precedent’. This coloured its whole outlook. It is noteworthy that its British section (the Labour Party) moved the derision even of conservatives by its timid refusal to innovate on sacrosanct parliamentary tradition. The Second International is now a cemetery. The social democratic leaders are the most useless of all God’s creatures, besides being the dullest. For them to call capitalists parasites is a joke, and a bad one at that. Professional reformers who cannot reform! Professional bargainers whose basis for bargaining has gone! The ideas that suited a rising capitalism able to grant reforms are useless in the period of its decline. In any case, social democracy was never Marxian or revolutionary in anything but name. It is the pathetic ghost of a dead era.
The case of the Third International is more complicated. Lenin was a great creative artist who intended to save the world, but was compelled to confine his attentions to saving Russia. Here lies the contradiction in Leninism. Lenin was essentially an internationalist who made a masterly adaptation of Marxism to the medieval soil of Russia. This adaptation was only intended as a temporary makeshift until the proximate victory of the world revolution, then believed to be imminent. But history confined the experiment to Russia: that is, to a country totally different from any country that Marx (or, originally, Lenin himself) had in mind as a suitable basis for a socialist revolution. An agricultural country, a feudal or (in parts) nomadic country, one in which the twin pillars of Marxian socialism, namely, big-scale production and a numerous and developed proletariat, were almost entirely lacking. A country where on Marxian principles, socialism could not develop for the simple and excellent reason that capitalism had not developed first; and to the Marxist, socialism develops not as an idea, but as the necessary result of the concrete experience of the working class as a consequence of the contradictions in capitalism.
The last few years have seen the triumph of Russian national reconstruction (represented by Stalin) over the adherents of the old Marxian doctrine of international revolution (led by Trotsky). We now have the grotesque spectacle of an ‘International’ pursuing an increasingly nationalist policy, and subordinating its own socialist revolution not (as the Communist mythology has it) to enable Russia to build up socialism, but to effect that primary industrial revolution (with elementary education, etc), which the Western European and American countries accomplished in the first half of the nineteenth century. This is leading from the rear with a vengeance! The real master of the Communist International is neither Marx nor Lenin, but that Gilbertian hero, the Duke of Plaza-Toro, who led his army from behind!
To conclude. It is clear that neither in the Second nor the Third Internationals is salvation to be found. What is wanted today is one who will do for the ideas of Lenin what that great man did for the ideas of his great master, Marx, that is, adapt them to changed conditions. The past is past, the revolution remains to be achieved and the historical process does not stand still.
If the Second and Third Internationals have failed, it remains to discard fetish worship, the idolatry of the instrument, and create a Fourth International, more attuned to the needs of our place and time.
To outline its content here would be impossible, but it may be finally remarked that history does not know the ‘pure’ doctrine of revolution by a single class. The peasantry under Wat Tyler failed. The working class in the Paris Commune failed. But in 1789 the Jacobin bourgeoisie in unison with the landless peasantry triumphed. In 1917 the Bolsheviks led the workers to victory only in alliance with the land-hungry peasants.
Today a new class is being created before our eyes, the disinherited middle class, educated, disciplined and beginning to be conscious of the fact that it is faced with the immediate choice between organising for revolution or of facing extinction as a socially unnecessary class with no future under monopoly capitalism; a class, moreover, which, unlike the children of the gutter, knows that life can be worth living, and that it can be worth fighting for.
All the signs point, in the opinion of the writer, to the emergence of a Fourth International, as a result of the union of this class with the working class properly so-called. Utopian socialism developed from a split in the Jacobin ranks. Marxism arose, philosophically, from a split in the school of Hegel, and politically from the radical wing of the German middle class. So it seems that the European revolution will be achieved by a Fourth International arising from a split in the middle class and its fusion with the proletariat.
 


FA Ridley Archive




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter IX: The Death of Spartacus – And the Appian Way
The final act in the tremendous drama represented by the Servile War had now opened. It was a fight to the finish between Spartacus and Crassus, between Rome and the revolution. The campaign that raged through the early months of 71 BC was swift, bloody and ruthless. If it ended in the victory of Rome, this was at least as much due to the endemic insubordination characteristic of a slave army composed of many peoples as it was to the military power of the Roman war machine. Even from our extant fragmentary accounts, it is clear that Spartacus displayed throughout military genius of the highest order, coupled with that personal magnanimity in coming to the aid even of deserters, that we have already noted in the case of Crixus. Spartacus’ final campaign, his ‘1814’ so to speak, was as brilliant as was Napoleon’s swan-song. If, like Napoleon’s, it was a barren masterpiece that ended in final disaster, that also was due to circumstances that lay in the nature of the times.
So far as we can compute, the first intention of Spartacus in marching north after escaping from the Roman cage in the opening days of 71 BC was to attempt to reach Sicily by a more circuitous route. He intended to march on the great Adriatic port of Brundusium (Brindisi) and, seizing the shipping in its harbour, sail thence to Sicily, and there, from his island stronghold, to wage permanent war against Rome. But this strategically sound plan was frustrated by the arrival of the Governor of Macedonia, Marcus Lucullus, with his army, in obedience to the orders of the Senate. Cut off from the sea by Lucullus, and without siege artillery wherewith to force walled towns, Spartacus and the slaves had now no option but to turn at bay, and, if possible, defeat the pursuing army of Crassus before it could effect a junction with either Lucullus or the formidable Pompey, now on his way from Spain with his veteran legions.
At this precise moment of extreme danger, when it was ‘make or break’ for the slaves, another breakaway took place in their army which destroyed any chance that Spartacus might still have had of defeating the Romans. The causes of this fatal split were similar to those which earlier on had characterised the breakaway of Crixus and Oenomaus: that is, jealousy of the superior personality of Spartacus and an overwhelming desire for aimless and indiscriminate plunder. Jealousy was a vice endemic amongst slaves, whose masters habitually played them off against each other. It is a vice not unknown in the modern trade-union and socialist movements – a vice combined with vanity and ambition. The British ‘Establishment’ know as well how to play up to a Jimmy Thomas and Ramsay MacDonald as the Roman Senate and People knew how to set their slaves against each other.
Under two Gauls, Castus and Gannicus, the Celts and Germans who had survived the massacre on Mount Garganus formed a separate camp from that of Spartacus and went off plundering on their own, carrying with them the captured eagles and consular insignia which Spartacus had taken during his earlier victories.
Consequently, when Crassus came up from the south, he confronted two separate and uncoordinated armies. Eager to finish off the war before his dreaded rival Pompey returned from Spain, Crassus utilised to the full the old adage to which his countrymen owed so much: Divide and Rule. Crassus concentrated on the Gauls as his obvious prey and surprised their camp by a forced march, whilst they were encamped near the Lucanian Lake in the course of a plundering raid. The Roman superiority in numbers and equipment was too much for the brave but undisciplined Gauls, and Castus, Gannicus and their men would have shared the fate of their predecessors Crixus and Oenomaus, had not Spartacus come to their rescue and arrived on the scene just in time. With the magnanimity of a political genius, who knew that the cause of social freedom was something to which they should all be dedicated and united, in spite of differences of opinion and method, Spartacus had hurried to the assistance of the deserters. A rapid forced march and a masterly tactical manoeuvre outflanked the attacking Romans, and Crassus perforce beat a hasty retreat to escape total destruction.
Unfortunately, Castus and Gannicus seemed to lack the good sense to profit by the lesson of the battle at the Lucanian Lake. Undeterred by their narrow escape from complete destruction, the Gauls again pitched their camp separately from that of their saviour, Spartacus. We may charitably assume that shortage of food was a factor which compelled the slave army to resort to these suicidal divisions in the face of the enemy. At any rate, whether due to this reason or to sheer ‘cussedness’ on the part of the Gauls, they soon learnt by bitter experience the truth of that profound epigram of the British politician Lord Melbourne: ‘Let us, at all costs, hang together, gentlemen. Otherwise, we shall hang separately.’
For Crassus, who had every reason a man could have for wanting to finish the war quickly, soon tried again. This time he demonstrated considerable military skill. His cavalry made a feint against the camp of Spartacus, which kept the Thracian busy. Meanwhile, Crassus, with his infantry, made a lightning dash with the object of surprising the Gauls. He would undoubtedly have succeeded had not the Gauls, who were carelessly camped by the River Silarus, been roused by two women who had risen earlier to offer sacrifice to the gods for the safety of their army, and caught sight of the advancing Romans. As it was, the Gauls had just time to form in battle order before the Roman legions were upon them.
The resulting battle of the Silarus was desperate to the point of extermination, and it ended in the literal annihilation of the army of Castus and Gannicus. When the battle ended the whole Celtic army, 10,200 in all, lay dead in serried unbroken ranks: only two, out of all this host, having attempted to fly and been cut down from behind!
This time there was no Spartacus to save them at the last moment. The Roman losses were, no doubt, proportionately heavy, but their victory was overwhelming from a tactical standpoint. Moreover, the prestige and self-respect of the imperial race were enormously gratified by the recapture of the five legionary eagles and the consular insignia taken by the slaves after the rout of the consuls in the Apennines.
The end of the Servile War was in sight. The strategic position of Spartacus was now desperate. Faced by the numerically superior army of Crassus, cut off from the sea by Lucullus, and with the formidable Spanish army of Pompey coming by forced marches to Rome, Spartacus retired into the hilly country of Calabria to prolong the now hopeless struggle by guerrilla warfare. Crassus followed him eagerly, sending on his subordinate Scrofas with an advance guard to harass and delay his movements and, if possible, bring him to battle before Pompey and Lucullus arrived to share his glory as the conqueror of the most terrible servile insurrection in classical history.
The Thracian lion, however, was not yet trapped, and had a last spring left. The Roman advance guard, which hung on the rear of the retreating slave army, became too impatient. It came closer and closer. Finally, it came too close, and the lion turned – and leapt! The Romans marched into an ambush, from which the survivors barely rescued their wounded leader, bearing whom they fled precipitately to the camp of Crassus. Spartacus was invincible! Single-handed, Crassus could not finish him off. Reluctantly he prepared to retreat and await reinforcement by the armies of Pompey and Lucullus before making his final effort.
The victorious ambuscade was, however, the last victory that Spartacus was destined to enjoy before the curtain finally fell on the slave revolution. A tactical success, it proved to be, ultimately, a strategic disaster. For the slaves, flushed with victory and, presumably, desperate for lack of food and shelter, clamoured for battle. Was not Spartacus invincible? And was not vengeance due for the overthrow of the Gauls at the hand of Crassus?
Spartacus appears to have stood out against this suicidal clamour. The odds were now too unequal. But the slaves continued to clamour. In any case, there was nothing else but a slow war of exhaustion, with the odds ultimately weighed overwhelmingly against the slaves. Only an act of supreme genius could save them. But this had also been the case in Rhegium and the Apennines, and, in both cases, Spartacus had wrought the necessary masterstroke which had saved an apparently lost army. Might he not do it yet again? Was not Rome on her last legs? Surely this was irrefutably demonstrated by her despairing recall of her frontier armies. One more victory and the tyrant of the world was down! Anyway, better a last despairing risk with faces to the foe than the slow, inglorious man-hunt which was now the sole alternative to giving battle, with the lash and the cross at its inevitable end.
So, no doubt, reasoned the slaves, and, if so, their reasoning was sound. It was do or die. Spartacus, too, may have come to agree with his battle-drunk followers. There seemed nothing else to do except to tempt Providence in a final fling. Anyhow, Spartacus had no official authority over the slaves, nor could he stand against their wishes. He was, after all, only general by election and because of his proven merits. If his army must fight, fight it should!
The final battle of the Servile War, which ended the insurrection of the slaves and which witnessed the death of Spartacus and the destruction of his army, took place near Petelia (near Strongoli in Calabria), in the early spring of 71 BC, perhaps some time in March. We do not know the exact date, but games were celebrated in Capua, where the revolt had originally started, in honour of its suppression, on 1 April of that year.
The battle itself seems to have been unpremeditated by either army and to have been due to the reckless impetuosity of the advance-guard of the slaves, who made a sudden attack on the Roman army as it was striking camp for the day’s march. Crassus, eager to end the war, accepted battle, and Spartacus, finding his vanguard heavily engaged without his orders, had either to leave them to their fate, single-handed, against the whole Roman army, or to accept a general engagement. The gladiator-general took the latter course and advanced his whole line.
Before battle was finally joined, Spartacus made a spectacular gesture that showed his realisation that all was at stake and displayed to his men his determination to conquer or die. Before ordering the attack, he dismounted from his horse and cut its throat before the whole army. After which he made a brief speech, as was customary in classical armies before engaging the enemy: ‘If we conquer’, he said, ‘we shall have all the horses we desire; if we lose, we shall not need them.’ With these words, Spartacus, on foot, placed himself at the head of the attacking slave columns, and the final battle opened.
The battle of Petelia ended in the rout of the slaves. Without cavalry and fresh equipment, such a result was virtually inevitable. No details of this battle are recorded by our authorities, except the end of Spartacus himself. For, finally, when he saw that his last battle was over and lost, Spartacus made a last effort to hew his way through the Roman ranks and to cut down Crassus in a desperate rally. But he could not come to Crassus, though he cut down two centurions who barred his path; and when the rout began and all the rest had fled, he stood his ground, and even when beaten to his knees by an arrow, continued to fight on until he was cut down; dying the death of an epic hero, as even the hostile historian Florus admits, ‘dying, as became a general, fighting most bravely in the front rank’.
So perished the heroic gladiator, who had moulded herdsmen, brigands and outcasts into a victorious army, supplied them with weapons and equipment, contrived during two years to feed them and to keep them together, done all that man could do to protect the innocent from their lust and vengeance, nine times defeated Roman armies, and compelled the Roman government to put forth their whole available power and to commission their most illustrious general to subdue him.
Such is the tribute of Rice Holmes [1] to the slave Spartacus.
It can hardly be questioned that Spartacus, seeing what he did, with what, and against what odds, was a military genius of the first rank. And there is no doubt that had he fought the battles of the propertied class instead of the despised slaves, official history, instead of ungraciously patronising him, would have celebrated the Thracian gladiator as one of the greatest captains of all times. If one takes into account the overwhelming superiority of Roman current resources in trained troops, equipment and finance, over Spartacus’ half-armed and improvised horde of slaves, it is obvious that the military exploits of the greatest generals in history were in no way superior to those of Spartacus. In making historical judgements in a class society, considerations of class frequently carry more weight than those of impartial science!
The ill-luck of the slaves did not end on the battlefield. Five thousand fugitives who escaped from the rout were intercepted by the returning legions of Pompey in Etruria and cut to pieces. The Servile War was over. But the conqueror of the slaves, the saviour of Rome, was as unlucky in his political ambitions as he had been fortunate in war.
His worst fears were realised. It was Pompey, who had merely struck the last blow by intercepting the fugitives, and not Crassus, the actual victor, who was hailed by Rome as the real conqueror of the slaves. Crassus had still eighteen years to live, but he never became Dictator. Nor, for that matter, did Pompey either. The young-man-about-town, the prodigal spendthrift, Caius Julius Caesar, who took nothing seriously except his love affairs, eventually carried off the glittering prize and became the first Emperor of Rome.
Caesar, destined to be the founder of the permanent Fascist regime in classical Rome, seems to have been as famous for his amorous, as for his martial exploits. Long after the time of Spartacus, in 45 BC, when he celebrated his ceremonial ‘triumph’ for the conquest of Gaul, his legions, marching behind their general through the streets of Rome, sang this ribald ditty:
Home we bring our bald whoremonger -
Romans, lock your wives away
All the bags of gold you lent him 
Went his Gallic tarts to pay. [2]
The great revolution of the slaves was over. The slaves were down, and the Roman plutocracy was determined that, never again, should there be another slave insurrection, or another slave army at the gates of Rome. There should be no second Spartacus! Now it was to be ‘woe to the conquered’. In the camp of Spartacus 3000 Roman prisoners were found alive. There were 6000 slaves who had been made prisoners. The slaves might spare their prisoners: the Roman ‘herrenvolk’ (master-race) had no time for such sentimental nonsense!
There followed upon the victory of Crassus one of those recurring ‘white terrors’ that have periodically stained the pages of ruling-class history, from the days of Crassus to those of the Paris Commune and of General Franco. Throughout Italy organised man-hunts of slaves took place. As Crassus marched up to Rome from the south, he planned a spectacular vengeance. The rules of war did not apply to slaves. For such ‘untouchables’ the cross was the traditional and appropriate punishment. So, outside Rome, Crassus gave his last order as commander-in-chief before handing back his temporary dictatorship to the Senate. Outside Rome, along the great Roman highway, the Appian Way, he nailed up alive on crosses the whole 6000 survivors of the army of Spartacus. The slaves had got as far as the gates of Rome, and there they should stop – for ever.
For days the ghastly mass of putrefying human misery quivered in the spring sunlight. Then, with the final expiring groan of the last victim, the Roman slaves took their farewell of history. Thereafter there were no more slave risings. The entire slave world, with its unutterable fears and aspirations, took refuge in that subterranean world beneath the threshold of (ruling-class) history, in which the ancient lowly, like the lowly of all ages, dwell in eternal obscurity.
Dives’ act of spectacular vengeance was celebrated in antiquity. It was a frightful warning to the slaves still in servitude. It was also a triumph which was intended to impress the claims of Crassus to supreme authority upon the Roman oligarchy. As we know, Crassus failed to become Dictator, but from the point of view of ‘the Senate and People of Rome’, the crosses on the Appian Way served their purpose. If there was another Spartacus in antiquity, he got no chance to rise above the surface of history. It is interesting to note that, as far as we know, no moralist amongst the many in antiquity protested against the human forest of crosses on the Appian Way. This, also, has its modern parallels. In class wars ‘all is permissible’ – as long, of course, as it is done by the ruling class, in the sacred names of Law, Order and the Preservation of Civilisation!
But it deserves to be remembered that, in his study of classical history, The Origin of Greek Tyranny, Professor PN Ure [3] describes the system of chattel slavery current in antiquity and gives his opinion of the punishment of the slaves in these terms:
It is difficult in these days to picture how unique a situation is here described. We are apt to forget how completely slaves were excluded from the life of the state. Politically, they were non-existent and the whole free population was vitally concerned in keeping them so. The slave was an essential form of property. To question the institution of slavery in ancient Greece [and in Rome – FAR] was like questioning the fundamental claims of property in modern Europe. It was a proclamation of ‘war to the knife’ against the whole established order of things. Individual slaves might win freedom and political rights, but any organised effort at emancipation on the part of the slaves themselves was put down with merciless severity. When, in 71 BC, Pompey and Crassus had crushed the slave rebellion of Spartacus, the moderate and statesmanlike revolutionary, whose name has come again to such prominence in recent days [Prof Ure’s book was written in 1922 and presumably his allusion is to the German Spartacist rising of 1919 – FAR], 6000 of his followers were crucified along the road from Rome to Naples. The distance is about 150 miles. At the time, therefore, of this exemplary punishment, if anyone had occasion to pass along the road in question, one of the most frequented in the whole Roman state, he would see some forty of these victims writhing in agony or hanging dead upon the cross for every mile of his journey. No piece of frightfulness quite so thorough and methodical is to be found in all the frightful history of the present century [this was written before the Nazi Terror – FAR]. The punishment of 71 BC is typical of the whole attitude of the ancient Republics of Greece and Rome towards rebellious slaves. No wonder then, if in their history, servile labour played no active part.
The fear of another servile rising continued to haunt the Roman rulers, for we hear that for long after Roman mothers quieted their unruly children by telling them that: ‘The bogey man, Spartacus, is coming.’ In the time of Nero, the aristocratic historian Tacitus records the remark of one speaker in the Senate: ‘These scum must be held down by terror.’
The defeat of the slaves, as is evident from the admissions of our authorities, was largely due to their own inherent weaknesses. Slavery inevitably degrades the slave. Homer expressed what is, unfortunately, a sociological truth when he wrote that ‘the slave loses half his manhood’. In an army composed of slaves, jealousy and insubordination are virtually inevitable, and we have seen already what havoc they played in the case of Spartacus. To keep a slave army together is almost impossible. Only an overwhelming personality and a military genius could have done what Spartacus did.
There has been only one slave insurrection that was permanently successful, that of Toussaint L'Ouverture and the Negroes in the West Indian island of Haiti at the end of the eighteenth century. And it is no disparagement of that heroic black ‘Spartacus’, himself a man of comparable calibre to the great gladiator, to admit that the circumstances were quite exceptional. Had it not been for the pestilential West Indian climate and for the French lack of maritime power, it is extremely doubtful whether even the genius of Toussaint could have steered the great Negro slave revolution to final victory.
It only remains to add that Crassus himself died violently, fighting against the Parthians, the eastern enemies of Rome, in 53 BC. By an ironic act of poetic justice, his severed head was exhibited on the Parthian stage during a performance of the famous Greek drama, the Bacchae of Euripides, the scene of which is Spartacus’ native land, Thrace!
Henceforth, the classical civilisation, unreformed by science and unrenewed by revolution, entered upon an ever-steeper decline as it plunged inexorably downwards towards the final abyss. Until a little Jew from Tarsus brewed a powerful drug of spiritual opium, under whose intoxicating spell, and seeing rapturous visions of another world, the ancient civilisation finally passed away in its sleep.

Notes
1. Thomas Rice Edward Holmes, The Roman Republic and the Founder of the Empire (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928).
2. From Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus, The Twelve Caesars (translation by Robert Graves) – MIA.
3. PN Ure, The Origin of Tyranny (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1922) [available at < https://archive.org/details/cu31924026412910 > – MIA].
 


Table of Contents




acus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter VI: Early Battles
The defeat of Clodius and the consequent expansion of the original diminutive band of gladiators and runaway slaves into something approaching an army convinced the Roman Senate that the revolt was a serious affair. No longer could it be regarded merely as a ‘commotion of fencers’, as the historian Plutarch was later scornfully to term it. Accordingly, the Roman government sent the Praetor, or military governor of Rome, Publius Varinius, with two legions against the slaves. This represented a considerable army, about 12,000 strong, for since the reform of the Roman military system by Marius, a generation earlier, a legion, or brigade, was standardised at about 6000 strong.
When the Roman general arrived in Campania, he found the slaves drawn up in battle array, ‘like a regular army’, despite their defective equipment which still largely comprised such primitive weapons as clubs and pointed stakes – poor enough weapons with which to attack the conquerors of the world!
Spartacus, however, had no intention of attacking. Such a course would evidently be premature. To attack too soon is as disastrous as not to attack at all. An undisciplined rabble of slaves, even if stiffened by a handful of gladiators and ex-soldiers, could be no match for a well-trained and equipped army. From the meagre details that survive, it is clear that, in the ensuing campaign, Spartacus demonstrated outstanding ability as a tactician, worthy of the greatest guerrilla warriors. Like an ancient Tito, he was everywhere and nowhere at the same time! His ‘chetniks’ were masters of the terrain in which they fought. On the slopes of the Latin hills, the slave guerrillas showed the reverse side of the military medal. The rocks on the hills aided them more in their warfare than the stones of the Roman roads, by the inexorable advance of which the Roman legions were continuing to wear down the resistance of the free tribesmen on the periphery of the Roman world. The fresh impact of the Roman gladium and the Roman via, the Roman legion and the Roman administration, upon the barbarians was one thing: freedom, even though armed with a pointed stake, if aimed at the heart of corrupt Rome, was quite another.
We can look back, with our superior historical knowledge, and sigh for the impossible – if only the slaves around Rome had been able to achieve an alliance with the tribesmen in faraway Britain, Gaul, Germany, Spain! What, then, would have emerged from the rubble of the Roman Empire?
It was now the autumn of 73 BC and the Roman army advanced slowly, hampered both by the damp autumn weather, and the consequent disease, and by frequent desertion from the army, which seems to have consisted largely of unwilling militia conscripts. On two successive occasions, the Roman general overtook his elusive enemy and drew up his lines for the pitched battle that was intended to end the revolt. But the Roman invitation to ‘come and be killed’ produced no response from the slave army. Like the Spanish guerrillas in the Peninsular War when faced with the invincible armies of Napoleon’s marshals, the slave army carefully avoided battle in the open. ‘In the deepest silence it had broken up and had turned to the south towards Picentia (Vicenza, near Amalfi), where Varinius overtook it, indeed, but could not prevent it from retiring over the Silarus into the interior of Lucania, the chosen land of shepherds and robbers’, wrote Mommsen. [1]
Taking full advantage of the difficult Lucanian country, Spartacus, whilst still declining battle against the main body of the enemy, proceeded to deal a series of swift and staggering blows against isolated detachments of the pursuing army. In succession, he launched a series of ruthless and victorious counter-attacks on the scattered divisions of the Roman army which was vainly attempting to catch up with and encircle the retreating slaves.
The French historian Jérôme Carcopino, in his History of the Roman Republic, [2] thus describes this succession of victorious counter-strokes:
Soon Spartacus had gathered an army of about 7000 men, some Thracians like himself, others Gauls and Germans, like Crixus and Oenomaus. In this kind of war it is always a mistake to divide the attacking army into isolated detachments. However, this was exactly what Varinius did. Having divided his army, for the purpose of marching faster, he met with nothing but defeats. His advance guard of 2000 men, under the command of his subordinate Furius, was annihilated. In his haste to avenge the rout of Clodius Glaber, he had marched too far ahead. A second division, under the brigadier-general (legionary commander) Cossinus, met the same fate. It was taken by surprise whilst its general was taking the baths at Salina, between Pompeii and Herculaneum. Before Varinius had time to reorganise his forces after these disasters, Spartacus took the offensive and completely defeated the Praetor himself, capturing his fasces (lictors’ rods), the symbol of his official rank, and even the Praetor’s own horse. The latter, unlike his subordinates, succeeded in making his escape and made urgent representations to the Roman Senate to send reinforcements.
Spartacus, having defeated the Roman army by this process of attrition, went on to make himself master of the fertile province of Campania. The Roman corps, under Gaius Thoranius, which had been left there by Varinius, was destroyed, its camp was stormed, and its commander killed. The slave army pressed home its successes and even considerable towns, such as Consentia, in the Bruttian country, Thurii and Metapontum in Lucania, Nola and Nuceria in Campania, were taken by storm and sacked. It would appear that upon these occasions Spartacus was not altogether successful in restraining his followers from paying off old scores, though he did his best to restrain them, both on the grounds of humanity and of policy, as he desired to secure the support of the lesser Italian towns against Rome.
The result of this staggering succession of victories was to make Spartacus the master of Southern Italy. His army grew by leaps and bounds, being swelled by runaway slaves from all parts of Italy, until, by the spring of 72 BC, it had attained a strength of at least 40,000. Moreover, the gladiator general set to work to turn this miscellaneous horde into a regular army capable of meeting the main Roman armies in the field.
For Spartacus possessed the rare faculty of being able to keep his head even in victory. He knew that his previous successes had merely been skirmishes, affairs of outposts only. No undisciplined force would have any chance of meeting on equal terms the ‘ever-victorious’ Roman legions. Consequently, Spartacus set himself to remedy the military chaos represented by an untrained horde of miscellaneous slaves.
The classical historian Mommsen tells us:
Spartacus doubtless – to judge by the little which we learn regarding that remarkable man – stood in this respect above his party. Along with his strategic ability he displayed no ordinary talent for organisation, as indeed from the very outset the uprightness with which he had presided over his band and distributed the spoil, had directed the eyes of the multitude to him quite as much at least as his valour. To remedy the severely felt want of cavalry and of arms, he tried, with the help of the herds of horses captured in lower Italy, to train and discipline a cavalry and, so soon as he got the port of Thurii into his hands, to procure from that quarter iron and copper wherewith to replace the crude arms of his followers. [3]
By these means, Spartacus sought to turn a rabble into an army capable of waging permanently successful war against the greatest military power that the world had known prior to his day. It was a tremendous ambition which, a century and a half earlier, had baffled even the great Hannibal, the greatest military genius, prior to Napoleon, in the whole history of war, and Hannibal had a veteran army and the richest state in the world behind him, not a hastily collected and half-armed rabble of slaves, as was the army of Spartacus; nor, in the period of Hannibal, had Rome yet evolved her formidable professional army.
With regard to the social ideals of Spartacus, it is more difficult to speak with assurance. We know that he forbade the use of gold and silver in his camp, but we cannot say how far this ‘war communism’ was merely a temporary measure dictated by the need to prohibit in the slave camp a luxury that would have been fatal to its continued morale. Ancient historians assure us that it was the luxury of Capua that undermined the iron discipline of Hannibal’s army and thus contributed to his downfall. Spartacus may have had this historic warning in mind when he uttered his prohibition.
It has also been alleged that Spartacus desired to found a ‘Sun-State’, an ‘Heliopolis’, like that of the ill-fated Aristonicus of Pergamus. Arthur Koestler has even incorporated this ambition in his fine historical novel The Gladiators, the subject of which is the Servile War. But I do not know what is his source for this statement and I do not find support for it in any of our extant classical authorities, although it is true that they are far enough from being exhaustive!
In any case, the ideals of the ‘Sun-State’, of social equality and of Utopian communism, were widely diffused in this era, and can hardly have been unknown in the great army of slaves gathered promiscuously from all quarters of the Mediterranean world, which might even, just possibly, have included veterans of Aristonicus from the Asiatic ‘Heliopolis’ itself, and which, as the sequel was to show, still cherished vivid memories of the two Servile Wars in Sicily. [4]
If Spartacus and his associates cherished any such Utopian ideal, they had but little time to set to work on idealistic projects, for which survival and, therefore, military victory were the first essential prerequisites. In the Roman Empire of the first century before the Christian era – for it was already an Empire if as yet without an Emperor! – governed by a ruthless and mercenary plutocracy and sustained by the most powerful war machine known up to that date, idealism and communism were remote and unsubstantial dreams. North, south, east and west the slaves faced a cold and heartless world, which regarded with an incredulous smile any social milieu other and higher than the jungle of class hatred and oppression in which mankind had lived since patriarchal times – a jungle which he has continued to inhabit down to our capitalist society of today!
For this world was now aroused. Spartacus and the slave army had disturbed the complacent sleep of the Roman Wolf! ‘The Senate and People of Rome’ now found that they had, on their own doorstep, a servile war of comparable extent and severity to those which, in the preceding century, in Sicily and Asia, it had taxed to the full the great military war machine of the Republic to suppress. And Spartacus was not only a greater general than Eunus, Aristonicus and Athenion, he was even more dangerous because of his strategic situation right at the gates of Rome itself, where he could paralyse the vast empire by a mortal blow at its metropolitan heart.
Accordingly, in the spring of 72 BC, the Senate took a step unheard of hitherto in a war against slaves. For the Roman citizens regarded their slaves as a barely human sub-species of men.
This was the current sentiment throughout antiquity regarding slaves in general, as is clear from the still surviving account of this war by the Roman historian Annaeus Florus, a conventional Roman ‘Tory’. To send both Consuls (the annual presidents of the Republic and Commanders-in-Chief) against the foe was a military distinction reserved for the most dangerous enemies of the Republic. This extreme step was now taken by the Roman government: a sure enough indication of its extreme fear. The gladiator had become a general. The horde of runaways had become an army. The revolt had become a revolution!

Notes
1. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
2. Jérôme Carcopino, Histoire Ancienne: La République Romaine (Les Presses universitaires de France, Paris, 1937). 
3. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
4. Arthur Koestler, The Gladiators (Jonathan Cape, London, 1939).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter I: Introduction
It has now become a truism to state that our current century is, pre-eminently, a century of revolution. Everything vital in our contemporary society strives against the outmoded social structure bequeathed to us by the ‘dead hand’ of the past. Moreover, the contemporary revolutionary movements entertain, despite temporary reverses, the brightest hope of ultimate success. They repeat to themselves that profound saying of Karl Marx, that mankind never seriously undertakes problems which he is incapable of solving in the given era; in other words, that history tends to be on the side of those who are on the side of history. The basis of our contemporary life is dynamic, thanks to the Machine Age and to the scientific permanent revolution that it engenders, and, sooner or later, the superstructure of society must come into line.
In earlier ages, however, this was not so. In the long era before the industrial revolution transformed the basis of social existence, the scales were heavily, probably hopelessly, weighted against revolutionary change. Thus, the social revolutions of earlier ages were doomed to failure by the very nature of the social order in which they operated. The long tragedy of social man lies precisely in the fact that his dreams of an ideal society, of a heaven on earth, have continually come up against and been frustrated by his social immaturity and inadequate economic technique.
As LD Trotsky has profoundly observed, the greatest literary masterpiece of antiquity, the tragic drama of classical Greece, derived its terrific intensity precisely from the glaring social tension between the powerful intellectual grasp of its creators, the most gifted race in antiquity, and the inadequate social technique which they shared with their epoch. ‘Fate is the voice of technical limitation and immobility; the voice of blood, of sickness, of death, of all that limits man and prevents him from becoming arrogant’, wrote Trotsky in his Literature and Revolution. [1]
The history of social revolution throughout all the ages prior to the capitalist era is the history of the frustration of ideals by social inadequacy. Again and again men rose in revolt against the harsh fate that doomed them to lifelong slavery and to endless enforced toil. But all their efforts, despite much heroism and the inherent ‘justice’ of their claims, failed and failed bloodily and completely. And they failed precisely because inequality and slavery lay in the nature of the times; because ‘justice cannot be in advance of economic conditions’, because, ultimately, in a pre-machine age, human servitude is a slavery not to man but to Nature, imposed by the hopeless inadequacy of man’s social means to ensure the social well-being of all.
Must we then suppose that because social revolution was virtually hopeless throughout the long pre-industrial era, therefore, it must be condemned and dismissed as mere quixotic romanticism? By no means! Mankind thrives ultimately by virtue of his failures as much as by his successes. In fact, one could reasonably defend the paradox that failure is as necessary as success to social evolution. It is not only in matters of religion that ‘the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church’. Oscar Wilde expressed a permanent social truth when he wrote that it is a sorry map of the world which contains no island of Utopia! The story of human revolution, of ‘moral man’ against ‘immoral society’, is a permanent incentive to human effort, a permanent memorial to the moral grandeur which constitutes man as truly human, as distinct from ‘the beasts that perish’.
In the scientific history of a socialist future, which is, we hope, not indefinitely remote, the great revolutionary heroes and martyrs of the long pre-capitalist era will rank among the greatest in the immortal pantheon sacred to the benefactors of the race. All mankind is an army, united across the ages by the solid links of a common humanity. Its past is embodied in its present: its present stretches forward into the future. The failures of yesterday lead to the partial successes of today, and these last, in their turn, presage the decisive victories of tomorrow!
In the long revolutionary sequence that constitutes man’s permanent protest against the hell on earth which has, thus far, been the unvarying lot of the masses in all ‘civilised’ societies based on class rule and the enforced exploitation of human labour, the name and fame of Spartacus stands out as the pre-eminent symbol of human revolt against the ‘exploitation of man by man’. What the outstanding names of Marx and Lenin signify in our contemporary era, that the name of Spartacus signifies for earlier epochs.
And, despite the considerable differences between antiquity, with its usury and predominantly agrarian background, and the social atmosphere engendered by modern capitalism today, the revolutionary movements of our own age have recognised in the heroic Thracian gladiator and his fellow slaves, the recognisably similar forerunner of their own movements of social protest culminating in social revolution. Have we not, in our own day and generation, seen the greatest tragedy of our times played out in the name of ‘Spartacus’: the heroic German revolution of 1919, forever associated with the glorious names of Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and their immortal band of ‘Spartacists’, the revolutionary victory of whom would have saved humanity from the orgy of slaughter and ‘total’ cultural ruin which was the Second World War by making an end of the imperialist capitalism which was its primary cause? 
The following pages seek to deal with the great slave revolution of antiquity not solely by itself, but, rather, as a sequential chapter in social history and against its historic background. The study of revolutionary history is an obligatory study for all serious revolutionary students. Without the past, there is no present; without the present, there is no future. It is a sorry consequence of the grip of the ruling class upon current education that the entire history of social revolution has been consistently distorted, and, more often than not, ignored. Truly, a giant stride forward will have been accomplished in human enlightenment when the names and deeds of the great heroes and leaders of social emancipation, from Nabis, Eunus and Spartacus, to Thomas Münzer, Jan of Leyden, John Ball and Jerrard Winstanley, supersede the voluminous pages in ruling-class ‘history’ devoted exclusively to the endless crimes, slimy intrigues and sterile stupidities of the monstrous regiment of kings, of their professional sycophants, and of their infinite brood of bastards! 
The servile insurrection, which goes by the name of its leader Spartacus, was the greatest of all the numerous revolts of the dispossessed which run like a crimson thread through the tangled skein of ancient society. So much can be gathered even from the nervous hints and obvious distress of the decadent and reactionary ruling-class ‘historians’ who describe its course. We must, of course, always remember that we know virtually nothing of the deeper causes and genuine character of these earlier landmarks in the ‘evolution of revolution’, for their ‘historians’ have been usually their deadly enemies.
Even if that were not so, all the classical literature that has survived cannot be said to have done so on its merits, but as the result of a highly selective process. To survive at all, it had to run the gauntlet not only of the barbarian invasions that eventually submerged the classical civilisation, and of the obvious accidents to which the incidence of wind and weather exposed an exclusively hand-written literature, but every document that recorded social revolution had to face the tireless scrutiny of a thousand years of medieval bigotry, and several centuries of modern class censorship, upon both of which, successively, the survival of all ancient literature depended.
The ‘subversive’ document that could survive all this must, indeed, be subtle! For that matter, even in our own age, so vastly superior in all resources for the technical diffusion and preservation of knowledge, how much would we know of such great revolutionary upheavals as the Paris ‘Commune’, or the Russian Revolution, if we had only the prejudiced scribes of the Carlton Club, or our (ubiquitous!) ‘correspondent in Riga’, to depend on, without any independent sources wherewith to check their prejudiced narrative and hopelessly biased sources?
Yet such are our main literary sources for all the slave risings of antiquity, including that of Spartacus, the greatest of them all. If any sympathetic account existed of those ancient ‘enemies of society’, the revolting slaves, it has not survived either those ruthless monastic mice which nibbled up so many classical manuscripts during the Middle Ages, or the still more ruthless ‘moral’ censorship, the age-long ‘law against dangerous thoughts’, which interdicts all searching social criticism of the basis of every class society which has, by its very nature, a vested interest in the maintenance of exploitation.
This being so, the detailed reconstruction of the Spartacus insurrection must be very largely a matter of conjecture and even of imaginative reconstruction since we have virtually no data beyond a barren (and sometimes conflicting) list of names of places, battles and personalities. And even these last are far from impeccable. It is the considered opinion of an erudite modern military historian that, for example, the details of the military operations in the Servile War, as recorded by such ancient ‘authorities’ as Plutarch and Annaeus Florus, are completely worthless. Not only are the ancient authors who dealt with the Spartacus rising hopelessly prejudiced, as is obvious in every line, but they are also unreliable as sources, being separated by centuries from the events they describe. Both Plutarch and Annaeus Florus, our two chief sources, belong to the second century AD and are entirely without that critical scientific spirit, which was all but unknown throughout antiquity, and is, to be sure, none too common even in modern times.
Thus any modern account of the Spartacus episode can only adequately deal with its subject by the method of reconstruction, and it is by this method that we shall seek to present the great slave revolution of antiquity.
First, we shall sketch the historic background both of ancient society and of the sequence of social revolutions which sought to overthrow that society. Secondly, we shall briefly reconstruct what can be known with certainty of the course of the revolution itself. And finally, we shall endeavour to strip this ancient ‘Bolshevism’ of the mists of prejudice and legend which have for so long veiled what was a major event in determining the final evolution of classical civilisation and of the Roman Empire which was its ultimate custodian; and thus we shall reveal what were its permanent effects upon the subsequent course of social history. We believe that those effects were profound in both the political and the religious spheres.
Nor, in this last connection, can we avoid a glance at the honoured place which, in more modern times, the name and fame of Spartacus has enjoyed in movements of a revolutionary character. This ‘Spartacist’ tradition will, also, engage our attention: what Lenin, more fortunate in the time of his historic appearance, has been to the modern social revolution, that was Spartacus in the revolutionary tradition of pre-capitalist times. Indeed, alone amongst the leaders of the older revolutionary tradition, his name and fame have come down to us from the mists of the past.
It is an ironic commentary on the way that ‘history’ is written in a class society when we find that the name of the greatest revolutionary leader in antiquity, the leader of a movement that evidently shook classical civilisation to its foundations, was until recently commemorated in the greatest library of which capitalist civilisation can boast by precisely two entries. Under the heading ‘Spartacus’, in the Library of the British Museum, we find mentioned only Spartacus: A Roman Tale by Susannah Strickland (1822), [2] and an untranslated (and absolutely unreadable!) French eighteenth-century tragedy, by a long-forgotten author, BJ Saurin! [3]
To make some literary reparation for this age-long neglect, two fine novels on the Spartacus rising have appeared in recent years: Spartacus by J Leslie Mitchell, [4] and The Gladiators by Arthur Koestler. [5] The first is a dramatically powerful narrative of imaginative reconstruction; the second, a less poignant but admirably detailed reconstruction of the rising against its contemporary background. Of serious history, precisely nothing! Such, no doubt, would be the fate of modern socialist leaders if a millennium of reaction supervened! Only revolutions perpetuate revolutionary traditions!
To the novels of Mitchell and Koestler must now be added the better known but, in my opinion, much inferior novel of Howard Fast, entitled Spartacus. [6] The modern cinema industry has produced a lavishly spectacular film based on the Fast novel, [7] but like it, the film is very inaccurate in its account of the origin and background of Spartacus. To add to the irony of this production, Spartacus, in which appear Sir Laurence Olivier and many other stars of stage and screen, was introduced to the public by a performance at which HRH Princess Margaret was present. Surely the Greek Clio, the ironic muse of history, would have appreciated this! Incidentally, there is absolutely no ground for the statement in the film’s opening scene that Spartacus was ever a slave in an African gold mine in Libya.
We hope in this modest publication to do something to tear away the veil, to break ‘the conspiracy of silence’ which has so long obscured one of the greatest of revolutions and of revolutionaries.

Notes
1. LD Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (International Publishers, New York, 1925), Chapter V .
2. Susannah Strickland, Spartacus: A Roman Tale (Newman, London, 1822).
3. Bernard-Joseph Saurin’s tragedy Spartacus was first staged in the Comédie-Française theatre in Paris in 1760. It appeared in print as Spartacus: tragédie en cinq actes et en vers (Didot, Paris, 1778) – MIA.
4. James Leslie Mitchell, Spartacus (Jarrolds, London, 1933) [Mitchell usually wrote under the pen-name Lewis Grassic Gibbon – MIA].
5. Arthur Koestler, The Gladiators (Jonathan Cape, London, 1939).
6. Howard Fast, Spartacus (Crown Publishers, New York, 1951).
7. Stanley Kubrick (director), Spartacus (Bryna Productions, 1960).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter XII: Spartacist Tradition in Revolutionary History
The name and fame of Spartacus have survived the centuries in a manner reserved for no other revolutionary leader of pre-capitalist times. Alone amongst the long sequence of Utopian leaders of the pre-scientific age, the name of Spartacus still stands for a vital revolutionary tradition. As such, in modern times, it has had many imitators and namesakes, some hardly less famous than their illustrious Roman original.
The revival of classical studies in the early centuries of the modern era again drew attention to the exploits of the Thracian gladiator, the formidable leader of the disinherited in ancient times. In particular, the forerunners of the French Revolution, those intrepid rebels against the dead hand of feudalism, and themselves steeped in classical traditions, rescued the name of the servile leader from the mists of the past.
I have already cited the laudatory reference of Voltaire, which I have placed on the title page of this book. About the same time as Voltaire (1760), BJ Saurin contributed his tragedy on this subject, not, to be sure, a work of any literary genius, but of interest as showing the revival in modern literature of preoccupation with the classical revolutionary tradition.
In the field of revolutionary action, the name and example of Spartacus likewise continued to influence a spiritual progeny in modern times. One of the most formidable and internationally known revolutionaries of the stormy era of the French Revolution, the German ex-Jesuit Adam Weishaupt, wrote under the nom-de-plume of ‘Spartacus’. And Weishaupt was the founder of the famous secret Masonic society of the Illuminati (the enlightened ones), who played a leading role in the international conspiratorial movements of the era, and became a name of terror to their contemporary ruling classes of the old feudal regime.
In the French Revolution itself, the Illuminati, the nineteenth-century Spartacists, played a most active role, and, it is alleged, had no less a person than Robespierre, the formidable revolutionary tribune of the Terror and the Jacobin Club, amongst their secret membership. In the reaction that followed the fall of Napoleon, the secret police of Metternich and of the Holy Alliance had all their work cut out to detect and to prevent the revolutionary activities of these disciples of Weishaupt-Spartacus.
It has, however, been reserved for our own age to witness the most glorious revival of the name and revolutionary role of Spartacus. I refer to that ever-memorable band of German revolutionaries, first and foremost amongst whom were the world-famous leaders and teachers of the revolutionary working class and of international socialism, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring and Karl Liebknecht. The German Spartacist movement, the extreme left wing of the German Social-Democratic Party, made their immortal stand for world revolution at a time when, above all, Germany was the key to the success or failure of international socialism to supplant capitalism on the world scale.
The Spartacus League vigorously opposed both the German government’s prosecution of the war and the pro-war attitude of the official leadership of the Social-Democratic Party. This policy of the League was then only shared by Lenin in Russia and by the Russian Bolsheviks. After the German Revolution in November 1918, which abolished the German monarchy and exiled the Kaiser, the Spartacists led a social revolution, primarily in Berlin, with the objective of transforming the political revolution against the Kaiser into a socialist revolution upon the Russian model.
Heavy fighting took place in Berlin in January 1919. The official Social-Democratic leaders, now in power in the Reichstag, supported by the old officer’s corps in the Kaiser’s army, suppressed the Spartacist rising. Its leaders, Luxemburg and Liebknecht, were captured and brutally murdered by members of the officer’s corps, with the full approval, apparently, of that modern Judas Iscariot – the Social-Democratic Minister of War, Noske.
The heroic courage and evergreen martyrdom of the Spartacists in 1919, went far to redeem the tarnished honour of the European working class corrupted by imperialist propaganda and by social-chauvinistic treachery.
It is now evident in retrospect that the failure of the Spartacists was the primary cause that led up to the victory in subsequent years of the Hitler counter-revolution, and, therefore, ultimately, to a fresh world butchery. It may be said definitely that the revolutionary victory of the Spartacists in 1919 would have saved humanity from the immense slaughter of the Second World War, as well as from the humiliating recurrence of European barbarism under the Nazi Reich.
The glorious names of the revolutionary fighters and martyrs Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht are, indeed, worthy to rank beside that of Spartacus himself in the long annals of the revolutionary struggles of the disinherited and of the oppressed. Let us hope that in the unparalleled age of revolutions amid which our lot is cast we shall find new successors in the glorious tradition which both Spartacus and Luxemburg sealed with their blood, successors, who, more fortunate in their times, will carry forward the emancipation of humanity from class rule to its final and victorious conclusion.
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter XI: Spartacus and the Rise of Christianity
As we have seen, the Spartacus insurrection was the last of its kind. No serious servile disturbance broke the iron uniformity of the police-state of the Caesars. The jealous suspicion with which the ruling class continued to watch the activities of the slave masses is clearly demonstrated by their rejection of a suggestion to give the slave class a common distinctive uniform, on the very significant ground that such a uniform would show the slaves their numbers and, hence, their potential power!
It seems to be a ‘law’ of human psychology that man cannot go on living without some hope in the future. After the failure of the great chain of servile insurrections, the prospects of the slaves in this world were hopeless. Warned by the event, the master class got rid of the decadent senatorial oligarchy, the incompetence of which had nearly been fatal when faced with a military genius like Spartacus, and put their administrative house in order. The iron military despotism set up by Julius and Augustus Caesar afforded no opportunity for the slaves to make any further effort to shake off their chains. The outlook in this world was without hope for the servile class. Their only hope, henceforth, lay in another, supra-mundane world, where the writ of Caesar did not run and where the cross had been transformed from an instrument of oppression into a symbol of salvation.
This last act of spiritual alchemy was effected in the century after Spartacus by the first religion in social history that was of popular, largely servile origin, and which came to be known as Christianity, from the name of its titular founder: the Galilean mystic, preacher and, perhaps, agitator, in whom Eisler [1] and others have seen a Jewish successor of Spartacus crucified for armed insurrection against the Roman Empire.
Never probably in the whole of recorded history has the social function of religion as ‘the opium of the people’ been demonstrated more clearly than in the case of the great religious revival at the opening of the Christian era. Understood realistically against its original social background, it represents probably the most colossal act of ‘escapism’ in recorded history. The transformation of the cross, the symbol of torture, into the symbol and instrument of salvation, was, assuredly, a stroke of genius on the part of Paul of Tarsus and his associate propagandists and goes far to explain its ultimate success.
The slaves made life again tolerable by this profound psychological victory over their oppressors, transferred from this world to the next. That the master class later captured the Church and turned it into one of the most effective instruments of counter-revolution in history must not be permitted to obscure its original social significance.
A vast literature has been composed round the origins of Christianity, without, however, adding much to our essential knowledge. But one of the authentic sources of Christianity seems to have been an armed Messianic insurrection against Rome. The prime instance is that Jesus is represented as having died on the cross, the special mode of execution designed for the slave and the revolutionary. We also learn that his follower Peter was carrying a sword in the Garden of Gethsemane, with which he cut off the ear of the High Priest. As the German socialist historian Karl Kautsky remarked in his book The Foundations of Christianity, this was a peculiar tool to carry at a prayer meeting.
In our Gospel narratives, in the oldest Gospel, St Mark refers to the insurrection in which Barabbas had participated. This seems to imply that his readers would have known what the insurrection was, though the Christian Church later found it convenient to suppress any information which may have been recorded in the original text.
Most significant of all, perhaps, Jesus is represented as seizing the Temple by force and driving out the money-changers. Since it is known that the Temple was held by a Roman garrison, this could only have been the result of a successful uprising in Jerusalem.
All these records may be regarded perhaps as straws blown by an original revolutionary wind. This interpretation derives further support from certain remarks attributed to Jesus in the Gospel. The Messiah – who is so often depicted as a pacifist – urges his followers that, if they do not possess swords, they must obtain them, and goes on record with the categorical assertion that: ‘The Kingdom of Heaven cometh by violence and violent men take it by force.’ A somewhat curious statement by the ‘Prince of Peace'!
The origins of Christianity can only be studied objectively in a post-Christian context. But the theory that Christianity actually started as an armed Messianic rising against Rome is at least a plausible one. In which case, Rome reacted by putting Jesus to the same death as it had put the surviving Spartacists. Be that as it may, the Roman Empire continued to regard the Christians as revolutionaries down to the time of Constantine. Where there was so much smoke, there must have also been some fire.
By a rather curious irony, perhaps only possible in the case of religious history, we still have extant a complete memoir of an unsuccessful revolution against the self-same Roman Empire, which Spartacus and his slaves fought so heroically in vain to overthrow. This revolution, a wish fulfilment, an eschatological escapism, on the part of its author, is to be found extant and set out in full, in terrifying symbolism, in the last book of our Biblical canon – the Apocalypse, or Revelation of St John.
In this terrifying work, composed of bizarre visions, recorded by one who obviously hated the Roman Empire – his picturesquely named Scarlet Woman – from the depths of his soul, we have a prophetic vision, couched in denunciatory language, of the victorious completion of the Jewish revolution against Rome. What Bar-Cockba – and perhaps Jesus Christ? – failed to achieve on earth, the final and irrevocable destruction of Rome, John’s Messiah descends from heaven to accomplish, and does actually accomplish – though, alas, only on paper! – at the head of an army of celestial cavalry led by the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.
What we have before us, in this Biblical narrative, preserved by so curious a chance on account of its alleged sacred character, is the only surviving contemporary account of the great social revolutions of antiquity, written by one of the revolutionaries themselves, but transferred from earth to heaven. For, as the French social historian quoted by Archibald Robertson has aptly observed: ‘From the moment that Spartacus failed Jesus was bound to win.’ As Robertson himself has noted, the Messiah of John, who wreaks final vengeance on Rome, is a kind of amalgam of all the great revolutionaries of antiquity, from Cleomenes of Sparta to Spartacus of Thrace.
The Book of Revelation is thus of quite unique interest. One need only add here that the victory of Spartacus upon this terrestrial earth would have made Revelation and its imaginary celestial victory over Rome impossible. But, in view of the circumstances of the age of the Caesars, one can only sympathise with the old Jewish revolutionary who was its author, who carried on the revolution in Heaven when it was no longer possible to carry it on upon earth.
In the colossal drama of ‘the foundations of Christianity’, Spartacus and the servile revolution take their place as an indirect but potent formative cause.
A number of passages in the New Testament are still recognisably anti-Roman. In particular, the Apocalypse (Revelation), which brands the Roman Empire as ‘the Beast’, is violently anti-Roman throughout. In such passages, bowdlerised as they are by ‘respectable’ ruling-class Christianity, we still hear faint but authentic echoes of the ancient slave revolutions.

Notes
1. Robert Eisler, John the Baptist and the Messiah Jesus (Dial, New York, 1931).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter III: The Rise of Rome to World Power
The Roman Empire, which came into existence as a result of the phenomenally rapid expansion of the Italian metropolis in the second century BC, represented the final and most advanced political form taken by classical society. The three Punic Wars, waged between Rome and Carthage during the third century BC for supremacy over the Mediterranean basin, were the decisive turning point – military, economic and political – in the evolution of the classical world. After the definite victory of Rome in this long drawn-out struggle, the whole of the Mediterranean civilisation – the ‘world’ of classical geography – came under the sway of the Roman state.
The Second Punic War, from 222 to 201 BC, in which the great Carthaginian general Hannibal led the struggle against Rome, represented in classical society what the Napoleonic Wars represented in more modern times, the decisive turning-point in the evolution of the Empire of England, the modern Rome. Hannibal, the greatest tactician in military annals, was the prototype of Napoleon, the greatest strategist in the history of war. But in the case of Rome against Carthage, unlike that of England against Napoleonic France, it was the military Empire of Rome that ultimately defeated the thalassocracy of Carthage.
Whosoever controlled the Mediterranean, the ‘Great Sea’ of antiquity, controlled the entire classical civilisation that had arisen upon its shores. Accordingly, for the rest of antiquity, classical society was synonymous with its Roman protector.
The eagles of Rome flew over the centres of classical civic life. The magic letters ‘SPQR’ (Senatus populusque Romanus – the Senate and People of Rome) henceforth were emblazoned in haughty defiance over the portals of the ancient civilisation right down to the hour of its final collapse, when, ravaged by social decay and bled white by economic exhaustion, the tottering structure crashed helpless at the feet of the northern barbarians.
In the centuries immediately prior to the Christian era, this last calamity still lay in the remote future. For these centuries, in particular the second century BC, were precisely those that witnessed the rise of Rome to ‘world’ power. In quick succession, the centres of Mediterranean civilisation were overrun by the ‘ever-victorious’ legions of Rome and brought beneath the yoke of the Italian Republic. By the end of the miraculous century of Roman expansion which followed upon the victory over Hannibal and Carthage in 202 BC, nothing but subjugated provinces and client vassal-states confronted the all-powerful Republic. The ‘glittering prize’ of world power, vacant since the premature demise of Alexander the Great, two centuries earlier (323 BC), had been won by the superior force and strategic ability of the Roman war-machine.
What were the motives which animated this ancient imperialism? Rome and Carthage had fought to the finish for world supremacy and Rome’s was the ultimate prize. What did it signify? In general, it can be stated that the imperialist wars of antiquity were fought primarily for land and for slaves to cultivate land.
Just as modern imperialist wars are primarily wars for trade and capitalist surplus investment in a pre-eminently commercial era, so ancient imperialist enterprises were fought out in a predominantly agrarian economy for land and its human ‘instruments of production’. Viewed from this historically correct angle, the wars of aggression fought by the slave empires of antiquity were equally land-ramps and man-hunting expeditions. And the wars of Rome, the greatest of all these ancient slave empires, fit most closely into the above categories.
It is true that commercial and even financial considerations were not entirely lacking, to give a superficial resemblance between the aggressive enterprises of ancient and of modern imperialism. We have not forgotten that merchant and usurious capital played their part, albeit a subordinate one, in the processes of classical economy. But, in the main, the distinction is as stated above.
When, therefore, we strip the startling conquests that effectually constituted ‘the grandeur that was Rome’ of the high-sounding phraseology with which sycophantic historians have seen fit to disguise them, we observe, beneath these euphemisms, that in reality the Roman conquests were glorified land-ramps and man-hunts, in the course of which Rome not only conquered the most fertile regions and populous civic centres of the ancient world, but, concurrently, sold up their conquered population.
Just as modern slave-hunters have depopulated and ‘civilised’ Africa, so the ancient Romans ‘made a desert and called it peace’, in the poignant words used by the mordant and disillusioned Roman historian Tacitus to describe the real procedure of his countrymen. In the ancient case, also, ‘white ivory’ (slaves!) was plentiful and cheap during the maximum era of Roman expansion between the conquest of Carthage by Scipio and the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar (202-49 BC).
The net effect of these gigantic man-hunts upon the hitherto static economy of antiquity was catastrophic and far-reaching – in the most literal sense, revolutionary. During this golden age of the slave trade, it was not uncommon for 10,000 slaves to change hands in a single day in the great slave market on the Aegean island of Delos, that ancient ‘Zanzibar’ of the traffic in human flesh. The slave-trader followed the victorious eagles like a human vulture – and not in vain! The greater Roman victories brought in staggering totals: 150,000 is the probable computation of the enslaved citizens of the Greek commercial metropolis of Corinth. Carthage, Rome’s vanquished rival, brought in perhaps an even greater number. Whilst, at the other end of the Mediterranean, the influx of Spaniards, Gauls and Sardinians periodically created ancient crises of ‘overproduction’, in which the bottom was knocked out of the market and prices sagged and sank in a manner today reserved fortunately for inanimate articles of exchange. It must, of course, be remembered that the population of the agrarian society of antiquity was much less than that of modern industrial society. Exact estimates are difficult to come by, but it is unlikely that the Roman Empire supported more than about sixty million people.
It goes without saying that the cheaper and more plentiful the human commodity, the more callous and brutal was the treatment accorded to the human chattel. And never previously had either slaves been so cheap or their treatment been so brutal. The two phenomena were not to be experienced again in such prolific abundance until the palmy days of the African slave trade, 2000 years later, and of the ‘middle passage’ across the Atlantic to the slave markets of the West Indies, where a similar superabundance was to produce a similarly brutal disregard of the human chattel.
Roman commercial slavery, which crowded its human tools into its vast latifundia (landed domains) and its insanitary ergastula (underground slave barracks), or into its mining death-traps, where, according to the ancient historian Diodorus Siculus, the average expectation of life was about three months, was an altogether different and far harsher species of servitude than the easy-going domestic servitude of the Greeks, or even the feudal serfdom of the ancient priest-kings of the Orient. The great historian Theodore Mommsen, in his History of the Roman Republic, [1] has stigmatised this hideous mass of misery upon which the grandeur of Rome was inseparably founded as the most hideous orgy of human suffering that the world is ever likely to have known. And there is every reason to accept such a judgement.
It is a major curse of slavery that it corrupts the slave-owner and his society equally with the slave himself. This hideous cancer, both political and moral in its ultimate effects, poisoned and distorted beyond all recognition the Roman society which experienced its effects during the period of ‘the primary accumulation’ of capital, including capital in slaves, that accompanied the great era of Roman conquest, which transformed the rustic republic of primitive Latin farmers into the dominant imperialism in the Mediterranean. Free, as well as servile labour, felt the effect of this staggering transformation.
In the place of the free land-holding peasantry that had formed the backbone of the tenacious resistance against which both the wealth of Carthage and the genius of Hannibal had dashed themselves in vain in the Punic Wars – which we again recall were the decisive imperialist wars of antiquity – the Italian countryside was parcelled up into vast latifundia owned by absentee landlords and tilled exclusively by slave labour supplied by the unceasing wars of conquest. The erstwhile free peasants were driven to the towns to become paupers, living precariously on ‘bread and circuses’, the original dole. Whilst the monopoly of the land and of the means of production continually accelerated.
So bad had the position become by the end of the second century BC that the would-be reformer, the tribune Tiberius Gracchus, declared in a public speech that ‘the wild beasts have their lairs and the birds their nests; but the Roman people have not a foot of land they can call their own. Conquerors of the earth, the earth itself denies them food and shelter.’
If this statement was demagogic rhetoric, it corresponded closely enough to the facts to rouse an instant and enthusiastic response and to inspire a formidable popular agitation, which found eventual expression in a murderous series of civil wars that lasted for practically a century, from the agitation of the Gracchi (133-121 BC) down to the final victory of the military dictatorship of the Caesars, the ‘Fascist’ era of the ancient world (49-30 BC).
During this century of civil wars, numerous attempts were made by democratic reformers to break up the big estates and to recreate a land-holding peasantry, such as had been the backbone of the Roman state at an earlier and simpler stage of its existence. Needless to say, in an agrarian society in which land was the basis both of wealth and political power, such attempts were fiercely resisted by the big land-monopolists who dominated the Senate and formed a close corporation, a ruling oligarchy, who mismanaged the affairs of the state for their own profit right down to the victory of Caesar. The two Gracchi, Tiberius and Caius, and other reformers, were murdered by the armed thugs of this decadent plutocracy.
It must, however, be borne in mind that the above agitation, which has attracted the virtually exclusive attention of orthodox Roman historians, when they describe the social question in these times, had nothing in common with the aims of the slave insurrections that I am about to describe. In fact, one of the arguments put forward by land-reformers of the type of the Gracchi was, precisely, that a free peasantry would prove a bulwark against slave revolt. The whole agitation was an internal affair of the free, that is, legally privileged classes. To all free Romans, rich and poor alike, the slave was a common enemy, since they all lived off his exploitation. In this last respect, Karl Kautsky has made an apt comparison with the British Labour imperialists of his day, who were similarly hostile to the enslaved colonial masses, the slave class of the British Empire!
In a society rent, as was that of antiquity, by fierce class antagonism, only two permanent solutions are possible: either the lowest class can ‘shake off its chains’ and remodel society in its own interests on a basis freed from exploitation – in antiquity this could only have resulted from a victorious slave insurrection: or the state (’the executive committee of the ruling class’) must become strong enough to assume a permanent dictatorship that will restore and regulate by force an unstable social equilibrium. This last method, which was the method of Caesarism in antiquity and is the identical method of Fascism today, finally triumphed with Julius and Augustus Caesar at the end of a century of more or less permanent civil war. When the revolt of the slaves had failed, there was nothing for it but permanent dictatorship or permanent chaos.
First, however, Roman society was subjected to the violent incidence of the first method. Not only did free society carry on a bitter class war over the division of wealth which was produced mainly by slaves, but the self-same era witnessed an entire sequence of slave insurrections which aimed, in practice at least, to abolish the very basis of servile economy. The insurrection of Spartacus, which formed the impressive conclusion of this sequence, cannot be understood apart from its predecessors and their common historic background.
I propose, accordingly, to direct a glance at the chain of servile wars which preceded the great insurrection under Spartacus.

Notes
1. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter V: The Origins of the Revolt
The greatest servile insurrection of classical antiquity took place between the years 73-71 BC, that is, in the century prior to the origins of the Christian era and a generation before the commencement of the Roman Empire of the Caesars. Neither of those epoch-making events was, in our opinion, uninfluenced by the great slave revolution nor unconnected with it. Its starting-point was the city of Capua, in Southern Italy. Its first recruits were drawn from the gladiators trained to fight for public amusement in that city. And its leader, upon whom the revolt has conferred historic immortality, was the Thracian gladiator Spartacus, whose strong personality and undoubted military genius raised him to become leader of the slave army and the terror of the Roman legions.
The period which witnessed the outbreak of the Servile War was one of general decadence and deep corruption, as is unmistakably portrayed for us by the writings even of such contemporary ruling-class apologists as Cicero and the historian Sallust. The epoch of civil war had come to a temporary lull with the victory of the Roman plutocracy under Sulla a decade earlier, at the decisive battle of the Colline Gate, outside Rome (82 BC), which put an end to the civil war amongst the free classes. The death of the ‘fortunate’ dictator, Sulla, left the aristocratic oligarchy without a competent and undisputed leader, a state of things soon to lead to a fresh struggle for power that only ended a quarter of a century later with the victory of Julius Caesar. The confusion among the free classes and the indecisiveness of the ruling oligarchy were highly favourable to the success of the servile insurrection.
Despite, however, the prevailing social corruption, the Roman Republic still remained without a rival as the greatest contemporary power. If weak in the centre, at Rome itself, it was still immensely strong upon the circumference. At the very time that Spartacus was threatening to march on Rome and destroy the terrified metropolis, the Roman armies were winning astonishing victories against heavy numerical odds in Asia. And, only a little later, the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar (59-49 BC) again demonstrated the strength of the Roman war machine. The conquest of Gaul threw at least 400,000 more slaves on the market.
Indeed, from the purely technical standpoint, the Roman army had never been so powerful as in this era of political confusion. For only a generation earlier, the great General Marius, the uncle of Caesar, had abolished the old militia system of the Roman Republic, under the threat of a contemporary barbarian invasion, and had organised a professional army on the lines of a permanent war machine. This was a technological development that had not a little to do with the ultimate defeat of the slaves.
The great revolt of the slaves, which was destined to bring the Roman Republic to the verge of destruction, and, it can hardly be doubted, to shake the classical civilisation itself to its foundations, began inconspicuously, like so many of the major events in history. Amongst the major evils of Roman society was the brutal ‘sport’ of gladiatorial shows, in which specially trained men fought each other singly or in bands, or even confronted wild animals in the arena. This ancient ‘sport’, analogous to the bull-fights of modern Spain, enjoyed a wide popularity in antiquity. There were occasions in which as many as 10,000 gladiators appeared in the Roman arena. And every provincial town of any standing had its arena and training school for the human ‘exhibits’.
In the early summer of 73 BC, a band of these professional fighting men broke out of the Capuan training school, which was run by a man named Gnaeus Lentulus Batiatus, and fled from the city, armed with such primitive weapons as spits and knives, which they obtained in the kitchen of the training school. On their way they seized a supply of arms which, by good fortune, they met with when on its way to another gladiatorial school. Armed with these weapons, they put to flight a band of soldiers who had been sent in pursuit, and, arming themselves further at the expense of the dead men, they took refuge on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, in wild and inaccessible country.
The band of gladiators who accomplished this feat numbered seventy-four persons in all. They were men with some training in hand-to-hand combat and in the use of arms. Many of them were, no doubt, prisoners of war with previous military experience. Their leaders were two Celts, known by their slave names as Crixus and Oenomaus, and a Thracian from the Danube country, known by what was probably his own name, Spartacus.
The meagre details which comprise all that is known for certain about the previous career of Spartacus are thus summarised by the German historian Mommsen:
The last, perhaps a scion of the noble family of the Spartocids which attained even to royal honours in its Thracian home, had served in the Roman army among the Thracian auxiliaries, had deserted and gone as a brigand to the mountains, and had been there recaptured and destined to the gladiatorial games. [1]
From other sources we learn that Spartacus owed his life on this former occasion to his remarkable strength, which marked him out for success in his role of professional man-killer. He appears to have fought with the ‘retiarius’, or trident and net.
Very little, then, is positively known about the antecedents of Spartacus. The name is a Thracian one, and there was a dynasty of the same name about this time in the Black Sea regions, which has left coins. The ancient Thrace was roughly equal to modern Bulgaria. If Spartacus belonged to that family, that would have assisted his rapid rise to a position of ascendancy in an army largely composed of his countrymen. Both the leaders of the two Sicilian slave wars assumed the royal title, not merely to enhance their prestige, but also to establish some sort of permanent leadership. It should be remembered that to an army composed of former barbarians, of enslaved tribal warriors, the kingly title signified Commander-in-Chief more than anything else. Perhaps Spartacus did not need to do so on account of his already existing family prestige. In which case, perhaps he already had some experience of military command. According to Plutarch, Spartacus was of nomadic stock. But we know nothing positive.
As was so usual in antiquity – we have already noted it in the case of the Sicilian slave king Eunus – superstitious and miraculous phenomena were attributed to Spartacus. According to the credulous Greek historian Plutarch, serpents coiled around him whilst he slept, and his prophetess wife foretold his greatness even when he was still a slave. Her name has not survived, but, according to the same authority, she was a Thracian woman who accompanied Spartacus from Capua and took part in the revolt. We do not know what was her final fate. There is nothing inherently impossible in this detail, since the Thracian women were famous for their association with mystical cults. Indeed, one of the most famous plays in Greek drama, the Bacchae of Euripides, was written precisely around this last theme. But it is more likely that some historian, allowing his imagination to supply the lacking facts, has introduced the mystic, the religious, element without which no medieval writer considered an account complete.
Since the original edition of this book first saw the light, Professor Ziegler of Gottingen has made the interesting suggestion, based on an emendation of the text of Plutarch, that Spartacus belonged to the Thracian tribe of the Maedi and that he was born near the river Strymon in what is now Bulgaria. [2] As it is already known that the Maedi were the Thracian allies of the famous King of Pontus, Mithridates Eupator, the ‘Hannibal of Asia’, the great rival of Rome, we are able, according to Professor Ziegler’s hypothesis, to date the capture of Spartacus with a certain degree of exactitude, since Mithridates was defeated and driven out of Greece by the Roman general Sulla in 86 BC.
If this was the date of the capture of Spartacus, assuming that he was old enough to have fought against the Romans, his probable date of birth would be shortly before 100 BC.
Professor Ziegler’s supposition also adds some probability to the statement of Plutarch that Spartacus had a Thracian wife who was a prophetess.
This small band, under the leadership of Spartacus and the two Celts, necessarily adopted a life of brigandage, since even escaped gladiators must live! They soon became renowned for their boldness and for the success of their foraging expeditions. In a short time their numbers were swelled considerably and they acquired a more than local reputation. The fame of the daring band spread as far as Rome itself, and it became necessary for the Roman government to do something to safeguard ‘law and order’ against this well-armed and daring band of desperadoes, who, from the inaccessible shelter of their mountain fastness, robbed and plundered the wealthy region of Campania. This region contained some of the favourite health resorts of the Roman plutocracy, such as Pompeii, which, a century and a half later, was so sensationally obliterated by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius (AD 80). At the period of which we are writing, the great volcano had been long quiet and was currently believed to be extinct. Its crater was popularly supposed to be the gate of hell!
Accordingly, the Roman Senate sent a force of 3000 men – that is, half a legion, probably militia rather than regulars – under a divisional general (praetor) named Clodius Glaber. When the Roman commander reached the foot of Mount Vesuvius, he found himself confronted with an impossible position. The only entry to the stronghold of the escaped slaves lay through a single narrow defile, which could only be traversed in single file. To force this pass could only be done by engaging in victorious single combat against gladiators – against professional duellists specially trained for this type of single combat! Unable, or unwilling, to induce his men to take this desperate risk, Clodius resolved to blockade the gladiators until starvation compelled them to come out and fight his greatly superior forces.
On the face of it, this looked the best strategy for the Romans to adopt, but it was baffled and turned into a complete Roman disaster by a daring stratagem of Spartacus. Faced with starvation, the trapped gladiators resorted to a last desperate device. The reverse side of the mountain from the Romans was so steep as to appear inaccessible, and was, in consequence, left unguarded. Resorting to the dangerous expedient, only possible to highly trained and desperate men, of descending the cliff with improvised ladders of vine branches, the band made the descent successfully.
Once the descent was made, the rest was easy. Advancing quickly round the mountain, the attackers took the carelessly guarded Roman camp by a surprise rush. The Roman militia made little resistance and a victory as rapid, bloodless and complete as that of Prince Charles Edward Stuart over Sir John Cope at Prestonpans in 1745, ended the first Roman attempt at suppression.
In revolts, more perhaps than in anything else, ‘nothing succeeds like success’. The victory of Spartacus over Clodius gave him both arms and prestige. His small band, equipped with captured Roman arms, was speedily swelled by an influx of escaped slaves, roving shepherds, and gladiators ‘on the run’. As the numbers of the slave army increased from scores to hundreds, from hundreds to thousands, both the scope of its operations and the magnitude of the danger, that, in such an unstable society, such a revolt represented to the classical social order, cumulatively increased. The brigand had become a leader. The gang of gladiators had become an army. The riot had become a revolt!

Notes
1. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
2. A reference to Joseph Ziegler’s contribution to the Göttingen Septuagint, a massive study of the Old Testament of the Bible – MIA. 
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter X: Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Antiquity
The servile revolt under Spartacus was the great revolution of classical times. No other slave revolt, so far as we can judge from our surviving records, caused such profound and lasting alarm amongst the ruling classes of ancient times. When we learn – of course, from sources bitterly opposed to the slave revolutions – that, long after the suppression of the insurrection, the mothers of the ruling class used to frighten their refractory children by telling them that the bogey-man, Spartacus, was coming, such an apparently trivial detail speaks volumes for both the profound alarm that the slave revolution had caused amongst the ruling classes and for the narrow margin by which it missed success. Indeed, even now a bare recital of the Spartacist campaigns demonstrates the narrow margin by which the slaves fell short of victory. Had they only held together under the military genius who commanded them, who knows what would have happened?
It cannot be stated dogmatically that military success for the slaves was necessarily impossible. As far as we can see, they could have scored a decisive military success had their luck not been so adverse. Indeed, if the study of universal history teaches us anything, it is that the word ‘inevitable’ must always be used with the very greatest caution in relation to historical phenomena. Nothing, indeed, seems ‘inevitable’, except death – and death is not a thing but the negation of a thing! Certainly, on the evidence at our disposal, we do not appear to be justified in asserting that the revolt of the slaves under Spartacus could not conceivably have been successful.
A revolt, however, is not a revolution, at least not in any scientific usage of the last-named term. Whilst a revolt only changes the political appearances of society, a revolution changes its underlying realities. A revolution creates not only or principally a new governing apparatus, but, ultimately, a new social order. The servile insurrections of antiquity, of which that of Spartacus was the climax, were certainly revolts, but whether they are entitled to be called revolutions is a much more complicated and doubtful question.
The scientific conception of revolution, as used in modern times, presupposes the existence of social and economic forces latent in a decaying society and waiting to be released from an outmoded social structure by the dynamic energy of a rising and historically progressive revolutionary class. Such revolutionary classes in modern society have been represented on the stage of world history by the capitalist class in the era of the Reformation and the French Revolution, and by the modern proletariat in our own era of social revolution. In both cases, the victory of the new rising class over the old order liberated new progressive forces from the womb of an obsolete and decadent social order and, by their instrumentality, created new social orders different from, and superior to, the old.
Thus, the victory of the sequential chain of bourgeois revolutions between the Reformation and the French Revolution ended not only the feudal class, but, equally, the feudal social order. And whatever one may think of the capitalist order which replaced it, it is at least historically undeniable that, with all its crimes and shortcomings, it released the potential forces latent in science and technology on a scale undreamt of by the old feudal order. Thus, it was a revolutionary force, which transformed contemporary society from top to bottom, so making for human progress and for human betterment in the current state of society.
As Marx and Engels pointed out, once for all, in the Communist Manifesto, whatever counter-revolutionary role the now decadent capitalist class may adopt today, nothing can deprive it of its historic claim to be the most revolutionary class in all history prior to the rise of the modern proletariat. The contemporary colossal forces of production, when compared with the meagre social production at the disposal of ancient and medieval society, constitute the convincing testimony to the thoroughgoing social revolution which the bourgeoisie have carried triumphantly through between the Reformation and our own day.
Similarly, the modern proletariat, as yet incompletely victorious, but moving forward in stages to the world revolution which is their historical goal, likewise have a still more far-reaching plan than their bourgeois predecessors. They aim at nothing less than world unity and universal well-being, to be achieved by internationalism and the world-wide substitution of production for use in place of production for profit. By the agency of this profound social transformation the vast reservoirs of social productive power will be released from capitalist bonds and from their limiting property relations, and will bring into being social achievements and potentialities that will far surpass the highest and most far-reaching achievements of the preceding bourgeois order.
The modern age, therefore, is a revolutionary age. It has been transformed beyond all recognition by the dynamic agency of revolutionary social forces, which have expressed themselves historically in the revolutionary victories of the class struggle against, successively, feudalism and capitalism.
Ancient society, contrarily, knew no such movements of social transformation and revolutionary renewal. For these historic results could, in the given conditions, have been achieved only by a revolutionary class utilising the latent possibilities of an industrial revolution; but, as we have seen, these technical possibilities were never translated from potentiality to fact at any point in the evolution of classical society, which remained to the end a complete stranger to the dynamic and all-transforming power of the scientific industrial revolution and of its offspring, the Machine Age. As for the revolutionary class, this could be none other than the slave class, of which Spartacus was the ‘Trotsky’, to employ a modern analogy. And the slave class never succeeded, under either Eunus, Aristonicus or Spartacus, in accomplishing the revolutionary overturn of the ancient slave-owning society, the ‘executive committee’ of which, its governmental apparatus, was the Roman Empire.
We cannot, therefore, say whether a slave revolt, had it been successful, could have become transformed into a revolution which would have been capable of effecting fundamental social changes in the composition of Roman society and of the Mediterranean world in general.
The answer to this speculative question is probably in the negative. Had Spartacus won, probably all that would have transpired would have been that the Romans would have become slaves, and the slaves Romans! Spartacus and Caesar would have merely changed places! The destruction of its centralised Roman government might have actually led to the decline of ancient society into a patchwork of rustic societies of a more primitive kind, such as later arose, after the fall of Rome, in the Dark and Middle Ages, between AD 500 and 1000. In this eventuality, the victory of the slaves would have been retrogressive in place of revolutionary, and Crassus and his legions would have actually been the saviours of civilisation from barbaric regression!
There was, however, another possible outcome to a victorious slave insurrection. Classical society had reached a very high cultural and administrative level by the first century BC, probably as high a level, in general, as was reached anywhere prior to the Industrial Revolution, which began about 1750. Many of the prerequisites for such a technical revolution existed in classical society. What held back such a scientific revolution seems to have been chiefly the basic institution of slavery, at all times and places so wasteful economically and so inimical to both scientific and economic development. If the victorious Spartacus had abolished slavery, under the influence of the ‘Sun State’, even for a short time, it is possible, though not very likely, that an industrial revolution might have followed.
In which case, the whole history of the Western world would have been entirely different. The ancient civilisation need not have sunk into decay, and its religious and ethical legacy to succeeding ages, one that has been so vastly influential, would have been entirely dissimilar. Indeed, if one elects to pursue the theme further, the ancient proletariat might have been transformed into a modern one without the retrogressive interregnum of the Dark and Middle Ages; and socialism might have found its ‘Marx’ in antiquity and made its historic appearance in the classical world. Had this been the case, our modern professors of mechanical ‘inevitability’ would have inevitably proved how inevitable the whole process was!
However, these are merely speculative might-have-beens. In actual history, unsuccessful revolutions do not lead generally to further revolutions, but to counter-revolutions. In our own day, we have seen the failure of the Russian Revolution to spread to the West in the years immediately after 1917 lead not to further revolutions, but to the victorious counter-revolutions of Fascism under Hitler, Mussolini, Franco and others. Similarly, the failure of the great servile insurrection of antiquity led to the counter-revolutionary regime of the Caesars, that era of permanent dictatorship and permanent counter-revolution that survived until the end of antiquity: a regime of despotism and iron repression which found its congruous figureheads in such monstrous figures as Nero and Caligula, and which exalted the worship of the Emperor, the personification of itself, because it had nothing else to offer mankind! That ancient regime undoubtedly presents impressive parallels with our modern Fascist regimes, which have similarly followed upon the failure of modern revolutionary movements. (Julius Caesar actually used the words ‘New Order’ in a speech!)
It cannot reasonably be doubted that the formidable slave insurrection of Spartacus gave a tremendous impetus to the tendencies towards dictatorship which already existed in the time of Crassus. Spartacus, therefore, can be ranked as one of the formative causes of the Empire of the Caesars, which was set up under Julius and Augustus Caesar, a generation after the death of Spartacus, by the ruling classes of the Mediterranean world in order to ensure their decaying society against both the internal consequences of its own decay and the recurrence of slave insurrections.
In both these aims, Caesarism was entirely successful. There were no more servile insurrections, and the Caesars avoided dissolution by stabilising decay. It is well known that for many centuries ‘the decline and fall of the Roman Empire’ dragged on its weary way, long after all its creative sap of life had departed. Without any social dynamic to urge it on, the revolution that alone might have saved classical society from the otherwise unavoidable consequences of its own decay remained in the limbo of the unborn. Henceforth the ‘Sign of the Beast’, the dead hand of the Caesars, presided over the antique world.
The huge stagnant state machine of the Caesars, with its ubiquitous state absolutism, expressed in megalomaniac emperor-worship, an all-pervading spy system, and a totalitarian military-bureaucratic structure, bore a very remarkable resemblance to the total states of modern Fascism. After its final consolidation under the Emperor Diocletian (AD 283-306), the transformation of the originally popular ‘middle-class’ dictatorship of the early Caesars into an oppressive totalitarian despotism became complete. Only the use of the radio was denied to the ancient ‘Fascist’ state, which, otherwise, possessed a complete machinery of repression. Let us recall the trenchant – and truthful! – epigram of the early Christian writer Tertullian (c AD 200): ‘It is more dangerous to swear falsely by the genius of Caesar than by that of all the gods put together.’ The ‘total state’ in a sentence!
A modern academic critic of an earlier book by this author, Julian the Apostate and the Rise of Christianity, [1] criticised my use of the term ‘fascist’ in reference to the classical empire of the Caesars, but the originator of modern Fascism, Mussolini – that outspoken admirer of Julius Caesar, the founder of the empire – knew better. When he called his newly-founded movement Fascism, and thus named it after the emblematic lictors’ rods carried before the magistrates of ancient Rome, he knew very well what he was doing – even if modern bourgeois professors fail to grasp its essential meaning.
The regime of the Caesars, as founded by those demagogic geniuses, those classical Mussolinis and Hitlers – Julius and Augustus Caesar – accomplished successfully the task which Fascism in the modern world unsuccessfully attempted by the same mixture of demagogy and terrorism. Classical Fascism succeeded in suppressing social revolution permanently in its contemporary society. After Julius Caesar there were no more servile risings in the ancient world. At least, if another revolt ever did occur, we know nothing of its existence.
Had the modern social order been technically stagnant like ancient Rome, no doubt the ultimate upshot would have been similar and the modern Fascist regimes would have succeeded in lasting as long as did that Roman Empire, whose long and lugubrious decline and fall has been narrated by Gibbon in his famous history. If Spartacus was an unsuccessful Carnot, the difference between these two great revolutionaries lay not in their individual genius but in their times.
As for the slaves, they sank into a deep mental coma of hopelessness and chronic despair – ‘without hope in this world’, as an early Christian writer phrased it in the first days of the Caesars. It is true that, as the Roman expansion slowed down and slaves became correspondingly scarce, some check was necessarily put upon the reckless cruelty with which they had been treated in the days of the great Roman land-ramps, when the supply exceeded the demand. As the decline of the Empire wore on, and the state passed to the permanent military defensive, the slaves acquired a certain ‘scarcity value’ and became the object of ‘humane’ legislative protection under the later Caesars! But the canker of slavery remained at the basis of ancient society, poisoning its roots and infecting incurably the whole social body.
An immense hopelessness seized upon the doomed class. Beaten in this world, it turned to another – to Heaven, the only ‘fatherland’ of the slave and the outcast. It was no accident, but was in the nature of social evolution, that, barely a century after the final defeat of the slaves, there appeared in the Roman Empire the first great slave religion, the divine symbol of which was the self-same cross upon which the last slave warriors of Spartacus had gasped out their lives in agony; that cross upon which, a century after Spartacus, the titular founder of Christianity, also, was supposed to have been suspended for treasonable revolutionary activities against the Roman Empire. It is not perhaps an accident that the Roman regime always regarded early Christians as revolutionaries.
The rulers of the Roman world were tranquil. They had crushed the slaves and then put their own administrative house in order. ‘All was for the best in the best of all possible worlds.’ Men so fortunately placed as those proud and powerful men needed no assistance, not even Divine. ‘Let the gods attend to their own affairs’, proudly declared the Emperor Tiberius (AD 14-37); and he, no doubt, spoke out aloud the thoughts of the class to which he belonged.
Such, however, were not the thoughts of the innumerable slaves, serfs and paupers, upon whose ruthless exploitation ‘the grandeur that was Rome’ was built up and maintained. For them there was no hope, no future, and no peace – except the peace of the grave. Only God could help these abject beings, who were so effectively precluded from helping themselves.
And, gradually, the idea arose that God had attended, had come from Heaven to help those who were without human help; had lived their life and had died their death on the cross.
A century after the death of Spartacus such ideas began to be preached, first in an obscure eastern province of the Roman Empire, and then universally, by a band of fishermen, slaves and artisans, with a weaver of rugs from Tarsus at their head, in the closing years of Tiberius Caesar.

Notes
1. FA Ridley, Julian the Apostate and the Rise of Christianity (Watts, London, 1937).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter VIII: Crassus and the Revolution
Marcus Licinius Crassus Dives was a man whose career was highly representative of the age in which he lived and of the class to which he belonged. An adherent of the plutocratic party, Crassus was an experienced soldier and politician, who had fought with distinction in the Roman Civil Wars and played a leading role in the political life of the Roman state. These activities were, however, subordinate to his main social aim: the acquisition of personal wealth. Crassus was, indeed, the most successful representative of the new usurious capitalism that was just then coming into power in Roman society. He had made a huge fortune out of the misfortunes of his opponents in the civil war. By buying confiscated property cheap and selling dear, the Praetor had become the richest man in Rome and had well earned his soubriquet of Dives.
In such a plutocratic society as was that of the Roman Republic, money was power. And just as his modern antitypes, the Rothschilds, used their vast wealth to acquire political influence at the courts and in the parliaments of modern Europe, so did the ancient Dives use his wealth to buy political power in that highly susceptible organisation of financial corruption and political jobbery, which, in the first century BC, concealed its nefarious activities behind the high-sounding title of ‘the Senate and People of Rome’. Crassus manipulated this financially sensitive organisation like a modern Tammany Hall boss. For Dives was a very ambitious man, to whom wealth and power were synonymous terms. He aspired to the dictatorship left vacant by his former leader, Sulla, and later to be restored in perpetuity by Julius Caesar.
In 72 BC, when he assumed command against the slaves, the chief rival of Crassus for supreme power was not Caesar, then a young man of about thirty who was not yet a front-line figure in Roman politics, but the famous general Pompeius Magnus, who had also risen to fame in the civil war, and who, at that very moment, had just crushed the popular party in Spain, where, under the democratic leader Sertorius, it had made its last stand.
Crassus intended to use his command not only to beat the slaves, but also, by turning this victory to good account, ultimately to capture supreme power over the Roman world. For this reason he at once rejected a suggestion to recall the victorious Pompey and his legions from Spain. For him to attain his supreme objective it was essential that he, and no one else, should reap the laurels of victory against Spartacus. However, before he could rule Rome, first he had to save it! The first prerequisite, upon which all the rest necessarily depended, was to beat the slaves. Crassus, therefore, proceeded to evolve a strategy for this purpose.
First of all, by dipping his hand freely into both the public treasury and his own, Crassus reorganised the demoralised Roman army. In addition to the legions which had survived the defeats of the consuls, he raised six more, and finally took the field with eight legions at full strength, about 50,000 men. With this numerically imposing army, Crassus set to work to end the Servile War.
His first movement was one of encirclement. His lieutenant Mummius, with two legions, was instructed to hang on the flank of the slave army, and thus hinder its movements, until Crassus and the main army could catch up with it and bring it to a decisive battle, which would end the revolt once for all. Taught by the fate of the consuls, Crassus gave strict instructions to Mummius not to attack the slaves before the arrival of the Commander-in-Chief.
This initial plan, however, quickly miscarried. After some successful skirmishes, Mummius, fired with contempt for the slaves, disregarded his orders and made a premature attack, eager to reap the laurels of victory before the arrival of his military superior. The result was a fiasco. The Roman troops turned tail at the first attack, and their general and the survivors took refuge in the camp of Crassus.
The Roman general took drastic steps to prevent the recurrence of similar fiascos. He revived the brutal Roman discipline of earlier centuries, long since discarded as a relic of a more primitive age, by which the defeated troops were ‘decimated’ – that is to say, one in ten were executed in the sight of the whole Roman army. As has so often been demonstrated in class wars, the combatants stop at nothing! Having thus restored discipline by terror, Crassus led his army against the slaves who, perhaps flushed with victory, or more probably impelled by lack of food, seem to have forced Spartacus to abandon his wiser guerrilla tactics and to accept battle.
No details of the resulting engagement have survived, but, for the first time, Spartacus had the worst of it. However, he showed in defeat the same remarkable coolness and tactical skill that he had previously shown in victory. He extricated his army from the field, converting what might have been a decisive defeat that would have ended the slave war into a mere reverse of which the Romans could take no advantage. Leaving 6000 dead on the field and 900 prisoners in the hands of the Romans, the revolutionary army made a masterly retreat, first to Thurii, where Spartacus enforced a severe discipline in the reorganisation of his army, and, finally, to Rhegium, in the extreme south, on the ‘toe’ of the Italian peninsula, facing Sicily.
A new phase of the war now dawned. Unable to take Rome, and outmatched in the field by the regular Roman army, there was now no question of the slaves winning a decisive victory over the Roman Republic. What Hannibal could not do with vastly superior resources, they could not do either. Meanwhile, the road to the north was closed by the victorious army of Crassus.
With the lightning rapidity of a Napoleonic strategy, Spartacus now changed his aim. He could no longer hope to win an absolute victory over Rome, but he could still win a limited one. With what was now a veteran army steeled in a dozen battles, he would cross over to Sicily, the fertile corn island just opposite his new headquarters at Rhegium. Sicily had a splendid tradition of servile insurrection. Twice, under Eunus (133 BC) and Athenion (104 BC), the slaves had become masters of the island and had held out for several years of hard fighting against the power of Rome. In Sicily, there must still be veterans surviving from Athenion’s army of a generation earlier. The memory of the two slave kingdoms was still green, and a general rising of slaves would be sure to follow the arrival of the formidable host of the gladiator. There was also every likelihood that many of the poorer free citizens might join such a rising, for Sicily was just then governed by a particularly infamous representative of the Roman plutocracy, Gaius Verres, whose unbridled rapacity was eventually too much even for his own class. He still stands pilloried before history as an ancient ‘Warren Hastings’ in Cicero’s famous speech for the prosecution at Verres’ trial for fraud and extortion.
The sole but sufficient difficulty was transport. The two and a half miles of water that constitute the Straits of Messina – the classical Scylla and Charybdis – are marked by fast-flowing tides and could only be crossed on ships, of which Spartacus had none. Like Napoleon in his camp at Boulogne, Spartacus could only look hopelessly at the opposite shore and reflect: ‘How near and yet so far.’ Once across, he could master Sicily in a few days, and to dislodge him then would prove a task of extreme difficulty. A free slave kingdom, a Sicilian Heliopolis, would be a kind of ancient Moscow, radiating revolution throughout the surrounding servile world. By hook or by crook he must get ships. The rest would be easy.
The only hope for Spartacus was to get the ships ‘by crook’. Just then the Mediterranean was ravaged by pirates, chiefly of Asiatic origin, who swept the seas with impunity, like the Algerian Corsairs of a later age, until they were themselves swept off the seas a few years after the time of Spartacus by Pompey the Great. Amongst their prisoners was no less a person than Julius Caesar, later to be the first Emperor of Rome and the conqueror of their conqueror, Pompey!
Spartacus approached a fleet of these redoubtable buccaneers, then off the coast of Sicily, and tried to bargain with this ‘floating republic’ to transport his army across the Straits of Messina, in return for cash down. The slaves were, however, ‘double-crossed’ over the transaction. The pirates took their money and played them false. Why, is not at all clear, since a permanent state of war, such as would have followed the conquest of Sicily by the slaves, would seem to have been in the pirates’ interest, if only as ‘the rejoicing third’. A few years later, when Rome turned her full strength against them, they were to pay dearly for their short-sighted treachery. Perhaps Crassus had bribed them? He, if anyone, had the money and knew how to use it!
Meanwhile, the Roman war lord was by no means idle. Unable or unwilling to attack the slaves in their strong defensive position, the Roman general proceeded to blockade them. The insurrection was scotched but not killed. Hunger should finish off Spartacus as it had finished off so many earlier enemies of Rome. The Roman army proceeded to dig an enormous trench right across the southernmost ‘toe’ of the Italian peninsula. The peninsula of Rhegium was blockaded by a huge trench thirty-six miles long and about fifteen feet deep, reinforced by vast earthworks. Inside this network of fortifications the slaves were hopelessly cooped up between the Romans – the effective substitute for the Devil! – and the deep sea. Crassus had only to sit down and wait until starvation disintegrated the social revolution.
The position of the slaves was, indeed, serious, and an unusually severe winter (72-71 BC) came to add to their misfortunes. In vain did Spartacus try every means at his disposal. A desperate sortie on the Roman lines was repulsed with heavy loss. A despairing attempt to cross the Straits on rafts made of skins was baffled by fast tides. ‘Time and tide wait for no man’ – not even for a revolution! As the winter wore on, the position of the slaves became more and more desperate. The winter passed with the hostile armies facing each other across the great dyke, separated by this classical ‘Torres Vedras’. (The lines of Torres Vedras were impregnable defensive lines held by Wellington against the French in Portugal during the Peninsular War in 1810.) ‘Rothschild’ had cornered not only the market, but also the revolution!
In despair, Spartacus even tried to negotiate. But the Romans did not recognise slaves as ‘enemies’: Roman law always classed them with cattle as ‘things’ ('res’) and not as human beings, and as such they had no ‘rights’ in peace or war. In any case, all the trump cards now lay with Rome. Surrender meant the cross and the lash. As the spring drew near, the slaves hung grimly on.
The Roman ‘Torres Vedras’, however, had one weakness from the strategic point of view. It was too long. Big as was the Roman army, it was not big enough to hold its whole length in equal strength. The keen eyes of Spartacus detected a weak spot. In a raging snowstorm, on a night as black as pitch, the slave army forced the dyke, overpowered its guards, and, swiftly filling it up, marched across. When the snowstorm finally abated, the peninsula was empty. The birds had flown. Spartacus had again marched north. Again the carefully-laid plans of the Roman strategists had been outwitted.
Crassus was in despair. Once again the war was being carried to the gates of Rome. Once more the torch of social revolution and civil war was sent blazing throughout the peninsula. To be outwitted by a gladiator! In his first black despair, the Roman generalissimo made a fatal blunder. He sent to Rome urging the Senate to recall Pompey and his legions from Spain, which the Senate promptly did. Then, recovering his courage, he marched hot-foot after Spartacus to end the war before his rival arrived to rob him of his glory. The revolution had stolen a march on ‘Rothschild'!
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter IV: The Slave Wars of the Ancient World
The vast social upheaval in the second century prior to the Christian era led to an era of ‘storm and stress’, of endemic civil war and of ‘permanent revolution’ without parallel in the history of the classical world. Not only was the free society of this epoch torn and ravaged by plots, assassinations and faction fights, but, more fundamentally still, the very basis of that system, the system of slavery and slave production itself, was directly threatened by a whole series of slave insurrections. In sharp distinction from the ‘palace conspiracies’ and military coup d'états which marked the political struggles of patricians and plebeians of the era in question, the slave revolts deserve to be called ‘revolutionary’, since they aimed at the radical overturn of existing social conditions. They demanded that slaves should be free men!
What was the generic nature of these slave risings? In general, it can be said that ancient social revolutions, and the social philosophies that inspired them, were Utopian and backward-looking in character. Unlike modern social revolutions, which strive to release from obsolete social fetters forces already implicit in the given social structure, their ancient counterparts looked back rather than forward for their inspiration. It was in the past, and not in the future, that they sought for their models: in an idealised patriarchal society conceived as existing in some blissful past, in some vanished Golden Age.
Since ancient society was largely static, because it had not produced the material means of social emancipation, it contained no forces capable of leading to a new social order in the future. When, therefore, the oppressed slaves sought for happiness and emancipation, it was only in the past that they could seek for it: in some fabled garden of Eden, ‘where none was for the Party, when all were for the State’, where a golden age of equality and social justice had actually existed on the Earth.
Such was the kind of communism preached by the revolutionary writers and thinkers of ancient Greece and Rome. The works of these men have perished and only some dubious names have survived, but there is no doubt at all of the existence of such a literature in antiquity, even though class hatred and the class state have subsequently tried to eradicate it so completely that no trace of it should survive to recall the passionate aspirations of millions of oppressed slaves hungry for freedom and justice which this literature embodied.
Like that of the Middle Ages, the social-revolutionary literature of antiquity has perished, except for such scraps and hints which remain in the bowdlerised religious version preserved in our New Testament. We know, however, that such a literature existed, and the names of two, at least, of its more famous productions are known to us. There is a Utopian romance in the fashion later made famous by Sir Thomas More, entitled Heliopolis (The Sun-State), by a Greek named Iambulus, who depicted his Utopia as situated in the Indian Ocean. And there is a lost work, The State by Zeno, the founder of the famous Stoic school of philosophy, whom Kropotkin has designated as ‘the first anarchist philosopher’. The fact that the work of so famous a philosopher was ‘lost’ is very significant as to its contents! There was, also, at least, one Utopian communist state in ancient Greece, known as ‘Ouranopolis’ or ‘Heavenly City’ (300 BC)! The Stoics held theoretically a communist point of view, and some of them took part in movements of social revolution. I may add that Plato favoured a modified communism in his famous work on the state (Republic), but, in practice, he was an extreme reactionary, a kind of ancient ‘Fascist'!
The great backward-looking force in human affairs, more even than law, has always been religion. It was in the name of religion that the ancient philosophers put forward their demands for human dignity and human justice. The greatest social revolution in the ancient world – next to that led by Spartacus, which was the greatest in all antiquity – was led by the Kings of Sparta, the descendants of the God Hercules (third century BC)! Amongst the pagan peoples the sun, ‘which shines equally on the just and on the unjust’, was the living symbol of equality. Perhaps this phrase in our New Testament represents an actual quotation from this ancient Utopian literature? Whilst among the monotheistic Jews the religious expectation of the Messiah, the promised Redeemer of Israel, was bound up with the conception of social justice. ‘He had put down the mighty from their seats and hath exalted them of low degree’, as an early Christian hymn unambiguously phrased it. Most of the slave revolutions in antiquity assumed an ostensibly religious form.
The Roman conquest of the Mediterranean aroused a burst of Messianic fervour amongst the peoples so ruthlessly uprooted from their immemorial homes and reduced overnight to slavery. As a modern social historian has phrased it: ‘An agitation was stirring all minds from the Capitoline Hill and the heights of Etna to the Asiatic ridges of Taurus.’ [1] As the century wore on, it witnessed a whole series of slave wars, several of which attained such formidable proportions that it required the whole strength of the Roman state to suppress them.
Below I record the more important revolts in this series. It is only necessary to add that, since the slaves represented conquered nations, nationalist and social objectives mingled in their programmes. At one and the same time, they sought freedom from the imperialist yoke of Rome and social justice in the name of equalitarian religious and philosophical conceptions of a Utopian character.
197 BC: Rising of Carthaginian slaves in Italy. This was of no great importance in itself, but is interesting as the first example of the application of the (originally Carthaginian) punishment of crucifixion, which henceforth was usually applied to slaves.
134 BC: Rising of the silver miners of Laurium in Greece. Mining was the most cruel of all forms of slavery. This rising was suppressed by the Athenian ruling class, supported by Rome.
134-129 BC: The first Sicilian slave war. This was a very formidable affair. Under a Syrian slave named Eunus, who was credited with magical powers – he blew fire out of his mouth! – the Sicilian slaves practically drove the Romans out of the island. Under the title of ‘Antiochus’, Eunus set up a slave kingdom in Sicily and inflicted several defeats on the Romans, who only repressed the insurrection with great difficulty. Eunus was eventually taken prisoner and the Romans crucified the whole slave garrison after the storming of Messina.
Albert Kalthoff comments on this revolt: 
However much we may or may not be disposed to accept these religious influences, it is at least undeniable that they must be regarded as a mighty lever in these as in numbers of later popular movements for redemption from human misery and degradation. Just as the religious socialism of the Anabaptists is not an isolated phenomenon, but a link in a great chain, so Eunus was not the last of his kind. The heroes of the second Sicilian slave rising (104-99 BC), which seemed to follow the lines of the earlier one down to the smallest details, appeal also to the superstition of the masses. Even the strong figure of Spartacus was haloed in the eyes of his followers by the dim light of religious superstition.
104-99 BC: During the civil wars in Rome, a second Servile War broke out in Sicily under two slave leaders, Salvius and Athenion. This, also, was only put down after hard fighting. But the revolutionary tradition in Sicily evidently survived the two failures and continued down to the time of the greatest of the slave revolutions, as we shall see when we come to deal with Spartacus.
133-129 BC: During the first Servile War, at the other end of the Mediterranean, there arose what is, perhaps, the most interesting of the ancient Servile Wars, since it best displays the ideological aspect of these desperate and ill-fated attempts to turn back the course of history.
In 133 BC, Attalus, the childless king of the wealthy state of Pergamos, in Asia Minor, bequeathed his kingdom by will to the Roman people in order, it seems, to prevent an insurrection of the slaves with which Pergamos was threatened. However, Aristonicus, an illegitimate member of the royal house, headed a nationalist revolt against the Romans. Defeated by them, he withdrew into the interior of Asia Minor and founded, or intended to found, a city named, significantly, Heliopolis, the City of the Sun, the traditional title of a Greek Utopia. We are further told that Aristonicus issued a proclamation freeing all slaves who should come to this city, and that his adviser was a Stoic philosopher of equalitarian views.
The revolt of the ‘Heliopolitans’ was suppressed and Aristonicus perished, like his predecessors. But the nature of his ‘Sun-State’ affords an interesting glimpse of the secret hopes that were current amongst the uprooted masses. Moreover, it should be noted that, despite their lack of regular arms and military training, the slaves won many victories. Evidently they must have been inspired by frenzied hopes and fought with desperate courage.
* * *
The above list constitutes a record of the chief slave risings in Rome prior to that of Spartacus. Before the Spartacus rising, the most important social wars to be waged in antiquity were those led by the Kings of Sparta, supposed to be divinely descended from Hercules: Agis, Cleomenes and Nabis. Plutarch has described the revolution led by Cleomenes and his heroic death. But very little is known of what was probably the most important of these revolutions, the last Spartan Revolution led by the Red King, Nabis, at the end of the third century BC. This was evidently a formidable affair – as is no doubt indicated by the silence of ancient ruling-class history about it.
It is interesting to note that the Encyclopaedia Britannica has this to say about the Red King: 
Nabis abolished debts, redistributed land, heavily taxed the rich, and furthered the social revolution by freeing the helots in the towns occupied by his army. Under him, Sparta again became the greatest military power in Greece.
The greatness of Sparta expired with this revolution, for, after the assassination of Nabis by an emissary of the old Greek ruling class, Sparta disappeared from the historic records. From a sociological angle, these Spartan ‘communist’ insurrections indicate better even than that of Spartacus the vast gulf that separates classical from modern society. For Sparta, under her divinely descended kings (including the revolutionary ones!), was the personification of Greek conservatism, the effective model upon which Plato, the Greek ‘de Maistre’, the arch-apostle of Greek fascism, based his model Republic and Laws, which included the prototype of the Inquisition.
After the First Punic War, which ended in the defeat of Carthage, her mercenary army mutinied, possibly egged on by Rome. The resulting war has been vividly described by the great French novelist Gustave Flaubert in his classical novel Salammbo. This war to suppress the mutineers, which brought Carthage to the verge of destruction, was waged throughout with incredible ferocity on both sides. The surviving mercenaries were crucified ruthlessly by the Carthaginians, as the surviving Spartacists were later crucified by the Romans.
The great Jewish Wars in AD 64-70 and 131-134 also had strong social aspects. The Jewish Messiah was to usher in a reign of social equality and religious well-being.
It only remains to add that, after the failure both of the popular agitation of the Gracchi and of the various slave risings, the political and economic state of the Roman world went from bad to worse, culminating in the great civil war in the opening years of the first century BC. This war between rival parties of free Roman citizens ended in the defeat of the popular party under Marius and in the triumph of the Senatorial oligarchy of landlords and moneylenders under the Dictator Sulla. After the death of Sulla in 79 BC, the ‘Franco’ of the old oligarchic regime, Roman society, with all its evils augmented and its glaring contradictions unsolved, sank into an orgy of corruption and intrigue, in which the Republic was immediately threatened with visible disintegration. This was the historic background of the great slave insurrection inseparably associated with the name and fame of Spartacus, the last desperate attempt of the submerged slave masses to hold up the tottering structure of their decaying civilisation and to ‘remould it nearer to the heart’s desire’.

Notes
1. Albert Kalthoff, The Rise of Christianity (Watts, London, 1907).
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter XIII: Ancient and Modern Revolutions
In the preceding pages we have already drawn attention to the main differences between the revolutions of antiquity, of which that of Spartacus was the greatest, and the revolutions of modern times. We have not failed to detect the vastly greater difficulties, represented by society’s static agrarian basis, that stood in the way of ancient revolutionary movements, as contraposed to modern revolutions based on the dynamic foundations afforded by the Machine Age.
We have also seen that the failure of the servile insurrection removed from the stagnant culture of antiquity its last hope of a social and cultural renaissance. Roman society continued to plunge downward until it reached its final graveyard in the vast silence of the Dark Ages, when ‘the glory that was Greece’ and ‘the grandeur that was Rome’, alike sank for a thousand years beneath the horizon of history. Christian monk and barbarian warrior ravaged a society which they held by spiritual terrorism and physical domination. The ancient pre-scientific society died of anaemia, of lack of means, of social exhaustion arising from its static technique.
Modern society is today clearly treading the same road to the abyss. The cycle of gigantic hecatombs, of recurring and ever more ‘total’ and totally destructive world wars, which, as far back as 1875, Michael Bakunin predicted as the bloody tomb of Western civilisation if it failed to make its social revolution, is now in full swing. Again, the Dark Ages confront mankind at the end of the road: only, this time, a Dark Age which, unlike that of antiquity, is due not to exhaustion, but to misused excess, which is self-caused and suicidal, not by natural scarcity but by social maladjustment, from the suicidal retention of a pre-scientific superstructure of society in a scientific age.
Once again, as in the generation of Spartacus, social revolution presents itself as the only saviour of a decaying and doomed social order. Only this time the age itself is revolutionary; for its foundation is not static agriculture, as in all earlier civilisation, but science, the supreme revolutionary force in all human history.
On account of this, above all, we have reason to believe that, despite temporary setbacks, the social revolutions of our day, unlike those of antiquity, will end in final victory. We believe that the emancipation of humanity from the age-long thraldom of the class state and class rule will be consummated finally in our own epoch.
And with this final victory, the name and fame of the great revolutionary leaders of mankind will come into their own at long last. Mankind will come to revere his benefactors and liberators in place of his exploiters and parasites.
In the literature of emancipated humanity, there will be held up to well-merited execration and contempt the ‘heroes’ and ‘great men’ of capital, whose historic eminence is usually in direct proportion to the success with which they have robbed and murdered their fellow-men. But the names of the great revolutionary liberators and martyrs of humanity, from Spartacus to Rosa Luxemburg, who fell foremost in the age-long struggle to redeem their fellows from the yoke of capital, will shine forever down the ages.
And when such an emancipated humanity enrols its great heroes in its spiritual Pantheon, we may be sure that the evergreen name of Spartacus and his heroic comrades will stand in the foremost rank.
 


Table of Contents




cus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter VII: The Funeral Games of Crixus
In the spring of 72 BC, therefore, the regular Roman army, the invincible legions of the Empire, were sent against the slaves. Two full consular armies, each under the personal command of a consul, took the field – six legions, with their auxiliary cavalry; a grand total of about 40,000 strong. In antiquity, with its more primitive transport, classical armies rarely exceeded 40,000 to 50,000 men. The best troops of the Republic were then engaged overseas, in Spain and Asia. In Spain, the civil war still smouldered, and Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) had just been sent to finish it off. In Asia, Rome was still engaged in her desperate ‘Thirty Years’ War’ with the redoubtable Mithridates, King of Pontus, against whom the Roman army had just won a brilliant victory under Lucullus. It will be recalled that Spartacus’ own tribe, the Maedi, might have been the allies of Mithridates in his earlier war against Rome. None the less, the forces at the disposal of the consuls seemed amply sufficient, in view of their vast superiority in training and equipment, to finish off any number of untrained and ill-armed slaves.
Lack of military discipline has its psychological aspect, and frequently this is more disastrous than the lack of actual military experience on the battlefield. At this moment of desperate peril to the slave army, this lack of cohesion now manifested itself with disastrous results. Whereas the slave army in the two Sicilian wars seems to have consisted mainly of Asiatics, that of Spartacus and Crixus consisted chiefly of Thracians and of Gauls, each of which followed their own national leader.
And, obviously, these leaders were men of entirely different mental and military calibre. Spartacus was an outstanding personality, a great man and a military genius: a natural leader arising from the ranks of the gladiators by sheer ability and strength of character.
Contrarily, his associates throughout seem to have been little more than ordinary barbarians, swollen ‘with a little brief authority’, more anxious for loot and luxury than for a permanent victory for the slave class. The differences between the leaders seemed to have been reflected in their followers, who could not unite even in face of the deadly menace that threatened their common interests.
Hence, when the Roman armies finally marched under the personal command of the consuls, they found the slave army divided into two separate and, it would seem, antagonistic camps: the Germans and Gauls under Crixus and Oenomaus; the Thracians and the rest under Spartacus. The latter wisely kept to the difficult hill country of the Apennines, which afforded ideal cover for waging a guerrilla war, whilst the other army, under Crixus, marched south without any particular aim, except plunder.
Such a suicidal policy played right into the hands of the Romans, with whom ‘divide and rule’ had always been a primary maxim of state policy. They were, indeed, the original inventors of the phrase, if not of the policy. Accordingly, they began their 72 BC campaign with a spectacular victory. Whilst the consuls for that year, Lucius Gellius and Gnaeus Lentulus, proceeded to pen Spartacus up in the hilly country of the Apennines, the praetor, Quintus Arius, the successor of the ill-fated Varinius, succeeded in running down the Celtic army of Crixus on Mount Garganus, in Apulia, and in completely destroying it. Amongst the slain was Crixus himself.
No accurate details of the battle itself have survived, though it has been conjectured from the meagre information at our disposal that the Celtic slaves fought in their traditional national style. Formed up behind a circle of wagons, they received and repulsed the initial Roman attack, but were lured outside their entrenchments by a feigned flight, in a manner reminiscent of the later Norman victory at Hastings (AD 1066), where a similar style of fighting on the part of the Saxons was defeated by the very similar tactics of the Normans of Duke William. Once in the open, Crixus and his disordered bands could not withstand the disciplined attack of the heavily armed Roman legions. The ill-fated secession came to a summary and bloody end, and the few survivors of the holocaust took refuge with the army of Spartacus.
The slave-general was now faced with a desperate situation. The end of the servile war appeared to be at hand – the defeat and destruction of the slaves. Eager to put an end to its ravages, which affected directly the revenues of the land-owning plutocracy, the consuls embarked upon a grand encircling ‘pincers movement’ (to employ the technical phraseology of modern war), the aim of which was to surround and annihilate the slave army in a kind of classical ‘Sedan’. Whilst Arius and Gellius moved up from the south to take Spartacus in the rear, the other consular army under Lentulus barred the road of the slaves to the north. The lion was trapped. Spartacus, the professional ‘net’ fighter, was himself caught in a net!
Under such desperate circumstances, Spartacus rose to the greatest heights. His consummate ability both as a strategist and a tactician were now displayed to the full. Hannibal himself had never struck swifter or more decisive blows than did the gladiator general at the head of his improvised army of slaves. The sequel is thus described by Max Beer in Social Struggles in Antiquity: [1]
The victorious praetorian army then made a junction with one of the two consular armies, which, divided into two columns, sought out Spartacus. The latter did not keep them waiting. With the greater part of his army – the smaller part he ordered to hold the other consular army in check – he hurled himself upon the first consular army [that is, that of Lentulus – FAR] and completely defeated it. He speedily joined the remaining section of his army, attacked the same day the second consular army, and also obtained a complete victory over the latter. The baggage and a great multitude of prisoners fell into the hands of Spartacus.
The ‘turning movement’ of the Roman generals had itself been turned! It was probably the most complete and spectacular disaster that the Roman army had experienced since Hannibal’s overwhelming victory at Cannae in 216 BC. The only detail in which the double victory missed completion lay in the escape of the consuls. No doubt this was due to the weakness of the slaves in cavalry for pursuit. Otherwise, the victory was as complete as Hannibal’s had been. The Roman armies had ceased to exist. The Roman eagles had fallen into the hands of despised slaves. 
Such an outcome seemed a breach of the laws of nature in a society accustomed from times immemorial to the division of ‘civilised’ society into bond and free. One can almost hear the Roman historian Annaeus Florus gnash his teeth as he exclaims bitterly: ‘Thus, those who ought to have been hauled away by the overseers, themselves pursued praetorian generals in flight from the battlefield.’ We are reminded of the criticism that a certain modern imperialistic poet seemed to think ‘the defeat of an English regiment was against the laws of nature'!
The road to Rome now lay open before Spartacus, as, after Cannae, it had lain open before Hannibal. But, with similar prudence, the gladiator general declined to take it. His victories had been the result of his own genius and of the desperate courage of the slaves. But he did not command a regular army, and he had, in any case, no munitions of war, nor siege artillery, such as were necessary for the capture of a great walled city like Rome. Moreover, the defeat of Crixus had demonstrated that inherent weakness of a slave army; its lack, not only of military discipline, but of the even more essential revolutionary prerequisite of moral unity. This fighting morale, necessary to sustain the slaves in years of long drawn-out war, could only come from a social programme for the future of a slave class, freed from their masters and themselves the masters of Rome, but such a revolutionary programme was not yet possible for the slaves, only lately savage tribesmen, whose own ancient way of life had been destroyed during the agony of their slavery and who clung hopelessly to the idea of a return to the happy days of their past, a past that could never return, least of all for them.
The slaves could win battles, but after a victory they just disintegrated. Such an army could win battles, but could hardly hope to win a protracted war, particularly against such a tremendous opponent as the Roman Empire, against the granite structure of which so many more powerful opponents had merely dashed themselves to pieces. Anyhow, was it not the time-honoured and justified boast of the Roman army that however many battles it lost, it always won the last? Spartacus had no resources for a fight to the finish against so titanic an adversary.
These considerations weighed with Spartacus, who appears to have been able to survey soberly the possibilities of victory. Instead of marching south on Rome, he determined, whilst the going was still good, to retire beyond the Alps, beyond what were then the limits of the Roman state. Whether he then intended to found a state of his own, perhaps based on the ideas of social justice and equality akin to those of Heliopolis, or whether he merely hoped to return to his ancestral home, Thrace, dispersing his army on the way, we have no means of determining. Anyhow, when the victorious slave army marched, it marched northwards, towards the Alps, and not southwards towards Rome. Marharbal, Hannibal’s cavalry commander, had urged the great general to march on Rome after his overwhelming victory at Cannae. When Hannibal refused, Marharbal made the famous remark: ‘The gods have taught you, Hannibal, how to win victories, but not how to use them.’ We do not know whether there was any ‘Marharbal’ in the slave army to reproach Spartacus for his failure to pursue a bolder policy and to risk his all on the capture of Rome.
Before taking the northern road, which would take his followers definitely out of the Roman world, Spartacus took a spectacular revenge for the death of Crixus. Our authority describes this sensational infliction of ‘punishment to fit the crime’:
He arranged a solemn funeral for Crixus, and, on the occasion, compelled 300 Roman prisoners to appear as gladiators and engage in mortal combat in the sight of the entire Spartacist army.
Our author adds:
The despised slaves were now the spectators – the proud Romans were now the prize-fighters in the arena. Of all the news concerning the losses which had hitherto been suffered in this gladiatorial war, not any wounded the Romans so deeply, so bitterly, as this. The death as gladiators of 300 Roman warriors inflicted the most ignominious insult upon the majesty of Rome, and made an indelible stain upon its honour. [2]
That this last statement by Max Beer is in no way an exaggeration is proved by the brief but eloquent comment of the Roman historian Florus in his Epitome of Roman History, as translated in the Loeb Classical Library. [3] Florus says of Spartacus:
His men brought to their leader the insignia and fasces captured from the consuls and praetors, nor were they refused by a man who, from being a Thracian mercenary, had become a soldier, and from a soldier a deserter, then a highwayman, and, finally, thanks to his strength, a gladiator. He also celebrated the obsequies of his officers who had fallen in battle with funerals like those of Roman generals, and ordered his captives to fight at their [funeral] pyres, just as though he wished to wipe out all his past dishonour by having become, instead of a gladiator, a giver of gladiatorial shows! Next, elated by these victories, he entertained the project – in itself a sufficient disgrace to us – of attacking the City of Rome.
One can almost hear the gasps of outraged class-feeling running through the pages of our Roman ‘Tory’, even at a distance of eighteen centuries, and it is upon the testimony of men filled with such prejudices that we have to depend for virtually all that we know of the greatest social revolution of the entire classical era!
The funeral games of Crixus had the double effect of striking terror into the Romans and of indicating the magnanimity of Spartacus himself, who thus showed himself free from personal vindictiveness against the Gauls, whose unpardonable desertion had brought their doom on their own heads. Having fulfilled this double objective, the slave army marched north into Cisalpine Gaul (the modern Lombardy), which was then the most northerly region of the Roman Empire. Once over the Alps, the slaves would leave definitely behind them the Roman world – and the servile society of the Mediterranean. The dreams of Rome, the yearning for the past, the need to shake the dust of the arena forever from their feet, the urge to flee from the humiliations of servitude and the deep disgrace of a free warrior forced to serve in the gladiator show, combined to send Spartacus and his gladiators, with their great following of armed slaves, towards the border of the Roman world, towards freedom.
Rome, however, did not allow this vast slave emigration to proceed without a final attempt at prevention, any more than Pharaoh, King of Egypt, had done at a still earlier period in the world’s history in the case of his escaping Israelite slaves. In slave societies, such as ancient Egypt and Rome, such examples were too contagious! Accordingly, the Roman frontier army, under Gaius Cassius, the pro-praetor (military governor) of the province, barred the path of the slaves near the town of Mutina, at the foothills of the Alps. Again, however, the invincible ex-gladiator triumphed. The praetor escaped with difficulty, but his army ceased to exist.
The road to the north, across the Alps, now lay open and unimpeded before the slaves. The road to freedom! But they did not take it. At the last minute, Spartacus turned back. This was the decisive turning-point in the sequence of his revolt: the moment at which it passed from a blind revolt born of despair into a definitive social revolution. For, once back in Italy, in the heart of the Empire, it was now make or break: get on or get out! Either the slaves must crush the Republic, which was synonymous with the servile civilisation of the Mediterranean, or the Republic must crush the slaves. Henceforth, it was a class war without mercy or quarter, waged to the bitter end, as class wars always are. It was, in the words of the Greek historian Polybius, an ‘inexpiable war’, like that earlier war of Carthage against her mercenaries in the third century BC, or like those terrible civil wars in Russia and Spain in our own times. In such a war, it is class survival itself that is at stake, and such a war has only one effective motto: vae victis – woe to the conquered!
We do not know the motive for this sudden and dramatic change in the strategy of Spartacus and his army. Was it due to the intoxicating effect of this last victory on the slaves, or to a desire to emulate the ill-fated Crixus and reap an ample harvest of plunder, including the richest prize of all, Rome, the Eternal City, instead of the dreary trek into the inhospitable north?
Or did Spartacus calmly weigh up the current situation which his unexpected victories had disclosed and conclude that the Roman colossus had feet of clay and that another well-aimed blow by determined men could bring the colossus down and smash its vast network of exploitation?
Conjectures of this nature are intriguing pastimes, but we simply do not know. The mind of the great slave warrior and his companions is obscured for us by the mists of ages. All that we know is that the slave army suddenly, at the very foot of the Alps, turned south and marched right down the Italian peninsula to the south.
The idea of attacking Rome itself appears to have crossed the minds of the slaves, who even seem to have made a feint against the capital, as if they meditated a serious attack. But, if so, it was not seriously pressed home.
Doubtless, many a German barbarian in the slave camp regarding the distant City of the Seven Hills, muttered what their remote descendant Blücher was to say of London in 1815. For Marshal Blücher, that reincarnation of the ancient German barbarians who overthrew the Roman Empire, was in this respect typical of all barbarians, from Attila the Hun and Alaric the Goth, those ancient conquerors of Rome, to his own countrymen, those more modern German barbarians, Hitler and Goering. After Waterloo, Blücher visited London and was shown the City from the dome of St Paul’s. Here, he turned to his staff and made his historic remark: ‘What a city to sack!’
But the capture of Rome was the end, not the beginning of the war; and, in any case, the necessary siege apparatus was lacking. Still, a desperate bid might just conceivably have succeeded. After all, the slaves in Rome must have sympathised with such a liberating army and might have opened the gates from within. Spartacus at the gates of Rome in 72 BC, like the Jacobites at the gates of London in AD 1745, makes us agog with speculation. But, in both cases, the historic moment – if it really was one – was missed. Spartacus, like the Young Pretender, marched the other way. And historians are left with the futile task of debating on ‘might-have-beens'!
Instead of launching an attack upon Rome, Spartacus led his men past the city onwards towards the extreme south of the Italian peninsula, where his army seems to have made headquarters at the port of Thurii.
The advance of Spartacus filled ‘the Senate and People of Rome’ with terror. Nothing like this had ever been known, even in the most desperate hours during which Rome had ‘lived dangerously’ – and the Eternal City had known many such hours! The slaves were at the gates of the city and, inside, every slave was a potential enemy, a permanent Fifth Column! Did not an old proverb say, ‘so many slaves, so many enemies'? The public elections produced no candidates. No one was anxious for the ‘honour’ of facing the invincible Thracian. The best generals of the Republic were away in Asia and Spain. To recall them when actually engaged with the enemy was hardly feasible, even if desired. The usual custom in such desperate emergencies was to proclaim a temporary dictator with absolute emergency powers. But it would be too humiliating to resort to such a desperate expedient against a sub-human species of slaves!
However, something had to be done. Without going quite as far as a dictator, the Senate appointed Marcus Licinius Crassus, surnamed Dives (’the Rich’) from his enormous wealth, a kind of Roman ‘Rothschild’, as praetor, with extraordinary power to supersede even the discredited consuls. Crassus, as the leader of the plutocracy and the richest man in Rome, had more to lose from the victory of the slaves than had anyone else, and had, therefore, every interest in their suppression. It was ‘Rothschild’ versus the revolution.

Notes
1. Max Beer, Social Struggles in Antiquity (Parsons, London, 1929).
2. Max Beer, Social Struggles in Antiquity (Parsons, London, 1929).
3. John Selby Watson’s translation of Florus’ Epitome of Roman History  – MIA.
 


Table of Contents




acus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962


Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1962
Chapter II: The Social System of Antiquity
The social system of the ancient world differed profoundly in its details from that of modern times, but none the less it belonged to the same category of the class state and a class-divided society. ‘Primitive communism’ was already a thing of the distant past by the first century BC, when the great slave revolt transpired. The class state and class society, the foundations of which had already been laid by the ancient monarchies of the Orient in the river valleys of Egypt and Mesopotamia, had already reached a very high level of political cohesion and of mental culture by the time of the Roman Republic, against which the slave insurrection was directed.
Much nonsense has been talked and written by the classically-trained historians in modern ruling-class circles about ‘the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome’. That both this ‘glory’ and ‘grandeur’ existed is undeniable. Then, as for long after, private property and the class state were historically progressive: their present decadence still lay far in the future. Undeniably, the classical Greeks stimulated a powerful movement in art, philosophy and literary culture in general. Whilst the classical state, and, in particular, the Roman state, its highest expression, represented a notable advance in political assimilation and social cohesion.
A modern anthropologist, Ruth Benedict, has observed that the Roman state extended the hitherto exclusive privileges of the tribal clan on an unprecedented scale. [1] Whilst that is true so far as it goes, none the less it is a one-sided view dictated by class considerations which have nothing in common with the objective view of science. It is the viewpoint exclusively of the beneficiaries of the social system; of its privileged exploiters, and not of the broad masses upon whose legal repression and ruthless exploitation was based the whole fabric of classical civilisation, including, very particularly, the ‘glory’ and the ‘grandeur’ of ancient Greece and Rome, in which that civilisation reached its cultural and political high water-marks.
It is a truism that the world is a different place when viewed from the pavement and when viewed from the gutter: ‘The world looks so different after dinner!’ We have still surviving a large amount of the literature of the old ruling classes, whose satisfied mental attitude is reflected by a series of great writers from Plato to Tacitus.
The views of the submerged masses, who, after all, very largely outnumbered the ruling class, have not survived, except in a few vague fragments preserved for us in a bowdlerised religious form in the literature of the New Testament. We know of the masses and their aspirations only from their deeds; from the armed insurrections whereby they sought to shake off their intolerable yoke. And these are summarised in the name of Spartacus. Whence arises his unique significance for the social history of antiquity.
What was the nature of the classical society that reached its full growth in the centuries that immediately preceded the Christian Era? Its salient characteristics were, in essence, these.
In common with every species of class society, our own included, ancient society rested on three main institutions: class inequality, class exploitation, and the class state wherewith to preserve and to extend that exploitation. In these basic respects the ancient civilisation stood on the same foundations as the modern one. Indeed, these self-same foundations are common to all class-divided societies which have risen since the end of ‘primitive communism’, of the patriarchal aboriginal society.
However, when we turn to their detailed workings, two profound differences can be observed between ancient and modern civilisation. The first of these was technological. Whereas our modern civilisation is based on the industrial revolution and the machine – that is, on a foundation which is in constant flux, in continual transformation, due to successive changes in its scientific and mechanical basis – the civilisation of antiquity was static in its economic foundations. It was based not upon dynamic science but upon static tradition.
From its earliest beginnings in the unknown past right down to its end in the epoch of the barbarian invasions in the fifth and sixth centuries AD, ancient civilisation reposed upon a pre-industrial foundation expressed in a few elementary technical inventions, which never changed or varied. We still have the list of mechanical appliances, as supplied by the Roman engineer Vitruvius, in the same century as witnessed the Servile War. The classical definition of a machine was given to us by Vitruvius: ‘A machine is an articulated connection of wood, affording great advantages in lifting weights.’ Such a definition, as is well pointed out by the Russian sociologist NI Bukharin in his Historical Materialism, [2] indicates the place of science in the ancient world as on the circumference, and not in the centre, of the ancient civilisation.
Throughout the whole of antiquity men drove in chariots, strangling their unfortunate horses by a harness pressed against their windpipe, and used the power supplied by the manual labour of man and beasts to harness the power of nature for the service of man. The Greeks, particularly in Alexandria, the scientific metropolis of the classical world, got as far as the fringe of the Industrial Revolution and of the Machine Age, but stopped at this point. They had rudimentary steam-engines, but they were never more than rudimentary. Water-mills were only discovered at the very end of antiquity, and, even then, were always exceptional.
Hence, it may be remarked, Aristotle’s definition of God as ‘Pure Act’ – that is, as a Being Who has no further potential life in His existence – was really an apt definition of the stagnant Mediterranean civilisation of his day, which had gone as far as it could go and could advance no farther.
The first great difference between classical and modern society lay in its attitude to science, to the great revolutionary force in society. Ancient society was stagnant; even at its highest level science only barely touched its fringe. As I have elsewhere expressed it: ‘When Alexandria stopped before the steam-engine, the ancient civilisation stopped with it.’ Classical society never experienced anything in the nature of an industrial revolution.
Its failure to reach this last level, the true starting-point of modern civilisation, is to be found in the second major difference between ancient and modern society, the institution of slavery. In the absence of machinery wherewith to harness the powers of nature, of wind and water, to the service of man, human energy was alone available for those forms of labour which could not be performed by domesticated animals. These tasks were performed by slaves: that is, by the majority of the human race legally enslaved to the ruling minority.
Throughout classical antiquity, and the more so as it approached its highest development, human enslavement was the basis of social labour. Slaves were ‘talking masks’, ‘animated instruments’, to employ the euphemistic language of ancient writers. Legal chattels, devoid until a very late period of classical civilisation of all legal protection, and at all times excluded from political life, the slaves were the beasts of burden, the hewers of wood and drawers of water of ancient society. From the Pyramids to the Parthenon, all the great cultural masterpieces of antiquity were the work of slaves.
In fact, it would be broadly true to say of this era of one-sided and immature development: no slaves, no culture! The tragedies of antiquity, those literary masterpieces which have moved the world to tears, are the tragedies of free men, of the ruling class. The tragedy of the slave, the tragedy of antiquity, remains unwritten. For who could have written it? ‘The ideas of every age are the ideas of its ruling class’, wrote Marx. [3] This tragedy was a tragedy not of literature but of life. It was the slow agony of human immaturity. ‘Sunt lachrymae rerum’, the poet Virgil wrote: these are the tears of life. [4]
It was upon this morass of human suffering, this perpetually renewed Golgotha, that ancient society rested. It was upon this that ancient society created its undying masterpieces, which nowise reflected the human agony which alone permitted their creation. In the main, men seem to have taken slavery for granted, like the air they breathed. Is not this the common attitude of a conservative public towards its traditional institutions?
Only a few exceptionally farsighted observers – an Aristotle, a Seneca – viewed the institution in its deeper aspects and against the fundamental background of society. The inspired prediction of Aristotle that slavery would automatically cease ‘when galleys sailed without oars and lyres played without strings’, must always rank, in the light of the given circumstances, as one of the most remarkable sociological predictions in recorded literature. No wonder that no less a person than Marx himself hailed Aristotle as the ‘Marx’ of antiquity! [5]
For the rest, the institutions of classical civilisation bore a sufficient resemblance to the earlier pre-industrial forms of modern capitalism to explain that remarkable enthusiasm for the ideas and institutions of antiquity which characterised the earliest phase of modern capitalist civilisation in the era of the Renaissance. As the dominant economic form of antiquity was agriculture, the dominant section of the ruling class was represented by agrarian capital. But there also existed a powerful class of merchant capitalists; not to mention usurers and money-changers, the bankers of the Roman world. A class of free wage-labourers and landed peasants also existed side by side with slavery. In some parts of the Roman Empire it actually predominated, as Karl Kautsky has pointed out was the case in Palestine, in his Foundations of Christianity. [6]
What was the probable proportion of slave to free in classical society? It varied from time to time and is difficult to compute with exactitude. But it is scarcely doubtful that the slave population preponderated very considerably over the free. The Roman Empire, as the most advanced form of political society in antiquity, represented its greatest ‘concentration of capital’, including its human ‘capital’, slaves. The old Scottish writer Blair, in his State of Slavery Amongst the Greeks and Romans, [7] estimates that in the Roman Empire the proportion of slave to free stood at about three to one. That is not at all improbable.
A society so constituted is from its nature unstable. Only the most direct and ruthless use of force by the class states of antiquity could have possibly kept such an unstable social structure in being. Classical society was a volcano constantly upon the point of eruption! That eruption was represented by the permanent possibility of slave insurrections. As Professor Farrington has recently pointed out: this background to the lofty ethics and unctuous platitudes of classical philosophers and politicians must always be kept in mind if we would appreciate their ironic limitations.
For the rest, and making allowance for the much slower pre-industrial rate of development, the classical political institutions were not so very different from our own modern ones. The successive political phenomena represented by plutocracy, oligarchy, democracy and dictatorship, are all to be found in the higher forms of ancient society after it had outstripped the immemorially stagnant theocracy of the priest-kings of the Orient. All the above political categories are to be found enumerated in the great political writers of Greece and Rome, such as Plato, Aristotle, Thucydides and Tacitus. Even such contemporary phenomena as Fascism and a military bureaucracy were anticipated to a substantial degree in the later history of the Roman Empire of the Caesars.
To this historic parallelism there is, however, one notable exception; one which arose necessarily from the nature of the times and of the economic system which they engendered.
This basic distinction is trenchantly expressed in the famous aphorism of the great historian Sismondi: ‘The proletariat lived on ancient society; modern society lives on the proletariat!’ That is, the ‘proletariat’, or (free) wage-earning class, did not form the economic basis of ancient as it does of modern society. Beneath the classical proletariat were the slaves: ‘depths below depths'! And all sections of the (legally) free society of antiquity, rich and poor alike, stood solidly united against the slaves.
Hence, the class struggles of antiquity were of two kinds: (free) rich versus (free) poor, patricians versus plebeians – and the slaves versus the whole free class, which could always be relied upon to sink its common enmities in face of this common danger and to stand four-square against the slaves.
And to be sure, even in the bitterest internal civil wars of the ancient world, it was altogether exceptional for either side to arm its slaves! In modern colonial wars we have seen the same reluctance of the imperialists to arm their colonial slaves!
Such, in brief essentials, was the anatomy of classical society. Highly cohesive in its political framework and embracing a highly civilised ruling class, with cultural masterpieces to its credit which have never been surpassed in the annals of civilised mankind, yet classical society was technically limited. Thus, without perspectives of potential development, it was forced to rely for its continued existence upon the most frightful exploitation of an ‘untouchable’ slave caste, which formed the actual majority of the population.
And since it is a sociological ‘law’ that any society which has reached a relatively advanced phase of social culture must either ‘make or break’, get on or get out, we are entitled to say that from the moment in which classical society failed to make the ‘industrial revolution’ which it so nearly reached, the eventual decay and disappearance of that society was absolutely inevitable. The decline and fall of the Roman Empire was implicit in its lack of technical means!
But before any complex set of human relationships finally folds up and disappears from human ken, its instinct for self-preservation, that first law of human as of animal existence, first expresses itself in fierce dying convulsions. And these usually burst out in the lowest social strata which are least exhausted and upon which the decline presses most harshly. These dying convulsions, which were represented in late medieval history by the chain of peasant revolts that stretched from the French ‘Jacquerie’ (1358) to the German ‘Peasants’ War’ (1525) and the Anabaptists of Munster (1534-35), were represented in the decline of classical antiquity by the chain of servile insurrections which found its final consummation in that of Spartacus.
Before we turn our attention to this last sequence, however, it may be expedient to glance at the evolution of the Roman Empire, the final political form taken by the civilisation of classical times, that self-same state against which the Servile Insurrection was directed, and which it came as near to overthrowing as was probably permitted by the nature of the times.

Notes
1. Ruth Benedict, Race and Racism (Routledge, London, 1942).
2. NI Bukharin, Historical Materialism: A System of Sociology (George, Allen and Unwin, London, 1926), Chapter V .
3. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, Part I .
4. From Virgil’s epic poem Aeneid – MIA.
5. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1, Chapter I .
6. Karl Kautsky, Foundations of Christianity (George, Allen and Unwin, London, 1925).
7. William Blair, An Inquiry into the State of Slavery Amongst the Greeks and Romans (Thomas Clark, Edinburgh, 1833).
 


Table of Contents






The contemporary situation in Britain can only be understood against its historic background. Considered as a “thing in itself” the present crisis is as meaningless as would be a single algebraic formula deprived of its correlative factor. The problems of Britain are problems that history has placed on the order of the day. And problems of such an order are not to be arbitrarily checked or swept back by the broom of the bourgeois Mrs. Partingtons.
The Industrial Revolution created new conditions in Britain, its classical home. To serve its newly-acquired world market, British capitalism brought into existence a population of wage slaves far in excess of its domestic capacity to maintain on even the barest subsistence level. Now that the Victorian age is gathered to its fathers and the world hegemony of Britain is a thing of the past, the British bourgeoisie finds itself faced with a reaction of proportionate dimensions to its previous gigantic action. The markets have gone but the working class remains! The problem of British Imperialism, today, is to reduce its population in proportion to the rapid loss of its markets. How this can be done without riot, insurrection, and, ultimately, civil war; that is the question of the day for the British ruling class.
Taken in its broadest sense (and history, unlike the historian, is never narrow) the present crisis is merely the first stage in this process. Now that the World Banker, London, has followed London, the commercial metropolis, into limbo, the British bourgeoisie has lost no time in reminding the British working class that it must no longer remain on the stage now that its raison d’etre, the world market, is a thing of the past. The concerted attack on the whole working class (unemployed and employed alike) is merely the first step in the process that will render the socially unnecessary working class socially impossible. The issue is now transparently clear. If the capitalists are shown in the light of Marxian science to be a socially unnecessary class, it is clear that the continued existence of the working class (in, at any rate, anything like its present dimensions) is incompatible with the necessities of the bourgeoisie. And this fact is most of all evident in Britain, the classical parasitic rentier, whose World Empire has gone but whose swollen slave class yet remains. British Situation Is Beyond Reform Viewed from this angle, nothing could be more mechanical and inane, than to isolate the crisis both from what preceded it and also from what will come after it. The present attack on the British workers is merely experimental, and, with an Imperialist bourgeoisie, notoriously, “appetite comes with eating”. The British working class is not, therefore, fighting merely for trade union standards. It is, ultimately, fighting for bare existence. And this, save the mark, is the time that the mandarins of the C.P.G.B. deem fit and proper for the slogan of a workers’ charter and a guaranteed minimum wage! If the issue were left to reformism, the only concession that the members of the working class are likely to get is a “stake in the country” large enough to contain their coffins!
It is clear that the situation has now got beyond reform. It is no accident that there is a simultaneous collapse of the bourgeois reformist Liberal Party and the working class reformist Labour Party whose policy is, in any case, merely the cast-off clothes of liberalism. It is Socialism or starvation, Communism or chaos! Only the iron broom of revolution can be relied upon to cleanse with complete efficiency this Augean Stables.
The events of the last few weeks have shown that the “inevitability of gradualness” only applies to overthrowing Capitalism. There was nothing gradual about the methods taken by Messrs. MacDonald, Snowden and Co., to save it! Reformism presupposes a stable and expanding capitalism as an essential preliminary to its reforms, and an even relatively stable capitalism can in Britain only be achieved over a literally decimated working class. The logical conclusion of reformism is, undoubtedly, that of MacDonald; since, unless Capitalism can be first saved, obviously, it cannot be reformed! The position of the Fabians in their “cloud-cuckoo-land” is, therefore, a fantastic farce, and the attitude of the I.L.P. in trying to pour the new wine of revolution into the old bottles of reformism, is merely a grotesque comedy.
If the I.L.P. is a comedy, the Communist Party is a tragedy. In an era when speedy revolution has become the one crying necessity of the working class, the only alleged revolutionary party indulges in chartist antiquarianism, converting the living slogans of the period of capitalism’s rise into musty falsehoods in the period of its decline. When the proletariat needs its party as never before in British history, the party is skulking in a sectarian corner, striving vainly to cling to the coat-tails of the militant workers outside.
 
Objective Conditions Favorable to Revolution
Indeed, so completely has a vulgar empiricism succeeded and superceded a Marxian analysis, that theory in the C.P.G.B. is despised on the eminently bourgeois ground that it is “unpractical”. In the laboratory of these alchemists, the word “intellectual” has undergone a “translation”. In the epoch of Marx and Lenin, the term “intellectual” denoted a revolutionary student preoccupied (sometimes excessively) with the intellectual problems that are inseparable from a revolutionary analysis. In the epoch of Stalin and Pollitt, an intellectual is scouted and condemned as a counter-revolutionary merely because he possesses an intellect! It is only such an attitude that could produce such theoretical Siamese Twins as the Workers’ Charter and the doctrine of socialism in one country, with its corollary of friendly (sic) competition with the world bourgeoisie.
What is our conclusion? It is that the era of gradual reform is over, and that of a swift reaction is at hand. The law of the pendulum applies to politics. The decline of British imperialism will be of a corresponding magnitude with its unparalleled ascent, and the speed of its world decline will be matched by the ferocity of its drive against the working class. If the 2nd Labour Government represented the last ineffective splutterings of British democracy, the “National” government represents the first stage of British fascism, which only requires time to become fully articulate.
Under these conditions, the period when the working class mustered under the banner of the Labour Party, with its bourgeois outlook and “evolutionary” socialism, is doomed to a speedy end, and an epoch of revolution is already rising above its ruins. For that revolution two things are indispensable, militancy and a party that is revolutionary to the end. The militancy is there, and grows rapidly – of that there can be no doubt whatsoever. Only the party is lacking, and the time is short.
If, as Disraeli once said, “adventures are to the adventurous”, it is no less true that revolutions can only succeed, if, and when, they are led by revolutionaries. From the era of Wat Tyler to that of the general strike of 1926, British history affords examples to show what happens to a movement whose leaders fear victory more than defeat!
For the solution of the revolutionary problem in England, all the ingredients are there except one; the most essential of all; the party that is not afraid both to think and fight out the problems of the British proletariat to their revolutionary end. The British revolution is now attaining dramatic proportions; but it is a drama without a centre; Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark, so to speak. All the problems of the British revolution are now reduced to this single problem. Without the lead of a mass party, revolutionary energy will dissipate itself in abortive and scattered riots. The problem of the revolution is now; simply and solely, the problem of a party.
 

acus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Part III: The Spartacist Tradition
Chapter I: Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Antiquity
The servile revolt under Spartacus was, as we have seen, the great revolution of classical times. No other slave revolt, so far as we can judge from our surviving records, caused such profound and lasting alarm amongst the ruling classes of ancient times. When we learn, and, of course, from sources bitterly opposed to the slave revolutions, that, long after the suppression of the insurrection, the mothers of the ruling class used to frighten their refractory children by telling them that the bogey-man, Spartacus, was coming, such an apparently trivial detail speaks volumes for both the profound alarm that the slave revolution had caused amongst the ruling classes and for the narrow margin by which alone it missed success. And, indeed, even the bare recital of the Spartacist campaigns cited above demonstrates the narrow margin by which the slaves fell short of victory. Had they only held together under the military genius who commanded them, who knows what would have happened?
Thus, it cannot be stated dogmatically that military success for the slaves was necessarily impossible. As far as we can see, they could have scored a decisive military success had their luck not been so adverse. Indeed, if the study of universal history teaches us anything, it is that the word ‘inevitable’ must always be used with the very greatest caution in relation to historical phenomena. Nothing, indeed, seems ‘inevitable’, except Death; and Death is not a thing but the negation of a thing! Certainly, on the evidence at our disposal, we do not appear to be justified in asserting that the revolt of the slaves under Spartacus could not conceivably have been successful.
A revolt, however, is not a revolution, at least not in any scientific usage of the last-named term. For whilst a revolt only changes the political appearances of society, a revolution changes its underlying realities: it creates not only or principally a new governing apparatus, but, ultimately, a new social order. The servile insurrections of antiquity, of which that of Spartacus was the climax, were certainly revolts, but whether they are entitled to be called revolutions is a much more complicated and doubtful question.
The scientific conception of revolution, as used in modern times, presupposes the existence of social and economic forces latent in a decaying society and waiting to be released from an outmoded social structure by the dynamic energy of a rising and historically progressive revolutionary class. Such revolutionary classes in modern society have been represented on the stage of world history by the capitalist class in the era of the Reformation and the French Revolution, and by the modern proletariat. For in both the above cases, the victory of the new rising class over the old order liberated new progressive forces from the womb of an obsolete and decadent social order and, by their instrumentality, created new social orders different from, and superior to, the old.
Thus, for example, the victory of the sequential chain of bourgeois revolutions between the Reformation and the French Revolution ended not only the feudal class, but, equally, the feudal social order. And whatever one may think of the capitalist order, which replaced it, it is, at least, historically undeniable that, with all its crimes and shortcomings, it released the potential forces latent in science and technology on a scale undreamt of by the old feudal order. And was, thus, a revolutionary force which transformed its contemporary society from top to bottom, thus making for human progress and for human betterment in the current state of society.
As Marx and Engels pointed out, once for all, in the Communist Manifesto, whatever counter-revolutionary role the now decadent capitalist class may adopt today, nothing, absolutely nothing, can deprive it of its historic claim to be the most revolutionary class in all history prior to the rise of the modern proletariat. The contemporary colossal forces of production, as and when compared with the meagre social production alone at the disposal of ancient and medieval society, constitute the extant convincing testimony to the thoroughgoing social revolution which the bourgeoisie have carried triumphantly through between the Reformation and our own day.
Similarly, the modern proletariat, as yet incompletely victorious, but moving forward in stages to the world revolution, which is their historical goal, likewise have a still more far-reaching plan than their bourgeois predecessors. They aim at nothing else or less than world unity and universal well-being, to be achieved by internationalism and the world-wide substitution of production for use in lieu of production for profit. By the agency of this profound social transformation the vast reservoirs of social productive power will be released from capitalist bonds and from their limiting property relations, and will bring into being social achievements and potentialities that will far surpass the highest and most far-reaching achievements of the preceding bourgeois order.
The modern age has, therefore, been a revolutionary age; it has, successively, been transformed beyond all recognition by the dynamic agency of revolutionary social forces, which last have expressed themselves historically in the revolutionary victories of the class struggle against, successively, feudalism and capitalism.
Ancient society, contrarily, knew no such movements of social transformation and revolutionary renewal. For these historic results could, in the given conditions, have been achieved only by a revolutionary class utilising the latent possibilities of an industrial revolution; which last, as we have seen already, were never translated from potentiality to fact at any point in the evolution of classical society, which remained to the end a complete stranger to the dynamic and all-transforming power of the scientific industrial revolution and of its offspring, the Machine Age. As for the revolutionary class, this was the slave class, of which Spartacus was the ‘Lenin’, to employ a modern analogy. And the slave class, as we have seen, never succeeded, under either Eunus, Aristonicus or Spartacus, in making its revolutionary overturn of the ancient slave-owning society, the ‘executive committee’ of which, its governmental apparatus, was the Roman Empire.
We cannot, therefore, say whether a slave revolt, had it been successful, could have become transformed into a revolution which would have been capable of effecting fundamental social changes in the composition of Roman society and that of the Mediterranean world in general.
On the whole, the answer to this speculative question is probably in the negative. Had Spartacus won, probably all that would have transpired would have been that the Romans would have become slaves, and the slaves Romans! Spartacus and Caesar would have merely changed places! Indeed, the destruction of its centralised Roman government might have actually led to the decline of ancient society into a congeries of rustic societies of a more primitive kind, such as later arose, after the fall of Rome, in the Dark and Middle Ages, between AD 500 and 1000. In this last eventuality, the victory of the slaves would have been actually retrogressive in place of revolutionary, and Crassus and his legions would have actually been the saviours of civilisation from barbaric regression! [1]
There was, however, another possible outcome to a victorious slave insurrection. Classical society had reached a very high cultural and administrative level by the first century BC. Probably as high a level, in general, as was reached anywhere prior to the Industrial Revolution, which began about 1750 AD. Many of the prerequisites for such a technical revolution existed in classical society. What held back such a scientific revolution seems to have been chiefly the basic institution of slavery, at all times and places so wasteful economically and so inimical to both scientific and economic development. If the victorious Spartacus had abolished slavery, under the influence of the ‘Sun State’, even for a short time, it is possible, though not very likely, that an industrial revolution might have followed.
In which later case, the whole history of the Western world would have been entirely different; the ancient civilisation need not have sunk into decay, and its religious and ethical legacy to succeeding ages, one that has been so vastly influential, would have been entirely dissimilar. Indeed, if one elects to pursue the theme further, the ancient proletariat might have been transformed into a modern one without the retrogressive interregnum of the Dark and Middle Ages; and socialism might have found its ‘Marx’ in antiquity and made its historic appearance in the classical world. In which case, our modern professors of mechanical ‘inevitability’ would have inevitably proved how inevitable the whole process was!
The above, however, are merely speculative might-have-beens. In actual history, unsuccessful revolutions do not lead necessarily to further revolutions, but to counter-revolutions. Thus, in our own day, we have seen the failure of the Russian Revolution to spread to the West in the years immediately after 1917, lead not to further revolutions, but to the victorious counter-revolutions of Fascism under Hitler and his Fascist co-dictators Mussolini, Franco and others. And, similarly, the failure of the great servile insurrection of antiquity led to the very similar counter-revolutionary regime of the Caesars, that era of permanent dictatorship and permanent counter-revolution that thereafter survived until the end of antiquity: a regime of despotism, the police state and iron repression which found its congruous figureheads in such monstrous figures as Nero and Caligula, and which exalted the worship of the Emperor, that is, of itself, because it had nothing else to offer mankind! An ancient regime which undoubtedly presents impressive parallels with our modern Fascist regimes, which themselves have similarly followed upon the failure of modern revolutionary movements. (Julius Caesar actually used the words ‘New Order’ in a speech!)
It cannot reasonably be doubted that the formidable slave insurrection of Spartacus gave a tremendous impetus to the already existing tendencies towards dictatorship which we have noted in connection with Crassus. Spartacus, therefore, can be ranked as one of the formative causes of the Empire of the Caesars: of the permanent regime of counter-revolution and repression which was set up under Julius and Augustus Caesar, a generation after the death of Spartacus, by the ruling classes of the Mediterranean world in order to ensure their decaying society against both the internal consequences of its own decay and the recurrence of slave insurrections.
In both these aims, we may add, it was entirely successful. There were no more servile insurrections, and the Caesars avoided dissolution by stabilising decay. It is well known for how many centuries ‘the decline and fall of the Roman Empire’ dragged on its weary way, long after all its creative sap of life had departed. Without any social dynamic to urge it on, the revolution that alone might have saved classical society from the otherwise unavoidable consequences of its own decay remained in the limbo of the unborn. Henceforth the ‘Sign of the Beast’, the dead hand of the Caesars, presided over the antique world.
As for the slaves, they sank into a deep mental coma of hopelessness and chronic despair: ‘without hope in this world’, as an early Christian writer phrased it in the first days of the Caesars. It is true that, as the Roman expansion slowed down and slaves became correspondingly scarce, some check was necessarily put upon the reckless cruelty with which they had been treated in the days of the great Roman land-ramps, when the supply exceeded the demand. As the decline of the Empire wore on, and the state passed to the permanent military defensive, the slaves acquired a certain ‘scarcity value’ and became the object of ‘humane’ legislative protection under the later Caesars! But the canker remained at the basis of ancient society, poisoning its roots and infecting incurably the whole social body.
Under these circumstances an incurable hopelessness seized upon the doomed class. Beaten in this world, it turned to another: to Heaven, the only fatherland of the slave and the outcast. It was no accident, but was in the nature of social evolution, that, barely a century after the final defeat of the slaves, there appeared in the Roman Empire the first great slave religion, the divine symbol of which was the self-same cross upon which the last slave warriors of Spartacus had gasped out their lives in agony; that cross upon which, a century after Spartacus, the titular founder of Christianity, also, was supposed to have been suspended for treasonable revolutionary activities against the Roman Empire. 
The rulers of the Roman world were tranquil. They had crushed the slaves and then put their own administrative house in order. ‘All was for the best in the best of all possible worlds.’ Men so fortunately placed as those proud and powerful men needed no assistance, not even Divine. ‘Let the gods attend to their own affairs’, proudly declared the Emperor Tiberius (AD 14-37); and he, no doubt, spoke out aloud the thoughts of his own class.
Such, however, were not the thoughts of the innumerable slaves, serfs and paupers, upon whose ruthless exploitation ‘the grandeur that was Rome’ was built up and maintained. For them there was no hope, no future, and no peace – except the peace of the grave. Only God could help these abject beings who were so effectively precluded from helping themselves.
And, gradually, the idea arose that God had attended, had come from Heaven to help those who were without human help; had lived their life and had died their death on the cross.
A century after the death of Spartacus such ideas began to be preached, first in an obscure eastern province of the Roman Empire, and then universally, by a band of fishermen, slaves and artisans, with a weaver of rugs from Tarsus at their head, in the closing years of Tiberius Caesar.
Note: The huge stagnant state-machine of the Caesars, with its ubiquitous state absolutism, expressed in megalomaniac emperor-worship, an all-pervading spy system, and its totalitarian military-bureaucratic structure, bore a very remarkable resemblance to the total states of modern Fascism. After its final consolidation under the Emperor Diocletian (283-304 AD) the transformation of the originally popular ‘middle-class’ dictatorship of the early Caesars into an oppressive totalitarian despotism became complete. Only the use of the radio was denied to the ancient ‘Fascist’ state, which, otherwise, possessed a complete machinery of repression. For example, compare the trenchant – and truthful! – epigram of the early Christian writer Tertullian (c 200 AD): ‘It is more dangerous to swear falsely by the genius of Caesar than by that of all the gods put together.’ The ‘total state’ in a sentence! (See my book Julian the Apostate and the Rise of Christianity (Watts, London, 1937).)
Note on Spartacus and the Rise of Christianity: As we have already seen, the Spartacus insurrection was the last of its kind. No serious servile disturbances broke the iron uniformity of the police-state of the Caesars. (The jealous suspicion with which the ruling class continued to watch the activities of the slave masses is clearly demonstrated by their rejection of a suggestion to give the slave class a common distinctive uniform, on the very significant ground that such a uniform would show the slaves their numbers and, hence, their potential power!
It seems to be a ‘law’ of human psychology that a class, or an individual, cannot go on living without some hope in and for the future. After the failure of the great chain of servile insurrections, the prospects of the slaves in this world were just hopeless. Warned by the event, the master class got rid of the decadent senatorial oligarchy, the incompetence of which had nearly been fatal when faced with a military genius like Spartacus, and put their administrative house in order. The iron military despotism set up by Julius and Augustus Caesar afforded no opportunity for the slaves to make any further effort to shake off their chains. 
The outlook in this world was, henceforth, hopeless for the servile class. Their only hope, henceforth, lay in another supra-mundane world, where the writ of Caesar did not run and where the cross had been transformed from an instrument of oppression into a symbol of salvation.
This last act of spiritual alchemy was effected in the century after Spartacus by the first religion in social history that was of popular, largely servile origin, and which came to be known as Christianity, from the name of its titular founder: the Galilean mystic, preacher and, perhaps, agitator, in whom Eisler and others have seen a Jewish successor of Spartacus crucified for armed insurrection against the Roman Empire; and who, similarly, died on the cross. [2]
Never probably in the whole of recorded history has the social function of religion as ‘the opium of the people’ been demonstrated more clearly than in the case of the great religious revival at the opening of the Christian era. Understood realistically against its original social background, it represents probably the most colossal act of ‘escapism’ in recorded history. The transformation of the cross, the symbol of torture, into the symbol and instrument of salvation, was, assuredly, a stroke of genius on the part of Paul of Tarsus and his associate propagandists.
The slaves thus made life again tolerable by this profound psychological victory over their oppressors, transferred from this world to the next. That the master class later captured the Church and turned it into one of the most effective instruments of counter-revolution in history must not be permitted to obscure its original social significance. In the colossal drama of ‘the foundations of Christianity’, Spartacus and the servile revolution take their place as an indirect but potent formative cause.
A number of passages in the New Testament are still recognisably anti-Roman. In particular, the Apocalypse ('Revelation’), which brands the Roman Empire as ‘the Beast’, and is violently anti-Roman throughout. In such passages, bowdlerised as they are by ‘respectable’ ruling-class Christianity, we still hear faint but authentic echoes of the ancient slave revolutions.
Note on the ‘Spartacist’ Tradition in Revolutionary History: As we have already observed, the name and fame of Spartacus have survived the centuries in a manner reserved for no other revolutionary leader of pre-capitalist times. Alone amongst the long sequence of Utopian leaders of the pre-scientific age, the name of Spartacus still stands for a vital revolutionary tradition. As such, in modern times, it has had many imitators and namesakes, some hardly less famous than their illustrious Roman original.
The revival of classical studies in the early centuries of the modern era again drew attention to the exploits of the Thracian gladiator, the formidable leader of the disinherited in ancient times. In particular, the forerunners of the French Revolution, those intrepid rebels against the dead hand of feudalism, and themselves steeped in classical traditions, rescued the name of the servile leader from the mists of the past.
I have already cited the laudatory reference of Voltaire, which I have placed on the title page of this booklet. About the same time (1760), BJ Saurin contributed his tragedy on this subject, to which, also, I have already made reference. Not, to be sure, a work of any literary genius, but of interest as showing the revival in modern literature of preoccupation with the classical revolutionary tradition.
In the field of revolutionary action, the name and example of Spartacus likewise continued to influence a spiritual progeny in modern times. One of the most formidable and internationally known revolutionaries of the stormy era of the French Revolution, the German ex-Jesuit Adam Weishaupt, wrote under the nom-de-plume of ‘Spartacus’. And Weishaupt was the founder of the famous secret Masonic society of the Illuminati (that is, the enlightened ones), who played a leading role in the international conspiratorial movements of the era, and became a name of terror to their contemporary ruling classes of the old feudal regime.
In the French Revolution itself, the Illuminati, the modern ‘Spartacists’, played a most active role, and, it is alleged, had no less a person than Robespierre, the formidable revolutionary tribune of the ‘Terror’ and the Jacobin Club, amongst their secret membership. In the reaction that followed the fall of Napoleon, the secret police of Metternich and of the ‘Holy Alliance’ had all their work cut out to detect and to prevent the revolutionary activities of these disciples of Weishaupt-Spartacus.
It has, however, been reserved for our own age to witness the most glorious revival of the name and revolutionary role of Spartacus. I refer to that ever-memorable band of German revolutionaries, first and foremost amongst whom were the world-famous leaders and teachers of the revolutionary working class and of international socialism, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring and Karl Liebknecht. The German ‘Spartacist’ movement, the extreme left wing of the German Social-Democratic Party, who made their immortal stand for world revolution at a time when, above all, Germany was the key to the success or failure of international socialism to supplant capitalism on the world scale.
The heroic courage and evergreen martyrdom of the Spartacists in 1919 went far to redeem the tarnished honour of the European working class corrupted by imperialist propaganda and by social-chauvinistic treachery.
It is now evident in retrospect that the failure of the Spartacists was the primary cause that led up to the victory in subsequent years of the Hitler counter-revolution, and, therefore, ultimately, to the present world butchery, from which the Spartacist victory would have, therefore, definitely saved humanity.
The glorious names of the revolutionary fighters and martyrs Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht are, indeed, worthy to rank beside Spartacus himself in the long annals of the revolutionary struggles of the disinherited and of the oppressed. Let us hope that in the unparalleled age of revolutions amid which our lot is cast we shall find new successors in the glorious tradition which both Spartacus and Luxemburg sealed with their blood, successors, who, more fortunate in their times, will carry forward the emancipation of humanity from class rule to its final and victorious conclusion.
Notes
1. See Arthur Koestler, The Gladiators (Jonathan Cape, London, 1939).
2. See Robert Eisler, John the Baptist and the Messiah Jesus (Dial, New York, 1931).
 


Table of Contents




acus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter III: The Funeral Games of Crixus
In the spring of 72 BC, therefore, the regular Roman army, the invincible legions of the Empire, were sent against the slaves. Two full consular armies, each under the personal command of a consul, took the field: six legions, with their auxiliary cavalry; a grand total of about 40,000 strong. In antiquity, with its more primitive transport, classical armies rarely exceeded 40,000 to 50,000 men. The best troops of the Republic were, it is true, then engaged overseas, in Spain and Asia, in the former of which lands the civil war still smouldered, where Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) had just been sent to finish it off; whilst in the latter, Rome was still engaged in her desperate ‘Thirty Years’ War’ with the redoubtable Mithridates, King of Pontus, against whom the Roman army had just won a brilliant victory under Lucullus. None the less, the forces at the disposal of the consuls seemed amply sufficient, in view of their vast superiority in training and equipment, to finish off any number of untrained and ill-armed slaves.
Lack of military discipline has its psychological aspect, and frequently this is more disastrous than the lack of actual military experience on the battlefield. Even at this moment of desperate peril to the slave army, this lack of cohesion now manifested itself with disastrous results. Whereas the slave army in the two Sicilian wars seems to have consisted mainly of Asiatics, that of Spartacus and Crixus consisted chiefly of Thracians and of Gauls, each of which followed their own national leader.
And these leaders were, obviously, men of entirely different mental and military calibre. Spartacus was, obviously, a great man and a military genius: a freak of nature to be found in the ranks of the gladiators! An outstanding personality. Contrarily, his associates seem, throughout, to have been merely ordinary barbarians: swollen ‘with a little brief authority’, and anxious only for loot and luxury. And the differences between the leaders reflected itself in their followers, who could not unite even in face of the deadly menace that threatened their common interests.
Hence, when the Roman armies finally marched under the personal command of the consuls, they found the slave army divided into two separate and, it would seem, antagonistic camps: the Germans and Gauls under Crixus and Oenomaus; the Thracians and the rest under Spartacus. The latter wisely kept to the difficult hill country of the Apennines, which afforded ideal cover for waging a guerrilla war, whilst the other army, under Crixus, marched south without any particular aim, except indiscriminate plunder.
Such a suicidal policy played right into the hands of the Romans, with whom ‘divide and rule’ had always been a primary maxim of state policy. (They were, indeed, the original inventors of the phrase, if not the policy.) Accordingly, they began their 72 BC campaign with a spectacular victory. Whilst the consuls for that year, Lucius Gellius and Gnaeus Lentulus, proceeded to pen Spartacus up in the hilly country of the Apennines, the praetor, Quintus Arius, the successor of the ill-fated Varinius, succeeded in running down the Celtic army of Crixus on Mount Garganus, in Apulia, and in completely destroying it. Amongst the slain was Crixus himself.
No accurate details of the battle itself have survived, though it has been conjectured from the meagre information at our disposal that the Celtic slaves fought in their traditional national style: formed up behind a circle of wagons, they received and repulsed the initial Roman attack, but were lured outside their entrenchments by a feigned flight, in a manner reminiscent of the later Norman victory at Hastings (1066 AD), where a similar style of fighting on the part of the Saxons was defeated by the very similar tactics of those mediaeval ‘Romans’, the Normans of William. Once in the open, Crixus and his disordered bands could not withstand the disciplined attack of the heavily armed Roman legions. The ill-fated secession came to a summary and bloody end, and the few survivors of the holocaust took refuge with the army of Spartacus.
The last-named was now faced with a desperate situation, and the end of the servile war appeared to be at hand. Eager to put an end to its ravages, which affected directly the revenues of the land-owning plutocracy, the consuls embarked upon a grand encircling ‘pincers movement’ – to employ the technical phraseology of modern war – the aim of which was to surround and annihilate the slave army in a kind of classical ‘Sedan’. Whilst Arius and Gellius moved up from the south to take Spartacus in the rear, the other consular army under Lentulus barred the road of the slaves to the north. The lion was trapped: Spartacus, the professional ‘net’ fighter, was caught himself in a net!
Under such desperate circumstances, Spartacus rose to the greatest heights. His consummate ability both as a strategist and a tactician were now displayed to the full. Hannibal himself had never struck swifter or more decisive blows than did the gladiator general at the head of his improvised army of slaves. The sequel is thus described by a modern social historian: 
The victorious praetorian army then made a junction with one of the two consular armies, which, divided into two columns, sought out Spartacus. The latter did not keep them waiting. With the greater part of his army – the smaller part he ordered to hold the other consular army in check – he hurled himself upon the first consular army [that is, that of Lentulus – FAR] and completely defeated it. He speedily joined the remaining section of his army, attacked the same day the second consular army, and also obtained a complete victory over the latter. The baggage and a great multitude of prisoners fell into the hands of Spartacus. [1]
The ‘turning movement’ of the Roman generals had itself been turned! It was probably the most complete and spectacular disaster that the Roman army had experienced since Hannibal’s overwhelming victory at Cannae in 216 BC. The only detail in which the double victory missed completion lay in the escape of the consuls, itself, no doubt, due to the weakness of the slaves in cavalry for pursuit. Otherwise, the victory was as complete as Hannibal’s had been. The Roman armies had ceased to exist: the Roman eagles had fallen into the hands of despised slaves. 
Such an outcome seemed a breach of the laws of nature in a society accustomed from times immemorial to the division of ‘civilised’ society into bond and free. One can almost hear the Roman historian Annaeus Florus gnash his teeth as he exclaims bitterly: ‘Thus, those who ought to have been hauled away by the overseers, themselves pursued praetorian generals in flight from the battlefield.’ (We are reminded of the criticism that a certain modern imperialistic poet seemed to think ‘the defeat of an English regiment was against the laws of nature'!)
The road to Rome now lay open before Spartacus, as, after Cannae, it had lain open before Hannibal. But, with similar prudence, the gladiator general declined to take it. His victories had been the result of his own genius and of the desperate courage of the slaves. But he did not command a regular army, and he had, in any case, no munitions of war, nor siege artillery, such as were necessary for the capture of great walled cities such as Rome. Moreover, the defeat of Crixus had demonstrated that inherent weakness of a slave army; its lack, not only of military discipline, but of the even more essential revolutionary prerequisite of moral unity. The slaves could win battles, but after a victory they just disintegrated. Such an army could win battles, but could hardly hope to win a protracted war, particularly against such a tremendous opponent as the Roman Empire, against the granite structure of which so many more powerful opponents had merely dashed themselves to pieces. Anyhow, was it not the time-honoured and justified boast of the Roman army that however many battles it lost, it always won the last? Spartacus had no resources for a fight to the finish against so titanic an adversary.
These considerations weighed with Spartacus, who appears always to have kept his head, even in victory. Instead of marching south on Rome, he determined to go, whilst the going was still good, and to retire beyond the Alps, beyond what were then the limits of the Roman state. Whether he then intended to found a state of his own, perhaps based on the ideas of social justice and equality akin to those of the ‘Sun State’, Heliopolis, or whether he merely hoped to return to his ancestral home, Thrace, dispersing his army en route for the same purpose, we have no means of determining. Anyhow, when the victorious slave army marched it was north, towards the Alps, and not southwards towards Rome. We do not know whether there was any ‘Marharbal’ in the slave army to reproach Spartacus for his failure to pursue a bolder policy and to risk his all on the capture of Rome, as his prototype had urged Hannibal. [2]
Before taking the northern road, which would take his followers definitely out of the Roman world, Spartacus took a spectacular revenge for the death of Crixus. Our authority describes this sensational infliction of ‘punishment to fit the crime’:
He arranged a solemn funeral for Crixus, and, on the occasion, compelled 300 Roman prisoners to appear as gladiators and engage in mortal combat in the sight of the entire Spartacist army.
Our author adds:
The despised slaves were now the spectators – the proud Romans were now the prize-fighters in the arena. Of all the news concerning the losses which had hitherto been suffered in this gladiatorial war, not any wounded the Romans so deeply, so bitterly, as this. The death as gladiators of 300 Roman warriors inflicted the most ignominious insult upon the majesty of Rome, and made an indelible stain upon its honour. [3]
That this last statement is in no way an exaggeration is proved by the brief but eloquent comment of the Roman historian Florus in his Epitome of Roman History (as translated in the Loeb Classical Library). [4] Florus says of Spartacus:
His men brought to their leader the insignia and fasces captured from the consuls and praetors, nor were they refused by a man who, from being a Thracian mercenary, had become a soldier, and from a soldier a deserter, then a highwayman, and, finally, thanks to his strength, a gladiator. He also celebrated the obsequies of his officers who had fallen in battle with funerals like those of Roman generals, and ordered his captives to fight at their [funeral] pyres, just as though he wished to wipe out all his past dishonour by having become, instead of a gladiator, a giver of gladiatorial shows! Next, elated by these victories, he entertained the project – in itself a sufficient disgrace to us – of attacking the City of Rome.
One can almost hear the gasps of outraged class-feeling running, even at a distance of eighteen centuries, through the pages of our Roman ‘Tory’, and it is upon the testimony of men filled with such prejudices that we have to depend for virtually all that we know of the greatest social revolution of the entire classical era!
The funeral games of Crixus demonstrated the double objective of striking terror into the Romans and of indicating the magnanimity of Spartacus himself, who thus showed himself free from personal vindictiveness at the unpardonable desertion of the Gauls, who had thus brought their doom on their own heads. Having fulfilled this double objective, the slave army marched north into Cisalpine Gaul (the modern Lombardy), which was then the most northerly region of the Roman Empire. Once over the Alps, the slaves would have left definitely behind them the Roman world – and the servile society of the Mediterranean. 
Rome, however, did not allow this vast slave emigration to proceed without a final attempt at prevention, any more than Pharaoh, King of Egypt, had done at a still earlier period in the world’s history in the case of his escaping Israelite slaves. In slave societies, such as ancient Egypt and Rome, such examples were too contagious! Accordingly, the Roman frontier army, under Gaius Cassius, the pro-praetor (military governor) of the province, barred the path of the slaves near the town of Mutina, at the foothills of the Alps. Again, however, the invincible ex-gladiator triumphed. The praetor escaped with difficulty, but his army ceased to exist.
The road to the north, across the Alps, now lay open and unimpeded before the slaves. The road to freedom! But they did not take it. At the last minute, Spartacus turned back. It was the decisive turning-point in the sequence of his revolt: the moment, probably, at which it specifically passed from a blind revolt born of despair into a definitive social revolution. For, once back in Italy, in the heart of the Empire, it was now make or break: get on or get out! Either the slaves must crush the Republic, which was now synonymous with the servile civilisation of the Mediterranean, or the Republic must crush the slaves. It was henceforth a class war without mercy or quarter, waged to the bitter end, as class wars always are. An ‘inexpiable war’, like that earlier one of Carthage against her mercenaries (third century BC) – and so described by the Greek historian Polybius – or the terrible social wars in Russia and Spain in our own times. In such a war, it is class survival itself that is at stake, and it has only one effective motto: vae victis (woe to the conquered)!
Again, we do not know the motive for this sudden and dramatic change in the servile strategy. Was it due to intoxication with victory on the part of the slaves, or to a mere desire to emulate the ill-fated Crixus and reap an ample harvest of plunder, including the richest prize of all, Rome, the Eternal City, instead of the dreary trek into the inhospitable north, which was the only practicable alternative? Or did Spartacus calmly weigh up the current situation which his unexpected victories had disclosed and conclude that the Roman colossus had feet of clay and that another well-aimed blow by determined men could bring the colossus down and smash its vast network of exploitation?
Conjectures of this nature are intriguing pastimes, but we simply do not know. The mind of the great slave warrior and his companions is obscured for us by the mists of ages. All that we know is that the slave army suddenly, at the very foot of the Alps, turned south and marched right down the Italian peninsula to the extreme south, where it seems to have made its headquarters at the port of Thurii.
As they marched by Rome, the idea of attacking the metropolis appears to have crossed the minds of the slaves, who even seem to have made a feint against the capital, as if they meditated a serious attack. But, if so, it was not seriously pressed home. Doubtless, many a German (and other) barbarian in the slave camp muttered regarding the City of the Seven Hills, what their remote descendant Blücher was to say of London in 1815: ‘What a city to sack!’ But the capture of Rome, never yet achieved in historic times, was the end, not the beginning of the war: and, in any case, the necessary siege apparatus was lacking. Still, a desperate bid might just conceivably have succeeded. There were, after all, many slaves in Rome who must have sympathised with such a liberating army and might have opened the gates from within. 
Spartacus at the gates of Rome in 72 BC, as the Jacobites at the gates of London in 1745 AD, makes us agog with speculation. But, in both cases, the historic moment – if it really was one – was missed. Spartacus, like the ‘Young Pretender’, marched the other way, and historians are left with the futile task of debating on ‘might-have-beens'! At any rate, this proverb was justified in both the ancient and modern cases cited above.
The advance of Spartacus filled ‘the Senate and People of Rome’ with terror. Nothing like this had ever been known, even in the most desperate hours during which Rome had ‘lived dangerously’ – and the Eternal City had known many such hours! The slaves were at the gates of the city and, inside, every slave was a potential enemy, a permanent Fifth Column! Did not an old proverb say, ‘so many slaves, so many enemies'? The public elections produced no candidates: no one was anxious for the ‘honour’ of facing the invincible Thracian. The best generals of the Republic were away in Asia and Spain; to recall them when actually engaged with the enemy was hardly feasible, even if desired. The usual custom in such desperate emergencies was to proclaim a temporary dictator with absolute emergency powers. But it would be too humiliating to resort to such a desperate expedient against a sub-human species of slaves!
However, something had to be done. Without going quite as far as a dictator, the Senate appointed Marcus Licinius Crassus, surnamed Dives (’the Rich’) from his enormous wealth, a kind of Roman ‘Rothschild’, as praetor, with extraordinary power to supersede even the discredited consuls. Crassus, as the leader of the plutocracy and the richest man in Rome, had more to lose from the victory of the slaves than had anyone else. And had, therefore, every interest in their suppression. It was ‘Rothschild’ versus the revolution.
Notes
1. Max Beer, Social Struggles in Antiquity (Parsons, London, 1929).
2. Marharbal, Hannibal’s cavalry commander, had urged the great general to march on Rome after his overwhelming victory at Cannae. When Hannibal refused, Marharbal made the famous remark: ‘The gods have taught you, Hannibal, how to win victories, but not how to use them.’
3. Max Beer, Social Struggles in Antiquity (Parsons, London, 1929).
4. John Selby Watson’s translation of Florus’ Epitome of Roman History.
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Part I: The Social Background of the Ancient World
Chapter I: The Social System of Antiquity
The social system of the ancient world differed profoundly in its details from that of modern times, but it belonged, none the less, to the same category of the class state and a class-divided society. ‘Primitive communism’ was already a thing of the distant past by the first century BC, when the great slave revolt transpired. The class state and class society, the foundations of which had already been laid by the ancient monarchies of the Orient in the river valleys of Egypt and Mesopotamia, had already reached a very high level of political cohesion and of mental culture by the time of the Roman Republic, against which the slave insurrection was directed.
Much nonsense has been talked and written by the classically-trained historians in modern ruling-class circles about ‘the glory that was Greece and the grandeur that was Rome’. That both this ‘glory’ and ‘grandeur’ existed is undeniable. Then, as long after, private property and the class state were historically progressive: their present decadence still lay far in the future. Undeniably, the classical Greeks stimulated a powerful movement in art, philosophy and literary culture in general. Whilst, concurrently, the classical state, and, in particular, the Roman state, its highest expression, represented a notable advance in political assimilation and social cohesion. As a modern anthropologist has recently observed, the Roman state extended the hitherto exclusive privileges of the tribal clan on an unprecedented scale. [1]
None the less, whilst the above view is a true one as far as it goes, it is, none the less, a class view, and, therefore, a one-sided view dictated by class considerations which have nothing in common with the objective view of science. It is the viewpoint exclusively of the beneficiaries of the social system; of its privileged exploiters, and not of the broad masses upon whose legal repression and ruthless exploitation was based the whole fabric of classical civilisation, including, very particularly, the ‘glory’ and the ‘grandeur’ of ancient Greece and Rome, in which that civilisation reached, respectively, its cultural and political high water-marks.
It is a truism that the world is a different place when viewed from the pavement and the gutter: ‘The world looks so different after dinner!’ We have in large measure still surviving the literature of the old ruling classes, which reflects such a satisfied mental attitude, the viewpoint of whom is reflected by a series of great writers from Plato to Tacitus.
That of the submerged masses, who, after all, very largely outnumbered the ruling class, have not survived, except to some extent in a bowdlerised religious form in the literature of the New Testament. We only know them and their aspirations from their deeds; from the armed insurrections whereby they sought to shake off their intolerable yoke. And these last are summarised in and by the name of Spartacus: whence his unique significance for the social history of antiquity.
What, in brief, was the nature of the classical society that came to a head, so to speak, in the centuries that immediately preceded the Christian Era? Its salient characteristics were, in essence, these.
In common with every species of class society, our own included, ancient society rested on three main institutions: class inequality, class exploitation, and the class state wherewith to preserve and to extend that exploitation. In these basic respects the ancient civilisation stood on the same foundations as the modern one; as, indeed, these self-same foundations are common to all class-divided societies which have risen since the end of ‘primitive communism’, of the patriarchal aboriginal society.
When, however, we turn to its detailed workings, two profound differences can be observed between ancient and modern civilisation. The first of these was technological. Whereas our modern civilisation is based on the industrial revolution and the machine; that is, on a foundation which is in constant flux; in continual transformation due to successive changes in its scientific and mechanical basis; the civilisation of antiquity was static in its economic foundations. It was based not upon dynamic science but upon static tradition.
From its earliest beginnings in the unknown past right down to its end in the epoch of the barbarian invasions in the fifth and sixth centuries AD, ancient civilisation reposed upon a pre-industrial foundation expressed in a few elementary technical inventions, which never changed nor varied. We still have the list of mechanical appliances, as supplied by the Roman engineer Vitruvius, in the same century as witnessed the Servile War. Throughout the whole of antiquity men drove in chariots, strangling their unfortunate horses by a harness pressed against their windpipe, and used the power of the manual labour of man and beasts to harness the power of nature for the service of man. (Water-mills were only discovered at the very end of antiquity, and, even then, were always exceptional.)
We can, therefore, say that the first great difference between classical and modern society lay in its current attitude to science, to the great revolutionary force in society. Ancient society was stagnant; even at its highest level science only barely touched its fringe. As I have elsewhere expressed it: ‘When Alexandria stopped before the steam-engine, the ancient civilisation stopped with it.’ Classical society never experienced anything in the nature of an industrial revolution.
Its failure to reach this last level, the true starting-point of modern civilisation, is to be found in the second major difference between ancient and modern society, the institution of slavery. For in the absence of machinery wherewith to harness the powers of nature, of wind and water, to the service of man, human energy was alone available for those forms of labour which could not be performed by domesticated animals. These tasks were performed by slaves: that is, by the majority of the human race legally enslaved to the ruling minority.
Throughout classical antiquity, and the more so as it approached its highest development, human enslavement was the basis of social labour. Slaves were ‘talking masks’, ‘animated instruments’, to employ the euphemistic language of ancient writers. Legal chattels, devoid until a very late period of classical civilisation of all legal protection, and, at all times, excluded from political life, the slaves were the beasts of burden, the hewers of wood and drawers of water, who bore the burden and heat of the day. From the Pyramids to the Parthenon, all the great cultural masterpieces of antiquity were the work of slaves.
In fact, it would be broadly true to say of this era of one-sided and immature development: no slaves, no culture! The tragedies of antiquity, those literary masterpieces which have moved the world to tears, are the tragedies of free men, of the ruling class. The tragedy of the slave, the tragedy of antiquity, remains unwritten. For who could have written it? ‘The ideas of every age are the ideas of its ruling class’, wrote Marx. [2] This tragedy was a tragedy not of literature but of life; of the slow agony of human immaturity. ‘Sunt lachrymae rerum’ (’such are the tears of life’), as the poet Virgil wrote. [3]
It was upon this morass of human suffering, this perpetually renewed Golgotha, that ancient society rested and created its undying masterpieces. In the main, men seem to have taken slavery for granted, like the air they breathed; as, indeed, is the common attitude of a conservative public towards its traditional institutions!
Only a few exceptionally farsighted observers, an Aristotle, a Seneca, viewed the institution in its deeper aspects against the fundamental background of society. Indeed, the inspired prediction of Aristotle that slavery would automatically cease ‘when galleys sailed without oars and lyres played without strings’, must always rank, in the light of the given circumstances, as one of the most remarkable sociological predictions in recorded literature. No wonder that no less a person than Marx himself hailed Aristotle as the ‘Marx’ of antiquity! [4]
For the rest, the institutions of classical civilisation bore a sufficient resemblance to the earlier pre-industrial forms of modern capitalism to explain that remarkable enthusiasm for the ideas and institutions of antiquity which characterised the earliest phase of modern capitalist civilisation in the era of the Renaissance. As the dominant economic form of antiquity was agriculture, the dominant section of the ruling class was represented by agrarian capital. But a powerful class of merchant capitalists existed concurrently; not to mention usury and such primitive forms of finance capital. Similarly, a class of free wage-labourers and landed peasants also existed side by side with slavery; in some parts of the Roman Empire it actually predominated, as Karl Kautsky has pointed out was the case in Palestine. [5]
What was the probable proportion of slave to free in classical society? It varied from time to time and is difficult to compute with exactitude. But it is scarcely doubtful that the slave population preponderated very considerably over the free. Indeed, in the Roman Empire which, as the most advanced form of political society in antiquity, represented its greatest ‘concentration of capital’, including its human ‘capital’, slaves, the estimate of the old Scotch writer Blair, that the proportion of slave to free stood at about three to one, is not at all improbable. [6]
A society so constituted is evidently unstable. To be sure, only the most direct and ruthless use of force by the class states of antiquity could have possibly kept such an unstable social structure in being. Classical society was a volcano constantly upon the point of eruption! That eruption was represented by the permanent possibility of slave insurrections. As Professor Farrington has recently pointed out: this background to the lofty ethics and unctuous platitudes of classical philosophers and politicians must always be kept in mind if we would appreciate their ironic limitations.
For the rest, and making allowance for the much slower pre-industrial rate of development, the classical political institutions were not so very different from our own modern ones. The successive political phenomena represented by plutocracy, oligarchy, democracy and dictatorship, are all to be found in the higher forms of ancient society after it had outstripped the immemorially stagnant theocracy of the priest-kings of the Orient. All the above political categories are to be found enumerated in the great political writers of Greece and Rome, such as Plato, Aristotle, Thucydides and Tacitus. To be sure, even such contemporary phenomena as Fascism and a military bureaucracy were anticipated to a substantial degree in the later history of the Roman Empire of the Caesars.
To this historic parallelism there is, however, one notable exception; one which arose necessarily from the nature of the times and of the economic system which they engendered.
This basic distinction is trenchantly expressed in the famous aphorism of the great historian Sismondi: ‘The proletariat lived on ancient society; modern society lives on the proletariat!’ That is, the ‘proletariat’, or (free) wage-earning class, did not form the economic basis of ancient as it does of modern society. Beneath the classical proletariat were the slaves: ‘depths below depths'! And all sections of the (legally) free society of antiquity, rich and poor alike, stood solidly united against the slaves.
Hence, the class struggles of antiquity were of two kinds: (free) rich versus (free) poor – patricians versus plebeians – and the slaves versus the whole free class, which could always be relied upon to sink its common enmities in face of this common danger and to stand four-square against the slaves.
And to be sure, even in the bitterest internal civil wars of the ancient world, it was altogether exceptional for either side to arm its slaves! In modern colonial wars we have seen the same reluctance of the modern imperialists to arm their colonial slaves!
Such, in brief essentials, was the anatomy of classical society. Highly cohesive in its political framework and embracing a highly civilised ruling class, with cultural masterpieces to its credit which have never been surpassed in the annals of civilised mankind. But technically limited and thus without perspectives of potential development, and thus forced to rely for its continued existence upon the most frightful exploitation of an ‘untouchable’ slave caste, which yet formed the actual majority of the population.
And since it is a sociological ‘law’ that any society which has reached a relatively advanced phase of social culture must either ‘make or break’, get on or get out, we are entitled to say that from the moment in which classical society failed to make the ‘industrial revolution’ which it so nearly reached, the eventual decay and disappearance of that society was absolutely inevitable: that ‘the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire’ was implicit in its lack of technical means!
But before any complex set of human relationships finally folds up and disappears from human ken, its instinct for self-preservation, that first law of human as of animal existence, first expresses itself in fierce dying convulsions. And these last usually burst out in the lowest social strata which are least exhausted and upon which the decline presses most harshly. These dying convulsions, which were represented in late medieval history by the chain of peasant revolts that stretched from the French ‘Jacquerie’ (1358) to the German ‘Peasants’ War’ (1525) and the Anabaptists of Munster (1534-35), were represented in the decline of classical antiquity by the chain of servile insurrections which found its final consummation in that of Spartacus.
Before, however, we turn our attention to this last sequence, it may be expedient to glance at the evolution of the Roman Empire, the final political form taken by the civilisation of classical times, that self-same state against which the Servile Insurrection was directed, and which it came as near to overthrowing as was probably permitted by the nature of the times.
Note on Classical Technique: The classical definition of a machine is given by the Roman engineer Vitruvius (first century BC): ‘A machine is an articulated connection of wood, affording great advantages in lifting weights.’ Such a definition, as is well pointed out by the Russian sociologist NI Bukharin, indicates the place of science in the ancient world as on the circumference, and not in the centre, of the ancient civilisation (see NI Bukharin, Historical Materialism). [7] The Greeks, particularly in Alexandria, the scientific metropolis of the classical world, got as far as the fringe of the Industrial Revolution and of the Machine Age, but stopped at this point: they had rudimentary steam-engines but there they stopped. Hence, Aristotle’s definition of God as ‘Pure Act’ – that is, as a Being Who has no further potential life in His existence – was really an apt definition of the stagnant Mediterranean civilisation which had gone as far as it could go and could advance no further.
Notes
1. Ruth Benedict, Race and Racism (Routledge, London, 1942).
2. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The German Ideology, Part I.
3. From Virgil’s epic poem Aeneid – MIA.
4. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1.
5. Karl Kautsky, Foundations of Christianity (George, Allen and Unwin, London, 1925).
6. William Blair, An Inquiry into the State of Slavery Amongst the Greeks and Romans (Thomas Clark, Edinburgh, 1833.
7. NI Bukharin, Historical Materialism: A System of Sociology (George, Allen and Unwin, London, 1926), Chapter V [available on the MIA at .
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter III: The Slave Wars of the Ancient World
The vast social upheaval in the second century prior to the Christian era led to an era of ‘storm and stress’, of endemic civil war and of ‘permanent revolution’ without parallel in the history of the classical world. Not only was the free society of this epoch torn and ravaged by plots, assassinations and faction fights, but, more fundamentally still, the very basis of that system, the system of slavery and slave production itself, was directly threatened by a whole series of slave insurrections. In sharp distinction from the ‘palace conspiracies’ and military coup d'états, which marked the political struggles of the era in question, the concurrent slave revolts deserve to be called ‘revolutionary’, since they aimed at what would later have been styled a ‘root and branch’ revolution: one that tore up society by the roots rather than by its superficial branches!
What was the generic nature of these slave risings? In general, it can be said that ancient social revolutions, and, also, the social philosophies that inspired them, were Utopian and backward-looking in character. Unlike modern social revolutions which strive to release from obsolete social fetters forces already implicit in the given social structure, their ancient counterparts looked back rather than forward for their inspiration. It was in the past, and not in the future, that they sought for their models: in an idealised patriarchal society conceived as existing in some blissful past; some vanished Golden Age.
Since ancient society was static because it was pre-industrial, it contained no forces capable of leading to a new social order in the future. When, therefore, the oppressed slaves sought for happiness and emancipation, it was only in the past that they could seek for it: in some fabled garden of Eden, ‘where none was for the Party, when all were for the State’: where a golden age of equality and social justice had actually existed on the Earth.
Such was the kind of communism preached exclusively by the revolutionary writers and thinkers of ancient Greece and Rome. The works of these men have perished and only some dubious names have survived, but there is no doubt at all of the existence of such a literature in antiquity, even if class hatred and the class state were subsequently to eradicate it so completely that no trace of it has survived to recall the passionate aspirations of millions of oppressed slaves hungry for freedom and justice which this literature embodied. (See note on ancient revolutionary literature at end of current chapter.)
The great backward-looking force in human affairs, more even than law, has always been religion. It was in the name of religion that these ancient philosophers put forward their demands for human dignity and human justice. The greatest social revolution in ancient Greece – next to that of Spartacus, the greatest in all antiquity – was led by the Kings of Sparta, the descendants of the God Hercules (third century BC)! Amongst the pagan peoples the sun, ‘which shines equally on the just and on the unjust’, was the living symbol of equality. Whilst among the monotheistic Jews the religious expectation of the Messiah, the promised Redeemer of Israel, was bound up with the conception of social justice motivated by social revolution. ‘He had put down the mighty from their seats and hath exalted them of low degree’, as an early Christian hymn unambiguously phrased it. Most of the slave revolutions in antiquity assumed an ostensibly religious form.
The Roman conquest of the Mediterranean aroused a burst of Messianic fervour amongst the peoples so ruthlessly uprooted from their immemorial homes and reduced overnight to slavery. As a modern social historian has phrased it: ‘An agitation was stirring all minds from the Capitoline Hill and the heights of Etna to the Asiatic ridges of Taurus.’ [1] As the century wore on, it witnessed a whole series of slave wars, several of which attained such formidable proportions that it required the whole strength of the Roman state to suppress.
Below I record the more important revolts in this series. It is only necessary to add that, since the slaves represented conquered nations, nationalist and social objectives mingled in their programmes. At one and the same time, they sought freedom from the imperialist yoke of Rome and social justice in the name of equalitarian religious and philosophical conceptions of a Utopian character.
I append a brief list of these slave insurrections with a note on their causes and course.
197 BC: Rising of Carthaginian slaves in Italy. Of no great importance in itself, but interesting as the first example of the application of the (originally Carthaginian) punishment of crucifixion, henceforth usually applied to slaves.
134 BC: Rising of the silver miners of Laurium in Greece. (Mining was the most cruel of all forms of slavery.) Suppressed by the Athenian ruling class, supported by Rome.
134-129 BC: The first Sicilian slave war. This was a very formidable affair. Under a Syrian slave named Eunus, who was credited with magical powers – he blew fire out of his mouth! – the Sicilian slaves practically drove the Romans out of the island. Under the title of ‘Antiochus’, Eunus set up a slave kingdom in Sicily and inflicted several defeats on the Romans, who only repressed the insurrection with great difficulty. Eunus was eventually taken prisoner and the Romans crucified the whole slave garrison after the storming of Messina.
A German historian comments on this revolt: 
However much we may or may not be disposed to accept these religious influences, it is at least undeniable that they must be regarded as a mighty lever in these as in numbers of later popular movements for redemption from human misery and degradation. Just as the religious socialism of the Anabaptists is not an isolated phenomenon, but a link in a great chain, so Eunus was not the last of his kind. The heroes of the second Sicilian slave rising (104-99 BC), which seemed to follow the lines of the earlier one down to the smallest details, appeal also to the superstition of the masses. Even the strong figure of Spartacus was haloed in the eyes of his followers by the dim light of religious superstition. [2]
104-99 BC: During the civil wars in Rome, a second Servile War broke out in Sicily under two slave leaders, Salvius and Athenion. This, also, was only put down after hard fighting, and, as we shall see when we come to deal with Spartacus, the revolutionary tradition in Sicily evidently survived the two failures and continued down to the time of the greatest of the slave revolutions.
133-129 BC: Meanwhile, at the other end of the Mediterranean, there arose what is, perhaps, the most interesting of the ancient Servile Wars, since it best displays the ideological aspect of these desperate and ill-fated attempts to turn back the course of history.
In 133 BC, Attalus, the childless king of the wealthy state of Pergamos, in Asia Minor, bequeathed his kingdom by will to the Roman people in order, it seems, to prevent an insurrection of the slaves with which Pergamos was threatened. However, Aristonicus, an illegitimate member of the royal house, headed a nationalist revolt against the Romans. Defeated by them, he withdrew into the interior of Asia Minor and founded, or intended to found, a city named, significantly, ‘Heliopolis’, ‘The City of the Sun’, the traditional title of a Greek Utopia. We are further told that Aristonicus issued a proclamation freeing all slaves who should come to this city, and that his adviser was a Stoic philosopher of equalitarian views (see note at end of chapter).
The revolt of the ‘Heliopolitans’ was suppressed and Aristonicus perished, like his predecessors. But the nature of his ‘Sun-State’ affords an interesting glimpse of the secret hopes that were current amongst the uprooted masses. Moreover, it should be noted that, despite their lack of regular arms and military training, the slaves won many victories. Evidently they must have been inspired by frenzied hopes and fought with desperate courage.
* * *
The above list constitutes a record of the chief slave risings in Rome prior to that of Spartacus. There were, also, formidable Greek social wars in antiquity a century earlier, and the great Jewish Wars (AD 64-70, 131-134) had, as noted above, a strong social aspect. The Jewish Messiah was to usher in a reign of social equality and religious well-being. But these came, respectively, too early and too late to be included in this series of the immediate predecessors of Spartacus.
* * *
It only remains to add that, after the failure both of the popular agitation of the Gracchi and of the various slave risings, the political and economic state of the Roman world went from bad to worse, culminating in the great civil war in the opening years of the first century BC, which ended in the defeat of the popular party under Marius and in the triumph of the Senatorial oligarchy of landlords and moneylenders under the Dictator Sulla. After the death of Sulla (79 BC), the ‘Pitt’ of the old oligarchic regime, Roman society, with all its evils augmented and its glaring contradictions unsolved, sank into an orgy of corruption and intrigue, in which the Republic was immediately threatened with visible disintegration. This was the historic background of the great slave insurrection inseparably associated with the name and fame of Spartacus, the last desperate attempt of the submerged slave masses to hold up the tottering structure of their decaying civilisation and to ‘remould it nearer to the heart’s desire’.
Note on Revolutionary Literature in Antiquity: Like that of the Middle Ages, the social-revolutionary literature of antiquity has completely perished, except, to some extent, in a bowdlerised religious version preserved in our New Testament. We know, however, that such a literature existed, and the names of two, at least, of its more famous productions are known to us. There is a Utopian romance in the fashion later made famous by Sir Thomas More, entitled Heliopolis (The Sun-State), by a Greek named Iambulus, who depicted his Utopia as situated in the Indian Ocean. And there is a lost work, The State by Zeno, the founder of the famous Stoic school of philosophy, whom Kropotkin has designated as ‘the first anarchist philosopher’. (The fact that the work of so famous a philosopher was ‘lost’ is very significant as to its contents!) There was, also, at least, one Utopian communist state in ancient Greece, known as ‘Ouranopolis’ or ‘Heavenly City’ (300 BC)! I may add that the Stoics held theoretically a communist point of view, and some of them took part in movements of social revolution. Also, Plato favoured a modified communism in his famous work on the state (Republic), but, in practice, was an extreme reactionary, a kind of ancient ‘Fascist'!
Notes
1. Albert Kalthoff, The Rise of Christianity (Watts, London, 1907).
2. Albert Kalthoff, The Rise of Christianity (Watts, London, 1907).
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter II: Early Battles
The defeat of Clodius and the consequent expansion of the original diminutive band of gladiators and runaway slaves into something approaching an army convinced the Roman Senate that the revolt was a serious affair. No longer could it be regarded merely as a ‘commotion of fencers’, as the historian Plutarch was later scornfully to term it. Accordingly, the Roman government sent the Praetor, or military governor of Rome, Publius Varinius, with two legions against the slaves. This represented a considerable army, about 12,000 strong. [1] 
When the Roman general arrived in Campania, he found the slaves drawn up in battle array, ‘like a regular army’, despite their still defective equipment, which still largely comprised such primitive weapons as clubs and pointed stakes – poor enough weapons with which to attack the conquerors of the world!
Spartacus, however, had no intention of attacking; such a course would evidently be premature. To attack too soon is as disastrous as not to attack at all. An undisciplined rabble of slaves, even if stiffened by a handful of gladiators and ex-soldiers, could be no match for a well-trained and equipped army. From the meagre details that survive, it is clear that, in the ensuing campaign, Spartacus demonstrated outstanding ability as a tactician, worthy of the greatest guerrilla warriors. Like an ancient ‘De Wet’, he was everywhere and nowhere at the same time! 
It was now the autumn (73 BC) and the Roman army advanced slowly, hampered both by the damp autumn weather, by consequent disease, and by frequent desertion from the army, which seems to have consisted largely of unwilling militia conscripts. However, on two successive occasions, the Roman general overtook his elusive enemy and drew up his lines for the pitched battle that would end the revolt. But the Roman invitation to ‘come and be killed’ produced no response from the slave army. Like Spanish guerrillas in the Peninsular War when faced with the invincible armies of Napoleon’s marshals, the slave army carefully avoided battle in the open. ‘In the deepest silence it had broken up and had turned to the south towards Picentia (Vicenza, near Amalfi), where Varinius overtook it, indeed, but could not prevent it from retiring over the Silarus into the interior of Lucania, the chosen land of shepherds and robbers.’ [2]
Taking full advantage of the difficult country, Spartacus, whilst still declining battle against the main body of the enemy, proceeded to deal a series of swift and staggering blows against isolated detachments of the pursuing army. In succession, he launched a series of ruthless and victorious counter-attacks on the scattered divisions of the Roman army which vainly attempted to catch up with, or encircle, the fleeing slaves.
A French historian thus describes this succession of victorious counter-strokes:
Soon he [Spartacus] had gathered an army of about 7000 men, some Thracians like himself, others Gauls and Germans, like Crixus and Oenomaus. In this kind of war it is always a mistake to divide the attacking army into isolated detachments. However, this was exactly what Varinius did. Having divided his army, for the purpose of marching faster, he met with nothing but defeats. His advance guard of 2000 men, under the command of his subordinate Furius, was annihilated. In his haste to avenge the rout of Clodius Glaber, he had marched too far ahead. A second division, under the brigadier-general (legionary commander) Cossinus, met the same fate. It was taken by surprise whilst its general was taking the baths at Salina, between Pompeii and Herculaneum. Before Varinius had time to reorganise his forces after these disasters, Spartacus took the offensive and completely defeated the Praetor himself, capturing his fasces (lictors’ rods), the symbol of his official rank, and even the Praetor’s own horse. The latter, unlike his subordinates, succeeded in making his escape and made urgent representations to the Roman Senate to send reinforcements. [3]
Spartacus, having defeated the Roman army by this process of attrition, went on to make himself master of the fertile province of Campania. The Roman corps, under Gaius Thoranius, which had been left there by Varinius, was destroyed, its camp was stormed, and its commander killed. The slave army pressed home its successes and even considerable towns, such as Consentia, in the Bruttian country, Thurii and Metapontum in Lucania, Nola and Nuceria in Campania, were taken by storm and sacked. It would appear that upon these occasions Spartacus was not altogether successful in restraining his followers from paying off old scores, though he did his best to restrain them, both on the grounds of humanity and of policy, as he desired to secure the support of the lesser Italian towns against Rome.
The result of this staggering succession of victories was to make Spartacus the master of Southern Italy. His army grew by leaps and bounds, being swelled by runaway slaves from all parts of Italy, until, by the spring of 72 BC, it had attained a strength of at least 40,000. Moreover, the gladiator general set to work to turn this miscellaneous horde into a regular army capable of meeting the main Roman armies in the field. For Spartacus possessed the rare faculty of being able to keep his head even in victory. He knew that his previous successes had merely been skirmishes, affairs of outposts only. No undisciplined force would have any chance of meeting on equal terms the ‘ever-victorious’ Roman legions. Consequently, Spartacus set himself to remedy the military chaos represented by an untrained horde of miscellaneous slaves.
The classical historian Mommsen tells us:
Spartacus doubtless – to judge by the little which we learn regarding that remarkable man – stood in this respect above his party. Along with his strategic ability he displayed no ordinary talent for organisation, as indeed from the very outset the uprightness with which he had presided over his band and distributed the spoil, had directed the eyes of the multitude to him quite as much at least as his valour. To remedy the severely felt want of cavalry and of arms, he tried, with the help of the herds of horses captured in lower Italy, to train and discipline a cavalry and, so soon as he got the port of Thurii into his hands, to procure from that quarter iron and copper wherewith to replace the crude arms of his followers. [4]
By these means, Spartacus sought to turn a rabble into an army capable of waging permanently successful war against the greatest military power that the world had known prior to his day. It was a tremendous ambition which, a century and a half earlier, had baffled even the great Hannibal, the greatest military genius, prior to Napoleon, in the whole history of war. And Hannibal had a veteran army and the richest state in the world behind him, not a hastily collected and half-armed rabble of slaves, as was the army of Spartacus.
With regard to the social ideals of Spartacus, it is more difficult to speak with assurance. We know that he forbade the use of gold and silver in his camp, but we cannot say how far this ‘war communism’ was merely a temporary measure dictated by the need to prohibit in the slave camp a luxury that would have been fatal to its continued morale. For example, ancient historians assure us that it was the luxury of Capua that undermined the iron discipline of Hannibal’s army and thus contributed to his downfall: Spartacus may have had this historic warning in mind when he uttered his prohibition.
It has also been alleged that Spartacus desired to found a ‘Sun-State’, an ‘Heliopolis’, like that of the ill-fated Aristonicus of Pergamus, which we have already described in the preceding chapter. Arthur Koestler has even incorporated this ambition in his fine historical novel The Gladiators, the subject of which is the Servile War. But I do not know what is his source for this statement and I do not find support for it in any of our extant classical authorities: it is true that they are far enough from being exhaustive!
In any case, the ideals of the ‘Sun-State’, of social equality and of Utopian communism, were, as we have seen, widely diffused in this era, and can hardly have been unknown in the great army of slaves gathered as they were promiscuously from all quarters of the Mediterranean world, which might even, just possibly, have included veterans of Aristonicus from the Asiatic ‘Heliopolis’ itself, and which, as the sequel was to show, still cherished vivid memories of the two Servile Wars in Sicily. [5]
In any case, if Spartacus and his associates cherished any such Utopian ideal, they had but little time to set to work on idealistic projects, for which survival and, therefore, military victory were the first essential prerequisites. In the Roman Empire of the first century before the Christian era – for it was already an Empire if as yet without an Emperor! – governed by a ruthless and mercenary plutocracy and sustained by the most powerful war machine known up to that date, idealism and communism were remote and unsubstantial dreams. North, south, east and west the slaves faced a cold and heartless world, which regarded with an incredulous smile any social milieu other and higher than the jungle of class hatred and oppression in which mankind had lived since patriarchal times – and which he has continued to inhabit down to our capitalist society of today!
For this world was now aroused. Spartacus and the slave army had woken the sleeping lion: they had disturbed the complacent sleep of the Roman Wolf! For ‘the Senate and People of Rome’ now found that they had, and this time on their own doorstep, a servile war of comparable extent and severity to those which, in the preceding century, in Sicily and Asia, it had taxed to the full the great military war machine of the Republic to suppress. And Spartacus was not only a greater general than Eunus, Aristonicus and Athenion, but was even more dangerous from his strategic situation right at the gates of Rome itself, where he could paralyse the vast empire by a mortal blow at its metropolitan heart.
Accordingly, in the spring of 72 BC, the Senate took an unheard-of step hitherto in a war against slaves. For the Roman citizens regarded their slaves as a barely human sub-species of men; for such was the current sentiment throughout antiquity regarding slaves in general, as is clear from the still surviving account of this war by the Roman historian Annaeus Florus, a conventional Roman ‘Tory’. To send both Consuls (that is, annual presidents of the Republic and Commanders-in-Chief) against the foe was a military distinction reserved for the most dangerous enemies of the Republic. This extreme step was now taken by the Roman government: a sure enough indication of its extreme fear. The gladiator had become a general. The horde of runaways had become an army. The revolt had become a revolution!
Notes
1. Since the reform of the Roman military system by Marius, a generation earlier, a legion, or brigade, was standardised at about 6000 strong.
2. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
3. Jérôme Carcopino, Histoire Ancienne: La République Romaine (Les Presses universitaires de France, Paris, 1937). 
4. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
5. Arthur Koestler, The Gladiators (Jonathan Cape, London, 1939).
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter II: Ancient and Modern Revolutions
In the preceding pages we have already drawn attention to the main differences between the revolutions of antiquity, of which that of Spartacus was the greatest, and the revolutions of modern times. In this last connection, we have not failed to detect the vastly greater difficulties, represented by its static agrarian basis, that stood in the way of ancient revolutionary movements, as contraposed to modern revolutions based on the dynamic foundations afforded by the Machine Age.
We have also seen that the failure of the servile insurrections removed from the stagnant culture of antiquity its last hope of a social and cultural renaissance. Roman society continued to plunge downward until it reached its final graveyard in the vast silence of the Dark Ages, when ‘the glory that was Greece’ and ‘the grandeur that was Rome’, alike sank for a thousand years beneath the horizon of history. The ancient pre-scientific society died of anaemia; of lack of means; of social exhaustion arising from its static technique.
Modern society is today clearly treading the same road to the abyss. The cycle of gigantic hecatombs, of recurring and ever more ‘total’ and totally destructive world wars, which, as far back as 1875, Michael Bakunin predicted as the bloody tomb of Western civilisation if it failed to make its social revolution, is now in full swing. Again, the Dark Ages confront mankind at the end of the road: only, this time, a Dark Age which, unlike that of antiquity, is due not to exhaustion, but to misused excess; which is self-caused and suicidal, not by natural scarcity as in antiquity, but by social maladjustment; from the (literally) suicidal retention of a pre-scientific superstructure of society in a scientific age.
Once again, as in the generation of Spartacus, social revolution presents itself as the only saviour of a decaying and otherwise doomed social order. Only this time the age is itself revolutionary; for its foundation is not static agriculture, as in all earlier civilisations, but science, itself, the supreme revolutionary force in all human history.
On account of this, above all, we have reason to believe that, despite temporary setbacks, our age is pre-eminently an age of revolution, and that the social revolutions of our day, unlike those of antiquity, will end in final victory, and that that the emancipation of humanity from the age-long thraldom of the class state and class rule will be consummated finally in our own epoch.
And also with this final victory, the name and fame of the great revolutionary leaders of mankind will come into their own at long last: mankind will come to revere his benefactors and liberators in lieu of his exploiters and parasites.
In the literature of emancipated humanity, there will be held up to well-merited execration and contempt the ‘heroes’ and ‘great men’ of capital, whose historic eminence is usually in direct proportion to the success with which they have robbed and murdered their fellow-men. But the names of the great revolutionary liberators and martyrs of humanity, from Spartacus to Rosa Luxemburg, who fell foremost in the age-long struggle to redeem their fellows from the yoke of capital, will shine forever down the ages.
And when such an emancipated humanity enrols its great heroes in its spiritual Pantheon, we may be sure that the evergreen name of Spartacus and his heroic comrades will stand in the foremost rank.
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter V: The Death of Spartacus – And the Appian Way
The final act in the tremendous drama represented by the Servile War had now opened. It was a fight to the finish between Spartacus and Crassus, between Rome and the revolution. The campaign that raged through the early months of 71 BC was swift, bloody and ruthless. If it ended in the victory of Rome, this was at least as much due to the endemic insubordination characteristic of a slave army composed of many nationalities as it was to the military power of the Roman war machine. Even from our extant fragmentary accounts, it is clear that Spartacus displayed, throughout, military genius of the highest order, coupled with that personal magnanimity in coming to the aid even of deserters, that we have already noted in the case of Crixus. Spartacus’ final campaign, his ‘1814’ so to speak, was as brilliant as was Napoleon’s swan-song in that year. If, similarly, it was a barren masterpiece that ended in final disaster, that also was due to circumstances that lay in the nature of the times.
The first intention of Spartacus in marching north after escaping from the Roman cage in the opening days – as far as we can compute – of 71 BC was to attempt to reach Sicily but by a more circuitous route. He intended to march on the great Adriatic port of Brundusium (Brindisi) and, seizing the shipping in its harbour, sail thence to Sicily, there, from his island stronghold, to wage permanent war against Rome. But this strategically sound plan was frustrated by the arrival of the Governor of Macedonia, Marcus Lucullus, with his army, in obedience to the orders of the Senate. Cut off from the sea by Lucullus, and without siege artillery wherewith to force walled towns, Spartacus and the slaves had now no option but to turn at bay, and, if possible, defeat the pursuing army of Crassus before it could effect a junction with either Lucullus or the formidable Pompey, now on en route from Spain with his veteran legions.
At this precise moment of extreme danger, when it was ‘make or break’ for the slaves, another breakaway took place in their army which destroyed any chance that Spartacus might still have had of defeating the Romans. The causes of this fatal split were similar to those which had, earlier on, characterised the breakaway of Crixus and Oenomaus: that is, jealousy of the superior personality of Spartacus and an overwhelming desire for aimless and indiscriminate plunder. (Jealousy was a vice endemic amongst slaves, whose masters habitually played them off against each other.) 
Under two Gauls, Castus and Gannicus, the remaining Celts and Germans who had survived the massacre on Mount Garganus formed a separate camp from that of Spartacus and went off plundering on their own, carrying with them the captured eagles and consular insignia which Spartacus had taken during his earlier victories.
Consequently, when Dives came up from the south, he confronted two separate and uncoordinated armies. Eager to finish off the war before his dreaded rival Pompey returned from Spain, Crassus utilised to the full the old adage to which his countrymen owed so much: ‘Divide and Rule.’ Crassus concentrated on the Gauls as his obvious prey and surprised their camp by a forced march whilst they were encamped near the Lucanian Lake in the course of a plundering raid. The Roman superiority in numbers and equipment was too much for the brave but undisciplined Gauls, and Castus, Gannicus and their men would have shared the fate of their predecessors Crixus and Oenomaus, had not Spartacus come to their rescue and arrived on the scene just in time. With the magnanimity that he had shown in the case of Crixus, Spartacus hurried to the assistance of the deserters. A rapid forced march and a masterly tactical manoeuvre outflanked the attacking Romans, and Crassus, perforce, beat a hasty retreat to escape total destruction.
‘Once bitten, twice shy.’ Unfortunately, Castus and Gannicus remained impervious to this wise proverb. Undeterred by their narrow escape from complete destruction, the Gauls again pitched their camp separately from that of their saviour, Spartacus. We may, perhaps, charitably assume that shortage of food was a factor which compelled the slave army to resort to these suicidal divisions in the face of the enemy. At any rate, whether due to this reason or to sheer ‘cussedness’ on the part of the Gauls, these last soon learnt by bitter experience the truth of that profound epigram of a modern British politician (Lord Melbourne): ‘Let us, at all costs, hang together, gentlemen. Otherwise, we shall hang separately.’
For Crassus, who had every reason a man could have for wanting to finish the war quickly, soon tried again. This time he demonstrated considerable military skill. His cavalry made a feint against the camp of Spartacus, which kept the Thracian busy. Meanwhile, Crassus, with his infantry, made a lightning dash with the object of surprising the Gauls. He would undoubtedly have succeeded had not the Gauls, who were carelessly camped by the River Silarus, been roused by two women who had risen earlier to offer sacrifice to the gods for the safety of their army, and caught sight of the advancing Romans. As it was, the Gauls had just time to form in battle order before the Roman legions arrived.
The resulting battle of the Silarus was desperate to the point of extermination, and it ended in the literal annihilation of the army of Castus and Gannicus. When the battle ended the whole Celtic army, 10,200 in all, lay dead in serried unbroken ranks: only two, out of all this host, having attempted to fly and been cut down from behind! This time there was no Spartacus to save them at the last moment. The Roman losses were, no doubt, proportionately heavy, but their victory was overwhelming from a tactical standpoint. Moreover, the prestige and self-respect of the imperial race were enormously gratified by the recapture of the five legionary eagles (standards) and the consular insignia taken by the slaves after the rout of the consuls in the Apennines. [1]
The end of the Servile War was in sight. The strategic position of Spartacus was now desperate. Faced by the numerically superior army of Crassus, cut off from the sea by Lucullus, and with the formidable Spanish army of Pompey coming by forced marches to Rome, Spartacus retired into the hilly country of Calabria to prolong the now hopeless struggle by guerrilla warfare. Crassus followed him eagerly, sending on his subordinate Scrofas with an advance guard to harass and delay his movements and, if possible, bring him to battle before Pompey and Lucullus arrived to share his glory as the conqueror of the most terrible servile insurrection in classical history.
The Thracian lion, however, was not yet trapped, and had a last spring left. The Roman advance guard, which hung on the rear of the retreating slave army, became too impatient: it came closer and closer. Finally, it came too close, and the lion turned – and leapt! The Romans marched into an ambush, from which the survivors barely rescued their wounded leader, and fled precipitately to the camp of Crassus. Spartacus was invincible! Single-handed, Crassus could not finish him off. Reluctantly he prepared to retreat and await reinforcement by the armies of Pompey and Lucullus before making his final effort.
The victorious ambuscade was, however, the last victory that Spartacus was destined to enjoy before the curtain finally fell on the slave revolution. A tactical success, it proved to be, ultimately, a strategic disaster. For the slaves, flushed with victory and, presumably, desperate for lack of food and shelter, clamoured for battle. Was not Spartacus invincible? And was not vengeance due for the overthrow of the Gauls at the hand of Crassus?
Spartacus appears to have stood out against this suicidal clamour. The odds were now too unequal. But the slaves continued to clamour, and there was, in any case, nothing else but a slow war of exhaustion, with the odds ultimately weighed overwhelmingly against the slaves. Only a miracle could save them. But this had also been the case in Rhegium and the Apennines, and, in both cases, Spartacus had wrought the necessary miracle which had saved an apparently lost army. Might he not do it yet again, and was not Rome on her last legs, as was irrefutably demonstrated by her despairing recall of her frontier armies? One more victory and the tyrant of the world was down! Anyway, better take even a desperate risk than the slow, inglorious man-hunt which was now the sole alternative to giving battle, with the lash and the cross at its inevitable end.
So, no doubt, reasoned the slaves, and, if so, their reasoning was sound; it was ‘do or die’. Spartacus, too, may have come to agree with his battle-drunk followers. There was nothing else to do except to tempt Providence in a final fling. Anyhow, Spartacus had no official authority over the slaves, nor could he stand against their wishes. He was, after all, only general by election and because of his proven merits. If his army must fight, fight it should!
The final battle of the Servile War, which ended the insurrection of the slaves and which witnessed the death of Spartacus and the destruction of his army, took place near Petelia (near Strongoli in Calabria), some time in March 71 BC, in the early spring. [2] 
The battle itself seems to have been unpremeditated by either army and to have been due to the reckless impetuosity of the advance-guard of the slaves, who made a sudden attack on the Roman army as it was striking camp for the day’s march. Crassus, eager to end the war, accepted battle, and Spartacus, finding his vanguard heavily engaged without his orders, had either to leave them to their fate, single-handed, against the whole Roman army, or to accept a general engagement. The gladiator-general took the latter course and advanced his whole line.
Before battle was finally joined, Spartacus made a spectacular gesture that showed his realisation that all was at stake and his determination to conquer or die; before ordering the attack, he dismounted from his horse and cut its throat before the whole army. After which he made a brief speech, as was customary in classical armies before engaging the enemy: ‘If we conquer’, he said, ‘we shall have all the horses we desire; if we lose, we shall not need them.’ With these words, Spartacus, on foot, placed himself at the head of the attacking slave columns, and the final battle opened. [3]
The battle of Petelia ended in the rout of the slaves; without cavalry and fresh equipment, such a result was virtually inevitable. No details of this battle are recorded by our authorities, except the end of Spartacus himself. For, finally, when he saw that his last battle was over and lost, Spartacus made a last effort to hew his way through the Roman ranks and to cut down Crassus in a desperate rally. But he could not come to Crassus, though he cut down two centurions who barred his path; and when the rout began and all the rest had fled, he stood his ground, and even when beaten to his knees by an arrow, continued to fight on until he was cut down; dying the death of an epic hero, as even the hostile historian Florus admits, ‘dying, as became a general, fighting most bravely in the front rank’.
So [declares a modern historian] perished the heroic gladiator, who had moulded herdsmen, brigands and outcasts into a victorious army, supplied them with weapons and equipment, contrived during two years to feed them and to keep them together, done all that man could do to protect the innocent from their lust and vengeance, nine times defeated Roman armies, and compelled the Roman government to put forth their whole available power and to commission their most illustrious general to subdue him. [4]
It can, indeed, hardly be questioned that Spartacus, seeing what he did, with what, and against what odds, was a military genius of the first rank. And that, had he fought the battles of the propertied class instead of the despised slaves, official history, instead of ungraciously patronising him, would have celebrated the Thracian gladiator as one of the greatest captains of all times. If one takes into account the overwhelming superiority of their current resources in trained troops, equipment and finance, over Spartacus’ half-armed and improvised hordes of slaves, it is obvious that the military exploits of the greatest generals in history were in no way superior to those of Spartacus. In making historical judgements in a class society, considerations of class frequently carry more weight than those of impartial science!
The ill-luck of the slaves did not end on the battlefield; 5000 fugitives who escaped from the rout were intercepted by the returning legions of Pompey in Etruria and cut to pieces. The Servile War was over, and to the fury of Crassus, the actual victor, his worst fears were realised, and Pompey, who had merely struck the last blow by intercepting the fugitives, was hailed by Rome as the real conqueror of the slaves. Crassus had still eighteen years to live, but he never became Dictator, nor, for that matter, did Pompey either. The young-man-about-town, the prodigal spendthrift, Caius Julius Caesar, who took nothing seriously except his love affairs, eventually carried off the glittering prize and became the first Emperor of Rome!
The great revolution of the slaves was over. The slaves were down, and the Roman plutocracy was determined that, never again, should there be another slave insurrection, or another slave army at the gates of Rome: there should be no second Spartacus! Now it was to be ‘vae victis’ ('woe to the conquered’); 3000 Roman prisoners were found alive in the camp of Spartacus, and there were 6000 slaves who had been made prisoners. The slaves might spare their prisoners: the Roman ‘herrenvolk’ (master-race) had no time for such sentimental nonsense!
There followed upon the victory of Crassus one of those recurring ‘white terrors’ that have periodically stained the pages of ruling-class history, from the days of Crassus to those of ‘the Paris Commune’ and of General Franco. Throughout Italy organised man-hunts of slaves took place. Meanwhile, as Crassus marched up to Rome from the south, he planned a spectacular vengeance. The rules of war did not apply to slaves. For such ‘untouchables’ the cross was the traditional and appropriate punishment. So, outside Rome, Crassus gave his last order as commander-in-chief before handing back his temporary dictatorship to the Senate; outside Rome, on the great Roman highway, the Appian Way, he nailed up alive the whole 6000 survivors of the army of Spartacus on crosses. The slaves had got as far as the gates of Rome, and there they should stop – for ever.
For several days the ghastly mass of putrefying human misery quivered in the spring sunlight. Then with the final expiring groan of the last victim, the Roman slaves took their last farewell of history. Thereafter there were no more slave risings; the entire slave world, with its unutterable fears and aspirations, took refuge in that subterranean world beneath the threshold of (ruling-class) history, in which ‘the ancient lowly’, like the lowly of all ages, dwell in eternal obscurity.
Dives’ act of spectacular vengeance was celebrated in antiquity, and, from the point of view of ‘the Senate and People of Rome’, it served its purpose. If there was another Spartacus in antiquity, he got no chance to rise above the surface of history. It is interesting to note that, as far as we know, no moralist amongst the many in antiquity protested against the human forest of crosses on the Appian Way. This, also, has its modern parallels. In class wars ‘all is permissible'; as long, of course, as it is done by the ruling class, in the sacred names of Law, Order and the Preservation of Civilisation!
It only remains to add that Crassus himself died violently, fighting against the Parthians, the eastern enemies of Rome, in 53 BC. By an ironic act of poetic justice, his severed head was exhibited on the Parthian stage during a performance of the famous Greek drama, the Bacchae of Euripides, the scene of which is Spartacus’ native land, Thrace!
Henceforth, the classical civilisation, unreformed by science and unrenewed by revolution, entered upon an ever-steeper decline as it plunged inexorably downwards towards the final abyss. Until a little Jew from Tarsus brewed a powerful drug of spiritual opium, under whose intoxicating spell, and seeing rapturous visions of another world, the ancient civilisation finally passed away in its sleep.
Note: Why Slave Revolutions Usually Fail: The defeat of the slaves was, as is evident from our authorities’ admissions, largely due to their own inherent weaknesses. Slavery inevitably degrades the slave. Homer expressed what is, unfortunately, a sociological truth when he wrote that ‘the slave loses half his manhood’. In an army composed of slaves, jealousy and insubordination are virtually inevitable, and we have seen already what havoc they played in the case of Spartacus. To keep a slave army together is almost impossible. Only an overwhelming personality and a military genius could have done what Spartacus did.
In point of fact, I can only recall one slave insurrection that was permanently successful, that of Toussaint L'Ouverture and the Negroes in the West Indian island of Haiti at the end of the eighteenth century. And it is no disparagement of that heroic black ‘Spartacus’, himself a man of comparable calibre to the great gladiator, to admit that the circumstances were quite exceptional. Had it not been for the pestilential West Indian climate and for the French lack of maritime power, it is extremely doubtful whether even the genius of Toussaint could have steered the great Negro slave revolution to final victory. I do not recall any other historic example of a permanently successful slave insurrection. [5]
Notes
1. See Plutarch, Lives: Life of Crassus (Heinemann, London, 1916); Thomas Rice Edward Holmes, The Roman Republic and the Founder of the Empire (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928).
2. We do not know the exact date, but games were celebrated in Capua, where the revolt had originally started, in honour of its suppression, on 1 April of that year.
3. From the above remark we may reasonably conjecture that the slaves had no cavalry left and that Spartacus preferred to lead his men on foot as was the usual custom in barbaric warfare, as described by Tacitus and other ancient authors. See Tacitus, Germania (Harper, New York, 1847). 
4. Thomas Rice Edward Holmes, The Roman Republic and the Founder of the Empire (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1928).
5. See CLR James, The Black Jacobins (Secker and Warburg, London, 1938).
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Part II: Spartacus and the Civil War
Chapter I: The Origins of the Revolt
The greatest servile insurrection of classical antiquity took place between the years 73-71 BC, that is, in the century prior to the origins of the Christian era and a generation before the commencement of the Roman Empire of the Caesars. Neither of those epoch-making events was, in our opinion, uninfluenced by the great slave revolution nor unconnected with it. Its starting-point was the city of Capua, in Southern Italy; its first recruits were drawn from the gladiators trained to fight for public amusement in that city; and its leader, upon whom the revolt has conferred historic immortality, was the Thracian gladiator Spartacus, whose strong personality and undoubted military genius raised him to become leader of the slave army and the terror of the Roman legions.
The period which witnessed the outbreak of the Servile War was one of general decadence and deep corruption, as is unmistakably portrayed for us by the writings even of such contemporary ruling-class apologists as Cicero and the historian Sallust. The epoch of civil war had come to a temporary lull with the victory of the Roman plutocracy under Sulla a decade earlier at the decisive battle of the Colline Gate, outside Rome (82 BC), which put an end to the civil war amongst the free classes. The death of the ‘fortunate’ dictator, Sulla, left the aristocratic oligarchy without a competent and undisputed leader, which last state of things was soon to lead to a fresh struggle for power that only ended a quarter of a century later with the victory of Julius Caesar: a circumstance that was highly favourable to the success of the servile insurrection.
Despite, however, the prevailing social corruption, the Roman Republic still remained without a rival as the greatest contemporary power. If weak in the centre, at Rome itself, it was still immensely strong upon the circumference. At the very time that Spartacus was threatening to march on Rome and destroy the terrified metropolis, the Roman armies were winning astonishing victories against heavy numerical odds in Asia. And, only a little later, the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar (59-49 BC) again demonstrated the incomparable strength of the Roman war machine. [1]
Indeed, from the purely technical standpoint, the Roman army had never been so powerful as in this era of political confusion. For only a generation earlier, the great General Marius, the uncle of Caesar, had abolished the old militia system of the Roman Republic, and, under the threat of a contemporary barbarian invasion, had organised a professional army on the lines of a permanent war machine: a fact that had not a little to do with the ultimate defeat of the slaves.
The great revolt of the slaves, which was destined to bring the Roman Republic to the verge of destruction, and, it can hardly be doubted, to shake the classical civilisation itself to its foundations, began inconspicuously, like so many of the major events in history. Amongst the major evils of Roman society was the brutal ‘sport’ of gladiatorial shows, in which specially trained men fought each other singly or in bands, or even confronted wild animals in the arena. This ancient ‘sport’, analogous to the bull-fights of modern Spain, enjoyed a wide popularity in antiquity. There were occasions in which as many as 10,000 gladiators appeared in the Roman arena. And every provincial town of any standing had its arena and training school for the human ‘exhibits’.
In the early summer of 73 BC, a band of these professional fighting men broke out of the Capuan training school, which was run by a man named Gnaeus Lentulus Batiatus, and fled from the city armed with such primitive weapons as spits and knives, which they obtained in the kitchen of the training school. En route they seized also a supply of arms which, by good fortune, they met with when on its way to another gladiatorial school. Armed with these weapons, they put to flight a band of soldiers who had been sent in pursuit, and, armed at their expense, took refuge on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, in wild and inaccessible country.
The band of gladiators who accomplished this feat numbered seventy-four persons in all: gladiators with, therefore, some training in hand-to-hand combat and the use of arms. Many of them were, no doubt, prisoners of war with previous military experience. Their leaders were two Celts, known by their slave names as Crixus and Oenomaus, and a Thracian from the Danube country, known by what was probably his own name, Spartacus. The meagre details which comprise all that is known for certain about Spartacus’ previous career of are thus summarised by the German historian Mommsen:
The last [that is, Spartacus – FAR], perhaps a scion of the noble family of the Spartocids which attained even to royal honours in its Thracian home, had served in the Roman army among the Thracian auxiliaries, had deserted and gone as a brigand to the mountains, and had been there recaptured and destined to the gladiatorial games. [2]
From other sources we learn that Spartacus owed his life on this former occasion to his remarkable strength, which marked him out for success in his role of professional man-killer. (He appears to have fought with the ‘retiarius’, or trident and net.) From other less reliable sources we learn that he was accompanied by a ‘concubine’ of the same nationality as himself, who was a prophetess and saw visions and had foretold the future in trances: a detail in which, however, there is nothing inherently impossible, since the Thracian women were famous for their association with mystical cults. Indeed, one of the most famous plays in Greek drama, the Bacchae of Euripides, was written precisely around this last theme.
This small band, under the leadership of Spartacus and the two Celts, necessarily adopted a life of brigandage, since even escaped gladiators must live! They soon became renowned for their boldness and for the success of their foraging expeditions. In a short time their numbers were swelled considerably and they acquired a more than local reputation. The fame of the daring band spread as far as Rome itself, and it became necessary for the Roman government to do something to safeguard ‘law and order’ against this well-armed and daring band of desperadoes, who, from the inaccessible shelter of their mountain fastness, robbed and plundered the wealthy region of Campania, which contained some of the favourite health resorts of the Roman plutocracy, such as Pompeii, which, a century and a half later, was so sensationally obliterated by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. (At the period of which we are writing, the great volcano had been long quiet and was currently believed to be extinct: its crater was popularly supposed to be the gate of hell!)
Accordingly, the Roman Senate sent a force of 3000 men (that is, half a legion), probably militia rather than regulars, under a divisional general (praetor) named Clodius Glaber. When the Roman commander had reached the foot of Mount Vesuvius, he found himself confronted with an impossible position: the only entry to the stronghold of the escaped slaves lay through a single narrow defile, which could only be traversed in single file. To force this could, therefore, only be done by engaging in victorious single combat against gladiators; that is, against professional duellists, expert in, and specially trained for, this type of single combat! Unable, or unwilling, to induce his men to take this desperate risk, Clodius resolved to blockade the gladiators until starvation compelled them to come out and fight his greatly superior forces.
On the face of it, this looked the best strategy for the Romans to adopt, but it was baffled and turned into a complete Roman disaster by a daring stratagem of Spartacus. Faced with starvation, the trapped gladiators resorted to a last desperate device. The reverse side of the mountain from the Romans was so steep as to appear inaccessible, and was, in consequence, left unguarded. Resorting to the dangerous expedient, only possible to highly trained and desperate men, of descending the cliff with improvised ladders of vine branches, the band made the descent successfully.
Once made, the rest was easy: advancing quickly round the mountain, the attackers took the carelessly guarded Roman camp by a surprise rush. The Roman militia made little resistance and a victory as rapid, bloodless and complete as that of the Jacobite ‘Pretender’ over Sir John Cope at Prestonpans in 1745, ended the first Roman attempt at suppression.
In revolts more, perhaps, than in anything else, ‘nothing succeeds like success’. Spartacus’ victory over Clodius gave him both arms and prestige. His small band, equipped with captured Roman arms, was speedily swelled by an influx of escaped slaves, roving shepherds, and gladiators ‘on the run’. As the numbers of the slave army increased from scores to hundreds, from hundreds to thousands, both the scope of its operations and the magnitude of the danger, that, in such an unstable society, such a revolt represented to the classical social order, cumulatively increased. The brigand had become a leader. The gang of gladiators had become an army. The riot had become a revolt!
Note on Spartacus: Nothing more than that stated in the text is positively known about the antecedents of Spartacus. The name is a Thracian one, and there was a dynasty of the same name about this time in the Black Sea regions, which has left coins. (NB: The ancient ‘Thrace’ was roughly equal to modern Bulgaria.) If Spartacus belonged to it, it would have assisted his rapid rise to a position of ascendancy in an army largely composed of his countrymen. We have not forgotten that both the leaders of the two Sicilian slave wars assumed the royal title to enhance their prestige (see previous chapter). Perhaps Spartacus did not need to do so on account of his already existing family prestige. In which case, he, perhaps, already had some experience of military command. According to Plutarch, Spartacus was of nomadic stock. But we know nothing positive.
As was so usual in antiquity – we have already noted it in the case of the Sicilian slave king Eunus – superstitious and miraculous phenomena were attributed to Spartacus. According to the credulous Greek historian Plutarch, serpents coiled around him whilst he slept, and his prophetess wife foretold his greatness even when he was still a slave. (Her name has not survived, but, according to the same authority, she accompanied him from Capua and took part in the revolt: we do not know what was her final fate. See Plutarch, Lives: Life of Crassus.
Notes
1. The conquest of Gaul threw at least 400,000 more slaves on the market.
2. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter IV: ‘Rothschild’ Versus the Revolution
Marcus Licinius Crassus Dives (the Rich), the new Roman commander-in-chief, the leader of the Roman plutocracy, was a man whose career was highly representative of the age in which he lived and of the class to which he belonged. An adherent of the plutocratic party, Crassus was an experienced soldier and politician who had fought with distinction in the Roman Civil Wars and played a leading role in the political life of the Roman state. These activities were, however, subordinate to his main social aim: the acquisition of personal wealth. Crassus was, indeed, the most successful representative of the new usurious capitalism that was just then coming into power in Roman society. He had made a huge fortune out of the misfortunes of his opponents in the civil war. By buying confiscated property cheap and selling dear, the Praetor had become the richest man in Rome and had well earned his soubriquet of ‘Dives’.
In such a plutocratic society as was that of the Roman Republic, money was power. And just as his modern antitypes, the Rothschilds, used their vast wealth to acquire political influence at the courts and in the parliaments of modern Europe, so did the ancient Dives with regard to that highly susceptible organisation of financial corruption and political jobbery, which, in the first century BC, concealed its nefarious activities behind the high-sounding title of ‘the Senate and People of Rome’. Crassus manipulated this financially sensitive organisation like a modern Tammany Hall boss. For Dives was a very ambitious man, to whom wealth and power were synonymous terms. He aspired to the dictatorship left vacant by his former leader, Sulla, and later to be restored in perpetuity by Julius Caesar.
But in 72 BC, when he assumed command against the slaves, the chief rival of Crassus for supreme power was not Caesar, then a young man of about thirty, not yet a front-line figure in Roman politics, but the famous general Pompeius Magnus (that is, Pompey the Great), another general who had also risen to fame in the civil war, and who, at that very moment, had just finished off the popular party in Spain, where, under the democratic leader Sertorius, it had made its last stand.
Crassus intended to use his command not only to beat the slaves, but, ultimately, to capture supreme power over the Roman world. For this reason he at once rejected a suggestion to recall the victorious Pompey and his legions from Spain. For him to attain his supreme objective it was essential that he, and no one else, should reap the laurels of victory against Spartacus. However, before he could rule Rome, first he had to save it! Accordingly, the first prerequisite, upon which all the rest necessarily depended, was to beat the slaves. Crassus, therefore, proceeded to evolve a strategy for this purpose.
First of all, by dipping his hand freely into both the public treasury and his own, Crassus reorganised the demoralised Roman army. In addition to the legions which had survived the defeats of the consuls, he raised six more, and finally took the field with eight legions at full strength, about 50,000 men. With this numerically imposing army, Crassus set to work to end the Servile War.
His first movement was one of encirclement. His lieutenant Mummius, with two legions, was instructed to hang on the flank of the slave army, and thus hinder its movements, until Crassus and the main army could catch up with it and bring it to a decisive battle, which would end the revolt once for all. Taught by the fate of the consuls, Crassus gave strict instructions to Mummius not to attack the slaves before the arrival of the Commander-in-Chief.
This initial plan, however, quickly miscarried. After some successful skirmishes, Mummius, fired with contempt for the slaves, disregarded his orders and made a premature attack, eager to reap the laurels of victory before the arrival of his military superior. The result was a fiasco: the Roman troops turned tail at the first attack, and their general and the survivors took refuge in the camp of Crassus.
The Roman general took drastic steps to prevent the recurrence of similar fiascos in the future. He revived the brutal Roman discipline of earlier centuries, long since discarded as a relic of a more primitive age, by which the defeated troops were ‘decimated'; that is to say, one in ten were executed in the sight of the whole Roman army. (As has so often been demonstrated in class wars, the combatants stop at nothing!) Having thus restored discipline by terror, Crassus led his army against the slaves who, perhaps flushed with victory, or more probably impelled by lack of food, seem to have forced Spartacus to abandon his wiser guerrilla tactics and to accept battle.
No details of the resulting engagement have survived, but, for the first time, Spartacus had the worst of it. However, he showed in defeat the same remarkable coolness and tactical skill that he had previously shown in victory. He extricated his army from the field, converting what might have been a decisive defeat that would have ended the slave war into a mere reverse of which the Romans could take no advantage. Leaving 6000 dead on the field and 900 prisoners in the hands of the Romans, the revolutionary army made a masterly retreat, first to Thurii, where Spartacus enforced a severe discipline in the reorganisation of his army, and, finally, to Rhegium, in the extreme south, on the ‘toe’ of the Italian peninsula, facing Sicily.
A new phase of the war now dawned. Unable to take Rome, and outmatched in the field by the regular Roman army, there was, henceforth, no question of the slaves winning a decisive victory over the Roman Republic. What Hannibal could not do with vastly superior resources, they could not do either. Meanwhile, the road to the north was closed by the victorious army of Crassus.
With the lightning rapidity of a Napoleonic strategy, Spartacus now changed his aim. He could no longer hope to win an absolute victory over Rome, but he could still win a limited one. With what was now a veteran army steeled in a dozen battles, he would cross over to Sicily, the fertile corn island just opposite his new headquarters at Rhegium. Sicily had, as we have not forgotten, a splendid tradition of servile insurrection. Twice, respectively under Eunus (133 BC) and Athenion (104 BC), the slaves had become masters of the island and had held out for several years of hard fighting against the power of Rome. In Sicily, there must still be veterans surviving from Athenion’s army a generation earlier. The memory of the two slave kingdoms was still green, and a general rising of slaves would be sure to follow the arrival of the formidable host of the gladiator. Indeed, many of the poorer free citizens might join such a rising, for Sicily was just then governed by a particularly infamous representative of the Roman plutocracy, Gaius Verres, whose unbridled rapacity was eventually too much even for his own class and still stands pilloried before history as an ancient ‘Warren Hastings’ in Cicero’s famous speech for the prosecution at Verres’ trial for fraud and extortion.
The sole but sufficient difficulty was transport. The two and a half miles of water that constitute the Straits of Messina – the classical ‘Scylla’ and ‘Charybdis’ – are marked by fast-flowing tides and could only be crossed on ships, of which Spartacus had none. Like Napoleon in his camp at Boulogne, Spartacus could only look hopelessly at the opposite shore and reflect: ‘How near and yet so far.’ Once across, he could master Sicily in a few days, and to dislodge him then would prove a task of extreme, perhaps impossible, difficulty. A free slave kingdom, a Sicilian ‘Heliopolis’, would be a kind of ancient Moscow, radiating revolution throughout the surrounding servile world. By hook or by crook he must get ships: the rest would be easy.
The only hope in the current situation was to get the ships ‘by crook’. For the Mediterranean was just then ravaged by pirates, chiefly of Asiatic origin, who swept the seas with impunity, like the Algerian Corsairs of a later age, until they were themselves swept off the seas a few years after the time of Spartacus by the great Roman general Pompey the Great. (Amongst their prisoners was no less a person than Julius Caesar, later to be the first Emperor of Rome and the eventual conqueror of their conqueror, Pompey!)
Spartacus approached a gang of these formidable buccaneers, then off the coast of Sicily, and, in return for cash down, tried to bargain with this ‘floating republic’ to transport his army across the Straits of Messina. The slaves were, however, ‘double-crossed’ over the transaction: the pirates took their money and played them false. Why, is not at all clear, since a permanent state of war, such as would have followed the conquest of Sicily by the slaves, would seem to have been in the pirates’ interest, if only as ‘the rejoicing third'; a few years later, when Rome turned her full strength against them, they were to pay dearly for their short-sighted treachery. Perhaps Crassus had bribed them, too? He, if anyone, had the money and knew how to use it!
Meanwhile, the Roman war lord was by no means idle. Unable or unwilling to attack the slaves in their strong defensive position, the Roman general proceeded to blockade them. The insurrection was scotched but not killed: hunger should finish off Spartacus as it had finished off so many earlier enemies of Rome. The Roman army proceeded to dig an enormous trench right across the southernmost ‘toe’ of the Italian peninsula. The peninsula of Rhegium was blockaded by a huge trench thirty-six miles long and about fifteen feet deep, reinforced by vast earthworks. Inside this network of fortifications the slaves were hopelessly cooped up between the Romans – the effective substitute for the Devil! – and the deep sea. Crassus had only to sit down and wait until starvation disintegrated the social revolution.
The position of the slaves was, indeed, desperate, and an unusually severe winter (72-71 BC) came to add to their misfortunes. In vain did Spartacus try every means at his disposal. A desperate sortie on the Roman lines was repulsed with heavy loss. A despairing attempt to cross the Straits on rafts made of skins was baffled by fast tides: ‘Time and tide wait for no man’ – not even for a revolution! As the winter wore on, the position of the slaves became more and more desperate. The winter passed with the hostile armies facing each other across the great dyke, separated by this classical ‘Torres Vedras’. [1] ‘Rothschild’ had cornered not only the market, but also the revolution!
In despair, Spartacus even tried to negotiate. But the Romans did not recognise slaves as ‘enemies’: Roman law always classed them with cattle as ‘things’ ('res’) and not as human beings, and as such they had no ‘rights’ in peace or war. In any case, all the trump cards now lay with Rome. Surrender meant the cross and the lash. As the spring drew near, the slaves hung grimly on.
The Roman ‘Torres Vedras’, however, had one weakness from the strategic point of view: it was too long. Big as was the Roman army, it was not big enough to hold its whole length in equal strength. The keen eyes of Spartacus detected a weak spot. In a raging snowstorm, on a night as black as pitch, the slave army forced the dyke, overpowered its guards, and, swiftly filling it up, marched across. When the snowstorm finally abated, the peninsula was empty. The birds had flown. Spartacus had again marched north. Again the carefully-laid plans of the Roman strategists had been outwitted.
Crassus was in despair. Once again the war was being carried to the gates of Rome. Once more the torch of social revolution and civil war was sent blazing throughout the peninsula. To be outwitted by a gladiator! In black despair, the Roman generalissimo made a fatal blunder: he sent to Rome urging the Senate to recall Pompey and his legions from Spain, which the Senate promptly did. Then, recovering his courage, he marched hot-foot after Spartacus to end the war before his rival arrived to rob him of his glory. The revolution had stolen a march on ‘Rothschild'!
Notes
1. The lines of Torres Vedras were impregnable defensive lines held by Wellington against the French in Portugal during the Peninsular War in 1810.
 


Table of Contents




cus: A Study in Revolutionary History by Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944


Spartacus: A Study in Revolutionary History. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1944
Chapter II: The Rise of Rome to World Power
The Roman Empire, which came into existence as a result of the phenomenally rapid expansion of the Italian metropolis in the second century BC, represented the final and most advanced political form taken by classical society. After the definite victory of Rome in her long drawn-out struggles with Carthage for supremacy over the Mediterranean basin in the third century BC, the whole of the Mediterranean ‘world’ came under the jurisdiction of the Italian Republic.
Henceforth the Mediterranean civilisation – the ‘world’ of classical geography – came under the sway of the Roman state. Whosoever controlled the Mediterranean, the ‘Great Sea’ of antiquity, controlled the entire classical civilisation that had arisen upon its shores. For the rest of antiquity, accordingly, the classical society was synonymous with its Roman protector. The eagles of Rome flew over the centres of classical civic life. The magic letters ‘SPQR’ (Senatus populusque Romanus – the Senate and People of Rome) henceforth were emblazoned in haughty defiance over the portals of the ancient civilisation right down to the hour of its final collapse, when, ravaged by social decay and bled white by economic exhaustion, the tottering structure crashed helpless at the feet of the northern barbarians.
In the centuries immediately prior to the Christian era, this last calamity still lay in the remote future. For these centuries, in particular the second century BC, were precisely those that witnessed the rise of Rome to ‘world’ power. In quick succession, the centres of Mediterranean civilisation were overrun by the ‘ever-victorious’ legions of Rome and brought beneath the yoke of the Italian Republic. By the end of the miraculous century of Roman expansion which followed upon the victory over Hannibal and Carthage in 202 BC, nothing but subjugated provinces and client vassal-states confronted the all-powerful Republic. The ‘glittering prize’ of world power, vacant since the premature demise of Alexander the Great, two centuries earlier (323 BC), had been won by the superior force and strategic ability of the Roman war-machine.
What were the motives which animated this ancient imperialism? Rome and Carthage had fought to the finish for world supremacy and Rome’s was the ultimate prize. What did it signify? In general, it can be stated that the imperialist wars of antiquity, fought over the proceeds of a slave economy, were fought primarily for land and for slaves to cultivate land.
Just as modern imperialist wars are primarily wars for trade and capitalist surplus investment in a pre-eminently commercial era, so ancient imperialist enterprises were fought out in a predominantly agrarian economy for land and its human ‘instruments of production’. Viewed from this historically correct angle, the wars of aggression fought by the slave empires of antiquity were primarily about equally land-ramps and man-hunting expeditions. And the wars of Rome, the greatest of all these ancient slave empires, fit most closely into the above categories.
It is true that commercial and even financial considerations were not entirely lacking to give a superficial resemblance even to the aggressive enterprises of ancient and of modern imperialism. (For example, we have not forgotten that merchant and usurious capital played their part, albeit a subordinate one, in the processes of classical economy.) But, in the main, the distinction is as stated above.
When, therefore, we strip the startling conquests that effectually constituted ‘the grandeur that was Rome’ of the high-sounding phraseology with which sycophantic historians have seen fit to disguise them, we observe, beneath these euphemisms, that the Roman conquests were, in reality, glorified land-ramps and man-hunts, in the course of which Rome not only conquered the most fertile regions and populous civic centres of the ancient world, but, concurrently, sold up their conquered population.
Just as modern slave-hunters have depopulated and concurrently ‘civilised’ Africa, so the ancient Romans ‘made a desert and called it peace’, in the poignant words used by the mordant and disillusioned Roman historian Tacitus to describe the real procedure of his countrymen. In the ancient case, also, ‘white ivory’ (that is, slaves!) was plentiful and cheap during the maximum era of Roman expansion between the conquest of Carthage by Scipio and the conquest of Gaul by Julius Caesar (202-49 BC).
The net effect of these gigantic man-hunts upon the hitherto static economy of antiquity was far-reaching, catastrophic, and in the most literal sense, revolutionary in its effects. During this golden age of the slave trade, it was not uncommon for 10,000 slaves to change hands in a single day in the great slave market on the Aegean island of Delos, that ancient ‘Zanzibar’ of the traffic in human flesh. The slave-trader followed the victorious eagles like a human vulture – and not in vain! The greater Roman victories brought in staggering totals: 150,000 is the probable computation of the enslaved citizens of the Greek commercial metropolis of Corinth. Carthage, Rome’s vanquished rival, brought in perhaps an even greater number. Whilst, at the other end of the Mediterranean, the influx of Spaniards, Gauls and Sardinians periodically created ancient crises of ‘over-production’, in which the bottom was knocked out of the market and prices sagged and sank in a manner today reserved fortunately for inanimate articles of exchange. (It must, of course, be remembered that the population of the agrarian society of antiquity was much less than that of modern industrial society: exact estimates are difficult to come by, but it is unlikely that the Roman Empire supported more than about sixty million people. [1]
It goes, of course, without saying that the cheaper and more plentiful the human commodity, the more callous and brutal was the treatment accorded to the human chattel. And never previously had either slaves been so cheap or their treatment been so brutal: the two phenomena were not to be experienced again in such prolific abundance until the palmy days of the African slave trade, 2000 years later, and of the ‘middle passage’ across the Atlantic to the slave markets of the West Indies, where a similar superabundance was to produce a similarly brutal disregard of the human chattel.
Roman commercial slavery, which crowded its human tools into its vast latifundia (landed domains) and its insanitary ergastula (underground slave barracks), or into its mining death-traps, where, according to the ancient historian Diodorus Siculus, the average expectation of life was about three months, was an altogether different and far harsher species of servitude than the easy-going domestic servitude of the Greeks, or even the feudal serfdom of the ancient priest-kings of the Orient. The great historian Theodore Mommsen has stigmatised this hideous mass of misery upon which the grandeur of Rome was inseparably founded as the most hideous orgy of human suffering that the world is ever likely to have known. [2] And there is every reason to accept such a judgement.
It is a major curse of slavery that it corrupts the slave-owner and his society equally with the slave himself. This hideous cancer, one both political and moral in its ultimate effects, poisoned and distorted beyond all recognition the Roman society which experienced its effects during the period of ‘the primary accumulation’ of capital, including slaves, that accompanied the great era of Roman conquest which transformed the primitive farmers’ rustic republic into the dominant imperialist race in the Mediterranean. Free as well as servile labour equally felt the effect of this staggering transformation.
In place of the free land-holding peasantry that had formed the backbone of the tenacious resistance against which both the wealth of Carthage and the genius of Hannibal had dashed themselves in vain in the Punic Wars – the decisive imperialist wars of antiquity – the Italian countryside was parcelled up into vast latifundia owned by absentee landlords and tilled exclusively by slave labour supplied by the wars of unceasing conquest. The erstwhile free peasants were driven to the towns to become paupers, living precariously on ‘bread and circuses’, the original dole. Whilst, concurrently, the monopoly of the land and of the means of production continually accelerated.
So bad had the position become by the end of the second century BC that the Roman tribune and would-be reformer, Tiberius Gracchus, declared in a public speech that ‘the wild beasts have their lairs and the birds their nests; but the Roman people have not a foot of land they can call their own. Conquerors of the earth, the earth itself denies them food and shelter.’
If this statement was demagogic rhetoric, it corresponded at least closely enough to the facts to rouse an instant and enthusiastic response and to inspire a formidable popular agitation which found eventual expression in a murderous series of civil wars that lasted for practically a century; from the agitation of the Gracchi (133-121 BC) down to the final victory of the military dictatorship of the Caesars, the ‘Fascist’ era of the ancient world (49-30 BC). For this entire century the entire free Roman society was rent by civil war.
In a society rent, as was that of antiquity, by fierce class antagonism, only two permanent solutions are possible: either the lowest class can ‘shake off its chains’ and remodel society in its own interests on a basis freed from exploitation: in antiquity this could only have resulted from a victorious slave insurrection. Or, alternatively, the state (’the executive committee of the ruling class’) must become strong enough to assume a permanent dictatorship that will restore and regulate by force an unstable social equilibrium. This last method, which was the method of Caesarism in antiquity and is the identical method of Fascism today, finally triumphed, with Julius and Augustus Caesar at the end of a century of more or less permanent civil war. When the revolt of the slaves had failed, there was nothing for it but permanent dictatorship or permanent chaos.
First, however, Roman society was subjected to the violent incidence of the first method. Not only did free society carry on a bitter class war over the division of wealth produced mainly by slaves, but the self-same era witnessed an entire sequence of slave insurrections which aimed, in practice at least, at the very basis of servile economy. The insurrection of Spartacus, which formed the impressive conclusion of this sequence, cannot be understood apart from its predecessors and their common historic background.
I propose, accordingly, to direct a glance at the chain of servile wars which preceded the great insurrection under Spartacus.
Note on Land Reform: During the century of civil wars numerous attempts were made by democratic reformers to break up the big estates and to recreate a land-holding peasantry, such as had been the backbone of the Roman state at an earlier and simpler stage of its existence. Needless to say, in an agrarian society in which land was the basis both of wealth and political power, such attempts were fiercely resisted by the big land-monopolists who dominated the Senate and formed a close corporation, a ruling oligarchy, who mismanaged the affairs of the state for their own profit right down to the victory of Caesar. The two Gracchi, Tiberius and Caius, and other reformers, were murdered by the armed thugs of this decadent plutocracy.
It must, however, be borne in mind that the above agitation, which has attracted the virtually exclusive attention of orthodox Roman historians, when they describe the social question in these times, had nothing in common with the aims of the slave insurrections that I am about to describe. [3] In fact, one of the arguments put forward by land-reformers of the type of the Gracchi was, precisely, that a free peasantry would prove a bulwark against slave revolt. The whole agitation was an internal affair of the free – that is, legally privileged classes. To all free Romans, rich and poor alike, the slave was a common enemy, since they all lived off his exploitation. In this last respect, Karl Kautsky has made an apt comparison with the present-day British Labour imperialists, who are similarly hostile to the enslaved colonial masses, the real slave class of the British Empire!
Notes
1. Foot, The End of the Ancient World [Ridley is probably referring to Ferdinand Lot, The End of the Ancient World and the Beginnings of the Middle Ages (Routledge, London, 1931) – MIA].
2. Theodore Mommsen, History of Rome (Bentley, London, 1862).
3. See Jérôme Carcopino, Histoire Ancienne: La République Romaine (Les Presses universitaires de France, Paris, 1937).
 


Table of Contents




ism and Religion by F A Ridley 1940s


Socialism and Religion. F A Ridley 1940s
Part I: The Origins and Nature of Religion
If God did not exist it would be necessary to invent him.  –  Voltaire
I: The Two Roots of Religion
Religion implies the belief in the existence of a god, or gods, with whom human beings can establish relations and from whom they can receive benefits. Usually, though not quite invariably, it also implies belief in the immortality of the ‘spiritual’ element in man: his soul. In practice, religion expresses itself in various forms of worship and intercession, both public and private. By means of such rites, as the Greek philosophers used to observe, mankind ‘does business with the gods’ and establishes reciprocal relationships.
The phenomena that together make up religion are unquestionably of extreme antiquity. Undeniably they can be traced back far beyond the dawn of civilisation to a very early stage in human social evolution. Indeed, if we assume magic to have been the earliest form of religion, which is probable, religion must be traced back almost to the earliest human societies. Amongst animals, as far as any test is possible, nothing that can be called religion seems to exist; indeed it is most improbable that any creature except man has any capacity for abstract reasoning. And the same was presumably true of the very earliest types of ‘ape-men’ who formed the very earliest societies that came in time to be fully human. We are necessarily dealing with conjectures, but religion in its primitive magical form can be traced with some certainty to the ‘neolithic’ (new stone) age, and may well have originated still earlier in the ‘palæolithic’ (old stone) age. In such vast periods of time dates mean nothing: say, anything from 20,000 to 100,000 years ago. [1]
The history of religion is therefore of vast antiquity, and is coeval in its entirety with many levels of cultural development. Between the witch-doctor beating his drum in the primitive rituals of the Congo, down to the intricate splendour of a High Mass in St Peter’s, Rome, a vast cultural cycle has been spanned. In investigating the evolution of religion all these stages of religion must be kept in mind. Only so can we do adequate scientific justice to the subject.
When we investigate the history of religion from the standpoint of the widest possible perspectives it becomes obvious that we are confronted with, broadly, two main species of religion. With substantial accuracy we may style these as, respectively, ‘natural’ and ‘supernatural’ religion. In our next two sections we will glance at the historical sequence of these two main types of religious evolution. Here we will glance at their social origins and character.
‘Natural’ religion is the religion of primitive races; that is, of races which have not yet attained to the cultural level of civilisation, using this last word in a Marxist sense to denominate not only a general level of material efficiency and cultural attainment, but, specifically, a society divided into classes and regulated by the class state. ‘Natural’ religion, contrarily, is the religion of primitive races who have not yet reached this last level; who still live in tribal communities based on common ownership of the means of production  –  which latter are obviously very primitive in such a society; and amongst whom class divisions are either unknown, as in the most primitive races, or at least are weak and undeveloped. [2]
These two types of religion are entirely dissimilar both in their character and in their motivating social causes.
In the case of ‘natural’ religion we are dealing with very primitive societies who carry on an unceasing battle with nature in order to wrest an uncertain existence from a hostile environment. Amongst peoples in this social stage religion becomes a ‘heavenly’ reflex of their actual life here below. And, as such, it is compounded chiefly of fear and ignorance, the two chief social features in all such primitive societies. Its gods are either personifications of natural forces, before which primitive man trembles, but which he does not understand: the Sun, the Moon, the Fire, the Thunder, etc. Or they are the ghosts of great chiefs, hunters, warriors, perhaps primitive agriculturalists, whose memory is held in reverence by the tribes which have solved their problem of existence under their leadership, or by means of their prowess in the chase or in war, the two chief occupations of all primitive races.
Hence, ‘natural’ religion, the religion of all pre-civilised races, is a religion motivated by fear and misunderstanding of natural forces. It is the product of man’s fear and ignorance of nature. Contrarily, its social roots are very feeble, and it does not reflect social antagonisms and social oppressions, at least, to any great extent, since history for such societies has not yet reached the point at which classes have grown up alongside the expanding means of production at which the class state presses heavily upon the enslaved masses.
We are consequently driven to this inevitable conclusion: primitive races profess a common type of religion which springs in general from a single source: misunderstanding, and, in direct consequence, fear of the terrifying and unknown forces of nature and of natural phenomena, upon which savage society depends for existence and before which it is so largely helpless.
With the expansion of the means of production and the consequent simultaneous and reciprocal growth of a class society, of the class state, and of civilisation, the above state of things inevitably passed away. Along with the demise of primitive society there vanished concurrently the type of religion which was the reflex and expression of that society. In its place there developed a new and distinct type of religion: the religion of ‘civilised man'; and therefore in itself the inevitable expression of the class-divided society and of the oppressive class state, which came into being concurrently with ‘civilisation’ itself. To this ‘civilised’ type of religion we apply the term ‘supernatural’, in sharp distinction to the ‘natural’ religion of primitive societies.
Supernatural religion differs sharply from natural both in its social origins and in its generic characteristics. Like all religion, like its predecessor, it is still based on fear and ignorance: the historic twin roots of religion. But on social rather than on natural fear. As society becomes progressively more civilised: that is, as it simultaneously acquires more knowledge of and more control over natural processes, its dependence on and consequent fear of nature becomes continuously less. For example, a citizen of a modern state has no reason to expect death by reason of the failure of the municipal water supply, unlike the dwellers in primitive societies, where droughts still take a heavy toll of human life. Nor does he fear the thunder, nor expect the wrath of celestial powers whenever an eclipse of the moon takes place. As civilisation advances, fear of nature declines along with growing knowledge of and power over its processes.
But fear and ignorance of nature are not the only kind of fear and ignorance. As civilisation progressively advances and frees mankind from the domination of natural forces, it concurrently enslaves it to social forces expressed in the exploitation of a class society and oppression by a class state. All civilisation hitherto is synonymous with slavery and exploitation of the majority by the ruling minority.
Consequently, in civilised society fear of man, of the ruling classes and of the class state which is their embodiment, takes the place of primitive fear of nature. Hence, in the ‘higher’ supernatural religions which accompany the rise of civilisation social causes predominate over natural causes. To revert to our previous illustration, the citizen of a modern capitalist state knows the nature of eclipses, and no longer lives in fear of drought, but he nonetheless has the liveliest fear of unemployment, bankruptcy and military conscription; all of which are social causes, unknown to primitive and inseparable from (capitalist) civilised societies.
To sum up this necessarily brief discussion of the nature and evolution of religion: as a product, for all its supernatural pretensions, of human society, religion reflects the fundamental nature of that society. And hitherto human society has passed through the primitive classless society of barbarism and the class-divided societies of civilisation. Religion is at all times and places the product of fear and ignorance: but these last assume different forms in different societies: respectively, fear of nature, and fear of exploitation and of the ruling classes who direct and symbolise that exploitation.
To complete our preliminary survey of religion it therefore behoves us to glance at these two sequential species of religion: the natural and the supernatural, according to our terminology. After which we shall be in a better position to investigate the current problem presented by religion in our contemporary world.
II: Natural Religion
In our contemporary society with which we are here primarily concerned, ‘natural’ religion, that is, the religion of primitive races, is merely a problem of historical interest. Consequently we only need touch upon it briefly.
How did religion originate? Of the various theories propounded, the respective merits of which still provoke controversy, two, in particular, stand out. According to the ‘animistic’ school, represented pre-eminently by such anthropologists as Tylor and Frazer, gods originally came into existence as the personification of the forces of nature: of the Sun and Moon, Dusk and Dawn, Fire and Thunder; all of which natural phenomena are incomprehensible to primitive peoples. According to the ghost-theory of Herbert Spencer and Grant Allen, gods always, or at least usually, represent the spirits of the dead ‘heroes’, who appear to their followers in dreams and are thus conceived as still alive in some spirit-land. Homer expressed the universal opinion of barbaric societies when he wrote that Sleep and Death were ‘twins’, and no barbaric race can distinguish between them. Consequently if the dead appear in dreams, in order to appear they must still be alive somewhere else! Hence the inevitability in such societies of the conceptions of personal survival and immortality.
Actually, both schools of thought probably contain an element of truth, and it is not always possible to decide between them in the case of particular cults. For example, was the Jewish God, Jahveh (usually mis-spelt Jehovah), originally a primitive thunder-god from the Sinai region, where the Jews seem to have originally adopted his worship, or a primitive Hebrew hero, worshipped after his death? Similarly, was the Scandinavian god, Odin, whom the primitive English worshipped, a personification of the Sky, or a primitive Norse ‘Führer’, an aboriginal ‘Hitler'? There is nothing inherently improbable in either explanation.
At any rate, whatever the precise origin or origins of a particular barbaric religious cult may be, there can be no room for doubt with regard to the social character of such particular cults. Every ‘natural’ religion accurately reflects the primitive unsophisticated barbaric society of which it is the celestial replica. In the great epic poems characteristic of such societies, such as the Greek Iliad, or the Scandinavian Sagas, the ‘gods’ are merely glorified men who spend their existence fighting and drinking  –  like their earthly worshippers; and who periodically descend from Olympus or Valhalla (the Norse heaven), to fight men or seduce women. And, as befits the gods of barbaric peoples, in the composition of such ‘reflex’ deities, brawn predominates decidedly over brain!
Another point must be noted. Barbaric societies are but little troubled by abstract ideas, and the uncertainties and complexities of civilised life are unknown. Hence the religions of the nature peoples are naive, unsophisticated, joyous; not ‘sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought'; and in their exercise concrete visual acts take precedence over abstract speculations, since the theology of such primitive peoples is elementary in the extreme, in striking contradiction to the complicated metaphysics which usually characterise the theological systems of the ‘higher’ (civilised) religions. [3]
To sum up: the ‘natural’ religion of barbaric peoples reproduces faithfully the elementary social organisms that characterise such primitive social states. Above all, it reflects as in a mirror the helplessness of such societies before the dark and unknown powers of an incomprehensible nature. Obviously, in the civilised societies of today such religions have little meaning. The artificial revival of antique paganism in recent Germany and Japan is not due to natural but to political causes! The ‘supernatural’ religions of today are as different in their character as in their motivating cause. Accordingly, we propose to glance briefly at this species of religion before turning our attention to the current problem of religion in present-day society.
III: Supernatural Religion
With the advent of civilisation and concurrently of class society and the class state, barbarism began to disappear, and along with it the type of religion which we have seen above to be characteristic of barbarism. In its place there arose, at first, probably gradually, another and quite different species of religion; one which reflected the new and radically different social conditions which came into existence along with civilisation and class society at some unknown period before the dawn of recorded history. [4]
In Marxist (that is, in scientific) terminology words like ‘civilisation’, ‘classes’, ‘the state’ etc, are used in a definite and precise sense; unlike bourgeois ‘science’, in which such terms are used in an extremely vague and haphazard manner, frequently undistinguishable from sheer mumbo-jumbo charlatanry. By the term ‘civilisation’ we imply a social order in which the means of production have expanded to the point where, for the first time, they yield a surplus wealth over and above the lowest needs of current society for immediate consumption. This wealth is owned and utilised in the form of private property, by the ruling class for the time being, which maintains its exploitation of the subjugated masses by the agency of a novel institution unknown in primitive society, that is, the class state: that ‘particular power of suppression’, to employ the masterly definition of Engels. In all societies so constituted, from those of the oldest civilisations, Ancient Egypt and Ancient Babylonia, down to and including those of our own day, this fundamental state of things exists. In all such societies, accordingly, the class struggle for control of surplus-value and for the consequent right to exploit, remains the decisive social factor.
Against the background of a society so constituted it is obvious that the primitive type of religion (in itself the reflex of an altogether different and more elementary society in which social antagonisms were relatively undeveloped and weak), could have no conceivable relevance and would, in fact, have been absolutely meaningless. For ‘Man  –  Society  –  made God in his own image'! And a ‘civilised’ god can only be the work of ‘civilised’ men! Despite the recent ludicrous efforts of the German militaristic disciples of Ludendorff and Alfred Rosenberg, along with their Japanese Shintoist colleagues, to revive primitive pagan cults amid modern industrial conditions, the incongruity between the ideology of the machine-age and the nature myths (the Swastika, the ‘Solar Wheel’, the (Japanese) Sun-Goddess, etc.) of primitive rustic paganism is altogether too great. The table-manners of the antique barbaric gods are simply impossible in a modern civilised society.
Unquestionably, the fundamental difference between ‘natural’  –  barbaric  –  religion and ‘supernatural’  –  civilised  –  religion, is to be found in the broad distinction already noted above: that is, in ‘natural’ religion it is physical nature that predominates; whereas in ‘supernatural’ religion it is social forces, antagonisms and contradictions, which play the decisive role. Barbaric religion is a reflex mainly of Nature; whereas civilised religion is a reflex mainly of Society: the accurate mirror of its social inhibitions and contradictions.
If we turn from the purely speculative consideration of the subject to the consideration of the positive evolution of religion this fact becomes crystal-clear. The earliest ‘civilised’ religions arose in the earliest civilisations; Egypt, Chaldæa, etc. These religions represent the faithful reflex of the societies wherein they originated. For example, each city-state in Egypt and Chaldæa had its own local God. The importance of the state-god waxed and waned proportionately with the temporal political and military fortunes of his terrestrial worshippers here below! Thus, when Assyria, by utilising iron weapons for the first time in the history of war, became the dominant empire in western Asia (c 800BC), simultaneously, Assur, the local Assyrian god, was elevated to the first place in the heavenly hierarchy: viz, the social discovery of iron for military purposes led to alterations not only in the terrestrial, but, equally, in the celestial sphere! Similarly, when the Egyptian city of Thebes became the capital of a united Egyptian empire, Amon, the city-god, became supreme over the other gods. Indeed, throughout the entire history of civilisation heaven faithfully reflects the vicissitudes of earth! The growth of equality in heaven accompanies the growth of inequality on earth!
When we turn to more advanced forms of religion than pagan polytheism the same phenomenon recurs. According to the writers of orthodox text-books on the history of comparative religion, the broad distinction in religious evolution is that between ‘polytheism’  –  belief in the simultaneous existence of many gods, and ‘monotheism’, that is, the belief in one god alone. But, in actuality, there is no absolute distinction between the two forms of belief. The historic link between polytheism and monotheism is found in ‘monolatry’, that is, the belief that many gods exist, but that one alone ('ours’, of course), is superior to all others. This was for centuries the belief of the Jews, the ‘discoverers’ of Monotheism. And Monotheism itself did not originate among the Jews as a result of speculative reasoning, but was due essentially to the hostility of the surrounding pagan peoples at the time of the Babylonian Captivity of the Jews (c 600BC), the gods of whom became accordingly quite inacceptable as objects of worship. Hence the Jewish god, Jahveh (Jehovah) was left as the solitary tenant in a vacant heaven.
The highest forms of religion faithfully reflect the highest forms of society. This age-old truth is seen with particular clarity in the case of the great cosmopolitan and ethical religions which have arisen in Europe and Asia during the course of the last 2500 years: Buddhism, Christianity, Islam, and their modern off-shoots. These ‘universal’ religions reflect with the fidelity of a mirror the social evolution of civilisation throughout this era. They are cosmopolitan because society during this period had been steadily widening its boundaries and advancing from the tribal, first to the national, then to the cosmopolitan sphere. They are ethical, since in a society founded on the exploitation of the many by the few mere brute force is insufficient to hold the masses in subjection: for this last purpose, an ethic is required; that is, the masses must be persuaded to do what it is against their real interest to do, and submit voluntarily to exploitation on earth in the name of heaven! And they all presuppose the regime of classes, private property and exploitation, not as temporary social phases, but as something fixed and eternal: ‘the sacred rights of private property'! Such universally found commandments as ‘Thou shalt not steal’, ‘Thou shalt not covet’, ‘Thou shalt not kill’, etc, etc, presuppose a state of society based on private property, inequality and violence. It is one of the most glaring paradoxes of all ‘civilised’ ethics that every society based on social theft and murder by the rich must peremptorily forbid individual theft and murder by the poor as an essential prerequisite for its existence!
Space is not, unfortunately, available to pursue in any detail the very interesting and instructive question of the social evolution of the higher religions. A word, however, may be usefully added on that of the one which most concerns us Europeans: viz, Christianity. Historically, this last may be described as the faithful reflex of the last phase of classical society. As the Roman Empire unified the local city-states of the Mediterranean, so, concurrently, Christianity unified the local religious cults that were their ideological expression. For example, the Greek writer, Plutarch (second century AD), went on record with the observation that every city-state (Polis) to be counted as such must have two things: ‘A god and a town-hall’  –  viz, seat of government. The Roman Empire abolished the second and the Catholic (Christian) Church the first. Similarly, it is well known that the rise of individualistic capitalism in the sixteenth century led to new forms of Christianity, in the reformed Churches, which accommodated themselves to the new competitive ethics so different from those of feudalism. For example, punctuality is pre-eminently a capitalist virtue. Protestantism is the first religion to make it a religious virtue: the proletarian who is late at the factory gate cannot be in time at the door of heaven! One could give countless similar examples.
To sum up accordingly the first part of this pamphlet: Religion has historically passed through two main epochs. The era of barbarism throughout which religion expressed chiefly man’s fear of and helplessness before Nature. And the era of civilisation, in which religion was primarily an instrument in the hands of the successive ruling classes and which primarily reflected fear of these classes and of the fundamental social antagonisms which have, hitherto, dominated every class-ruled society.
One further point may be added. Under capitalism and, in particular, under monopoly-capital, the most advanced form of capitalism which brings all its contradictions to a head, the first, natural root of religion, man’s awe of natural phenomena, becomes extremely weak, and indeed, in the most advanced countries almost disappears with society’s growing mastery of natural forces due to the machine-age. Whereas the second, social root in insecurity and in social disharmony acquires a terrible and altogether unprecedented power due to the previously unheard of intensity of prevailing social contradictions expressed in war, crisis and universal instability. Hence, in dealing with current religion it is its second, social root that almost exclusively concerns us as, even a generation ago, Lenin had already specially insisted. The second part of this pamphlet is written from this last point of view.
Note: In this brief analysis of the fundamental characteristics of religion we have not, unfortunately, the space to delve deeply into special problems of theological criticism. But we may relevantly add that the idea of ‘god’, though due essentially to social and not to intellectual causes, is also a logical absurdity from the purely intellectual standpoint. For if, as the theologians say, everything has to be made by someone, and therefore, the universe must have been made by god, it is, in the first place, obvious that the universe  –  the all  –  is not a thing, but a name, or rather an abstraction: no one can see or touch the universe, but only some part or aspect of it. And, in any case, if the universe must have a maker, so by the same logic must god, and so on, ad infinitum! In any case a ‘first cause’ is an absurdity, since by the term ‘cause’ we understand something that is, also, an effect of a previous cause.
Moreover, we know the world to be full of pain and misery. Such a world could not possibly originate from an all-good and all-perfect god who, by definition, could not create anything not, also, good and perfect. This point was made once for all by the old Greek philosopher, Epicurus: God must be either all-powerful or all-good, or neither, if we conceive him as the author of so imperfect a world: one in which all animals must struggle for existence and in which as has been aptly said: ‘History is the conjugation of the verb “to eat.”’ But, of course, such quibbles are not ‘the foundations of belief’: they are merely excuses  –  and very bad ones!  –  for not giving up a belief that was necessitated by social conditions in past eras. It is only the lack of real evidence that brings the ‘evidence societies’ (who peddle such puerile arguments) into existence.
We could, of course, continue to pick holes in theology indefinitely. For example, if the ‘soul’ had a beginning, it must have an end, etc, etc. But here we are concerned with the social realities of religion, not with the verbal acrobatics of its professional apologists. When a thing is old and profitable one can always find reasons for justifying it, and not always in conscious bad faith!
 


Table of Contents




ism and Religion by F A Ridley 1940s


Socialism and Religion. F A Ridley 1940s
Epilogue: The Death of the Gods
Man is a bridge and not a goal.  –  Nietzsche
There is little more to add. Religion in its present form becomes ever more obviously a parasite on the exploiting civilisation and society of which it is the ideological expression. As the machine-age develops it becomes more and more an absurdity, and its specific dogmas approximate ever more closely to self-evident mumbo-jumbo. More and more, as his historic role becomes ever more retrogressive, the priest becomes a mere witch-doctor battening on ignorance and fear, and droning his meaningless incantations with an ever more wearisome monotony. Men of intellect like Calvin or Newman are no longer found in institutions the ‘evidences’ of which become continually feebler. The gods are old: they have become senile: it is time for them to die!
But they will die no natural death. Capital will keep them alive even, if necessary, by artificial stimulants! As the capitalist civilisation declines, as war follows war, each more ‘total’ and soul-destroying than the last, religion again plants its feet firmly on the familiar ground of fear, and, like the fabled giant, grows stronger with every contact. In this society, religion will never die out. This is, above all, an age of fear, and fear and superstition are age-long twins.
Only the Social Revolution will destroy religion by abolishing its effective causes. Thereafter, man takes the place of god. An evolving earth succeeds a static heaven as Humanity, now, at long last, master of his own destiny in a free society, moves ever onward from the ape-man of yesterday to the man of today, and to the superman of tomorrow. Today gods and capitalists stand together: tomorrow, gods and capitalists will fall together.
‘Chase gods from the skies and capitalists from the earth.’ Forward to the Social Revolution! Mankind comes of age!
 


Table of Contents




ism and Religion by F A Ridley 1940s


Frank Ridley
Socialism and Religion
Source: An undated pamphlet published by the Engels Society, 21 Lime Tree Road, Heston, Middlesex. By internal evidence, it was probably published in the late 1940s. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.
Introduction
Socialism is a system which in politics expresses itself as republicanism, in economics as communism and in religion as atheism.  –  August Bebel
The problem of religion is one that is important both in the practical and the theoretical spheres. How comes it that mankind in the past has devoted so large a portion of his energies to the investigation of alleged ‘spiritual’ phenomena to the point of neglecting his proper material environment? And in practice, whence comes the enormous power of organised religion  –  a power which has dominated what passes for ‘civilisation’ almost throughout its entire existence? A power which, whilst shorn of much of its former influence, still wields today an extensive authority throughout the world. And not only throughout the primitive world of barbarism but also among the ‘civilised’ and professedly scientific nations of the contemporary world.
This important question has naturally aroused much interest and discussion during those comparatively rare epochs in human history in which mankind has been free to think at all about such matters. It goes without saying that, throughout by far the greater part of history, it would have been found distinctly dangerous to ask such questions, indeed impossible, with any measure of legal and personal impunity. Such tribunals as the Inquisition saw to that very effectively! For that matter, in modern Germany and Japan it would have been the reverse of safe to question the divine origin of the ‘herrenvolk’ ('master-race’): in Japan, ruled by the divine descendants of the Sun-Goddess, it would have been distinctly hazardous to draw attention to too many eclipses of the Sun! Not even in Europe does complete religious liberty exist today: in Franco Spain, as in the Ireland of De Valera, the power of the Roman Church still preserves almost mediæval proportions.
In particular, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries an extensive critical and scientific literature was devoted to these questions. For these epochs of capitalist growth and progressive expansion afforded extensive scope for religious toleration and for scientific and disinterested religious investigation. In such works as Frazer’s monumental Golden Bough, and its French and German counterparts, the origins of ‘natural’ religion were subjected to an exhaustive and critical survey, as were also the ‘higher’ cosmopolitan and supernatural religions. The origins, dogmas and general history of Christianity as the traditional religion of Europe were, in particular, made the subject of an elaborate and learned criticism from the time of Voltaire down to the latest researches of our own day.
As a result of these sequential investigations the natural origins and character of religion, including Christianity, are now tolerably well-known. On some details there is, no doubt, still room for controversy. But, in broad outline, we now know what religion is, in what kind of mental environment it originally arose and to what kind of intellectual attitudes its alleged ‘truths’ appealed. And since this is so, can we wonder that the rationalistic critics of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries  –  the contemporaries of Voltaire, Renan, Huxley, Darwin, Spencer, Grant Allen and Frazer  –  believed confidently that, its origins and nature once known and ascribed to purely natural causes in human immaturity and ignorance, religion would speedily and automatically vanish from the social scene?
We now know that these too optimistic ‘rationalists’ were wrong: their ‘rationalism’ was not sufficiently rational! For religion has not died out. On the contrary, in many respects, it has increased its power. And it has done this because religion is not only an intellectual but a social product. Because, as a given society declines, it requires soporifics to drug the multitude. And religion is primarily a social, and not an intellectual phenomenon. For Marx laid bare its essential nature in his classical epigram: ‘Religion is the heart of a heartless world, the soul of soulless conditions, the opium of the people.’
For, as a social product, and one at that which arises in a society divided into classes and based on exploitation, religion discharges a necessary role in that type of society, and cannot die out while such an exploiting society continues to exist. Hence the socialist criticism of religion differs profoundly from the purely intellectual criticism of capitalist scholars. For religion is necessary to the class state and to class society in general. And, as such, can only perish with it. Hence, no amount of merely expository or destructive criticism, useful and necessary as such criticism is in itself, can finally destroy religion. Only the coming of a classless society can do that, by abolishing the social antagonisms which necessitate its existence. It is from this standpoint that the problem of religion is examined in the following pages.
Note: Many books written by bourgeois specialists can be strongly recommended in their own particular fields. Frazer’s Golden Bough is, of course, a whole literature in itself. Among shorter works we may specially recommend Grant Allen’s Evolution of the Idea of God and S Reinach’s Orpheus, a History of Comparative Religion. The social limitations of such works must, of course, always be borne in mind. It is unfortunate that there is no definitive Marxist book on the subject: such a book would be one of the most valuable additions to contemporary literature. Probably the best single book ever written by a Marxist on a religious theme is still Karl Kautsky’s masterly book The Foundations of Christianity, written when its author was still a Marxist. Everyone interested in the subject and having the time should read this excellent work. The classics of Marxism contain, of course, many valuable observations: in particular, Engel’s Feuerbach; Lenin’s On Religion; NI Bukharin’s Historical Materialism. I must add that none of the works quoted above deal at all fully with the subject nor show much specialised acquaintance with its particular problems. I do not know any existing pamphlet or short work on the subject that is suitable for general reading. The SPGB formerly had a pamphlet which was a work of undoubted merit, though too prone, in my opinion at least, to adhere to the peculiar theories of Herbert Spencer on the origins of religion, but I understand that it is now out of print.
 


Table of Contents




ism and Religion by F A Ridley 1940s


Socialism and Religion. F A Ridley 1940s
Notes
1. In the caves of the Pyrenees which have been recently excavated, and which were certainly inhabited in the neolithic age, magical, that is, primitive religious ideas are clearly indicated in the drawings of animals on the cave walls. These drawings are typical of ‘sympathetic magic’ (that is, the representation of the animal on the cave wall was believed to attract the animal itself). It is still a hotly disputed question, and one on which final agreement has not yet been reached, whether the most primitive races still extant, such as the Australian Bushmen, the Congo pygmies, and the Polar Esquimaux, have anything that can properly be called a religion.
2. ‘They are without a god and without a government. In all matters they are ruled by custom’, as a Danish explorer described the Polar Esquimaux, still in the social stage of primitive communism.
3. Climatic considerations also play their part in such primitive religions of nature: for example, Greek Paganism was sunny and cheerful, like the blue skies of the Aegean beneath which it arose. Norse Paganism, contrarily, was sombre, brooding and sad, reflecting faithfully the gloomy terrain of the dark North. In the case of the last named, we may add that its ‘hell’ was cold: the terrors of heat are unknown near the Arctic circle, whilst those of cold are only too familiar!
4. As we are still dealing with the prehistoric era no exact dates can be given for the origin of civilisation. The estimate of 5000 years, given by older authorities for the total duration of civilisation, is certainly too short. (This was the estimate of Lewis Morgan, the great American anthropologist in his well-known book Ancient Society. But the known history of Egypt and Babylonia goes back nearly as far as that, and it is evident that civilisation was already well advanced in prehistoric times. Cf Gordon Childe, What Happened in History.) Nor can we go here into the still hotly disputed question of its origin. Did civilisation arise in a single centre whence it spread outward  –  the ‘diffusionist’ theory  –  or did it arise independently in a number of climatically favourable centres? In the opinion of the present writer, both views are compatible with the materialistic interpretation of history, though on the available evidence the latter seems to be the more probable explanation.
5. In a booklet on the Servile Insurrection of Spartacus we have given some precise details regarding the nature and extent of this exploitation. [See FA Ridley, Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves, second edition, Frank Maitland, Ashford, nd [1962]  –  MIA.]
6. Cf R Eisler, John the Baptist and the Messiah Jesus.
7. Sic: the text should surely read ‘for the ruling classes’  –  MIA.
8. In ferocious cruelty the clerical exploiters kept well abreast of their secular allies. For example, compare the classic reply of an Inquisitor (thirteenth century) who was asked how to distinguish between ‘heretics’ and the faithful: ‘Kill them all, my son; at the Day of Judgment God will know how to distinguish!’
9. The chief social encyclical letters of the Popes are ‘Rerum Novarum’ by Leo XIII (1891), the so-called ‘Workers’ Charter’, and ‘Quadragesimo Anno’ (1931) by Pius XI. Both contain very explicit statements of the Catholic position with regard to socialism, plus a good deal of demagogic criticism of monopoly-capital. However, if what we hear is correct, the Vatican is still persona grata in Wall Street!
10. A curious feature of contemporary Anglicanism is its ‘modernist’ movement which combines relatively radical and scientific views on religion with the most die-hard Tory reaction. The famous ex-Dean of St Paul’s, Dr Inge, is a case in point.
 


Table of Contents




ism and Religion by F A Ridley 1940s


Socialism and Religion. F A Ridley 1940s
Part II: Religion and Society
Religion is the opium of the people.  –  Marx
I: Religion and the Class War
The fundamental and decisive fact in every social order that has arisen since prehistoric times has been the class war for control of the surplus-value produced by that society. And the control of surplus value, of ‘the means of production’, carries with it automatically control of the state, of ‘the particular power of suppression’ (Engels) and of cultural processes in general. Historically nothing is more certain or well-established than that, in the words of Marx, ‘the [dominant  –  FAR] ideas of every age are the ideas of its ruling class’. Since the publication of the Communist Manifesto (1848), which first laid the foundations of an exact social science, only prehistoric survivals can be found to dispute this primary fact of social development.
The part that official religion has played in this age-long process is evident on every page of the historical record. As ‘the opium of the people’, as a drug, a soporific to deaden the effect of an inevitable social misery in a class-ruled society; religion has played always an important and often a decisive role in every known class society that has hitherto existed.
In the very earliest civilised societies of which we have any exact knowledge, the sacerdotal theocracies of the pre-classical archaic world prior to Greece and Rome, the role played by religion in sanctifying social inequality and oppression was decisive and overwhelming. In the oldest civilised societies, such as Egypt, Babylonia, Crete, ‘God and the State’ were virtually synonymous terms. (Though, we may add, Bakunin and his disciples were quite wrong in maintaining that the latter was derived from the former. Whilst undoubtedly influenced by religious ideas the earliest states did not originate from the ‘idea of god’, but from the concrete fact of the development of the means of production and the simultaneous development of classes.) The very name of the ruler of the oldest known civilisation, that of Egypt, derives from religious auspices: viz, ‘Pharaoh’ is derived from ‘Per-Ea’, ‘the Great House'; the Temple. And has not the most learned of ancient philosophers, Aristotle, left it on record that the Egyptian priests, the first ‘leisured class’ in history, were the creators of civilisation?
The colossal monuments left behind by this earliest civilisation, the giant Pyramids which still stand in the Egyptian desert, were about equally temples and tombs. Indeed, the imagination recoils before the spectacle of the ruthless slave-driving of whole generations necessary in a pre-machine age to erect these massive mausoleums. Literally, whole generations of slaves must have perished worn-out in the task of building an adequate memorial to the ruling class of the first known civilisation, symbolised in the Divine Pharaohs, for whom the Pyramids originally served as tombs: a necropolis of exploitation!
When we turn to subsequent ages and civilisations we are confronted with the same or a closely similar spectacle. The Roman Empire, the greatest engine of exploitation known up to that date, identified its religion with the worship of Cæsar, of the Emperor: and as to what sort of ‘gods’ the frenzied Caligula, the sadistic Nero, and the perverted Elagabalus were, even ‘official’ history bears eloquent testimony! And, so far as we know, none of the numerous moralists throughout antiquity protested against the frightful exploitation of the slave-majority by the free minority. [5]
Nor is it any different essentially when we turn to the ‘higher religions’, such as Christianity and Islam. For if, as is not at all unlikely, Christianity itself started as a ‘revolutionary’ mass movement against Roman society, as Eisler and others have sought to demonstrate, and as some of its surviving early scriptures seem to indicate (viz, ‘the Apocalypse’, etc), it is at least certain that it was soon effectively captured by the ruling classes of the day and became an instrument in the hands of the class state. [6]
In that respect, the ‘conversion’ of the Emperor Constantine (fourth century AD), was the perversion of (the original) Christianity. Even reputable bourgeois historians now admit that the Roman Emperors of the Decline, in adopting Christianity as the state religion, were motivated primarily by political and economic motives rather than by considerations of a purely religious character. They needed ‘moral cement’ wherewith to hold together their cracking administrative structure, and to arrest the decay of their exhausted civilisation in the era of the Barbarian Invasions. For a time it was doubtful whether Christianity or Sun-Worship (Mithraism) would best fulfil this social role. Eventually, however, a combination of favourable circumstances enabled the Son of God to prevail over the Sun-God. Both gods, in any case, would have functioned in much the same way in that society!
Since its official adoption as a state-religion Christianity has faithfully acted as the docile instrument of the class state; it was always for the classes [7] against the masses; for the exploiters against the exploited. Under the peculiar conditions of the Middle Ages the Church indeed became itself the dominant force in society and the exploiter-in-chief. According to a moderate computation, one-third of the land of Europe was ecclesiastical property throughout this period: and this in an agrarian society when land was (in feudal law) real property, that is, the kind of property which pre-eminently bestowed social prestige and political power. It is well known how during this epoch, the golden age of (Catholic) Christianity, the Church waged the most frightful wars in the so-called Crusades (c 1100-1300 AD), and that its ‘Gestapo’, the Inquisition, bloodily and most effectively suppressed every free movement of the human mind throughout this entire era, during which a ‘law against dangerous thoughts’ (to employ modern Japanese terminology) was in unbroken operation.
And we may add there is strong reason to believe that the Inquisition was an engine of conscious social at least as much as religious repression. The heretical sects which it drowned in blood were the radicals of their period: indeed, some of them belong to the category of Utopian communist sects. The rack and stake of the Inquisition served both God and Mammon impartially. As Kautsky has aptly remarked: ‘It was a fanaticism of avarice masquerading under the forms of faith.’ [8]
And all this transpired during the era of the greatest Church-power: ‘the Ages of Faith'! For it is a matter of common knowledge that mediæval culture was entirely dominated by the Church. Its leading theologians, St Augustine and St Thomas Aquinas, were the highest cultural authorities. Throughout this whole millennium (c 500-1500 AD), the word ‘clerk’ denominated equally and impartially either a person in holy orders, or a literate person able to read and write; the two were regarded as virtually identical in mediæval Europe, as in modern Tibet.
Nor has the situation been essentially different in modern times, even though religion has, in general, not exercised the overwhelming power that it enjoyed during the preceding era. From the time of that great ‘rebel’ Luther, who urged the German princes to ‘stab and slay’ their serfs revolting against intolerable oppression (1525) during the ‘Peasants’ War’ (Bauernkrieg), ‘the social record of Christianity’ has been one of almost unbroken subservience to the rich and powerful. As Engels himself demonstrated, Lutheranism reduced the free peasants of Germany to the level of serfs. If Calvinism was revolutionary in its social effects, it was only so in the interests of the new bourgeois exploiters, the lords of money, against the older feudal exploiters, the lords of land. As Tawney and others have shown it actually worsened the lot of the poor. It is notorious how the (reformed) Anglican Church has always been the obsequious tool of the English ruling class: ‘God bless the squire and his relations and keep us in our proper stations!’
And subsequent religious history is the same. Every social revolution from the French to the Russian has had to meet the full fury of the Churches. (According to some historians, it was the influence of Methodism which prevented the French Revolution from spreading to England.) In both its ideology and its property-relationships official religion has only played one role in the class war: that of chaplain, apologist, and, where necessary, active auxiliary to the ruling class.
The lack of real democracy on earth is made up by a fictitious democracy in heaven.
And what has been said above of Christianity is equally true and could easily be duplicated, had we the necessary space, in respect of other religions also. For example, Islam has always stubbornly opposed even the bourgeois revolution: Arabia and Afghanistan, still strongholds of Mohammedan clericalism, are almost completely feudal. Kemal Atatürk had to suppress it in Turkey in order to carry through the bourgeois revolution there. Whilst Hinduism, by means of its doctrine of reincarnation, has cleverly allayed the discontent of the Indian masses with their frightful conditions in this life! Even the originally rationalistic Buddhism has, in modern Mongolia and Tibet, become an obscurantist and oppressive priestly despotism.
To sum up: as far as the class struggle is concerned, official religion is, and always has been, on the side of the exploiters. Indeed, granted its social background, it could not have been anything else. And the same is true today.
Note: In dealing with the reactionary role of religion in past societies we are, of course, dealing with the official religion in such societies. In fairness we must add that another type of religion has existed on which Christian Socialists lay great stress. We refer to such movements as those of the Lollards and Anabaptists which were anti-ruling-class, and in some cases, even ‘communistic’ in their tenets. It is undeniable that such movements existed, that they reflected their contemporary class antagonisms and were, even, to a certain extent, revolutionary in their relation to contemporary states and society. To that extent accordingly they must be excepted from the strictures passed above on their official counterparts, the ‘orthodox’ churches. We must not forget that in a pre-scientific society religion necessarily became itself an instrument of the prevailing revolutionary class war.
We must add, however, that their ‘communism’ was pre-scientific and therefore backward-looking: ‘When Adam delved and Eve span where was then the gentleman?’, as the Lollards phrased it: viz, in the beginning class distinctions did not exist. In all such Utopian ‘Communism’ history chases its own tail. Moreover, most of these movements were dominated by clerics  –  for example, John Ball and Thomas Munzer, etc. Had they succeeded they would have inevitably become themselves theocracies. Voltaire has summed up, once for all, the social character of all theocratic communism in his satirical description of the clerical ‘communistic’ state founded by the Jesuits in Paraguay (eighteenth century): ‘In Paraguay perfect communism existed: the Jesuits shared the wealth; whilst the Indians shared the work!’
II: The Churches and Society
In the preceding section we have summarised the historical role of religion throughout all earlier periods. It remains to glance at the contemporary attitude of the Churches in present-day society.
By far the most powerful, best organised, and logically consistent of the Christian Churches is the Roman Catholic Church. This originally mediæval and feudal institution almost foundered in the storms of the Reformation era which witnessed the opening-up of the world market and the earlier phases of the bourgeois revolution against feudalism and clericalism. By a skilful combination of terror and demagogy the Catholic ‘Counter-Reformation’ extricated the Church from its dangerous situation and, under the brilliant direction of the Jesuits, made a masterly adaptation to the rising capitalist social order.
Today, the Papacy is fully alive to the urgency of social questions, and even to the imminence of social revolution. If this ancient institution does not really know much about the next world it undeniably knows quite a lot about this one! It has not wasted its 1900 years’ historical experience. And to meet its current dilemma it pursues a two-faced and subtle policy: here, we only touch upon its social aspect.
Despite its claims to Divine origin the Roman Church is an institution with a very strong sense of ‘survival-values’. It was not an accident that the biologist, Lamarck, who invented the theory of ‘creative evolution’, was a pupil of the Jesuits: to arrive at his theory of ‘the giraffe’ which deliberately ‘grew a long neck’ in order to survive, all he had to do was to study the evolution of the famous Order! Today, the Papacy knows that it is in even greater danger than at the time of the Reformation. For whilst it survived Protestantism it could not possibly survive Communism, which would necessarily be fatal to all religion, The Pope may, or may not, be ‘infallible’, but he knows this only too well!
There is no doubt at all that the fundamental aim of the present-day Papacy is at all costs to defeat Communism. All its other aims are subordinate to this one. It fights for its life; and it knows it! To defeat the Social Revolution it resorts, as at the Reformation, to a combined policy of demagogy and terror. On the one hand, the Popes issue encyclical letters denouncing the ‘abuses’ of capitalism, and demanding a ‘square deal’ for the masses. On the other hand, whenever the masses attempt to secure a ‘square deal’ for themselves it backs terrorist movements against them. It is well known how actively it assisted Hitler and Mussolini to come to power; and how fiercely it denounced Bolshevism whilst the revolutionary phase of the Communist International endured. And the whole world knows how strenuously the Roman Church exerted its worldwide activity on behalf of Franco during the Spanish Social War.
Its pronouncements leave no room for doubt as to its motives: it was not taken in by the myth of (bourgeois) democracy promulgated by the Stalinists and their allies during the Spanish war. The Church knew as well as we do, that in our era the alternative to Fascism is revolutionary Communism, and not bourgeois democracy. On this point, at least, the extreme Left and the extreme Right agree! Hence, in Spain as elsewhere, the Church fought for its life against the ‘Red Peril’. It will do so again whenever Social Revolution threatens and it will always support Capitalism  –  with whatever mental reservations, since the Roman Church is a pre-capitalist institution  –  when the alternative is revolutionary socialism.
The Papacy is itself a totalitarian institution. For it, socialism is not a question of politics but a ‘moral’ question. This is so. It is, indeed, fantastic to imagine that either Christian pre-scientific doctrine or Christian servile ethics could survive in a communist and libertarian society. Hence, as Cardinal Newman predicted long ago: whenever and wherever the Social Revolution appears, it will find the Catholic Church in the forefront of its enemies. And the workers of Spain, Ireland and Mexico, etc, know this already from bitter experience! [9]
We accordingly conclude that the Roman Church  –  the one Christian Church which is still a world-power  –  stands in the front rank of the opponents of socialism.
The remaining Churches can be dismissed briefly since they have little real power, and that only local. Moreover, they are not organised on the efficient totalitarian lines which characterise Roman Catholicism.
In general, they can be described as anti-revolutionary and anti-socialist, though some more blatantly so than others. For example, the surviving Calvinistic Churches: the State Churches of Scotland and Holland, are hotbeds of black reaction. Still worse, if possible, is the South African Church which adds colour to class hatred. The above is somewhat ironic when we consider the prominent role played by the Calvinist Churches in the bourgeois revolutions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. However, ‘predestination’ automatically becomes counter-revolutionary after victory!
On the other hand, the Anglican Church, whilst at bottom probably equally reactionary, is so less openly in that it permits a certain amount of ‘Leftism’ among even its higher clergy: it goes without saying that this presents no real danger to the existing social order. Thus we have a ‘red Dean’ of Canterbury and have even had a ‘pink’ Archbishop! However, since the state controls the purse-strings in the form of endowments, it may safely be presumed that Anglicanism, in the future as in the past, will be the faithful servant of British capital and British Imperialism. The recent Education Bill, introduced by a Tory minister, evidently predicates a closer alliance in Britain between Church and State in the coming era for the purpose of promoting a common reaction.
The same goes for the others as well. The ‘revolutionary Church’ of the ‘Christian Socialists’ is a revolutionary myth. Historically, in the pre-capitalist days of such sects as the Lollards and Anabaptists, there were, undoubtedly, ‘heretical’ Churches that can accurately be called revolutionary, having regard for the circumstances of their time. But that is all ancient history. It is a far cry from the revolutionary Anabaptists of the sixteenth century to the smug Baptists of the twentieth: from Jan of Leyden to ‘Spurgeon’s Tabernacle’. [10]
The case of the Russian ‘Orthodox’ Church, recently re-established by Stalin, is a special case, and, as such, merits a word. In Tsarist days the Russian State Church was one of the most ignorant, intolerant and obscurantist of all. The brutality of its ‘Holy Synod’ was notorious. And its charlatan-in-chief, Rasputin, had become a bye-word. The official recognition recently given for political reasons to this Church indicates undoubtedly the growing compromising character of the Stalinist regime and its increasing reversion to power-politics. Every class revolution in decay tends to compromise with religion. The example of Napoleon’s ‘Concordat’ with Catholicism is a well-known instance (1801). The latest Stalinist policy demonstrates that even an originally socialist revolution is liable to retrogression in the cultural sphere if it remains indefinitely backward and isolated. Only international socialism can abolish religion.
Regarding the non-Christian world we have already alluded to its reactionary character. For example, the pacifist role of the Hindu ‘Mahatma’, Gandhi, is a most powerful contemporary obstacle to the Indian Social Revolution. Whilst Islam, as remarked above, is still an anti-socialist barrier of feudalism. In Japan, the militarist cult of Shintoism was artificially revived by the Japanese warlords as a barrier against revolutionary ideas. But Emperor-worship is unlikely to survive the defeat of Japan. The Deity has now become a Democrat!
To sum up: as the social utility of religion becomes less, and as the Social Revolution gains ground, everywhere organised religion allies itself more closely with the forces of reaction in other spheres. The gods form a ‘united front’ against the Revolution! For the Revolution digs a common grave for all the gods!
Note: Space does not permit us to deal with ‘freak’ cults, such as Christian Science, Theosophy, etc. In any case, the time has long gone past for the foundation of new religions. The old ones already have sufficient difficulty in keeping afloat!
III: Religion and Socialism
After what has been written above it is unnecessary to devote much time to the question of the relations of Socialism and Religion: they necessarily mix about as well as oil and water! We have already seen what were the historical causes for the appearance and growth of religion and how it arose out of fear and ignorance; fear and ignorance in savage societies before the incomprehensible phenomena of nature; fear and ignorance of the uncontrollable forces of civilisation and of the social tyranny which is inseparable from the operations of a class-dominated society. In this last respect, the aphorism of that shrewd bourgeois politician Napoleon, ‘I regard religion not as the mystery of the incarnation, but as the mystery of the Social Order’, is abundantly borne out by history. Indeed, before Bonaparte, Robespierre had expressed to perfection the role of religion in a society based like all class societies on fundamental inequality and injustice: ‘Atheism is aristocratic. The idea of a god who avenges outraged innocence and punishes triumphant crime, is essentially the idea of the people.’
Or in other words, if there is no justice here, there must be somewhere else!  –  an obvious case of ‘wishful thinking'! ‘If God did not exist it would be necessary to invent him’: this remark of Voltaire is absolutely correct of any society based on exploitation, even if the circumstances of his era prevented Voltaire himself from drawing this correct conclusion.
For, we repeat: there is nothing accidental about the rise and historical role of religion. It is a mere waste of time to try to kill it by argument or ridicule where the social or natural causes exist that inevitably result in its reappearance. To attempt to do this is, indeed, the cardinal error of bourgeois rationalism which lops down the branches of religion but leaves its roots untouched. Wherever injustice and fear exist men will seek a remedy elsewhere, if none exists here. Hence as an Anglican bishop recently naively remarked: ‘Ages of fear have always been ages of religion.’ For example, after the Roman slaves had failed to win their social liberty under Spartacus (73-71 BC), they resorted to the ‘spiritual’ salvation of Christianity.
Hence, to seek to abolish religion in a society founded on exploitation is futile. The ancient Greek and Roman freethinkers such as Epicurus and Lucretius demolished every theological argument as well as their modern successors have done, but when Paganism passed from the scene it was Christianity, not Atheism, which took its place. And, we may add, the mediæval freethinkers who perished at the stake of the Inquisition could testify that the change, as far as freedom of thought was concerned, was merely from ‘the frying-pan into the fire'!
If, however, it follows from the above that religion cannot die out or be abolished in a class society, it follows equally and by the same reasoning that it could not survive under the world-order of international socialism. Once a communist order was fully established the twin foundations of religion, ignorance and fear, would be torn up by the roots. International socialism, by doing away with class exploitation and by developing to the fullest possible extent the unfathomed productive potentialities of the machine-age, hitherto hardly touched under capitalism, would make poverty and insecurity absolutely meaningless terms in an age of universal plenty. Whilst war, the third partner in the unholy capitalist trinity, would necessarily pass into oblivion along with the competitive capitalism and imperialism which is its sole efficient cause.
All the social roots of religion would thus simultaneously disappear. And, of course, it goes without saying that the last remains of barbaric ignorance and superstition which still survive from pre-civilised eras would vanish before the impact of universal free education based on the scientific humanism that is inseparable from socialism, and no longer twisted as today by class domination into a mere machine for producing standardised wage-slaves, mechanical minders of machines, and servile robots.
Whosoever therefore is capable of reasoning scientifically from cause to effect must realise that the universal arrival of scientific socialism means inevitably the definitive end of religion; which, deprived of all reason for existence, would become a mere anachronism in such a society: a modern version of Mohammed’s coffin floating unattached in space without visible means of support. Under world socialism we shall arrive at that pleasing state of things humorously depicted by Anatole France in one of his novels, where the then reigning Pope is forced to earn his living on the race-course whilst discharging his official duties as a spare-time occupation! Can we wonder that the Papacy dislikes the prospect?
What then are, or should be, the present relations of the revolutionary socialist movement with religion? Obviously, if and when the revolutionary workers seize power in a given society they will establish immediately the secular state and secular education, according to the principle: ‘The free Church in the free State’. Equally obviously, they will rely on education and propaganda to abolish the remnants of religion in the new era. Despite clerical scares, the ‘Red Peril’ is a civilised and civilising force: it will not make use of the methods of the Inquisition. Of course, if, as has so often happened, the Churches support counter-revolutionary movements then naturally the workers’ state will take strong measures against them as counter-revolutionary agents. But such obvious methods of self-protection have nothing in common with the persecution of religion as such, which would be offensive to the humanitarian ethic that is an integral part of international socialism. The workers’ state will rely on education, on scientific socialist propaganda, and, above all, on the progressive achievement of the socialist society which will make religion superfluous. The Churches have more reason to fear that than a thousand persecutions.
In the meanwhile, prior to the conquest of power, the revolutionary socialist party continues its necessary propaganda against all manifestations of capitalism, including those which belong to the sphere of religion. Whether it is necessary to attack religion specifically depends on local and on particular circumstances, but every reactionary movement of the Churches in our current society should be duly noted and exposed. It goes without saying that a revolutionary party has no official relations with religion: though whether a specific ‘anti-religious’ test is necessary for each individual member is, again, a matter for local and particular decision in view of the existing circumstances. Under no consideration, of course, would any party member posture on religious platforms nor angle for Church support.
To sum up: Religion is a social phenomenon in present-day society. Hence no amount of merely negative and critical propaganda can destroy it. Only the positive achievement of a classless society can do that by abolishing its causes. The war against the gods is, henceforth, equivalent to the class war for a socialist society: Forward to the Social Revolution!
Socialism and Religion. F A Ridley 1940s
 


Table of Contents






Of all the European lands subjected, via the Marshall Plan, to the hegemony of Wall Street over the capitalist world, Britain is, today, the most dependent and is, in fact, no longer an independent nation. Few people in this country, in fact, seem to realize how far British enslavement to the USA has gone. For, over and above her obligations under the plan, Which she shares with the other European debtor states, Britain is now actually an “occupied country,” a military colony of the USA, to which the British ruling class and its political instrument, the Foreign Office (using Ernest Bevin as a convenient rubber stamp), have sold out as completely as the French bourgeoisie did to Hitler in 1940.
Not only is the United Kingdom now America’s front trench in the only-too-probable event of war with Russia; but she is now actually already America’s “floating aircraft carrier” and is already occupied by the armed forces of the American Republic – even before war has broken out. And, if and when it should eventually come, America will, no doubt, fight to the last Briton!
In a recent broadcast on the BBC on the subject of the recent Stalin-Tito correspondence, the Oxford historian A.J.P. Taylor, ended by expressing the hope that Britain would become America’s “Tito” – that is, would display a similar independence toward America as Tito’s Yugoslavia is now doing toward Russia!
A courageous hope! One may remark in passing that it is a disgrace to the British socialist movement that it should be left to an academic, “non-political” historian to say it.
We hope that Britain will, indeed, soon become America’s “Tito.” The sooner a nationwide agitation for this end, and for the withdrawal of the American “occupying forces” from this country gets going, the better for everybody
 

volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter IX: The Future of the Papacy
The Church is an anvil which has broken many hammers.  –  Calvin
The present age is essentially the age of the decline of religion. The ancient animistic doctrine which in one shape or another has haunted the credulous imagination of an immature mankind is now at long last becoming dispelled in the growing light of knowledge. For our age, which has as its decisive characteristic the entry of the hitherto inarticulate masses into history, now witnesses for the first time the spread of irreligion amongst the masses. This represents an absolutely new phenomenon. For prior to the French Revolution, that greatest of historical events, scientific enlightenment and the atheistic and secularistic views of the universe and of society which accompany it, adhered exclusively to enlightened aristocratic cliques and to solitary thinkers who took their lives in their hands and lived obscurely, and, often enough, died violently.
The contemporary spread of irreligion amongst the broad masses of the people is, we repeat, something absolutely new, and it spells the doom of religion and of the Churches which embody it. Religion today can only continue to exist in the more backward areas of mankind. The further progress of humanity infallibly spells its doom.
The Churches themselves understand this very well. And the Church of Rome, the oldest and most experienced of them all, understands it perfectly well; the Papacy is, after all, not ‘infallible’ for nothing! Whatever it may or may not know about the next world, it undeniably knows a great deal about this one, it has had nineteen centuries of experience. We may, in fact, say that it is precisely this knowledge which determines its present, and will decide its future.
The greatest of all the many paradoxes in the constitution of the Papacy is to be found in the fact that whilst fundamentally a political institution, it is yet founded on a religious belief the loss of which would be fatal to it. Whilst the Popes themselves may regard Christianity as (in the words ascribed to Leo X) ‘a profitable superstition for Popes’  –  and such undoubtedly it has been as a matter of historical fact  –  yet the Vatican is dependent on this belief. Rome would undoubtedly follow God into oblivion.
Consequently, the contemporary collapse of religious belief in all the more advanced areas in the world, which follows inevitably in the wake of economic industrialism, political Liberalism and secular scientific and historical education, inevitably spells the ultimate end of the Papacy. Only a speedy reversion to a Dark Age can now save the Church of Rome, and its leader, the Papacy. Otherwise it will surely face the doom which overtook its historic predecessors, the Pagan Priesthoods of Antiquity. The continued expansion of modern secular civilisation and its progressive democratisation amongst the masses who are just now consciously entering history for the first time, means the end of the Vatican, and the Vatican knows it! The Popes did not keep their stakes and inquisitors busy for centuries stifling such enlightenment as then existed for nothing. And it was not for nothing that already within the lifetime of our oldest contemporaries, Pope Pius IX proclaimed in his famous Syllabus of Condemned Errors (1864): ‘Let him be anathema who affirms that the Roman Pontiff can and ought to come to terms with progress, Liberalism, and with modern civilisation.’
And one can relevantly add, even if Rome were willing to compromise with modern civilisation, modern civilisation from its very nature, as a culture, the life-blood of which is scientific understanding, could not possibly compromise with the Vatican, founded as it is and always has been, upon a pre-scientific culture compounded of ignorance, misunderstanding and credulity in relation to the external universe and to the life of Man.
As the great Bradlaugh so far-sightedly proclaimed, ‘The final struggle will be between Rome and Reason’, the latter embodied in modern secular culture, and it will be a struggle to the death.
Today Rome is busily engaged in preparing for what she well knows is the final struggle, and all her present-day actions are determined by it. At present, the major part of her energies, in the Old World at least, are devoted to the event for which she is now busily exhorting the Catholic world to prepare: the coming ‘Crusade’ against Russia, ‘the war for Christian civilisation’ against Russian-inspired Communism.
For the political power of Russia, one of the two World Powers of our era, and the quasi-religious discipline, dynamism and fanaticism which are associated with the ideology of present-day Communism constitutes it as ‘Public Enemy No 1’ in the computation of the Vatican, and Rome traditionally believes in taking her enemies one at a time. 
What successively Manichæanism, Mohammedanism, Calvinism and Liberalism have been in the past, that is Communism today, the ‘heresy’ of the twentieth century; and Rome is mustering all her forces, and those of her secular allies, to fight it to the finish  –  her own or that of the rival ‘Church of Moscow’.
And she will stick at nothing to achieve her ends when her survival is at stake. Let no one have any doubt about that! There is no need to hark back to the ‘crusading’ armies of Simon de Montfort, the butcher of the Albigenses, the Duke of Alva or St Bartholomew’s Eve, one need only look at the methods by which the present Pope’s ‘beloved son’ General Franco came to power in Spain, with the worldwide backing of militant Catholicism in the Civil War in Spain (1936 – 39), and at the ruthless methods by which this same ‘Christian General’ still retains power today, with the whole power of the Catholic Church enlisted on behalf of his bloodthirsty regime. Incidentally, if Franco succeeds in his present attempt to secure admission to UNO as his fellow Catholic  –  Dictator Perón  –  has already done, it will be simultaneously a triumph, one of the most brilliant of Catholic diplomacy, and one of the greatest crimes even of our crime-strewn age; the ghosts of untold millions of Fascist victims would assuredly turn in their graves.
The whole present policy of the Papacy is centred upon the coming ‘crusade’. In Rome, heavy with the memory of the centuries, they take long views. The coming anti-Communist crusade takes its place in the archives of the Vatican along with those earlier crusades against the successive enemies of the Church which we have enumerated above.
But Rome prepares for all eventualities, including defeat  –  that is, of course, temporary defeat  –  for the Papacy; the self-styled ‘Pilgrim of Eternity’ can never admit that its defeat can ever be permanent and final, for such an admission would mark the Church as what it actually is, a product of time and not of eternity, of earth and not of heaven. Nonetheless, there are signs available for those who can read  –  between the lines  –  that Rome herself is unsure of the result of the approaching clash.
It is to this unsureness that we may ascribe the persistent rumours that the Papacy is about to quit Communist-infested Rome for some safer seat. Had Communism won the Italian General Election on 18 April last, we were credibly assured that the exodus would already have eventuated to either Madrid or Buenos Aires. But the Church won its Italian opening round in its struggle with Communism.
Still more it can be discerned in the frantic eagerness that Rome is now displaying to acclimatise Catholicism in other continents besides her traditional but now precarious headquarters, Europe.
It is to this last desire that we must ascribe certain epoch-marking recent developments within the Catholic Church; the creation of Chinese cardinals and African bishops  –  the extraordinary solicitude manifested by the Vatican for the conversion of Japan  –  a desire which has produced some curious and diverting twists and turns in Papal policy. To the same cause must be ascribed the now official policy of concentrating in every missionary country upon the development of a ‘native’ clergy as an essential condition for the establishment of national Catholic Churches in non-European lands.
All such developments when viewed as Rome herself views them, in the grand perspective of world strategy, can only mean one thing: the centres of world power, in the opinion of the Vatican, are shifting from decrepit Europe. To keep pace with the times, the Vicars of Christ must move too. Had St Peter, the ‘first Pope’, been advised of future developments, he would have made his way to America and not to Rome! His future successors may well be Americans. For the post-Reformation Italian monopoly of the Papacy seems to be about to end.
For there can be no doubt at all that it is towards the Western Hemisphere, to the ‘New World’ originally presented by the Papacy to the Catholic Powers, Spain and Portugal, that Rome is looking for her salvation today. Rome makes her own, today, the historic words of George Canning about ‘calling in the New World to redress the balance of the Old’.
At present, the Vatican’s ‘marriage of convenience’ with Fascism has been succeeded by the present alliance with the American plutocracy of Wall Street. It is the USA that is cast for the role of ‘Crusader No 1’ when the ‘crusade for Christian civilisation’ does eventually get going. The Cross today depends for its effective survival upon the monopolist of the atomic bomb, and a Protestant monopolist at that, with a Federal Constitution which wholly ignores the supernatural.
That is, Anglo-Saxon America, the present greatest World Power, Rome’s chosen ‘sword’ against ‘godless Russia’. But there is also Catholic America as well in the Latin South; probably the Vatican’s most ambitious project today is concerned with Argentine, the Clerical-Fascist Empire of Perón, which is Latin America’s greatest power. By means of a vast immigration scheme, confined to Latin and Catholic races, administered by a Priest and blessed by the Church, Perón aims to build up Argentina as a World Power. 
Perhaps the ambitious Dictator and his Vatican backers dream already of the coming centuries when the Catholic South will succeed the Protestant North as the master of the Western Hemisphere, or even as the leading World Power! Perhaps even too as Rome’s successor as the headquarters of world Catholicism.
Be that as it may, Rome is today preparing for her coming struggle with the Communist ‘heresy’ upon which her very existence depends. If she loses, she is finished. But even if she and her secular backers win, she will only have obtained a respite, and probably only a brief one. For her fundamental enemy is not Communism, but that modern secular civilisation of which Russian Communism is only one form, and not, we hope, either the last or the best.
Sooner or later Rome must destroy that civilisation if she wishes to survive at all. If in order to destroy that inimical civilisation it will be necessary to destroy civilisation itself  –  well and good  –  so much the worse for civilisation.
Rome has faced Dark Ages before; the last one made her fortune, and in this respect history may repeat itself. Rome may again return to power on the ruins of human culture. At least, this is her sole remaining chance of survival. She must now kill civilisation, or else civilisation will certainly kill her.
Civilisation will have to kill her. For Rome is tenacious of life. We may, indeed, say of the Roman theocracy what Lenin once said of the Moscow theocracy of the Czars: ‘It will never die naturally; you will have to kill it.’
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter VI: The Papacy and the Social Encyclicals
No one can be both a sincere Socialist and a good Catholic.  –  Pope Pius XI, Encyclical Quadragesimo Anno
The proclamation of Papal Infallibility, which marked the high-watermark of Papal supremacy in and over the Roman Catholic Church  –  a Church, incidentally, now more ‘Roman’ and less ‘Catholic’ than in past ages  –  was quickly followed by the loss of the Popes’ Temporal Power. For war broke out between France and Germany immediately after the Proclamation of Papal Infallibility upon 18 July 1870. The counter-revolutionary French Dictator Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon III) was forced to withdraw his troops from Rome, where they had safeguarded the last days of the Papal Power. The Italians thereupon promptly marched in. Rome became the capital of the secular Italian Kingdom, whilst the Pope, now the (self-styled) ‘Prisoner of the Vatican’, henceforth sat and schemed behind its walls.
In 1878, the ultra-reactionary Pope Pius IX, who in his famous Syllabus of 1864 had denounced modern civilisation and all its works, died, and was succeeded by Leo XIII, probably at bottom equally reactionary, but a good deal more intelligent. The long reign of this remarkable Pope (1878 – 1903) marked important historical developments, particularly in the social and political spheres. For it was Leo’s Social Encyclical Letters which marked the beginnings of the powerful modern movements of ‘Christian Democracy’ and ‘Catholic Action’.
As this is the predominant type of Catholicism in the twentieth century, a word may usefully be added upon these recent developments in Papal policy. For the Church of Rome, particularly since those political opportunists, the Jesuits, took charge of its destinies, is a very flexible institution in worldly affairs, and one must not make the mistake of judging its subtle policies purely on the strength of the denunciations of its opponents.
Upon 15 May 1891, Pope Leo XIII issued his most famous Encyclical, The Condition of the Working Classes, or Rerum Novarum, to give it its proper Latin title. This Encyclical of Pope Leo, whose chief adviser here is said to have been the English Cardinal Manning, was the first of many such defining the new social and political outlook of the Papacy as and when faced with the problems of the modern industrial age. Its teaching is the foundation of modern Social Catholicism; and it is necessary to understand it if one would understand what modern Catholicism is today.
If we penetrate the long-winded verbosity which characterises modern Papal pronouncements, we can express the essentials of this policy in the following terms. (The two most important documents that are relevant in this connection are the aforementioned Rerum Novarum of Pope Leo and the later Quadragesimo Anno  –  In the Fortieth Year  –  of Pope Pius XI  –  15 May 1931.) 
The following paragraphs may be taken as a summary (not at all in ecclesiastical inflated phraseology) of the modern social policy of the Popes that began in 1891.
Prior to the publication of Rerum Novarum, the social policy of the Popes had been one of pure undiluted reaction in every sphere. All and any democracy was alien to the Vatican. The French Revolution, that potent seed of modern political progress, was anathema to Rome. The Papacy sought for its allies not among the broad masses of the people, who, to be sure, did not count for much politically before the French Revolution, but solely at Courts and in the narrow and exclusive circles of the governing classes; amongst royal autocrats, landowners, generals and, in brief, amongst the feudal ruling classes of the old pre- (French) Revolution regime. It was in alliance with these atavistic feudal relics that the Papacy tried to drown the European revolutionary movements in blood during the era between 1814 and 1870 when the ‘Holy Alliance’ was in its hey-day.
However, as the nineteenth century wore on the European landscape began to change with increasing rapidity, particularly after the ‘Year of Revolutions’, 1848. The Industrial Revolution crossed the Channel from its birthplace, England, and began to transform the ancient agrarian civilisation of Europe. In country after country the factory system made its appearance, and along with it there came the inevitable problems that accompany industrialism everywhere, the struggle of Capital and Labour, the rise of Socialism, the emergence of the masses to political consciousness. The fundamental social fact about the past century has been undoubtedly the entry of the popular, previously inarticulate, masses upon the stage of history.
Confronted with an age of such a kind, both political and ecclesiastical reaction were forced to remodel their traditional methods; either they had to find a broader basis in popular support, or else face a speedy obliteration. Secular reaction solved this fundamental problem, as I shall show in my next chapter, by resorting to Fascism, the essential feature in which it differs from old-style Conservatism is that it uses demagogic ‘leftist’ phraseology in order to attract the unprivileged masses to support its essentially counter-revolutionary aims.
But here again, as in the case of its adoption of a totalitarian dictatorship in 1870, the clerical reaction was a generation ahead of the political reaction. For the Social Encyclicals of the Popes between 1891 and 1931 discharged an identical purpose. Their essential aim was  –  and is  –  to find a mass basis for Papal policy by the use of ‘leftist’ demagogic phrases. Here again the Popes were the teachers of Fascism.
The Papal Encyclicals envisage a definite Social Order, which the Church of Rome seeks to put into force wherever it has the power. A Social Order which may, perhaps, be defined as a Church-controlled Capitalism resting on a judicious balance of Capital, Labour and peasantry in which the Church has the last word as umpire. Both the excesses of Capitalism and Socialism are denounced. Capital, according to Pope Leo, ‘lays upon the workers a burden but little lighter than that of slavery itself’. Whilst Socialism, according to Pope Pius, ‘conceives society in a manner entirely repugnant to Christian Truth’.
Here the Church becomes the ‘rejoicing third'; it simultaneously safeguards the propertied classes against Socialist and Communist expropriation by the workers, whilst simultaneously protecting the masses against the abuses of Capitalism. Such was and is ‘Christian Democracy’, the ideal state of Roman sociology. Who was it once said that one cannot serve God and Mammon simultaneously?
The above type of social order obviously requires a clerical-controlled dictatorship to enforce it, and it is in fact the formula since revealed to the world as Clerical Fascism, from Austria to the Argentine.
A word may here be usefully added upon the attitude of Roman sociology to respectively Capitalism and Socialism, the two main social ideologies of the modern world. Contrary to the opinion of many people, the Vatican is neither completely pro-Capitalist nor completely anti-Socialist. It all depends (to quote that eminent pundit Dr Joad), what one means by Capitalism and/or Socialism.
Competitive Capitalism was the creation not of the Church of Rome, but of its bitterest enemies, the Protestant Reformers, amongst whom it has always found its main support. Competitive Capitalism has actually always fitted in much easier into the atmosphere of Protestant rather than of Catholic countries. And whilst the Vatican may, and today does, regard Capitalism as a lesser evil than ‘godless Communism’, it has never unreservedly accepted the competitive ideology of Free Trade, so profoundly foreign to Catholic Traditionalism.
Similarly with regard to Socialism, in spite of the dictum of that ultra-reactionary Pope Pius XI quoted at the head of this chapter, the Vatican has never officially condemned the moderate (non-Marxian) Socialism of such bodies as the British Labour Party and the Canadian ‘Cooperative Commonwealth Federation’.
Here again, it all depends on what one means by that somewhat elastic term ‘Socialism’. Some forms of Socialism are undoubtedly irreconcilable with Catholicism, for instance, Marxist Socialism with its materialist analysis of human history and society, Anarchism with its categorical repudiation of any and all authority; such manifestations of Socialist thought will never, one can assert with complete confidence, be received at the Vatican.
But there is Socialism and Socialism! In Australia, for instance, the Vatican works quite well with the Labour government. Under the title of Catholic Socialism, Signor FS Nitti has collected an impressive array of authorities, and Catholicism could coexist with Socialist governments provided they were not too materialistic in outlook and, an important point, did not socialise too much Church property.
Thus a new political Catholicism developed along with the industrial age between Rerum Novarum (1891) and Quadragesimo Anno (1931). This new Catholicism has the ultimate intention of dominating European (including American) society, let there be no mistake about that! But in 1917, before the new Catholicism had acquired sufficient strength for this ambitious purpose, a new wave of revolution set in with the Russian Revolution, the successor to the Reformation and the French Revolution.
Once again, as in the days of the Inquisition and the ‘Holy Alliance’, Rome had occasion to seek for a secular sword wherewith to drown the anti-clerical revolution in blood. She found it in her secular pupil, Fascism.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter I: The Origin of the Papacy
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.  –  Matthew, Chapter XVI, Verse 18
In the year 49 prior to the origin of the Christian Era, Julius Cæsar, the military governor of Gaul, crossed the boundary into Italy, the River Rubicon, and staged his March on Rome, an event which was destined effectively to install the Roman Empire of the Cæsars, the ‘Fascist’ era of the ancient world, to employ a modern terminology which is, in this instance, not only dramatic, but which also conveys an impressive and, up to a point, accurate historical analogy.
A year later, Cæsar broke the power of the effete senatorial oligarchy which misgoverned the Roman Republic, in the decisive Battle of Pharsalia (48 BC).
The secular Roman Empire, whose historical ghost, according to the classical definition of Thomas Hobbes (1588 – 1679), the ecclesiastical Roman Empire of the Papacy was destined to become, had definitely arrived upon the stage of history.
Julius Cæsar, its effective founder, did not long survive his historical creation. Upon the ill-fated Ides of March (44 BC), he fell before the daggers of the beaten senatorial oligarchy. But his nephew and successor Augustus (Octavian) Cæsar, a far abler political brain than the great soldier Julius, again defeated both the oligarchy and his own rival Mark Anthony, and built up the imperial edifice on permanent foundations (44 BC – AD 14).
The Empire of the Cæsars, starting with a demagogic dictatorship like its modern Fascist antitypes, had become the totalitarian empire ‘over all persons and causes supreme’ which it remained down to the end of classical antiquity, and, in its Eastern Byzantine form, down to the end of the Middle Ages (AD 1453).
In the reign of Tiberius Cæsar, the immediate successor of the great Augustus, a new religion arose in the oriental province of Palestine, not, to be sure, a very surprising occurrence in an age of cultural and religious syncretism, when new religions were apt to shoot up like mushrooms after rain. This new religion started as a Judaic heresy, and its founder, at least if we are to credit the Gospel narratives with an historical basis, was a Galilean wandering preacher named Jesus, accepted by his followers under the title of ‘The Christ’  –  ‘The Anointed One’  –  the promised Messiah or Deliverer whom the Jewish scriptures had long foretold.
According to his evangelical biographers, the would-be Messiah received his earthly reward in a painful execution by means of crucifixion at the hands of the Roman administration. In which there is nothing improbable or surprising in the then troubled state of what was Rome’s most turbulent province. Even though the Evangelists were certainly not mirrors of Boswellian accuracy when they sat down to write the story of the origins of Christianity.
However, whatever may be the truth with regard to its titular founder, the Christian Church at least is an historical fact, of portentous dimensions, and it soon spread far, if at first not particularly fast, nor did it neglect Rome, the capital of the Universal Empire, to which every known form of credulity and superstition gravitated irresistibly, as Tacitus was soon to testify.
The Church of Rome can hardly be later in its inception than the first century of the Christian propaganda, it is not improbable that its foundation can be ascribed to the earliest decades of that propaganda. For Rome, ‘The Eternal City’, the unchallenged mistress of the Mediterranean world, drew all cults and creeds towards her like an irresistible magnet. To make one’s way in the Roman world, one had first to make one’s way in and to Rome, for in those days it was literally true that ‘all roads led to Rome’.
The approximate dating of the foundation of the ‘Church of Rome’ depends actually upon our critical assessment of two early documents, one religious and one of a secular nature  –  Paul’s ‘Epistle to the Romans’ and Tacitus’ Annals. For if the former or any part of it was actually written by Paul, then there was a Christian congregation in Rome prior to AD 64. Whilst Tacitus described how Nero (AD 54 – 68) persecuted the Christians AD 64, which leads to the same conclusion.
But no one can say with certainty whether Paul wrote any of the voluminous literature which a later generation ascribed to him, and the Roman historian Tacitus, writing half a century later from hearsay, may have confused some early Jewish messianic sect with the Christians, of whom he must gave heard in the second century when he actually wrote. We cannot say.
Similarly with regard to the foundation by Peter of the Roman Church, an assumption founded upon legend only; an ancient legend it is true, but one obviously motivated by self-interest, and in any case entirely unsupported by any evidence beyond tradition.
It is only in the second century, wherein Christianity first appeared in a form recognisably similar to its later forms, that we first emerge from the realm of conjecture and meet the Church of Rome in the flesh. About AD 130, the ‘Church of God which is in Rome’ had occasion to write a business letter to the ‘Church of God which is in Corinth’. The letter is actually unsigned, but a very ancient tradition ascribes it to the Elder (Presbyter) Clement, whom his contemporary, the Prophet Hermas, [1] declared was in charge of the foreign correspondence of the Roman Church.
This information, meagre as it is, sheds a good deal of light on the internal administration of the now certainly existing Church of Rome. For Clement, who wrote perhaps the first non-biblical document of Early Christianity which we possess, his ‘Epistle to the Corinthians’, was not apparently Bishop of Rome, but a simple Elder. Moreover, another early Christian writer, the author of the ‘Muratorian Fragment’ (late second century), tells us that not Clement but Pius was Roman bishop in the days of Hermas, who, according to our authority, was himself the brother of Bishop Pius.
Evidently, the earliest form of Church government possessed by the Roman Church, like that of the other Christian Churches of the earliest period, was (in modern phraseology) Presbyterian rather than Episcopal in form. Indeed, the scientific study of early Church history undoubtedly demonstrates the mythical character of the Doctrine, of the Apostolic Succession.
The earliest Roman ‘bishops’ are shadowy figures, chairmen of Church Boards of Elders, rather than bishops in the modern sense of the word. It is a far cry from the shadowy Pope Pius I, who was not even allowed to write the letters of his own Church, to his ‘infallible’ successor Pius XII.
The latter half of the second century witnessed great changes in the organisation of Christianity. As Alfred Loisy has conclusively demonstrated in the concluding chapters of his remarkable book The Birth of the Christian Religion, the second half of the second century witnessed the effective consolidation of Church organisation and dogma in reply to the contemporary growth of gnostic heresies. In particular, there was a rapid growth of the power of the bishops as part of the centralising process, the loose Presbyterian organisation of Early Christianity gave way to rigid Episcopal control. It is arguable that Christianity itself might have disappeared without the change.
The Church of Rome shared in this evolution. There as elsewhere, the Elders gave way to the bishop and the bishops of the World-Capital, Rome, were obviously no ordinary bishops. They began to assert themselves. In the later second century, one Roman bishop tried, not very successfully, to lay down for the benefit of the Eastern Churches hard and fast rules for the date and observance of Easter. In the following (third) century, another incurred the anger of his African colleague, the masterful Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, by his arrogant claims.
By the beginning of the fourth century, the era of the religious conflict which ended in the triumph of Christianity, the Bishops of Rome had ‘arrived’. It only required a further development of contemporary history for the Papacy, for the Universal Bishopric, to make its appearance.
Between 150 and 200 of the Christian Era, the Church, which had now finally broken with Judaism, evolved its own distinctive Bible, its New Testament, in contrast to the ‘Old Testament’ of the Jewish Synagogue. No qualified critic now supposes that what we have in the New Testament is unbiased history. Contrarily, what we actually have is the history of an institution, the Christian Church, written and rewritten in the evolving interests of that institution.
In this ‘editorial’ work, the powerful Church of Rome took a prominent part. Two notable additions to the original text of the Gospels must be ascribed to its direct agency.
The Fourth Gospel had asserted the primacy of John, ‘The Beloved Disciple’, its titular author, amongst the Apostles. So a new, admittedly forged chapter, the twenty-first in the current text, had to be added to prove the primacy of Peter, the legendary founder of the Roman Church.
‘Appetite comes with eating.’ As the power and claims of the metropolitan Roman Church grew, they required a direct divine authority. An unknown forger of genius proved equal to the daring task. Probably early in the third century, the famous commission of Christ to Peter, ‘Thou art Peter’, etc, which gave Peter and his successors the keys of Heaven and Hell, was inserted in the original text of Matthew, [2] then regarded as the eldest and most authoritative of the Gospels. In a sense, one could state that the unknown forger was the Founder as well as the Prophet of the Papacy.
Notes
1.  Author of the nearly canonised ‘Shepherd’.
2.  No historic Jesus could possibly have used the words added to the text of Matthew. For the term ‘Church’ only came into use after the new religion had broken with the Jewish Synagogue (AD 70) after the destruction of the Temple, at the very earliest, and probably much later.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Appendix II  –  Anti-Popes
355 Felix II
367 Ursinus
418 Eulalius
498 Laurentius 
530 Dioscorus
686 Theodorus and Pascal
767 Constantine, Theophylactus 
824 Zozimus
855 Anastasius 
891 Sergius
963 Leo VIII
974 Boniface VII 
996 John XVI 
1012 Gregory
1044 Sylvester III 
1045 John XX 
1046 Clement II 
1047 Benedict IX 
1058 Benedict X 
1061 Honorius II 
1080 Clement III 
1118 Gregory VIII 
1130 Anacletus II 
1138 Victor IV 
1159 Victor V
1164 Paschal III 
1168 Calixtus III 
1178 Innocent XIII 
1378 Clement VII 
1394 Benedict XIII 
1406 Gregory XII 
1424 Clement VIII 
1439 Felix V
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter III: The ‘Totalitarian’ Papacy and the Middle Ages
There are in particular, illustrious Emperor, two powers by whom the world is governed, the authority of the bishops and the Imperial power.  –  Pope Gelasius to the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius, end of fifth century
One of the fundamental mistakes made by popular history is to confuse the ‘Dark Age’ with the ‘Middle Age’ that followed it. The ‘Dark Age’ was nothing much except dark. As that acute Christian Rationalist Dr WR Inge once aptly remarked, had the centuries of the Dark Age not existed, it would have made hardly any difference to the cultural history of the world.
True enough! But the Middle Ages, properly so-called, were a good deal more than that. For medieval Europe evolved an ecclesiastical civilisation somewhat similar to that of modern Tibet, and alien as it is to modern secular thought one must in fairness admit that this civilisation had great works of art to its credit, one has only to think of Dante and the medieval cathedrals. Whilst intellectually, medieval, unlike modern theology, displayed at least a remarkable if perverse ingenuity and even at times an inverted rationalism.
Like all the distinctive eras of human civilisation, the Middle Age and its ecclesiastical civilisation had its successive epochs of rise, meridian and decline. These may be dated respectively as follows: between 800, the foundation of the Holy Roman Empire, and 1100, the beginning of the era of the Crusades; between about 1100 and 1300, soon after which date the Papacy was transported from Rome to French Avignon. Lastly, the medieval era of decay, which ended about 1500 with the vast and simultaneous intellectual, geographical and religious revolution that expressed itself in the Renaissance and in the Reformation, and which ushered in the modern secular age.
Thus, the total duration of the Middle Ages was from about AD 800 to 1500, some seven centuries in all.
The ‘Middle’ Age, that is the ecclesiastical age between the secular epochs of classical and modern times, was the high-watermark, the golden age of the Papacy. It then attained its zenith of prestige and power, for particularly during the High Middle Age  –  c 1100 – 1300  –  the Papacy was the effective ruler of Europe; and its unique combination of spiritual, economic and even political power made it the effective and (in current phraseology) the totalitarian ruler of medieval Europe.
What the Dalai Lama, the God-King, is to modern Tibet, that was the Pope to medieval Europe. And since every social institution looks back longingly to its heyday, our contemporary Catholic reactionaries turn nostalgic eyes towards the Catholic and Papal Rome of the High Middle Ages. Indeed, as a recent historian (Dr Delisle Burns) has aptly phrased it, our modern contemporary Papacy is merely the ghost of the real medieval Papacy.
In the eighth century, on the threshold of the Middle Ages, the Papacy made two significant moves. Firstly, when threatened by Mohammedan invaders, who penetrated to the actual gates of Rome itself, the Papacy laid the foundations of its temporal power, which was destined to last until 1870. For the now-distant ‘Roman’ Emperor at Constantinople could no longer afford effective protection.
And just as the foundation of the power of the Roman Bishops had been laid by a forgery, so also was that of the Temporal Power of the Popes. For about this time another brilliant and historically opportune forgery was perpetrated at the Roman Court: ‘The Donation of Constantine’, which boldly ascribed the gift of the Papal States to the See of Rome to none other than the first Christian Emperor, Constantine himself. This forgery, which was not exposed until the Renaissance (1434), was one of the pillars of Papal Power throughout the Middle Ages.
Secondly, and even more ultimately important, the Papacy, as I have indicated in the previous chapter, created the ecclesiastical ‘Holy’ Roman Empire in the West (800) as its political instrument to defend it against the infidel Arabs and heretical Greeks. These two events may be said to mark the beginning of the ecclesiastical civilisation of the Middle Ages.
At first, however, this was not evident, for the medieval age got under way slowly. The ninth and tenth centuries were for Rome centuries of disorder and corruption, during which Papal mistresses frequently directed affairs, giving rise to the picturesque legend of ‘Pope Joan’.
In the eleventh century, however, a reforming movement, which originated in the French monastery of Cluny, assumed the direction of the Church. Its leader, Hildebrand, afterwards Pope Gregory VII and the greatest of all the Popes, launched the Papacy upon new and brilliant paths, which made it for two centuries the effective ruler of Europe.
By this time, the Holy Roman  –  actually German  –  Empire, had revolted against its creator, the Papacy; the name ‘Roman’ had still too many traditions of secular independence to be a sufficiently subservient instrument of ecclesiastical rule. Gregory and his successors waged remorseless war against their creation; at the Castle of Canossa (1077), Gregory kept the Emperor waiting in the snow to make his submission. Indeed, the word ‘Canossa’ has itself become the synonym for the humiliating victory of the ecclesiastical over the secular power. In the course of their struggle with the German Emperors, the Papacy then made frequent use of the terrible weapons of excommunication and interdict; that is, the Papacy, the successor of the heavenly doorkeeper St Peter, locked the gates of the next world against its enemies in this one.
But excommunication, a ‘spiritual’ weapon, was obviously useless against infidels and heretics, who did not accept the supremacy of the Popes as successors of St Peter. To deal with such people a political instrument, a secular ‘sword’, was necessary. Sometimes the Popes still used the Holy Roman Empire for this purpose. But more often, the Emperors were not dependable instruments of the Church’s will. The greatest of them, the Hohenstaufen Emperor Frederick II, ‘the Anti-Christ’, was an advanced Freethinker who derided Christianity and, worse, used Mohammedan troops to fight the Pope (1194 – 1250).
So the Papacy had to find another instrument to fight its battles. By a Napoleonic strategy, Hildebrand enlisted the Normans, the converted Norse pirates who had conquered and settled down in Normandy, to fight the battles of the Church.
With the Normans as their soldiers, the Papacy launched the greatest enterprise of its whole career, the Crusades, which continued for two centuries; indeed, in Northern Europe for longer still. The primary object of the Crusades was to reconquer the Holy Land, Palestine, for the Church. This the First Crusade actually did at the end of the eleventh century. For a century a Latin ‘Kingdom of Jerusalem’ continued in the East, and several more Crusades were undertaken to recover or extend it. The idea of the Crusade was either taken from the Mohammedan ‘Holy War’ or else from the warlike Pagan traditions of the converted Normans.
But the Crusades were not confined to Palestine, they were a universal phenomenon, and their greatest effects were actually to be found, not in Palestine, which was soon recovered by the Turks, but in Northern Europe, in Pagan Prussia, which was permanently conquered by the crusading Teutonic Knights, [1] and in Spain and Portugal, where the Crusaders gradually expelled the Mohammedan Arabs and Moors. Another Crusade temporarily conquered the heretical Greek Empire of Constantinople, Christian but not subject to Rome. Whilst yet another, under the Norman William, permanently conquered England, then not sufficiently submissive to the authority of Rome. [2]
More immediately useful to the Popes perhaps than any of the above, the Normans finally drove the Mohammedan Arabs out of Italy itself, and conquered the powerful Arab kingdom of Sicily. An unsuccessful Crusade was even directed against Egypt. 
The Crusades unified Christian Europe and they constituted the Popes, the recognised leaders of the Crusades, as the effective rulers of Europe or ‘Christendom’. The twelfth and thirteenth centuries represented the high-watermark of the Papal power, which it has never since been able to recover. But the Crusades had also dangerous and unintended results. For European culture now began to revive as a result of its contact with the more civilised East, and along with it, as was inevitable, there was a rebirth of heresy and even of downright Freethought, which directly menaced the power of the Papacy. 
Against this new menace the Papacy mobilised two weapons, one old, and the other new. Its old weapon was the Crusade; early in the thirteenth century the great Pope Innocent III launched a war of extermination against the heretical Albigenses (or Manichean Dualists) in the south of France, and later in the century another ruthless Crusade wiped out the Hohenstaufen dynasty of the Freethinking Emperor Frederick, ‘The Anti-Christ’.
The new weapon was the (Roman) Inquisition, the ecclesiastical ‘Gestapo’, of the Papacy, its special weapon to preserve its totalitarian rule and to prevent what the modern Japanese called ‘dangerous thoughts’. For the rest of the Middle Ages a permanent reign of terror, based on the universal espionage of the Inquisition and enforced by torture and death by fire at the stake, haunted Europe and retarded its social and intellectual development.
In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the medieval theocracy began to decline, and the Papacy itself, rent by internal rivalries, began to lose ground and at the end of this period a combination of new revolutionary forces made their appearance which effectively undermined the totalitarian Papacy of the Middle Ages.
Notes
1. Originally founded to fight in Palestine.
2. Hildebrand blessed William’s ‘Crusade’ at Hastings.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter V: The ‘Infallible’ Papacy
I am Tradition.  –  Pius IX in 1870
The Era of the Reformation versus the Counter-Reformation, an era marked pre-eminently by religious wars, lasted about two centuries, from the beginnings of the Reformation to the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), which finally checked the schemes of the French ‘Sun King’, Louis XIV, the political instrument of the Jesuits to reconquer Europe for militant Catholicism.
The succeeding (eighteenth) century proved to be from the point of view of the Papacy a kind of, as it were, watershed between the two revolutions, the Protestant Reformation and the French Revolution.
The Popes of this era were by no means fanatics  –  one of them actually accepted the dedication of a play by Voltaire  –  and in 1773 the Papacy yielded to contemporary political pressure and officially dissolved its shock troops, the ‘SS Men’ of the Church militant, as one can accurately term them, the Jesuits. For in that year the famous ‘Company of Jesus’ was officially declared to be ‘abolished and abrogated for ever’. [1]
However, the Papacy soon had occasion to regret its action. For in 1789 a new wave of social and intellectual revolution broke upon Europe, the famous French Revolution. From the point of view of the Church of Rome, the slogans enunciated by the Revolution  –  ‘Liberty, Equality and Fraternity’  –  represented the most pestilential heresy and denial of all authority. The more so in that the way for the great Revolution had been prepared by writers like Jean Meslier, Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot and the Encyclopædists, who were avowed Atheists, or at least Deists, and in all cases avowedly anti-clerical in their mental outlook.
Did not the spokesman of the Jacobin Club at the height of the Revolution repeat with gusto that forthright saying of the arch anti-clerical Jean Meslier (himself a priest) that ‘the world would never know happiness until the last king had been strangled with the entrails of the last priest'? Not exactly a quotation likely to endear the French Revolution to the Vatican!
With the French Revolution there began a new epoch in the history of the Church of Rome. From that day down to this, the philosophy broadly described as Secularism, a philosophy concerned solely with this world and embodied successively in the various (and often mutually conflicting) forms of Liberalism, Socialism, Communism and Anarchism  –  all philosophic doctrines concerned solely with this world  –  succeeded the rival religion of the Protestant Reformers Luther and Calvin as the chief menace to and rival of the Popes and their Church. 
The dawn of this so dangerous an epoch was quickly recognised by the men of the Vatican. The conclusive proof of which is to be found in the prompt restoration of the Jesuit Order after its temporary dissolution. In 1814, as soon as Pope Pius VII returned from Napoleon’s prison in France he restored the Jesuits both to their legal position as a recognised religious order and, in practice, to their old position which, as far as an outsider can judge, they still retain as the arch-strategists of militant Catholicism.
The French Revolution itself made a frontal attack, not only on the Christian religion, but, what was even more criminal, upon the clerical monopoly of culture and education. It is true that this ‘ultra-left’ outspokenly anti-clerical phase did not last long. Under the dictatorship of Napoleon, the ‘Stalin’ of the French Revolution  –  the historical parallel is striking  –  a Concordat was concluded between the Catholic Church and the Napoleonic Empire (1801). But relations remained very strained as is usually the case when two regimes of a totalitarian nature try to coexist, and the Pope remained a prisoner in France until the defeat of Bonaparte in 1814.
Meanwhile, the French had united Italy and abolished the Temporal Power of the Papacy by abolishing the Papal States, and sowed in Italy the seeds of Liberalism and Freethought, which the subsequent reaction was never wholly able to eradicate. [2]
The European reaction which overthrew Napoleon and restored the Temporal Power, also tried unsuccessfully to restore the Spanish Inquisition. The Popes returned to Rome from captivity resolved at all costs to fight the French Revolution to a finish. Henceforth, republican and freethinking France was the enemy  –  ‘The eldest son of the Devil’, as an ultramontane Catholic writer called her (an allusion to the old pre-revolutionary title of the French Kings, ‘the Eldest Son of the Church’). As already remarked, the first thing they did on their return was to restore the ultra-reactionary Jesuit Order to its old position. In Rome the Popes restored medieval conditions of life, and banned all such modern innovations as railways, telegraphs and gas. Whilst throughout the world in general they allied themselves with the blackest reaction, in particular with the infamous ‘Holy Alliance’ of Russia, Austria and Prussia (1815 – 48), that ‘gaoler of liberty’.
From 1814, the date of the return of the Papacy to Rome, to 1870, the date of the proclamation of Papal Infallibility, a merciless struggle raged unceasingly between clericalism and the secular anti-clerical forces unleashed by the French Revolution. If one wishes today to recapture the violent hatred of clericalism in general, and of the Jesuits in particular, which marked that age, one should turn to the pages of Eugene Sue’s famous anti-clerical novel The Wandering Jew, or to the impassioned denunciations of the great French historian Jules Michelet.
Michelet’s famous denunciation  –  ‘If you stop the man in the street, the first passer-by, and ask, “What are the Jesuits?,” he will immediately reply, “The Counter-Revolution."’  –  aptly sums up the general viewpoint of the whole anti-clerical generation between 1814 and 1870.
The high-watermark of this two-generation-long struggle between clerical reaction and the French Revolution was reached in the European Revolution of 1848. One of the results of that famous ‘year of revolutions’ was the flight of the Pope and the temporary proclamation of a Roman Republic under Mazzini and Garibaldi.
More dangerous still in the long run to the Papacy was the appearance in that self-same year of a new and dangerous ‘heresy’ destined to cause Rome much concern between 1848 and 1948, Marxian Communism; for Marx and Engels issued their famous Communist Manifesto in that year. Incidentally, even before Marx and Engels had made their historic pronouncement, the Papacy had already warned the Church against the new enemy.
For, on 11 September 1846, the then newly-enthroned Pope Pius IX (1846 – 78) proclaimed: ‘Communism is completely opposed to the natural law itself, and its establishment would entail the complete destruction of all property and even of human society.’ A denunciation to be frequently repeated from 1848 to 1948.
However, the tide of anti-clericalism continued to spread, and in both the intellectual and the political spheres the Vatican suffered defeat after defeat, culminating in the loss of most of the Papal States themselves in 1860, when the Kingdom of United Italy was formed in the teeth of Papal denunciations. Thereafter the Pope could only cling precariously to Rome itself with the aid of a French garrison.
Something had to be done. The Papal answer to the anti-clerical menace was proclaimed when Pius IX called a General Council of the Church at the Vatican in 1869 – 70. Upon 18 July 1870, the Pope proclaimed the Dogma of Papal Infallibility; the Pope, when he speaks as Pope (the limitation should be noted carefully) on ‘Faith and Morals’, cannot err, and it should, incidentally, be noted that in the Catholic scheme of things ‘Faith and Morals’ between them can be made to cover most human transactions.
The Papal Decree of Infallibility, properly understood, was the answer of the Papacy to the French Revolution, that is, its real causes belonged to the sociological rather than the theological domain. The Popes contraposed their own dictatorship over the Church to the growth of democracy in the secular sphere, in a fast-moving age the Church could now move quickly, freed from the cumbrous ecclesiastical machinery of a more leisurely age. Pius IX himself remarked at the time: ‘I am Tradition.’
But ecclesiastical dictatorship was something more, it was the assertion of a new principle which was soon to find imitators in the secular political sphere. For, on 18 July 1870, the ‘Leader Principle’ was first proclaimed, to be widely imitated by the Fascist Dictators of the following (twentieth) century. Ecclesiastical Fascism was born in 1870, the Totalitarian Dictatorship of the Pope. It was the old master at the Vatican, and none other, who taught the Catholic-trained Fascist Dictators of our own day  –  Hitler, Mussolini and Franco  –  the secret of their trade.
Notes
1. It is true that the Pope, Clement XIV, who had the temerity to get rid of the ‘Black Pope’ and his associates did not long survive the dissolution. He died soon after, not without suspicion of poison.
2. In Spain, that other clerical stronghold, the French abolished the Spanish Inquisition and discharged a similar role.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Appendix I  –  Popes
The following list of Popes is accepted by the Roman Catholic Church and recorded in its registers. Evidence, at least for the first part of the list, is extremely ambiguous and conflicting. For example, it is denied by some non-Catholic authorities that Peter was ever in Rome. The title of Pope was formerly given to all bishops, but was adopted exclusively as the title of the bishops of Rome first by Hyginus, AD 138.
41 Peter
67 Linus
79 Anacletus
91 Clement
100 Evaristus
109 Alexander
119 Sixtus
128 Telesphorus
138 Hyginus
142 Pius
157 Anicetus
168 Soterus
177 Eleutherus
190 Victor
218 Zephyrinus
220 Calixtus
223 Urban
230 Pontianus
235 Anterus
236 Fabian
251 Cornelius
253 Lucius
254 Stephen
257 Sixtus II
259 Dionysius
269 Felix I
275 Eutychianus
283 Caius
296 Marcilineus
307 Marcellus I
309 Eusebius
310 Melchiades
314 Sylvester
336 Marcus
337 Julius
352 Liberius
366 Damasus
384 Siricius
398 Anastasius
402 Innocent I
417 Zozimus
418 Boniface I
422 Celestine I
432 Sixtus III
440 Leo (The Great)
461 Hilary
468 Simplicius
483 Felix III
492 Gelasius
496 Anastasius II
498 Symmachus
514 Hormisdas
523 John I
526 Felix IV
530 Boniface II
532 John II
535 Agapetus
536 Silverius
537 Vigilius
555 Pelagius
560 John III
574 Benedict I
578 Pelagius II
590 Gregory (The Great)
604 Sabinianus
607 Boniface III
608 Boniface IV
614 Deusdedit
619 Boniface V
625 Honorius I
640 Severinus
640 John IV
642 Theodorus
649 Martin I
654 Eugenius I
657 Vitalianus
672 Adeodatus
676 Domnus I
678 Agathon
682 Leo II
684 Benedict II
685 John V
686 Conon
687 Sergius
701 John VI
705 John VII
708 Sisinnius
708 Constantine
715 Gregory II
731 Gregory III
741 Zacharias
752 Stephen II
752 Stephen III
757 Paul I
767 Constantine
768 Stephen IV
772 Adrian I
795 Leo III
816 Stephen V
817 Pascal I
824 Eugenius II
827 Valentinus
827 Gregory IV
844 Sergius II
847 Leo IV
855 Benedict III
858 Nicholas (The Great)
867 Adrian II
872 John VIII
882 Martin II
884 Adrian III
885 Stephen VI
891 Formosus
896 Boniface VI
896 Stephen VII
897 Romanus
897 Theodorus II
898 John IX
900 Benedict IV
903 Leo V
903 Christophorus
904 Sergius III
911 Anastasius
913 Lando
914 John X
928 Leo VI
929 Stephen VIII
931 John XI
936 Leo VII
939 Stephen IX
942 Martin III
946 Agapetus II
955 John XII
963 Leo VIII
964 Benedict V
965 John XIII
973 Benedict VI
974 Domnus II
975 Benedict VII
983 John XIV
984 Boniface VII
985 John XV
985 John XVI
996 Gregory V
999 Sylvester II
1003 John XVII
1003 John XVIII
1009 Sergius IV
1012 Benedict VIII
1024 John XIX
1033 Benedict IX
1045 Gregory II
1046 Clement VI
1048 Damasus II
1049 Leo IX
1055 Victor II
1057 Stephen X
1058 Benedict X
1059 Nicholas II
1061 Alexander II
1073 Gregory VII
1086 Victor III
1088 Urban II
1099 Pascal II
1118 Gelasius II
1119 Calixtus
1124 Honorius II
1130 Innocent II
1143 Celestine II
1144 Lucius II
1145 Eugenius III
1153 Anastasius IV
1154 Adrian IV
1159 Alexander III
1181 Lucius III
1185 Urban III
1187 Gregory VIII
1187 Clement III
1191 Celestine III
1198 Innocent III
1216 Honorius III
1227 Gregory IX
1241 Celestine IV
1243 Innocent IV
1254 Alexander IV
1261 Urban IV
1265 Clement IV
1271 Gregory X
1276 Innocent V
1276 Adrian V
1276 John XXI
1277 Nicholas III
1281 Martin IV
1285 Honorius IV
1288 Nicholas IV
1294 Celestine V
1294 Boniface VIII
1303 Benedict XI
1305 Clement V
1316 John XXII
1334 Benedict XII
1342 Clement VI
1352 Innocent VI
1362 Urban V
1370 Gregory XI
1378 Urban VI
1389 Boniface IX
1404 Innocent VII
1406 Gregory XII
1409 Alexander V
1410 John XXIII
1417 Martin V
1431 Eugenius IV
1447 Nicholas V
1455 Calixtus III
1458 Pius II
1464 Paul II
1471 Sixtus IV
1484 Innocent VIII
1492 Alexander VI
1503 Pius III
1503 Julius II
1513 Leo X
1522 Adrian VI
1523 Clement VII
1534 Paul III
1550 Julius III
1555 Marcellus II
1555 Paul IV
1559 Pius IV
1566 Pius V
1572 Gregory XIII
1585 Sixtus V
1590 Urban VII
1590 Gregory XIV
1591 Innocent IX
1592 Clement VIII
1605 Leo XI
1605 Paul V
1621 Gregory XV
1623 Urban VIII
1644 Innocent X
1655 Alexander VII
1667 Clement IX
1670 Clement X
1676 Innocent XI
1689 Alexander VIII
1691 Innocent XII
1700 Clement XI
1721 Innocent XIII
1724 Benedict XIII 
1730 Clement XII
1740 Benedict XIV
1758 Clement XIII
1769 Clement XIV
1775 Pius VI
1800 Pius VII
1823 Leo XII
1829 Pius VIII
1831 Gregory XVI
1846 Pius IX
1878 Leo XIII
1903 Pius X
1914 Benedict XV
1922 Pius XI
1939 Pius XII
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter 10: Some Historical Reflections on the Evolution of the Papacy
To live is to change; to be perfect is to have changed often.  –  Cardinal Newman
Having concluded our brief survey of the evolution of the Papacy, it will now be opportune to conduct a brief investigation, to do, as it were, some historical stocktaking into the nature and more permanent characteristics of that truly extraordinary institution. For one need not be a good Catholic, nor even a believer in revealed, or any other kind of religion, to admit that the Papacy is a truly extraordinary institution.
In point of fact, the Atheistic or non-Christian historian occupies a much better and more effective position from which to pass accurate judgements on the Roman ecclesiastical empire than can ever be the case with Catholic historians, whose own belief in proportion to its intensity precludes them from objective, that is, from scientific judgements in respect of an institution which for them shines with no mortal light.
In the first place, it is evident from its entire history that the Papacy, whilst religious in form, belongs essentially to the sociological sphere. In this primary respect, the famous definition of old Thomas Hobbes cited at the head of this work  –  ‘The Papacy is the ghost of the Roman Empire sitting crowned upon the grave thereof’  –  remains still, three centuries later, the classical definition of the Roman See; unsurpassed and probably unsurpassable in its trenchant accuracy.
We have alluded above to the remarkable paradox that lies at the heart of the Papacy a religious institution in form, a political institution in substance. For Rome has always been that. A shrewd modern observer, himself an ex-Roman cleric, has aptly defined the normal mentality of the Vatican as that of ‘a great public department’. And so it seems always to have been. The Roman Church has indeed had its fanatics in plenty, but they have rarely found their way to the throne of the Fisherman. And those few who have done so have rarely made successful Popes.
In recent times the ‘saintly’ and honest but stupid and bigoted Pius X (1903 – 14), who remarked before his election that the ‘Holy Ghost would never make such a mistake as to make me Pope’, is a case in point.
The Papacy is thus essentially an institution that belongs to the sphere of sociology rather than to that of religion. Lord Macaulay, in his famous essay, showed not only his usual incomparable verve, but also for him a rather unusual insight into the deeper processes of history, when he compared the Papal dynasty, not with other religious institutions, but with the secular dynasties of Europe.
Indeed, with the doubtful exception of the Japanese God-Emperors, no secular dynasty has lasted longer than the Papacy; and the scope and influence on world politics exercised by the Mikados is in no respect comparable to that exercised by the Vatican.
The Papacy must accordingly be regarded primarily as a political institution. Like its actual predecessors, the Roman Cæsars, only far more so, it used religion as an effective cloak for its own secular ambitious, but its essence is not religious any more than was that of the Roman Empire which preceded it. The Cæsars also called themselves by the title ‘Pontifex Maximus’ ('High Priest’), which, it is diverting to recall, the Christian Roman Emperors refused to use on account of its Pagan associations, but which the Popes still continue to use!
As the eminent Protestant historian Adolf von Harnack tersely observed: ‘It is an Empire which this priestly Cæsar rules.’ And as and when considered as a sociological institution, it cannot be disputed that the Papacy, when objectively considered as such, stands in the very front rank amongst historical social forms. In European history, one could not name its superior  –  perhaps that microscopic social miracle, the Venetian Republic, comes nearest to being its equal in the secular history of Europe.
If, indeed, one would confirm the judgement of the Papacy as primarily a political rather than a religious institution, one has only to compare its brilliant feats in the sphere of world history with its mediocre religious results.
In this last sphere, its achievements have certainly been unimpressive. Roman mysticism has been non-existent, her religious literature puerile, her theology crude and unoriginal. Religious opportunism, ecclesiastical diplomacy, has been the specifically Roman contribution to religion. Anything deep, fresh or sincere has withered and died in the crooked atmosphere of the Vatican corridors.
In this last connection, the judgement of history on Rome as a specifically religious body may well be that cri de coeur of the great Pascal, the ill-fated opponent of the Jesuits, when Rome finally pronounced against him in favour of those wily opportunists: ‘What I say is condemned in Rome, but what I condemn is condemned in Heaven.’ The finer types of Catholic Christians  –  and it would be hopelessly prejudiced to deny the existence of such  –  have owed little enough to the astute politicians who have sat in St Peter’s chair.
For astute politicians the Popes have certainly been. That, at least, one must grant them; it stands out in the chequered record of the Papacy. Indeed it is, perhaps, the Papacy rather than the individual Popes whom one ought to characterise in that respect. For the Papacy has always been more remarkable than the individual Popes, only one of whom  –  Hildebrand, Gregory VII  –  ranks amongst the world’s great figures, and few of them have been individually brilliant or remarkable.
Indeed, routine mediocrity, perhaps as the result of the electoral compromises between stronger candidates, seems to be the usual qualification for election at Papal conclaves. Only when imminent crisis threatens to destroy the Church does a man of real ability, such as Leo XIII or the present Pope, manage to secure election.
Considered as it should be, from the sociological angle, the historical record of the Papacy has been brilliant and remarkable. Since the distant date of its foundation by itinerant preachers (who, as the Roman historian Suetonius tells us, roused the fury of the Jewish Ghetto in Rome, on ‘account of Christ’), the world has passed through many changes. In particular, three entirely distinct civilisations with radically different economic foundations and mental outlooks have waxed, flourished and waned during the 1900 years which separate ‘the days of Peter’ from those of our contemporary, Pius XII. In historical succession, the classical servile civilisation, the feudal order of medieval times, and our modern Capitalistic society have come and either gone or, at present, show every sign of going.
Rome has seen them all come and go, and has successively survived these avatars of human culture. Successively she has known how to entangle herself with them in their heyday and how to disentangle herself when their hour struck. Indeed, even in the course of our all too brief ‘outline of history’, we have had many opportunities to note the skill with which Rome knew how to make what we have termed ‘marriages of convenience’ with successive potential allies. And how shrewdly she used these allies from the days of Charlemagne to those of Hitler, to save her from the many perils, both ‘spiritual’ and secular, that have confronted the Vatican during the course of its long crisis-strewn career.
With regard to these opportune ‘marriages of convenience’  –  in which the Vatican has been a polygamist of the first water!  –  we will only repeat that it is absolutely untrue to affirm that the Papacy has ever been unreservedly ‘pro’ anything except  –  pro-Catholic. For the successors of St Peter have always, despite the verbal disclaimers due to their ostensibly religious character, acted upon the assumption that the ‘end justifies the means’, and very queer means they have been on some occasions!
However, Rome’s allies exist for Rome’s purpose, and not for their own. She never identifies herself with any of them absolutely: again from Charlemagne to Hitler. In that sense, it is paradoxical but true to affirm that ‘Rome has no politics’. [1] For the ‘Holy’ Reich and the Fascist Reich have both gone, but the Vatican still survives in the ‘Century of the Common Man’.
How long, we may ask, can the Papacy continue to exist in the century of democracy, the ‘Century of the Common Man'? For ever since the Reformation ended her era of theocratic rule, Rome has been on the defensive, and today fights a rearguard action with contemporary history. In this conflict, the political arts which she has mastered and her vast experience serve her well.
But the current odds are against her survival. For the age of science has cut the roots of religion and to re-graft them effectively will not prove an easy task. Today, Rome’s best ally is the fear of change, intellectual and also social change. The international Catholic army now forming around the Vatican for its last stand has many motivating causes, but religion and religious zeal are not conspicuous, probably, among them in an age such as ours of headlong change and consequent threatened vested interests.
However, the final decision of history with regard to the Papacy still lies in the future, and the future cannot correct our proofs. Whatever the nature of Rome’s final exit from history, Macaulay’s judgement still stands; for nineteen centuries the world has witnessed the unfolding of an authentic political masterpiece. 
So much so, in fact, that Catholics have described the Vatican as ‘God’s masterpiece’, and Protestants as the equally supernatural creation of the Devil. But the scientific historian will stick by and to history. He will pronounce the Papacy to be of all recorded institutions that which best embodies the human ‘will to power’, that which has known best how to erect a lasting dominion upon the credulity, the superstition, and the age-long fears of mankind.
Notes
1. Rome never identifies herself absolutely with any social system. The old chestnut, beloved of Communists in particular, that Rome is a ‘feudal’ institution, just is not true. The Roman Empire which lives on in its ecclesiastical ‘ghost’ was pre-feudal and, in most respects, the antithesis of Feudalism, which was local, whilst Rome is universal.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter VIII: The Papacy and ‘Catholic Action’
Kill them all, my son, at the Last Day God will know how to distinguish between them.  –  Arnold, Abbot of Citeaux, Papal Legate and Inquisitor in the Crusade against the Albigenses (1209)
The fall of the Fascist empires at the end of the Second World War put an end to the grandiose dreams entertained by the Papacy of exterminating with fire and sword the contemporary forces of social progress. Nonetheless, the Church survived. And except south of the Pyrenees the Papacy no longer appears before the world as the ally of Fascism. However, this is not to imply that it has given up the ghost and has resigned itself to inevitable dissolution, quite the contrary! The Vatican has never been more active in world affairs than it is today.
The chief political weapon in the hands of Rome today is the international organisation of ‘Catholic Action’, the movement founded by Pope Pius XI; no doubt as a counter-blast to the current advance of Communism, Socialism and other enemies of the Church on the terrestrial plane. The movement itself is closely bound up with its founder’s cult of ‘Christ the King'; that is, it exists to promote the reign of the Church in this world.
Its founder himself defined ‘Catholic Action’ as the ‘Apostolate of the Laity in the service of the hierarchy’, a somewhat long-winded definition which is more infallible than intelligible! Actually, ‘Catholic Action’ may be defined as an organisational basis for Catholic politics rather than as a political party in the ordinary accepted sense. To borrow an expression from contemporary Socialist organisation, ‘Catholic Action’ may be broadly described as the political and social ‘International’ of militant Catholicism; here again, the Church and the Jesuit opportunists who lead it have known how, yet once again, to borrow from the arsenals of their secular opponents.
The late Mr Lloyd George once used an analogy in relation to the Protestant Churches and the political parties which we may find helpful in defining the contemporary role of ‘Catholic Action’. The famous Nonconformist once compared the relationship of the Churches with the political parties as that of a power station which radiated currents of spiritual energy throughout the political field. This metaphor is applicable to the relationship of ‘Catholic Action’ with Catholic politics and to political parties with a Catholic basis.
Such parties are today found all over the Western world. For, we repeat, political Catholicism was never more active than during the post-Fascist era (1945 – 48). For, except in the Iberian Peninsula, Rome has now dropped Fascism like a hot brick. In an age such as ours, whose conspicuous feature is professedly a universal adhesion to democracy  –  a name which today covers a multitude of sins and meanings  –  the Church of Rome, the oldest enemy of democracy in the world, has gone all democratic too; after all, even the God-Emperor of Japan, a more ancient religious leader even than the Vatican, has been transformed overnight by atomic democrats from a deity into a Democrat!
Similarly, the Church of Rome is now represented in the political arena by whole congeries of ‘Christian Democrats’ and similar parties. And the secular ‘sword’ of the Church against what now more than ever before is the chief bugbear of the Vatican, Russian Communism, is no longer Fascist Germany, but Democratic (with a capital ‘D’) America.
There is an apposite story told of that famous clerical diplomat, ex-Bishop Talleyrand. One fine July day in 1830 he was watching the fighting in the streets during the Parisian revolution which overthrew the Bourbon Monarchy. Suddenly he turned and exclaimed, ‘We are winning!'; when asked who ‘we’ were, he replied, ‘I don’t know yet!’
One might almost call this reply the classic motto of clerical diplomacy and of political Catholicism. The Vatican will support anyone or anything upon the sole condition that it will look after the interests, both secular and spiritual, of Rome. And that is nowhere more evident in Papal diplomacy than today. Yesterday, pro-Fascist, today, pro-Democrat, the Vatican remains consistently pro-Catholic.
Today, the Vatican, under a host of pseudonyms and political nom-de-plumes, holds or shares power in half the countries of Europe and Latin America, besides being by no means a negligible force in (ostensibly) Protestant America, Britain and Australasia. And for a totalitarian regime like that over which the Papacy presides, to hold political power is essential for the effective guarantee of its ethical and religious ideologies. The history of such totalitarian regimes as Catholicism itself, Islam (Mohammedanism) and Hinduism, proves this up to the hilt.
In contemporary Europe, west of the so-called ‘Iron Curtain’, the Vatican represents today the most powerful ideology; in fact Communism and Catholicism represent, undoubtedly, the two most powerful forces in contemporary Europe  –  not to mention the hardly less powerful influence wielded by Catholicism throughout the Americas, and its not inconsiderable influence in Australasia. What an anti-clerical French writer has aptly described as ‘The Church of Moscow and the Church of Rome’ divide between them by far the greater part of the European continent.
As our author aptly comments in this connection: if one takes away from the contemporary map of Europe those lands not subject to either Catholic or Communist influence, one is left with only Turkey, Switzerland and the Scandinavian countries.
Today, chiefly through the agency of ‘Christian Democratic’ Parties (outside the Iberian Peninsula), political Catholicism governs in the interests of Rome, either solely or in coalition, Italy, France (De Gaulle’s victory there would intensify clerical rule), Spain, Portugal, Ireland, Austria and the ‘Benelux’ countries. Political Catholicism also represents the dominant force throughout Western (non-Russian) Germany. In Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia, political Catholicism is the illegal but only real opposition to the otherwise totalitarian rule of Moscow and its henchmen.
In a Europe in which Capitalism and the bourgeoisie are discredited by their ‘collaboration’ with Fascism, whilst Social Democracy is in a state of decay, political Catholicism is unquestionably the most powerful non-Communist force. It is America’s most powerful European auxiliary in its approaching clash with Russia for the unchallenged domination of the whole world. 
And the list just given only comprises Europe. In Protestant America, Rome is a potent social and political force. In Catholic (Latin) America, she appears to be still the dominant ideological and social force everywhere, except in the sturdily anti-clerical Republic of Mexico, perhaps the most progressive country in our contemporary world.
Whilst in South America, Rome is today engaged in a Napoleonic strategy, of which the Perón dictatorship is the secular ‘sword’, to build up the Argentine, the greatest power in Latin America, upon the basis of militant Catholicism into a World Power, into the ‘USA’ of the next (twenty-first) century.
Consequently, when in the opening months of 1949, Pope Pius XII, himself a shrewd professional diplomat and a politician rather than an ecclesiastic, looks out upon World Catholicism under the dynamic inspiration of ‘Catholic Action’ and of political Catholicism which springs from it, he has no reason to feel dissatisfied, for Rome is still a World Power after centuries of Liberalism and Secularism have done their worst  –  or best!
However, whilst the Western sky is bright, that in the East becomes ever more menacing. For Communism, which already in 1846 Pope Pius IX had found occasion to denounce, by 1949 has grown from a humble acorn into a massive oak, and one has only to open any Catholic newspaper today to see that Rome regards Russian-inspired Communism as the pre-eminent heresy of our era, the ‘Calvinism of the twentieth century’ as I have elsewhere termed it.
All over the Western world today, what Robert Louzon (cited above) has described as the conflict between the ‘Church of Moscow’ and the ‘Church of Rome’, is in full spate. Nor is this description of Rome versus Moscow one merely figurative in character, for the two totalitarian creeds that today contend for mastery all over the Western world, Catholicism and Communism, have more than a little in common, for if its whole history demonstrates that the Church of Rome has many of the characteristics of a political party, it is equally obvious that Russian Communism has many of the characteristics of a Church.
Dogmatic intolerance, unquestionable obedience, tortuous casuistry are common to both rival creeds, as is also the famous ecclesiastical motto, ‘the heretic is worse than the infidel’. It is not only at Rome that this last maxim is understood and practised, the successive heresiarchs of Communism from Trotsky to Tito know it to their cost. And Moscow, no less than Rome, knows too that in the world of power politics, ‘the end justifies the means’. Both the ancient practice of the Vatican and the modern practice of the Kremlin illustrate this famous axiom of the Jesuits.
Today, the Papacy is looking Eastward, and already she proclaims the ‘holy war’ against Moscow, as against Jerusalem in the Middle Ages and also against Protestant England in the epoch of the Spanish Armada. And since this ‘holy war’ for religion must, willy nilly, be fought with the weapons of an atomic science that may well leave a ruined civilisation in its wake, so be it! Better to ruin civilisation, better to ruin humanity itself, than to tolerate the poisonous weed of heresy. Who lives if the Church dies? Better a dead mankind than a heretical one!
When the rain of atomic death shrouds the East in its fiery mist, the bells of the Vatican will ring in triumph as at the news of the Massacre of the Protestants on St Bartholomew’s Eve in 1572. And the Papacy will raise the old crusading battle cry ‘Deus Vult’ ('It is the Will of God’), as once over the Crusaders of Peter the Hermit and over the destroying hordes of the most Holy Inquisition which exterminated the Albigenses.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter IV: The Papacy and the Counter-Reformation
No Jesuit was ever elected Pope, for they assumed that every Pope would be a Jesuit.  –  Hermann Mueller
The Middle Ages may be said to have ended about AD 1500, when, almost simultaneously, a succession of new and intensely revolutionary forces broke in upon the stagnant feudal-clerical civilisation which had dominated Europe since the Crusades. Almost concurrently, a geographical, a cultural, an economic and a religious revolution broke in upon the agrarian medieval culture and combined effectively to destroy its traditional world.
We have here only space to describe in the very briefest outline the main causes of the revolutionary era of the Renaissance and the Reformation. Suffice it here to say that between about 1450 and 1550, that century of stupendous discovery, the Era of the Voyages of Discovery to East and West, the world was literally ‘put on the map’ and the world market opened up by the simultaneous discovery of America and the sea route to the East (1492 – 98). 
The economic results of this marvellous expansion were staggering. The eminent economic historian Alexander Del Mar has calculated that about 2000 million dollars-worth of bullion (gold and silver) were dumped into Europe during the sixteenth century. We may in fact say that the unseen ‘pull’ of the newly-discovered world market represented the most powerful force making for social, and even for religious change throughout this self-same period.
The concurrent intellectual and religious revolutions are better known; the Renaissance, the rediscovery of classical antiquity and the creation of a secular humanistic culture independent of the Church, and the religious revolution against the ‘dead hand’ of the totalitarian Church of the Middle Ages started by Martin Luther in 1517. In their relationship to our proper subject, the Papacy, only one point need here be added: the Reformation was not, as is sometimes supposed, a continuation of the Renaissance, quite the contrary. The Popes welcomed the Renaissance, but they fought the Reformation to the finish.
Actually the Reformation started as a revolt against the Renaissance. For it was the ruthless exploitation of Germany by the Renaissance Papacy which caused the German people to welcome Luther, and, on the whole, the early Protestant Reformers were not more but less liberal in their cultural outlook than were the Renaissance Popes.
One must reject the conclusion that there was anything new in itself about the religious revolution of the sixteenth century. Actually, the Protestant Reformers did not go as far in their Church ‘Reformation’ as some of their medieval predecessors had done. It was the revolutionary social changes alluded to above, to which must be added certain technical changes, primarily the contemporary invention of printing, that made the Bible universally accessible, which explains the success of the Reformers.
The Reformation took the Papacy by surprise, and its initial resistance was feeble, so much so that by the middle of the sixteenth century it looked very much as if the Roman Church was doomed to make a hasty exit from History. The Roman See was weakened by the schisms in the last centuries of the medieval era, when disputed successions and even anti-Popes were a regular occurrence.
Whilst the Popes of the Renaissance era were easy-going humanists whose personal morals were often the reverse of Christian, and who were not above poisoning an inconvenient rival, [1] such Popes were obviously not fanatics. If they  –  Leo included  –  defended the Church with fanaticism against the Reformers, it was, as Karl Kautsky, the German historian, aptly observed, ‘a fanaticism of avarice masquerading as faith’.
It is well known that the Roman Catholic Church was saved from what seemed a certain destruction by the Counter-Reformation of the late sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The Popes, however, were the figureheads rather than the actual leaders of the movement, the actual directors of which were the Jesuits; the General of which Order was known as the ‘Black Pope’ and seems frequently to have been the real leader of the Church. The study of the Counter-Reformation is far more the study of the Jesuit ‘Company’ than of its nominal leader, the Papacy.
Between about 1550 and 1650, the Counter-Reformation under the effective leadership of the Jesuits checked and even drove back the Reformation by a combination of ‘jesuitical’ demagogy and open terrorism.
A word may usefully be added on the origins and nature of the famous Spanish ‘Company of Jesus’. Its founder was the Spanish soldier Ignatius of Loyola (1490 – 1556), who founded the Company, as its name in Spanish implies, on military lines, with the original object of recovering Palestine by a new Crusade from the Turks. Circumstances, however, turned the Spanish order principally into the chief weapon of Rome against the Reformation. Its discipline, strict but flexible, is said to have been modelled on that of the Dervish religious orders of Mohammedan (Moorish) Spain. The famous motto ‘Ad majorem dei gloriam’  –  ‘To the greater glory of God’  –  is taken from the same source.
Under the nominal leadership of the Papacy, but under the real direction of their autocratic General, the Jesuits devoted themselves to teaching and preaching, and developed all the arts of religious demagogy. Their system of dialectics and of moral casuistry excited the indignation of old-fashioned Catholics like Pascal, who made a most effective attack on them in his Provincial Letters (1656 – 57), but proved most useful to the Church, particularly in the economic sphere, where it enabled the Church to discard its medieval prohibitions of ‘usury’ which were becoming impossible to continue in the rapidly expanding commercial age.
Briefly, one can say that the Jesuits were the shock troops, the corps d'élite or, in current phraseology, the ‘SS men’ of the Papacy, and down to the present time they have remained the arch-strategists of militant Catholicism. [2]
The Papacy, however, did not rely entirely upon the Jesuits and their famous casuistry of ‘ends and means’  –  ‘the end justifies the means’  –  in its dealings with the Reformation. It also used a host of more carnal weapons, from religious terrorism organised in the Roman and Spanish Inquisitions (both founded in this period) to literary censorship. [3] These weapons against ‘heresy’ were adequately supplemented by the ‘Invincible Armadas’ and armies of the Kings of Spain, the fighting standard-bearers of the Counter-Reformation.
The result of a century of physical and ideological struggle which culminated in the terrible ‘Thirty Years War’ (1618 – 48) was to leave Europe divided on lines which remained substantially unaltered until 1789, when Freethought may be said to have succeeded Protestantism as the chief rival of the Church of Rome.
The Reformation which ended the Middle Ages themselves, ended concurrently the Totalitarian Papacy of the Middle Ages. Modern, unlike medieval Catholicism, has been a defensive Catholicism, and the modern Papacy, no longer the unchallenged master of Europe, has been reduced to fighting for its existence against the ever-mounting modern secular tide of heresy. But Rome has, notwithstanding, managed to delay her final exit from History, and still today fights on, haunted by the vanished dream of her former medieval grandeur.
Notes
1. The Borgia Pope, Alexander VI (1492 – 1503), had a particularly bad reputation in this last respect. Another Medici Pope, Leo X, the actual Pope under whom the Reformation started (1513 – 21), is said to have observed ‘What a profitable superstition for Popes is this fable of Christ.’
2. In my book The Jesuits  –  A Study in Counter-Revolution (London, 1938), I have traced in a detail not possible here the influence exercised by the Jesuits upon modern as distinct from medieval Catholicism.
3. The famous ‘Index of Prohibited Books’ belongs also to the era of the Counter-Reformation.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter VII: The Papacy and Fascism
Mussolini was the man sent by Providence.  –  Pope Pius XI, 20 December 1926
Upon 7 November 1917, the Russian people carried through a revolution which placed the Bolshevik Party in power, and installed an anti-Capitalist regime in Russia. (The Czar had already been forced to abdicate the previous February.) The Russian Revolution set in motion a wave of social revolution which swept over the Western World, and in its (Communist) Russian form quickly took an openly anti-religious attitude in consonance with the Marxist materialist views officially professed by the Bolsheviks. (It must be remembered that in Czarist Russia the Orthodox Church was virtually a part of the Czarist autocracy.)
It is now evident in retrospect that the era of social revolution which began in 1917 has now succeeded the era of the French Revolution as the fundamental bugbear of the Catholic Church. In the twentieth century ‘Communism’ is mentioned in various Papal Encyclicals quite as much as ‘Liberalism’ was in those of the nineteenth century. But at first this was not apparent. There had been an enmity of long- standing between the rival theocracies of Rome and Moscow, and the Vatican at first welcomed the overthrow of the heretical and persecuting Czars; ‘A Divine judgement’, the then Papal Secretary of State, Cardinal Gasparri, told a visiting English Catholic.
But this feeling of good-will did not last long. The wave of social revolution promulgated by the Communist International spread too fast across the troubled postwar world and assumed too openly anti-religious forms. Rome soon came to the frame of mind in which she adheres today, in the calculations of the Papacy Communism came to occupy the place occupied in bygone ages by such former enemies of the Church as the Albigenses, the Calvinists and the Freemasons.
This change of attitude on the part of the Papacy can be dated officially from the accession of Pius XI (Achille Ratti) to the Papal Throne early in 1922. For this very able and ultra-reactionary Pontiff had been Papal Nuncio at Warsaw in 1920 when the Bolshevik ‘Red’ Army had advanced to the gates of the Polish capital.
Thereafter Cardinal Ratti devoted his life to fighting the ‘Red Peril’ from the Communist East. Since his election as Pope in 1922, the Church has energetically pursued his policy, which Ratti’s successor and former Secretary of State, Eugenio Paccelli (Pope Pius XII), is pursuing today with redoubled vigour.
Pius XI (1922 – 39) reorganised the Church in order to meet the Communist menace; in particular he was the founder of ‘Catholic Action’, to the activities of which it will again be necessary to refer. But at the time when Pope Pius commenced his new anti-Communist policy, ‘Catholic Action’ was barely hatched, and the official Catholic parties, like the German ‘Centre’ Party or the Italian ‘Peoples’ Party, were too much out of date and loosely organised to hope to make a successful stand against the highly-organised, fanatical and politically ruthless Communist Parties backed by the Russian Colossus.
‘New times, new manners’  –  and old tactics! In this dilemma the Pope and his advisers fell back on the old Catholic tactic of making a ‘marriage of convenience’, of forming an alliance with a secular ally, and of using this ally as a ‘sword’ to eradicate contemporary ‘heresy’ by force. It should be pointed out that this tactic was not a new one, contrarily, it was the traditional tactic of the Papacy which it has actually used over and over again. The ‘Holy’ Roman Empire, the Norman Crusaders, the French and Spanish Kings, the ‘Holy Alliance’ are all cases in point. The Papal – Fascist alliance was of the same kind.
From 1922, the date both of the accession of Pius XI and of Mussolini’s ‘March on Rome’, to 1945, the date of the fall of the Fascist Empires in Europe and Asia at the end of the Second World War, we observe a complete era in Papal and, since the Vatican is a World Power, in world-politics, the era of Catholic – Fascist alliance.
The details of this still so recent, and in the Latin world still existing, era can be found set out with appropriate detail in Avro Manhattan’s important book The Catholic Church Against the Twentieth Century, more concisely in Dr LH Lehman’s recent valuable study The Vatican Policy in the Second World War, and perhaps the present writer may be permitted in this connection to mention his own earlier (1937) book The Papacy and Fascism. The appropriate details in the Roman – Fascist alliance can be found in these and similar books; here the necessary limits of space imposed by this short thesis limit us to a consideration of the fundamental philosophy and strategy of this alliance.
In the first place, there were several kinds of Fascism and the reactions of the Vatican towards each, and its consequent degree of collaboration towards each, differed considerably. To ignore such differences is merely to imitate the cruder type of Left-wing writers who use the word ‘Fascist’ as an indiscriminate term of abuse wherewith to brand anything they dislike; as in fact, a sort of universal ‘Esperanto’ of crime!
Actually there were three kinds of Fascism, and the attitude of the Papacy differed markedly towards each. Firstly, there was the Clerical-Fascism, Catholic in environment, ideology and inspiration, of Franco and Salazar in Spain and Portugal, of Dollfuss and Schuschnigg in prewar Austria, of Perón in the Argentine, and of Pétain in (Vichy) France: with all these 100 per cent Catholic regimes, past and present, the Vatican was and is 100 per cent united, ideologically and politically, for they all represent the beau ideal of Roman sociology, its ‘Christian Corporate State’.
Secondly, there was the type of Fascism, personified by Mussolini’s Italy, which arose in a Catholic atmosphere, but was largely inspired by the non-Catholic ideals of pre-Christian Pagan Rome. On the whole, the Vatican worked cordially with Mussolini, the quotation at the head of this chapter testifies to that! And we do not forget the Lateran Treaty (1929) which restored a modified version of the Temporal Power and replenished the Vatican treasury, but notwithstanding there were certain clashes between the two totalitarian regimes. The Papacy heartily approved of Mussolini’s wholesale extirpation of the parties of the Left, it kept quiet about the murder of the Socialist leader, Matteotti, and it backed up the Italian conquest of ‘heretical’ Ethiopia, and, of course, the Italian intervention in Spain.
But there was friction over the Fascist monopoly of education, the Pope did not like the Fascist high-handed suppression of his pet movement ‘Catholic Acton’, and the Papacy never completely trusted Mussolini; after all, he had once been an atheist  –  a habit which sticks!  –  and had once written that excellent little Anarchist pamphlet entitled God Does Not Exist.
Last, but in power politics the reverse of least, there was non-Christian Fascism; entirely pagan in Japan, largely pagan in Hitler’s Germany. Although the German Dictator repeatedly declared his admiration for the historic role of the Catholic Church, and even though the Nazi movement itself originated in Catholic Bavaria, we must not forget that there was a strong openly anti-Christian Pagan wing of Nazism, and in its marriage and family ethics the Nazi Reich was flatly opposed to Catholicism.
In the case of Pagan Fascism, the Church probably limited its approval to the destructive aspect of Fascism, in which Germany was its most potent ‘sword’, it backed Hitler against Communist Russia and Liberal France, and Japan against Chinese Communism. But the positive ideals of the Cross and the Swastika differed too widely to be permanently harmonised. Had Hitler won his war and succeeded in his gigantic gamble for world power, as far as the Vatican was concerned there would probably have been a struggle for power, the Nazi ‘Third Reich’ would probably have repeated the stormy history of the ‘First Reich’, the Holy Roman Empire. However, history never allowed the question to rise.
The elemental reasons for the Catholic – Fascist alliance are obvious enough. In my book The Papacy and Fascism, I have cited nine fundamental aspects of human action and thought in which the two authoritarian systems run parallel. [1] 
Here it will be sufficient to mention the more important points of identity, or close similarity.
Both Fascism and Roman Catholicism are authoritarian, the infallible Pope and the Dictator who is always right, intolerant of opposition, and backward-looking in their social ideals. Both find their ideal in the Past, both are anti-evolutionary in practice and theory; above all, both have the same enemies, the forward-looking movements in ethics, in economics and in politics, and both are totalitarian and seek to dominate every sphere of human life. The Gestapo and the Japanese Law against ‘dangerous thoughts’ are the Fascist equivalents of the Inquisition.
Such are the main causes for the Clerical – Fascist alliance which lasted from 1922 to 1945. One further point may be added: both Catholicism and Fascism are essentially demagogic in their tactics. Here the Church and, in particular, the Jesuits were first in the field. Fascist strategy and propaganda owe much to their Jesuit masters. Hitler and Goebbels, in particular, well qualified for honorary membership of the famous Order founded by St Ignatius Loyola, ‘For the greater glory of God’  –  and counter-revolution.
However, the great Fascist gamble failed. The Papal ‘sword’ failed to subdue the Communist, Liberal and secular foes of Holy Church. In 1945 the Papal ‘marriage of convenience’ with Fascism was ended by death. But the Vatican did not perish with its secular ally. With the matchless tenacity in which Christian Rome recalls its Pagan original, the Church in the post-Fascist world continued its search for new weapons with which to lay low the secular enemies of the ecclesiastical Empire of the successors of the Cæsars.
Notes
1. FA Ridley, The Papacy and Fascism: The Crisis of the Twentieth Century (London, 1937), pp 166-68.
 


Table of Contents




volution of the Papacy by Francis Ambrose 1949


The Evolution of the Papacy. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1949
Chapter II: The Papacy and the Dark Ages
It has sometimes been said that Christianity brought civilisation to medieval Europe, but it would be truer to say that civilisation brought Christianity.  –  C Delisle Burns, The First Europe
‘The Papacy is the ghost of the Roman Empire sitting crowned on the grave thereof.’ This definition of the great English philosopher Thomas Hobbes remains today the classical definition of the Papacy. But a ‘ghost’ cannot by definition function whilst its original survives. In this last respect, the Papacy lived up to its ghost-like character. For it only began to flourish as its original, the secular Roman Empire of the Cæsars, began to decline, that is, in Western Europe. For in the East, where the ‘Lower’ (Byzantine) Roman Empire continued down to the Fall of Constantinople in 1453, the Papacy could never make any headway.
The Roman Empire in the West began to crumble to pieces in the third century of the Christian era, as the result of economic exhaustion, servile discontent and barbarian invasion. Already writing about AD 178 under Marcus Aurelius, the Pagan apologist Celsus had warned the Christians that the Empire was going to pieces, and that it was their duty as patriots to rally to its support. Incidentally, Celsus’ polemic against Christianity, suppressed by the Church after its victory, has been partly preserved in the counter-polemic of the Christian doctor Origen.
As the Russian historian MI Rostovtsev has demonstrated in his Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire, the third century marked the real exit from the stage of history of the old Roman ruling class, and, since the classical culture was a class culture, of the culture itself of antiquity. As a result of this ‘revolt of the masses’, brutalised and steeped in superstition, as the result of immemorial centuries of servitude, a flood of credulous superstition swept in from the East, and the old Pagan Rationalism embodied in the philosophic schools of the Stoics, Epicureans and Cynics disappeared finally in the self-same century. The intellectual ‘glory that was Greece’ preceded the political ‘grandeur that was Rome’, on the way to oblivion.
The new ruling class that was thrown up by the social upheaval of the third century shared to the full the superstition of the masses from which it sprang. The Roman Emperors of the Decline were men of humble origin, strange to the rational culture of the old ruling class. The greatest of them, Diocletian, was of servile origin, whilst Constantine, ‘the first Christian’ Emperor, was the son of an innkeeper’s daughter.
The triumph of the masses was simultaneously the triumph of religion. In a servile social order, where the majority of the men were unpaid labourers, and the women unpaid prostitutes, and such was the much-trumpeted classical civilisation in its relation to the servile masses  –  this was inevitable.
The third century marked the end of classical rationalism, the fourth, the beginning of medieval superstition. For this century witnessed the religious conflict between the two chief oriental religions of the day, Christianity and Mithraism (Sun worship). The conflict remained for long undecided before the bigoted Spanish Emperor Theodosius (378 – 395), the first really Christian Emperor (Constantine was a political opportunist rather than a zealous believer), ensured the definite triumph of Christianity and concurrently introduced persecution as a permanent feature into the European life of the next 1200 years. [1]
The Church of Rome and its bishops rose in the world along with Christianity itself. Already by the second half of the fourth century, the Pagan historian Ammianus Marcellinus comments on both the splendour and the corruption of the Roman bishops’ entourage, and armed riots in the streets of Rome accompanied the elections to this important and lucrative office.
But the Roman bishop had still a very limited authority even in the Roman Empire. At the epoch-marking Council of Nicæa (325), which marked both the victory of Christianity and the definition of the Trinitarian Dogma, the Roman bishop was not officially represented, and the decrees of the Council were not apparently submitted for his endorsement.
However, the final victory of Christianity, the essential prerequisite for the subsequent dazzling fortunes of the Papacy, led to a fresh development in the status of the Bishops of Rome. For AD 378, the Roman Emperor Gratian issued an Imperial decree constituting the Bishop of Rome and his successors officially as Patriarchs of the West; henceforth, all the bishops of the Western Empire (roughly, Western Europe and North Africa) were subordinated to the Roman See. A landmark in the historic evolution of the Papacy. ‘The birthday of the Papacy’, as the learned historian of Catholic dogma Joseph Turmel has described it.
History was on the side of the newly-christened Papacy, for the fifth century witnessed the final dissolution of the Roman Empire in the West, and a new and much more considerable historical role thereafter devolved upon the Papacy. AD 452, Pope Leo, perhaps the first ‘Pope’ in a recognisable modern sense of the word, effectively stood between Rome and the fury of the Hunnish invader Attila, ‘the scourge of God’. In the succeeding centuries between the final collapse of the Roman Empire (AD 476) and the Papal creation of the Holy Roman Empire (AD 800), the leadership of what was left of Western civilisation devolved on the Papacy.
During those centuries which constitute the ‘Dark Age’, properly so-called  –  400 – 800  –  when the Nordic and Teutonic barbarians finally overran Western Europe and North Africa, it was the Bishop of Rome, rather than the distant Emperor at Constantinople, who was the effective leader of what had once been the Roman world. The Popes  –  as we now begin to call them  –  came before the northern barbarians as the representatives of a culture, that of the vanished world of antiquity, of the ‘mighty men of old’.
Whatever culture survived in the huge slum that was the Europe of the Dark Ages, survived in and through the Church, which preserved whatever was left both of the administration and of the culture of the vanished Empire. It is true that some Freethinkers have rashly denied the social services rendered by the Church to the Europe of the Dark Ages. But this is to make a miracle of the expansion of Christianity. [2]
The ‘ghost of the Roman Empire’ was now replacing its original. Between the sixth and eighth centuries, the Papacy  –  for the institution of the Universal Bishopric is now emerging from the mists of its pre-history  –  launched its ecclesiastical cohorts of monks to a reconquest of Europe as effective as, and far more lasting than, its earlier conquest by the Roman legions had been. [3] Between AD 500 and 1000 the barbarian conquerors of secular Rome were converted by ecclesiastical Rome. Ancient ‘Europe’ was being succeeded by medieval ‘Christendom’.
A character in a modern drama is made to observe: ‘Money is made in the dark.’ So, also, was the Papacy! In the darkness of the Dark Ages. The Bishop of Rome went into the Dark Ages a Roman official; he emerged from them as the actual spiritual and cultural ruler of the West. Rome now only required a physical sword to become its temporal ruler as well.
This sword, this political instrument, the Popes acquired in the late eighth century when they called in the military aid of the Franks, the most powerful of the German conquerors of Rome. The immediate cause of this ‘marriage of convenience’, the first of many such which Papal Rome has contracted during the course of its long career, was to resist the newly-arisen rival religion of Mohammed, and also fresh swarms of barbaric invaders from the North and East of Europe. The outward and visible sign of the alliance was witnessed at Rome on Christmas Day 800, when the Pope crowned Charles (Charlemagne), King of the Franks, as ‘Roman Emperor’.
This last event marked the beginning of the ‘Holy’ Roman Empire, the political instrument of the Papacy for the creation of a Christian Europe. It marked in reality the beginning of the Middle Ages, the classic era, the Golden Age of the Papacy, to which it still looks back with nostalgic regret, to the epoch of its totalitarian rule.
Notes
1. I have traced this momentous religious revolution in my book Julian the Apostate and the Rise of Christianity (London, 1937).
2. C Delisle Burns, The First Europe.
3. The Benedictine Order, founded by a Roman aristocrat, was the most effective of these missionary cohorts.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Frank Ridley 1941
Fascism: What Is It?
I: The Science of Counter-Revolution
The art and science of Dialectics consists essentially of the study of things in movement. As History, rightly apprehended is, essentially, movement, it must be considered as the most suitable subject for dialectical treatment, not as some quasi-theological mumbo-jumbo, as in the writings of the so-called ‘Communist’ party, but in its correct sense, as the study of movement in action. And since Revolutionary history is history in its most dynamic movement, it is obvious that revolutionary history must, to obtain an exact perspective, be treated as a continuous movement of action and reaction, of revolution and counter-revolution; the latter necessarily caused and conditioned by the former.
It has been the basic and fundamental fallacy hitherto, of all historians of Revolution that they have treated Revolution statically and metaphysically, as a ‘thing in itself’, and not as the forward movement of the historic process, to which there usually follows an equally abrupt movement to the rear, the counter-revolution. (Compare HM Hyndman  –  The Evolution of Revolution  –  plus ‘the monstrous regiment’ of American professors who write ‘philosophies of history’ as though they were writing ‘histories of philosophy'!)
In actual history, that is, the history of class society, every real revolution is always followed by a counter-revolution, successful or unsuccessful. However, it is only recently that we have discovered this. For if it was reserved for the nineteenth century to discover that there is a permanent science of revolution, it has been reserved for the twentieth to discover that there is a complementary science of counter-revolution also.
Observing history from this standpoint, we note that all the great social changes from epoch to epoch have been ages of revolution followed by counter-revolution. The earliest revolutions of all, those that ‘liquidated’ the immemorial society of patriarchal times, are indeed screened from our view by the mists of ages  –  though in the writings of Homer, and still more of Hesiod, the Greek poets of the Age of Transition, glimpses of the contemporary landslide can still be obtained. But since the rise, concurrently, of classes and the class war, the process is plain for all to see.
In classical society we have a whole epoch of social revolution; in Greece, culminating in ‘The Red Kings’ of Sparta; in Rome in the revolution of the immortal Spartacus, and in reply we see the threatened property owners of the Mediterranean civilisation create the Empire of the Caesars, the ‘totalitarian’ phase of Antiquity, which concurrently ended the era of Social Revolution and the Ancient civilisation itself.
At the end of the Middle Ages we note the rise of Capitalism expressing itself in the Reformation in an era of social and religious revolution against the ‘dead hand’ of the Middle Ages and the Roman Papacy which had ruled that feudal theocracy. And faced with this age of uninterrupted revolution we see Catholicism forced back on the defensive, create in Ignatius Loyola [1] and his ‘Company of Jesus’ the toughest and most adaptable band of deliberate counter-revolutionaries that the world has known even up to this hour.
And, yet again, when the storms of the French Revolution surged over Europe, obliterating Monarchy, clericalism, and the whole mercantilist-feudal ancient regime, we see in quick reaction the era of ruthless counter-revolution represented by De Maistre and his ultra-montane Papacy, by that generation of repression and of the tyrannical suppression of the Liberal Revolution that is conjured up by the names of Metternich and the ‘Holy Alliance’  –  1814-48.
If the sixteenth century, era of dawning capitalism and of the Reformation, represented Revolution in the Positive degree; and if the nineteenth century, epoch of the Liberal Revolution and of the world-expansion of Capital, represented it in the comparative; the twentieth century, era of the world-diffusion of Socialism and of the Russian and Spanish Revolutions, represents it in a degree that is absolutely superlative. Whether we like it or no, ours is the age of the World-Revolution. Our age is only significant when and where it is revolutionary. The economics of the ‘Age of Plenty’ embodied in the revolutionary struggle of the Workers and Peasants throughout the world, rise with an ultimately irresistible violence against the ‘scarcity economy’, against the era of class society, which the Past has bequeathed to us.
And yet again, we see the recurrent phenomenon of Revolution succeeded by counter-revolution. On the one side, the Russian and the Spanish Revolutions, and revolutionary agitation throughout the world: on the other, the international counter-revolution, the most dynamic and original form of which is to be found in Fascism, the Counter-Revolution par excellence, of the twentieth century. It is with this contemporary form of Counter-Revolution that this pamphlet must henceforth concern itself.
First, however, we must ask ourselves this question: what is a counter-revolution? It is the more necessary to do this, since there is no subject in our contemporary world about which there is so much stark confusion, and about which so much sheer nonsense is talked and written, as there is about Fascism. There is not in existence a political regime, from that of Stalin to that of the ex-Negus of Ethiopia, which has not at one time or another found someone to style it as ‘Fascist’.
What is a counter-revolution? In what precisely consists its essence as and when contrasted with pure reaction? Speaking broadly, we can state that blind reaction is purely negative: to the ‘yes’ of the Revolution, it answers simply ‘no’. It defends the indefensible, and there is nothing positive about it. Hence, from the intellectual standpoint reaction is merely atavistic and ridiculous: its generic prototype, ‘Colonel Blimp’, [2] is simply and solely a figure of fun. Unlike blind reaction however, a genuine counter-revolution is never simply negative, and it is never simply a figure of fun. Contrarily, it always embodies a positive aspect which usually deceives many who are not necessarily merely fanatics and/or fools. Counter-revolution, unlike sheer reaction, consciously aims at, and often succeeds in obtaining, the adhesion of the masses, and not merely of interested cliques,
All the successive forms that counter-revolution has assumed throughout the ages conform to this permanent principle. The Roman Caesars who  –  as I have elsewhere expressed it  –  ‘averted dissolution by stabilising decay’, did, at least, make the decay tolerable to a society rendered desperate to the point of revolution by the intolerable corruption and oppression that characterised the rule of the Roman plutocracy in the last century of the Republic. Similarly the Jesuits not only defeated the Reformers but also stole their demagogic thunders: to be sure, these master-champions of reaction were the paradoxical protagonists of the ‘Social Contract’ of Jean Jacques Rousseau, and of modern democracy, even to the point of advocating the assassination of rulers, though of course, only of heretical rulers. Moreover, it was these arch-champions of the Medieval church who yet ‘reconciled’ Catholicism with the Capitalist System which ended the Middle Ages for ever. And we shall shortly see Fascism, the modern counterpart of Caesarism and Jesuitism, also fight Socialism by stealing its thunders; and combat our imperative contemporary need for an organised society by grafting upon bourgeois society as much organisation as any class society can stand without losing its generic nature as a class society.
In fact we may sum up the nature of any effective counter-revolution when we state that, in contradistinction to reaction pure and simple, a genuine counter-revolution only defends defensible positions. It concedes part in order to preserve the remainder. It defeats the Revolution by borrowing heavily from it.
We have briefly noted that this was so with regard to the successful counter-revolutions of the Past, such as Caesarism and Jesuitism. We can now note the same phenomenon in more detail in relation to the pre-eminent counter-revolutionary movement of our own century  –  viz Fascism  –  to the rise, evolution and political and economic character of which the remainder of this pamphlet must now be devoted.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Fascism: What Is It? F A Ridley 1941
Fascism: What Is It?
III: What is Fascism? (Fascism and the Totalitarian State)
The primary question  –  ‘what is Fascism'?  –  can only be answered scientifically if we consider successively its originating causes, its political nature, and its economic character; accordingly, we consider these seriatim.
Its originating causes: For Fascism to grip hold of the State machine, it is necessary for several concurrent factors to be present. In particular the old State forms must be discredited by failure; the ruling classes must be thoroughly confused and frightened; the masses must be disgusted to the point of revolt with the old regime, but must be without either a scientific knowledge of its causes or a constructive political alternative. Without these preliminary conditions, there can be no Fascism. For, pace the Liberal – Labour – Popular Front (of yesterday) mythology, a Fascist movement is only indirectly made from above directly  –  and consciously  –  it is a mass-movement that springs from below; from the broad masses of the people. It is not a kind of political electric switch that the bourgeoisie can turn on and off as and when they require it.
In the two great Fascist States: Germany and Italy, all these prerequisite phenomena were present. Germany had been decisively beaten, despoiled and humiliated, in the most disastrous defeat of modern times, in 1918. The Weimar regime  –  1919-33  –  set up by the victorious allies after Versailles represented simply the symbol of defeat and humiliation: Moreover, it was Left enough in theory to alarm the ruling classes, and yet was Right enough in practice to frighten the masses.
Similarly, Italy had attained national unity too late in the nineteenth century to prosecute imperialist designs with any substantial success. As already remarked, she had been swindled at Versailles; though nominally on the side of the winners, she may be ranked, substantially, as a defeated nation, considering her heavy war losses (at Caporetto, etc) and her meagre reward. Moreover, her postwar Liberal governments of Giolitti, Nitti and Facta also aroused both the anger of the Right and the contempt of the Left: we have in mind, particularly, the pusillanimous and facing-both-ways attitude of the Italian government of Giolitti, when faced with the seizure of the factories by the workers in the autumn of 1920, when the Left proved not to be strong enough to seize power, but strong enough to make the Right think that they were going to seize it.
Consequently, despite differences in detail, Mussolini  –  in October, 1922  –  and Hitler  –  in January, 1933  –  both seized power in situations that were fundamentally similar: in a frustrated Imperialist nation, where the Right feared social revolution and the Left was impotent to achieve it. And in both countries Fascism simultaneously appealed to both Left and Right: to the Right as the Saviour from Revolution; to the Left as the champion of the Revolution.
We have already noted the conditions that alone made this possible. Without the previous failure of their respective Imperialisms, neither Mussolini nor Hitler could have come to power, we can, therefore, define Fascism as, in the first instance, the politics of a frustrated Imperialism. It is, for example, obvious that had Germany and Italy succeeded in their struggle for political existence; had they won the First Imperialist war and thus become world empires, the Hohenzollerns would still be reigning in Potsdam, and the Italian Party caucus of Giolitti, Nitti & Co would still rule Italy from the Aventine. It was the blunders of the German General Staff on the Marne and of the Italians at Caporetto, which, in the first instance, made Mussolini and Hitler possible.
The Political Nature of Fascism: Fascism is then in the first instance, the politics of a frustrated Imperialism, of a defeated, and therefore discredited ruling class which has failed in the jungle-struggle for political existence. A Fascist movement has, in its pre-power phase, three essential characteristics: it is financed by the Capitalist class, by ‘Big Business,’ as a shock-absorber against Revolution; it is enthusiastically welcomed by a large strata of workers, peasants and petit-bourgeoisie, who look to it to carry out a national revolution, to achieve on the national field what their own (internationalist) parties have failed to achieve on the international. And it is fanatically nationalistic-objectively Imperialistic, the wrongs of which it exists ultimately to right. Financed by Big Business, backed by the masses, Imperialistic and therefore militarist; who does not recall examples of all these phenomena in the course of the political evolution of the regimes of Hitler and Mussolini?
The political essence of Fascism is the (one) Party Totalitarian State in which the individual is completely subordinated to the State, and (in theory at least) the State to the Party. After what we have stated above as to the causes of Fascism, it is hardly necessary for us to examine in detail this political structure, which is merely the expression in practice of Fascism’s reasons for existence. It is obvious that Fascism can only accomplish its ostensible dual role of protecting Capitalism from the Revolution, and the workers from Capitalism, if it includes both parties in a State against which neither has any rights, and over which Fascism  –  ‘The Party’  –  is permanently all-powerful. As Fascism, in its own estimation embodies both sides of the class war, to exist permanently, Fascism must include, and, by including, suppress both. The ‘Total’ State is not an original creation of Fascism: to be sure, it is the oldest form of the State from the days of the Pharaohs onward. But without it, Fascism could not exist for the proverbial day. The class struggle in a society based on private property must either be decided by revolution from below, or be smothered from above by the State. Since Fascism is objectively counter-revolutionary, it can only adopt the latter method.
Whilst, however, Fascism is, objectively, the most distinctive counter-revolutionary movement of our age, yet in its own estimation, it is neither revolutionary nor counter-revolutionary  –  or rather it is both. The Fascist State is ‘the rejoicing third’ which both gaols Thälmann and exiles Thyssen, [3] which suppresses Labour in the interests of privately-owned capital  –  and privately-owned capital in its own interest  –  for the greater power and glory of Fascism. ‘Our Programme? It is to rule Italy.’ This inspired bon mot of Mussolini may be taken as the legitimate motto of the whole Fascist movement, North as well as South of the Alps. (It is this purely pragmatic and activist character that explains the complete contempt for anything abstract or theoretical which unvaryingly characterises all forms of Fascism. To be: not to reflect on its own insoluble contradictions! ‘In the beginning was the Act!’ (Faust)
It is obvious that such a conception is entirely remote from the demagogic interpretations of Fascism which have hitherto passed muster to the almost complete exclusion of any scientific analysis. Fascism explains itself as the Revolution in its only practicable shape. But as our next paragraphs will demonstrate, Fascism does not abolish Capitalism  –  that regime of scarcity economics, of ‘poverty in the midst of plenty’ which now alone bars the forward movement of Humanity from unimagined heights. On the contrary, Fascism saves Capitalism, not only from the Revolution, but, equally effectively, from itself! That is, Fascism saves Capital from the now outmoded control of individual (unorganised) capitalists: it preserved capitalism in the only form in which it can survive in a society that clamours, above all for organisation. That is, State Capitalism. (See next subsection.)
If we cannot accept Fascism’s own account of its ‘revolutionary’ character, neither, equally, can we accept in toto the account given by the philosophers of the Left who explain Fascism simply and solely as the Dictatorship of Big Business operating under a demagogic cloak  –  we have in mind, particularly, the late Leon Trotsky, and such living writers as Rajani Palme Dutt and Daniel Guérin (see Dutt, Fascism, and Guérin, Fascism and Big Business).[4]
It is, of course, quite true that this description holds broadly of the first phase of Fascism prior to its seizure of power. This preliminary building up of a mass party from very small beginnings into a mass party obviously required lavish expenditure of money. And where else but from Big Business could the requisite cash be obtained in a capitalist society? Certainly not from the Plebeian clientele of an incipient Fascist movement, impoverished peasants and ruined rentiers.
In its totality, however, the theory breaks down. It is always a mistake to judge any movement solely by its first phase. Who, for instance, could adequately judge Christianity as an historical phenomenon merely by reference to the New Testament? Fascism is no exception. It is almost self evident that a complete ‘Total’ Party State  –  the final stage of a Fascist society  –  is incompatible by its very nature with the rule of a single class. In a ‘total’ State it is the State that rules: the executive bureaucracy is all-powerful. That this is so in practice is demonstrated by the entire political and increasing economic subordination of Big Business to the State, particularly in Germany, the more thoroughly organised Fascist State. Already it seems quite clear that by the end of this war, if not sooner, the much trumpeted dictatorship of Big Business in Germany will have about as much significance as a dead cat. Already, the little finger of Hitler is thicker than the loins of Thyssen, his erstwhile ‘Mayor of the Palace’ according to the superficial estimate of Ernest Henri (see Hitler Over Europe). [5]
The theory that Fascism is merely ‘a police dictatorship of Big Business’ (that is, of privately-owned Capital) is still almost universal on the Left, and being entirely false, at least with regard to the present phase of mature Fascism, has been responsible for untold blunders; particularly as regards the relations of Nazi Germany with the Soviet Union. Who does not recall the stupefaction, rising into the regions of hysteria, at the Pact between Soviet Russia and the Nazi regime? To understand this elementary blunder it is now necessary to turn to the economics of Fascism, to discover in what precise sense Fascism is an instrument for the preservation of Capitalism.
The Economics of Fascism: Fascism preserves Capitalism; that is its proper counter-revolutionary mission, to preserve Capital  –  ‘the economics of scarcity’  –  in the age of Power-Production and consequent potential plenty. Fascism embodies itself in the ‘strong state’, organised politically to suppress revolution, its primary role in Italy, organised economically to ‘iron out’, to overcome capitalist economic crises; its primary role in Germany. The essence of Fascism is its character as the counter-revolutionary state organised, first and foremost, to prevent the decline of Capitalism culminating in its proximate fall.
‘The State of declining Capitalism’ what is this, someone may ask us, except the dictatorship of Big Business, of the Capitalists taken as a class. The two are, however, not at all the same thing: Capitalism is not the simple equivalent of the capitalist class, capitalism can exist without Capitalists: there is also, over and above private capitalism, State Capitalism, either partial or complete. It is this form of Capitalism  –  its last and most developed form internally as Imperialism is its last external form  –  that Fascism comes to represent more and more completely.
What is the essential nature of a capitalist state? The usual idea, evidently taken virtually for granted by Dutt, Strachey, Guerin & Co, is that a capitalist State exists to protect capitalists, but this is not necessarily the case. Indeed in final analysis, it is quite untrue. Contrarily, the essential feature of a Capitalist State is to supervise the accumulation of Capital, either in the hands of individual capitalists or of its own. The latter alternative is that which increasingly bears sway in a Fascist economy. Having been called to power originally by the capitalist class, Fascism has to expropriate the capitalists gradually, from the Right in order to safeguard more efficiently the accumulation of Capital. It is in this connection that we see most clearly the relationship of Fascism, as and when considered in relation to Stalinism  –  National Bolshevism  –  with which it is so often compared. and wrongly identified. Fascism, coming from the Right  –  created ultimately, with the then indispensable help of the capitalist class  –  (more or less) gradually expropriates the capitalist in order the better to preserve capital, of which it then undertakes the imperative task of accumulation, necessary to every phase of Capitalism. Whereas Bolshevism coming from the Left as a result of a revolution, has forcibly expropriated the whole (Russian) Capitalist class, has been able to realise State Capitalism at a blow, with the all powerful ‘Stalinist’ State Bureaucracy as the supreme custodian and accumulator of the national capital piled up as a result of the surplus value extracted from the wage-labour of the Russian masses. Two regimes of State Capitalism  –  ‘National Socialism’  –  ‘Socialism in one country’  –  arising, respectively, from counter-revolution on the Right and Revolution on the Left! Will they last long enough to meet ultimately in the middle? How far this process has already gone is evident from the opinion recently expressed by a well informed investigator, who calculated that, whilst there are still more rich men (private capitalists, etc) in Germany than in Russia, yet there is already a wider gulf between the living standards of the Soviet bureaucracy and those of the Russian masses than there is between those of the Nazi bureaucracy and the German masses!
(NB: If Fascism can be accurately styled, as above, the politics of a frustrated Imperialism, so Bolshevism à la Stalin can be styled equally accurately as the politics of a frustrated Revolution: that is, though both produce increasingly similar fruits, the roots of Bolshevism and Fascism originated in diverse soil: it is therefore wrong to identify them, as is so often mistakenly done. Their appearances are virtually identical, but here as elsewhere ‘appearances are deceptive’. We may also note that Bonapartism in the nineteenth century also represented the politics of a frustrated revolution  –  the ‘Stalinism’ of the bourgeois revolution!)
We thus observe that on both the political and economic fields Fascism stands for the maximum concentration of power. Politically, it suppresses every possibility of independent activity: the individual is completely dominated by the State, and the State itself is the simple tool of the Party, which in its turn, is summarised and summed up in the ‘Man of Destiny’, the Duce – Führer. Thus, concentration of Power is the essence of Fascism. A smooth monolith which no hostile hand can grasp, to adopt the excellent metaphor of Daniel Guérin. All within the State, None against the State, None beyond the State. And, on the economic plane the same principle holds good. The Fascist State in its economic capacity as supreme monopolist, as the jealous guardian of Capital from both the revolts of Labour and the excesses of privately owned capital, is as jealous of ‘laisser faire’ on the economic field as of its concurrent Liberalism and Individualism on the field of politics. For, let us repeat again, Fascism is none other than capitalist society in a state of siege and under martial law, to prevent the overthrow of Capitalism either by revolution from below or, equally, by its own internal weaknesses.
It is, of course, precisely this fundamentally concentrated character that gives Fascism its peculiar power as the pre-eminent counter-revolutionary force of our era. For the whole crisis of our times lies of course, in the fundamental proposition that ‘the means of production’ have become organised and collectivist, whilst the means of ownership and exchange concurrently remain tied to the ‘anarchy’ of private ownership and to the chaos of the (unorganised) world market. It is this elementary disharmony that is tearing our civilisation up by the roots; and which not merely may, but must, make another Dark Age of Barbarism inevitable if it continues unchecked.
Fascist Totalitarianism gives a partial solution to this fundamental problem of our age. That is, it ‘solves’ the problem as far as it can be solved within the framework of the Capitalist System. It grafts as much organisation upon an unorganised bourgeois society as such a society can stand without thereby ceasing to be bourgeois. whilst altogether rejecting the ethics and Humanism of Socialism it borrows from it many of the externals of collectivism. If by ‘Socialism’ we mean merely collectivised Capital, then  ‘National Socialism’ is not un unjustified term, and the pundits of the Fabian Society should logically regard Hitler and Mussolini as bona fide socialists who have actually done what they have only talked about doing  –  indeed, to be fair, Bernard Shaw has actually styled Mussolini as a ‘socialist’  –  in return for which spiritual membership of the Fabian Society we understand that Italian socialists in Fascist gaols are given the priceless privilege of reading the works of Bernard Shaw. We do not know whether Mussolini has had time to prepare an Amharic version for the benefit of the ‘socialised’ natives of Ethiopia!
In all seriousness, however, Fascism carries off the counter-revolutionary palm in our age by the fundamental fact that it has borrowed from socialism all that is, so to speak, ‘borrowable’ by a regime that still remains within the framework of Capitalism and of class relationships. Again, if socialism be taken to mean simply the State as accumulator and ultimate owner of Capital  –  le voilà!  –  Mussolini and Hitler are the authentic heirs of Bakunin and of Marx; the false definition is pressed to its appropriately ridiculous conclusion.
It is, however, this masterly appropriation which stamps Fascism as a counter-revolutionary Creation of genius. For we have not forgotten that a counter-revolution must never be confused with simple reaction. On the contrary, let us repeat, it only defends defensible positions (see section one). In this respect, Fascism walks faithfully in the footsteps of its counter-revolutionary forerunners  –  mentioned above in our first section  –  in particular, of the Jesuits, those arch-masters of counter-revolution, who, as I have elsewhere shown, saved the Roman Catholic Church from an otherwise inevitable destruction in the era of the Reformation, by ‘reconciling’ the medieval Church with the rising capitalist economics and with the world-outlook of the bourgeois civilisation that arose at the Renaissance in the sixteenth century (see, ut supra, FA Ridley).
What Jesuitism was to Capitalism, that is Fascism to Socialism: a (Lamarckian) adaptation of a dying system to the irresistible new social forces of the era of power-production, so as, by yielding non-essentials, to preserve the essentials of the old.
Will it succeed in doing so? To form an opinion about its chances in this respect it is necessary to consider the problem of its future. First, however, we can usefully direct a glance at the future of Fascism in Britain.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Fascism: What Is It? F A Ridley 1941
V: The Future of Fascism
It will now, we hope, be clear from our preceding sections what are the main characteristics of Fascism, when considered generically as the sociology of the current counter-revolution staged by declining capitalism. Centralised capitalism, with a strong state in control, ‘Black Socialism’, in the excellent phrase of a recent American writer (Dwight Macdonald in the July-August Partisan Review). Its character as fundamentally counter-revolutionary is demonstrated by the fact that it imposes upon the unorganised ('laisser-faire’) capitalism of the Past that degree of collectivism without which no society can hope to adapt itself to politico-economic conceptions that were foreign to the liberal capitalism of the Past. From this we deduce both the character of Fascism as deliberate counter-revolution and also the falsity of the current conception in ‘Left’ circles that regards Fascism as reaction pure and simple. It is, we repeat, precisely because Fascism is not simply that, is not merely blank negation, that we must differentiate sharply between Mussolini, Hitler, and, say, mere political atavism embodied in the symbolical person of ‘Colonel Blimp’.
It is precisely because Fascism is not merely blind reaction that it is the deadly danger that it is: mere blind reaction would not last long in an age of headlong change such as ours. For the Socialist conception of the State as existing for the service of man and as progressively ‘withering away’, Fascism substitutes a State for which man exclusively exists, and which is an ‘end-in-itself’. In place of the State that ‘withers away’ we have a political regime in which everything ‘withers away’  –  except the State!
From the economic standpoint, Fascism substitutes for the economics of Free Trade, of individual competition, the economics of autarchy  –  an economic system analogous to the mercantile system of early capitalism. Instead of the individual capitalist as the accumulator of Capital with the State as his protector, the ‘total’ regime concentrates in the hands of the State itself the primary capitalist function of the accumulation of Capital. Even where it does not become the direct owner yet the Fascist State more and more becomes the rigorous supervisor and controller of the sum total of economic processes and of the fluctuations and oscillations of the Market. Indeed, whilst not entirely free to implement its desires in this respect, yet it is undeniable that Fascism dislikes the conception of the market and that it hankers after a ‘natural economy’ (that is, a system of barter without the intervention of money in the process of exchange). [7]
In fact, Fascism has two enemies: Socialism on the Left which would destroy it by Revolution; and Laisser Faire (Cobdenite Liberalism), the outmoded character of which would now be indubitably fatal to any Capitalist regime that still adhered to it. The character of Fascism as the scientific counter-revolution of the collectivist age is strikingly displayed in this fundamental antithesis.
When considered purely as a political regime Fascism stands for the fiercest and most frustrated Imperialism: for the practical supremacy of the military ‘virtues’, for ultimately a series of the most terrible wars for world supremacy. Neither moral order nor international law exist for the Fascist State considered as an ‘end-in-itself’, in the phraseology of the Kantian School. Only the conquest of the planet, or its agreed division with other Fascist Powers, could secure a lasting peace, other than an armistice, in a Fascist world. Incidentally we may add that, since Fascism is, according to our definition, the politics of a frustrated Imperialism, nothing short of a Social revolution can eliminate it. Its defeat, and consequent frustration, by a rival Imperialist power, merely strengthens it by definition.
From a consideration of this aspect of Fascism we obtain fresh and convincing light on the futility  –  and worse  –  of those who are just now vehemently urging us to support a rival Imperialism against Germany and Italy, on the ground that a war of such a kind is a war ‘against Fascism’. Let these pundits propound to themselves this simple question: by the last (1914-1918) victory of ‘Democracy’ (read  –  British, French and American Imperialism) over Germany ('Prussian militarism’) was not Germany ‘frustrated’ to the point of Fascism? And will not further frustration result in super-Fascism by the same logic inherent in the soil itself of declining Capitalism? To remove Fascism in perpetuity nothing less than an earthquake is necessary  –  the Social Revolution! And nothing else will do the trick. Whosoever says that any alternative exists, misleads and betrays the Workers.
From the standpoint of human culture Fascism spells decay, infallibly ending in ruin. To prove this, it only needs to repeat this equation: creative instincts constitute the life-blood of culture; freedom is absolutely essential to the rise and to the free play of creativeness in all its manifold forms. Fascism is the death of Freedom; for no species of the counter-revolution could coexist with Freedom for long; not even Fascism of the veiled ‘gentlemanly’ type. Freedom would soon damage the system and bring it to an abrupt end. With the Western World thus stifled and devitalised, the history of European civilisation would be over. Only a stagnant, purely defensive and preservative civilisation; only a ‘Byzantine’ culture  –  in the worst sense of that term  –  could hope to survive as such in an arid Sahara of the soul. With thought in chains, and without that freedom which all history proves to be the Siamese Twin of Progress, only disintegration and death could follow in a society with its back forever turned upon the Future. For the Renaissance of European culture, no less than for economic and political resurrection, there is now only one Aladdin’s password: it consists of two words: World Revolution!
Lastly we must ask this final question: what is the future of Fascism? Evidently a bright one as long as capitalism has any future at all. For in an age of counter-revolution, the ‘law’ of ‘the survival of the fittest’ holds good: more ‘scientific’ forms of counter-revolution will ultimately defeat less. And Fascism is, we repeat, the counter-revolution of our era. The name may vanish, particularly if the Fascist Empire lose the present war; and various individual features may either be modified, or even totally disappear. Nonetheless, if capitalism continues, Fascism  –  in its essence at least  –  must continue amid the growing inevitable frustration of Imperialism and Capitalism, to gain both on Reformism and on rival, less developed types of counter-revolution. Could Fascism stabilise itself over a whole historical epoch, ‘modern’ civilisation, like its classical predecessor, would end in what the proto-fascist Oswald Spengler has styled ‘the [renewed] Age of the Caesars’. In an all-powerful military and bureaucratic ‘étatisme’ presiding over a stagnant social order, in which the creative sap of life had dried up, and from which all life and movement had departed, such was the last ‘Byzantine’ phase of Classical Antiquity: such, if Fascism wins, will be the last phase of ours. If Fascism were to win out, the most probable result would be a series of wars leading ultimately to a Dark Age. If one Fascist Empire were strong enough to crush its competitors a (world) ‘Byzantine’ despotism could arise.
Will Fascism win? Prophecy is alien to our scope, but it is very unlikely that it will. For Ancient Society rested on a virtually unchanging foundation; whilst ours rests on a foundation of ceaseless and headlong change. Unless Fascism can destroy the technical foundations of society, its stagnant superstructure can scarcely endure  –  and, we may add, its perennial necessity for technical efficiency in war makes this task virtually impossible. ‘The (New) Roman Empire’ is therefore unlikely to endure as many decades even as the old did centuries.
What will succeed it? If Fascism fails to endure, there will be no possibility of return to (bourgeois) Democracy. That social phase is finished for ever. Only the Social Revolution can succeed it: only the end of class society and of the present age of human adolescence, and the permanent substitution of the struggle of man versus nature for that of man versus man. To Fascism, the quintessence of stagnation, succeeds socialism: history as a continual dialectic: society in continuous evolution, freed from class struggles and consequent retrogression: moving forward in a straight continuous line to ever wider domination over the forces of Nature: Man, the King of the Universe!
A final point! As Fascism, the last phase of class society, concentrates all power in the hands of the national State so the struggle for human emancipation  –  the Social Revolution in its widest sense  –  is henceforth inseparably bound up with the substitution of Freedom for Authority: with the struggle against the national State.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Fascism: What Is It? F A Ridley 1941
IV: Fascism in England
Everyone knows the celebrated description of snakes in Ireland: ‘There are no snakes in Ireland.’ The same is broadly true of Fascism in Britain, at least, if and when considered as a serious political force. Indeed, it is obvious from our preliminary definition that this must be so. For, if Fascism is correctly described as, in its origins, ‘the politics of frustrated Imperialism’, then Britain, the most successful imperialist country in the entire course of (modern) history is the least likely country of all to go Fascist: the fact that this has been actually so lends additional weight to our definition and strikingly confirms its truth.
Indeed, the record of Fascism in Britain has been one of dismal futility embodied in a number of powerless groups, only one of which, Sir Oswald Mosley and his (self-styled) ‘British Union of Fascists’ (founded in 1932) is even known by name to the general public: the successive election polls of the BUF served to reveal its farcical weakness, and as soon as the British government struck, under war conditions, it simply petered out.
We have already seen what was the fundamental reason for this, viz, the tremendous strength of the British Empire and the still immense political and economic power enjoyed by the British ruling class as a result of the world power of British Capital. Whilst the property-owners are massed in serried ranks in the Tory Party around the financial oligarchy which rules the Empire from the ‘City’, and equally, whilst the forces of Labour are ranked just as firmly behind a reformist party, the sole real purpose of which is to fight the party of Capital for a bigger share of the profits derived (ultimately) from the ruthless exploitation of Britain’s still ubiquitous world empire: whilst such basic conditions dominate British economy, we need not expect the appearance of any considerable Fascist Party. For the indispensable preliminary conditions for Fascism as traced by us above, viz, political and economic frustration and loss of confidence by both Capital and labour  –  are simply non-existent. Until wholly different conditions appear, it can be confidently predicted that Fascism in Britain will resemble the snakes in Ireland!
(NB: This, of course, is the fundamental cause for the hitherto complete failure of Fascism to spread in this country. We need not trouble to enumerate all the secondary causes; merely remarking that Mosley is far from being a great demagogue; a Mussolini or a Hitler, perhaps because an aristocrat born in the purple, as Mosley is, cannot ‘get over’ to the masses in their own language, like his continental masters. The best demagogues spring from the masses to whom they appeal. A still more serious handicap is to be found in the fact that British Fascism, a vehemently nationalist movement by definition, is yet allied in the popular imagination at least, with the present national enemies, that is, Germany and Italy, those ‘frustrated Imperialisms’ which can only obtain their ‘living space’ at the expense of the British Empire. This fact alone would probably be enough to damn Mosley and his movement. The other Fascist groups are simply not worth talking about.)
The Past of Fascism in Great Britain is then represented by a nought. Will this also apply to its Future? It will be obvious from what has been said above, that this depends entirely on one thing: the duration of the British Empire; of the World Power of British Capital taken in its ultimate sense. The only real bullet-proof safeguard against the rise in Britain of Fascist movements  –  that is, of movements that are Fascist in fact if not in name  –  would be the immortality and eternity of the British Empire.
What are the chances of such an immortality, let alone eternity? In actual fact, such a supposition is precarious in the extreme just at present, almost farcically so. It would indeed be distinctly hazardous to wager that the duration of the Empire will survive this century  –  or, perhaps, even this decade. The current tides of history now run as strongly against the British Empire, and the British World Power as a century ago, they ran with it.
Assuming then that the British Empire will decline, perhaps even fall, in the proximate future, what then would be the chances of Fascism in Britain? Obviously, excellent! (I speak of course of the thing, not the name  –  to be sure, in their own imperialist interests, the British ruling class is, at present, throwing so much mud at the name of Fascism that enough of it will stick to damn it for some time to come: but ‘names are not things ‘  –  the City of London knows this as well as anyone else. The philosophy of the British ruling-class has always been ‘nominalist’ to the core!)
Why ‘excellent’ it may be asked? Obviously because the collapse of British World Power would be the greatest frustration of all; and from this most frustrated of all imperialisms would come the most vicious of Fascisms. To be sure, we cannot tell how vicious, until the hordes of Britain’s thugs and Imperialist ‘strong-armed heroes’ are dumped back on her shores by the collapse of her Empire and with it, of her ‘colonial’ Fascism abroad.
But all this, even if eventually probable to the point of certainty, belongs to the Future. And the Future is not in a position to correct our proofs! It cannot, in any case, be mapped with certainty. We will therefore refrain from plunging into the Future, and will content ourselves with observing that an effective British Fascist Party is not yet in sight: to turn one of our existing (bourgeois) democratic parties into such would be impossible: ‘the leopard does not change his spots’  –  democracy and fascism, products respectively of capitalist maturity and decay, are absolutely distinct and sui generis: one cannot conceivably ‘evolve’ into the other. Fascism, at all times and places, is simply  –  Fascist!
Finally we may note that a learned astrologer in the course of his stellar survey has stumbled  –  in a remote corner of the heavens?  –  upon what may well prove an important sociological truth relating to this earth, and to the British Empire, in particular. In reference to Mr Bevin, the British Labour Party’s ‘last hope’ he recently assured us that this eminent reformist would surely be ‘Labour’s next  –  and last?  –  Prime Minister’. And, so he goes on to assure us, would be immediately succeeded by ‘The Man of Destiny’.
We do not know whether the stars have enlightened Mr Naylor [6] as to the exact connotation of this term ill the current sociology of the counter-revolution. But we are duly grateful to Mars  –  or was it Minerva?  –  for this only too likely prognosis. For it is not at all impossible that the fall of the World Power of British Capital, and, concurrently, of its parasitic Labour Party  –  ‘the junior partner of British Imperialism’ as I have elsewhere termed it  –  may indeed prove the harbinger of a real British Fascism. If so, the British reformists, of whom Bevin is the outstanding current example, will have done as much as did their Italian and German brethren to hand over the workers politically blind, gagged and mentally doped, to be crushed under the juggernaut car of the Man of Destiny and his fascist hordes.
However, we can console ourselves in this connection with the old medieval aphorism  –  itself doubtless the fruit of much bitter experience  –  ‘The stars cannot, indeed, lie, but the astrologers can.’ The same general sociological causes that can bring about Fascism quicker and fiercer in a declining Britain than anywhere else, can equally bring its antithesis  –  Revolution!  –  also quicker and fiercer than anywhere else, transforming Britain herself in the process from the least to the most revolutionary country in the world. Certainly, the decline of the British Empire particularly, if catastrophic, will posit sharply before the workers the only remaining alternative: Fascism or the Social Revolution.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Fascism: What Is It? F A Ridley 1941
Notes
1. The founder of the Jesuit Order. See FA Ridley, The Jesuits: A Study in Counter-Revolution (London, 1938).
2. Colonel Blimp was a cartoon character in Britain, an unimaginative military officer whose hidebound way of working stifled efficiency. He became a symbol of those unable to break from obsolete traditions and bureaucratic practices. [MIA note].
3. German industrialist and original backer of Fascism. Thälmann: leader of German Communist Party.
4. Rajani Palme Dutt, Fascism and Social Revolution (Martin Lawrence, London, 1934); Daniel Guérin, Fascism and Big Business (Pioneer, New York, 1939) [MIA note].
5. Ernst Henri, Hitler Over Europe (Dent, London, 1934); the actual name of the author was Simon Rostovsky [MIA note].
6. A reference to Richard Harold Naylor, who started the first regular horoscope column in Britain, in the Daily Express in 1930. Entitled ‘What the Stars Foretell’, it proved extremely popular, and paved the way for similar columns in other newspapers [MIA note].
7. Already the Nazi leaders assure us that their ‘New Order’ will be based on ‘Labour’  –  viz, a natural economy of barter  –  and not on gold.
 


Table of Contents




m: What Is It? by F A Ridley 1941


Fascism: What Is It? F A Ridley 1941
II: The Rise of Fascism
Modern capitalist society, like its historic prototype, the (slave) ‘capitalism’ of classical antiquity, has known successively, the three main phases of rise, meridian and decline characterised respectively by revolutionary dictatorships, by Democracy, and by ‘totalitarian’ dictatorships in its decline. Speaking generally, the era of bourgeois Democracy represented the maturity of the capitalist system, and was, as such, broadly equivalent to the nineteenth century. It began with the French Revolution (1789-94) and ended in 1914, the date of the First World (Imperialist) War, the year One of the Decline of Capitalism.
The World War revealed to the Capitalist civilisation its own doom approaching on the historic horizon. The Russian Revolution dotted the I’s and crossed the T’s of this historic warning. Whatever the subsequent betrayals blunders and crimes that we associate with the Bolshevik Revolution and with the Third International which it sponsored, it must be conceded that the Russian Revolution frightened the international bourgeoisie out of its wits: in fairness we must grant it this negative virtue, at least. (If ‘Communism’ (Russian variety) still frightens our ‘Blimps’ into apoplexy, their fear, like their outlook in general, is an echo from the past! For them 1917 is still a contemporary date!)
The classic era of Bolshevism, both national and international, dated from 1917 to 1927  –  from the November Revolution to the Fall of Trotsky, the last great champion of ‘permanent’ Revolution. This decade also represented the high water-mark of bourgeois ‘democracy’ in Europe. An Indian Summer, inaugurated by the defeat of semi-feudal ‘Prussian Militarism’ in 1918. Now, sociologically speaking, Democracy expresses capitalist society in its prime; the voluntary union of the classes under the leadership of the capitalist class as the most dynamic and progressive class in the current historic era. Such a society is, by its very nature, incapable of counter-revolution, which belongs, necessarily and by its very nature, to a different social phase, to a society in decay. Hence, by an imperative social ‘law’ a democratic capitalism is incapable of learning ‘the Lessons of October’. Against a determined revolution it is helpless, once granted a genuine revolutionary situation.
A social order, however, like an individual species, does not commit suicide voluntarily. It never has done, and never will do. When it senses its approaching dissolution on the horizon of history it ‘suffers a sea-change’ from maturity to decay. It seeks for the arts of counter-revolution: it resolves itself into a society suitable for their application.
The ‘October’ Revolution led by Lenin, took place in Russia. The ‘October’ counter-revolution, led by Mussolini, took place in Italy, a backward, poverty-stricken, still largely disunited country, swindled out of its promised share of war-spoils at Versailles by its allies in the world war, England and France; and with a labour movement bitterly divided by fiercely competing rival sections of communists, anarchists, syndicalists and (parliamentary) socialists. On 30 October 1922, Mussolini staged his ‘March on Rome’ (the Blackshirts, that is, marched, whilst their Duce, like the Duke of Plaza Toro of Gilbertian fame, ‘led his army from behind’  –  on the cushions of a Pullman express car!).
30 October 1922, the date when the Italian ruling classes voluntarily handed over power to the ex-socialist, to the blacksmith’s son, Benito Mussolini, may be styled the birthday of Fascism in Europe; the birthday of the European counter-revolution; the moment at which capitalist society passed consciously from its meridian to its decay.
(NB: It is not necessary for me to encroach upon my limited space in order to describe the earlier career of Mussolini and his movement. Mussolini himself an ex-socialist, originally a disciple of the revolutionary school of Georges Sorel, ‘sold out’ to the Italian bourgeoisie during the world war. He founded the Fascist Party early in 1919, but at first it made so little headway, that in the Autumn of 1920 when the Italian workers forcibly occupied the factories, Mussolini dared not oppose them: it was this event that caused the frightened Italian bourgeoisie to ‘discover’ in the Duce and his Blackshirts a corps of useful mercenaries, and it was their fear only that transformed this hitherto insignificant politician into the Italian Dictator. I may add that the name ‘Fascist’  –  from the ‘Fasces’  –  the lictor’s rods of Classical Antiquity  –  was not invented by Mussolini, but had been used in Sicily as far back as the nineteenth century.)
Thus, the first phase of the Fascist Counter-Revolution took place in Italy. Between 1922, when Fascism formed a coalition in conjunction with other parties, to 1923, when the ‘Law of Corporations’ made the Fascist regime absolute, and installed the (so-called) ‘Corporative State’, Italy was transformed into a fully-fledged one-party State. Fascism had ‘arrived’ in a major European State; which henceforth abrogated all the freedom that capitalist Democracy had won in its hard-fought struggles with the relics of medieval absolutism. Thereafter, Italy was a counter-revolutionary State: that is, a State in a permanent state of siege; governed primarily with the object of preventing revolution. For this is the generic character of any and every Fascist State.
The first phase of the World Revolution was, we repeat, constituted by the Bolshevik Revolution. The first phase of the counter-revolution, that inaugurated by Italian Fascism between 1922 and 1928, represented the political answer to this Revolution: its dialectical negative. But the precedent (dialectical) positive did not prove permanent. From 1928 on the Russian Revolution, under the leadership of Stalin, became more and more nationalistic and bureaucratic: as for the Third International, it retrogressively deteriorated into ‘the subordinate branch of the Russian Foreign Office’ that it has since become.
Consequently as the danger of revolution diminished, so did counter-revolution become increasingly unnecessary. Hence Italian Fascism remained isolated as a governmental regime: for, despite the terrified bleatings of (ex) ‘Popular Fronters’ and other pseudo-socialist ‘intellectuals’, the bourgeoisie don’t resort to Fascism, to the permanent counter-revolution, merely for the fun of the thing; nor indeed is it in their power to do so without the psychological creation for a mass basis, which the ruling class cannot conjure up at will apart from suitable conditions (see infra  –  next section).
Hence, as Bolshevism, the positive pole, stagnated, so, concurrently did Fascism, its negative pole. So much so in fact, that Mussolini had to make a virtue of necessity and declare publicly that ‘Fascism is not an article of export ‘! Indeed, since Fascism must always, by its very nature, be ‘counter’ something or other, the Duce, having no communists in sight to fight, was forced to stage ‘the battle of wheat’, to employ castor oil against the unyielding macaroni stalks!
From this painful dilemma and the isolation that was its compelling cause, Il Duce del Fascismo was rescued by the World Crisis of 1929-33, which, so great was its severity, may be styled as the second stage in the decline of Capitalism; as 1917 had been the first. It is a matter of common knowledge that, as Mussolini and Italian Fascism were the product of the first, so Hitler and German Fascism ('National Socialism’) were the direct outcome of the second phase in the decline of Capitalism: only this time its originating cause was the economic contradiction inherent in the outmoded system, and not (unfortunately) any actual political revolution against it. With Hitler and the advent of the Third Reich Fascism ceased to be an article unsuitable for export. The Fascist ‘Axis’ was formed, and at the moment of writing (January 1941), dominates Europe.
Nonetheless, whilst (genuine) Fascist parties exist from Bolivia to  –  Brixton!  –  yet we resolutely reject the current practice of styling anything and everything as ‘Fascist’. To date, Fascism properly so-called exists in two countries only, Italy and Germany. Spain?  –  a clerical-militarist dictatorship of a traditional Spanish type, bolstered up by foreign bayonets  –  which happen to be those of Fascist Powers. France?  –  the regime of the old dodderer Pétain, is not Fascism spontaneously evolved, but a decrepit military dictatorship; ‘a senile Bonapartism’, to recall the excellent definition of Trotsky in one of his last articles. Norway, Belgium, Rumania, etc, etc? thinly veiled military colonies of Germany. The Russia of Stalin? a Totalitarian State certainly, but not Fascism  –  (see next section) , Japan? a medieval Theocracy in form; a military dictatorship, pursuing most un-medieval policies of Imperialism, in substance. It is unnecessary to mention the ‘Democratic’ States of the West.
Hence, the investigation into the nature of Fascism that we are about to undertake is still an analysis, solely, of the German and Italian counter-revolutionary States.
 


Table of Contents



aphical Note on F A Ridley 


Biographical Note on F A Ridley 
Source: Dust-cover of his Spartacus: The Leader of the Roman Slaves.
Born in February 1897  –  the year of Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee!  –  F A Ridley failed the entrance examination to Oxford University and so joined Gibbon and Shelley in the ranks of the illustrious refugees from that institution. Subsequently, he received a theological education, which laid the foundations of his encyclopædic knowledge of Catholic theology and church history.
After a short experience of business in the City of London, which left him with a lifelong conviction that all capitalists are crooks (actual or potential), F A Ridley settled down to his life work as a professional revolutionary.
In the course of this work, he has debated with Harold Macmillan; helped in founding the Trotskyist movement, to be eventually excommunicated by Trotsky in person; and was mentioned by name in the Nazis’ English Death List of 1940.
A one-time member of the National Administrative Council of the Independent Labour Party, he was until recently President of the National Secular Society, fourth in succession to Charles Bradlaugh.
F A Ridley, at 65, with 20 publications in the British Museum Library and some 2000 articles to his credit, mostly in the Freethinker and the Socialist Leader, is now on the threshold of a long and brilliant career, in the course of which he hopes to see translated into fact the multifarious advanced causes which he has championed in (comparative) obscurity for a generation.
Perhaps it should be added that F A Ridley started his literary career as a pioneer of science fiction!
 


F A Ridley Archive




man Catholic Church and the Modern Age. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1940


Francis Ambrose Ridley 1940
The Roman Catholic Church and the Modern Age
Source: Pamphlet published in 1958 by Freedom Press, 27 Red Lion Street, London WC1; previous editions published in 1940 (in War Commentary), 1946 and 1948. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
Publisher’s Note
In this pamphlet, which was first published in War Commentary in 1940, FA Ridley clearly and concisely shows the development of the Roman Catholic Church throughout the ages. From this study he is able to reach conclusions as to the present and future policy of the Papacy which are of the greatest importance for socialist and revolutionary ideas, especially in this postwar period of social flux and conflict. The publishers reissue the pamphlet now, not only because of the intrinsic importance of the matters with which it deals; but still more because there is a tendency on the part of the socialist and rationalist movements to regard the Roman Catholic Church as a merely obscurantist opponent of advanced ideas. They ignore its essentially political nature, despite the evident sympathy and concrete support which it has shown for movements of political reaction during the era of developing fascism. It is of the utmost importance that persons and movements concerned with social change should evaluate the role of the Roman Catholic Church correctly. For if they fail to do so, they will be ignoring a most powerful enemy wielding international influence and equipped with age-long experience. This pamphlet, written by one who is an acknowledged authority, both on the Roman Church and on revolutionary history, is of the first importance and fills a long-felt need.
* * *
In 1651, the English political philosopher Thomas Hobbes, the champion of the absolute monarchies then rising upon the ruins of mediæval society, wrote in his Leviathan: ‘The Papacy is the ghost of the Roman Empire sitting crowned upon the grave thereof.’ About two centuries later, Jules Michelet, the historian of the French Revolution and the apologist of the rising bourgeoisie in its struggle with the last remnants of the bureaucratic absolutism, wrote apropos of the Jesuits, the all-powerful advisers of the Papacy since the Reformation: ‘If you stop the first man in the street and ask him, “What are the Jesuits?,” he will reply without hesitation, “The Counter-Revolution."’ Neither remark, one can add, has been in any way invalidated by the passage of time.
The historical role of the Roman Catholic Church, ‘the Black International’, is, indeed, adequately summarised in the broadest historical perspective by the two observations quoted above. As the spiritual and, in time, temporal successor of the Roman Empire, the Roman Church and See dominated mediæval society as the last and most impressive construction of the vanished civilisation of antiquity; a civilisation that appeared to the semi-barbarians of the Dark Ages as the magical creation of a fabulous race of giants, the mighty men of old. (So far was the Roman Catholic Church from being the creation of feudalism, as is sometimes erroneously stated, that it appealed to the barbarians precisely because of its Roman character, and because above all of its unity, in a glaring contradistinction to the endemic divisions of feudal society. A modern theologian, Ernst Troeltsch, has aptly characterised the Roman Church as ‘the last creative masterpiece of classical antiquity’.) Nevertheless, as the millennial Master of Mediæval Society, the Church was constrained to offer to rising capitalism an energetic opposition; in the era between the Protestant Reformation and the French Revolution, the Roman Church led by the Jesuits represented perhaps the most powerful single force opposed to the rising commercial classes and to the novel social economic order. In the course of its opposition, the Papacy by no means confined itself to the use of propaganda of a purely religious or cultural character; even its persecutions had a social character. It burned Giordano Bruno, et al, and forcibly silenced Galileo on account of discoveries in astronomy and navigation which directly forwarded the march of the bourgeoisie towards world power, by the impetus which these discoveries gave to navigation, the art of capitalist world expansion and to artillery, the chief weapon of the city burgesses in their military conflict with the feudal cavalry and castles, hitherto invincible and impregnable when judged by the standards of military art, off-set by the warfare of the Middle Ages. 
Concurrently with these acts of social suppression under a religious guise, the Jesuit order  –  founded by Ignatius Loyola (1534 – 40) and organised on Mahommedan models supplied by the Dervish orders of Moorish Spain  –  supplied a demagogy in which it still remains as the unrivalled specialist in counter-revolution.
 With merely the most grudging concessions to the spirit of the new age, the Vatican remained as the Chinese Wall of anti-modern, anti-liberal, anti-capitalist reaction from the mid-sixteenth century, the era of the Catholic Counter-Reformation, down to the closing years of the nineteenth century.
The Roman Church and the Jesuit order have had many enemies, and have had many hard things said about them. One thing, however, is hardly open to dispute; the political flexibility, adaptability and Machiavellian political genius of both Popes, the ‘White’ and the ‘Black’, is a phenomenon without equal in recorded human annals. Whatever may be thought of their knowledge of the next world, there is very little that escapes the Papacy and its Jesuit advisers in this one! The late nineteenth century witnessed yet another example of this brilliant flair for political flexibility which has won for the Catholic Church its well-deserved soubriquet as ‘the very masterpiece of human polity’. The last years of the nineteenth century witnessed yet another chameleon-like change in that institution, whose vaunted motto yet remains ‘semper eadem’  –  ‘for ever the same’. (NB: The Pope wears white ceremonial robes, hence the term ‘White Pope’. The ‘Black Pope’ is the popular designation of the general of the Jesuits, so often the real ruler of the Church.)
Up to the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the Papacy, and wherever possible the Jesuits, presented to rising capitalism and to the political ambitions of the bourgeois liberals a face of flint. In the Jesuit-ruled dominions of ‘the very Catholic’ King of Spain, people were burned alive for heresy by the Inquisition right up to the eve of the French Revolution, and not until the nineteenth century had passed its middle years did the barest religious and cultural toleration exist in Spain. In Rome, the heliocentric theory of Copernicus remained on the Index until 1832, and the Popes of the Restoration period (1814 – 48) prohibited street-lamps, railways and gas, as savouring unduly of the accursed heresies of revolution and ‘liberalism’. In an age of such headlong change as was the nineteenth century, such cast-iron conservatism appeared even to friendly critics such as Chateaubriand and Gladstone to be the road to the abyss. The extinction of the venerable theocratic dynasty appeared to be imminent, and ‘the end of an auld song’, the definitive exit of the Papacy from the historic stage, was freely anticipated towards the middle of the nineteenth century.
In his remarkable essay on the Papacy (1840), Lord Macaulay had already drawn attention to the phenomenal power of adaptability which the Papacy has never failed to display when confronted by a world in continual change. The latter half of the nineteenth century witnessed, yet again, a fresh manifestation of that genius for continuous evolution which coexists in so remarkable a manner with that theological conservatism denoted by the age-long motto of the Roman See, ‘semper eadem’. For, beginning with the decree of Papal Infallibility inaugurated by the arch-reactionary Pius the Ninth (1846 – 78) on 18 July 1870, a silent but very remarkable revolution has effectually transformed the social policy and aims of the Roman Catholic Church so as to dissociate it entirely from decrepit feudalism, yet without identifying it altogether with the now dominant capitalist system. This social counter-revolution, for such in effect it is, constitutes at one and the same time both one of the most remarkable proofs of the political genius endemic to the Church of Rome, and one of the most important social facts of the present (twentieth) century; it is, indeed, only in our time that its full fruits have become apparent; and are not, even yet, at all adequately grasped by the advanced movements of our time; an evolution that a century ago would have appeared absolutely incredible in connection with the apparently moribund Papacy of that day. On the course and effects of this new ‘counter-reformation’ which has resurrected the Papacy as a great power, and has restored the Catholic Church to a role of independent volition in political and social affairs, I now propose to glance in the remaining portion of this pamphlet.
The history of the Papacy reveals that the Vatican has learned, no doubt as a result of its experience, to keep its ear close to the ground and to discern the changes in popular interest. To learn the value of ideas, and the ideas especially of its enemies, from the reception popularly accorded to them, that technique the Papacy has made peculiarly its own. First to condemn ‘dangerous thought’, novel ideas, destructive of established tradition, and then to adopt the elements contained in such ideas, which elements have demonstrated their opportune and timely character, such is the approved Roman technique. The successors of St Peter and the self-professed disciples of Jesus have learned how to combine most aptly ‘the wisdom of the serpent’ with more worldly characteristics, and, if the See of Rome may be justly accused of neglecting much of the teaching of the New Testament, yet one Gospel aphorism, at least, it has never failed to observe: viz, that ‘the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light’. Again and again, the practice of the Vatican has demonstrated its entire familiarity with this evangelical axiom.
The new social policy of the Roman Catholic Church was first proclaimed by a daring French cleric, the Abbé Lamennais (1783 – 1854) who in the years immediately following the fall of Napoleon  –  he was ordained priest in 1816  –  boldly proclaimed the alliance of the Church and the new democracies then recently unloosed by the French Revolution and its European offspring. Lamennais was, beyond a doubt, one of the most remarkable men known to the world of the early nineteenth century; he was at one and the same time the founder of Catholic democracy, and of the ultra-montane highly-centralised Papacy of the later nineteenth century. His plan, set out with striking eloquence and logic in numerous writings, may be summarised as a democratic theocracy, in which the Church led the masses against the classes. Lamennais, in short, baptised the French Revolution: he sought to universalise the democratic revolution under the leadership of the Roman Theocracy. At a time when Catholicism still linked its destiny with that of the Holy Alliance and the Legitimism of the European Reaction, such an idea was revolutionary in the extreme. (The Jesuits had, it is true, flirted with democratic ideas in the sixteenth century, striving to use the people as a counterpoise to heretical or lukewarm governments. But such a policy was limited exclusively to countries that had relapsed, or were about to relapse, from Rome. In relation to approved Catholic states, such as Austria and Spain, absolute monarchy had no more devoted henchmen than were the Jesuits, from the era of Charles V to that of the last King of Spain, Alfonso XIII  –  cf R Roeder, Catherine de Medici and the Lost Revolution, and the present writer’s book The Jesuits: A Study in Counter-Revolution.)
The revolutionary ideas of Lamennais proved, however, too advanced for the reactionary Pope who reigned in the generation of the Restoration. In 1832, Gregory XVI (1831 – 46) condemned L'Avenir (The Future), the organ of the new ideas, and in 1834 the appearance of Lamennais’ famous book Paroles d'un Croyant (Words of a Believer) marked the disappointed reformer’s final breach with his conservative Church. (’small in size, but immense in its perversity’  –  so the Pope described the book!) Ultimately the most influential thinker of modern Catholicism took part in the social revolution of 1848, and a procession of communists and revolutionaries escorted to a nameless grave in Paris the remains of the ex-cardinal of the Holy Roman Church. Nonetheless, it has been the ideas of Lamennais to which the social evolution of modern Catholicism have been in the main due. The Church which condemned him, as it had previously condemned Galileo, was yet to learn from his ideas. Lamennais is the father of ‘Catholic Action’. From his nameless tomb in Père Lachaise cemetery his ideas rule the Church which rejected them in his lifetime. It is not the first time in Church history that orthodoxy has known how to learn from heretics!
Lamennais had put forward two dominant ideas: the absolute monarchy of the Papacy over the Church, and the creation of a Catholic democracy based not upon rulers, but upon the people. Gregory XVI had rejected these ideas, but the two Popes who were his immediate successors carried them into effect. Pius IX (1846 – 78) realised the first, Leo XIII (1878 – 1903) made a beginning, at least, of the second and more daring conception of Lamennais.
On 18 July 1870, the Infallibility of the Pope was solemnly proclaimed by the Vatican Council. Henceforth General Councils, the clerical equivalent of the parliamentary system in secular states, became superfluous. Henceforth, it was the Pope alone whose fiat, once delivered ‘on faith and morals’, could neither be questioned nor modified, in virtue of his ‘infallibility’. As Pius IX remarked with a perhaps unconscious profundity, ‘I am Tradition’, the ecclesiastical equivalent of ‘l'état c'est moi’. In place of the ‘dead hand’ of the General Council, only called at intervals of centuries, it was henceforth the living Pope who ruled alone. Before the Vatican Council of 1869 – 70, there had been no General Council since the Council of Trent in 1549 – 64.
The social, as distinct from the theological, character of the Decree of Infallibility has been universally misunderstood by Protestant and rationalistic historians. Far from being a reactionary weapon, it was a revolutionary move on the part of the Papacy. The Councils of the past are dead, but the Pope lives and can move with the times! The modern social policy of the Popes, in particular, cannot rightly be understood apart from it. Lamennais, the original author of the Papal Revolution of the nineteenth century, had grasped with the glance of genius the indispensable connection between Papal supremacy and a new social policy to meet the needs of the coming age. So radical an innovation upon its reactionary past did the idea of Catholic democracy constitute in the evolution of the great conservative Church, that only an ‘infallible’ Papacy could hope to carry it through. Rightly understood, the Decree of 18 July 1870 is a revolutionary and not a reactionary measure, whatever may have been the conscious intention of its framers.
In this connection I have written elsewhere: 
But in the doctrine of the infallibility of the living and changing Pope she [the Church] has an unrivalled instrument for going forward as well as back! Attention has generally been drawn to the reactionary nature of this doctrine, but unless we greatly err, Rome will know how to go forward with this unrivalled instrument for ‘liquidating the dead hand’ of the past for the development of doctrine and morals, and for adapting Romanisin to tasks and problems which lay beyond the limited horizon of the Middle Ages. The Vatican Council of apparent reactionaries who decreed this dogma in 1870 provided the Church with a superb evolutionary weapon, equally adapted to reactionary or progressive purposes. (FA Ridley, The Papacy and Fascism, p 120)
Pius IX thus realised the first part of Lamennais’ programme, the unchecked absolutism of the Pope over the Church; the establishment in perpetuity of the ‘Leader’ principle in the Church, with power to nullify the dead hand of the outmoded past. Under her Papal leader, and guided by his ‘infallible’ judgement, the Church is free to move forward. Under the successor of Pius, Leo XIII, she did actually move forward. Under the guidance of this great political strategist, the Roman Catholic Church finally quitted the Middle Ages and evolved those modern principles of social strategy to which she still adheres. If Pius IX had realised the first part of the programme of M de Lamennais, that premature ‘voice crying in the wilderness’ who was yet the effective father of Modern Catholicism, Leo XIII embarked upon the second and more revolutionary part of his policy. He began the creation of a ‘unity of theory and practice’, of ‘Catholic Action’, and Catholic social philosophy which  –  and herein lay its revolutionary character  –  took as its starting point the modern-capitalist, and not the mediæval-feudal age. Not only did the Earth move, as Galileo had made evident despite his clerical persecutors, but the time had come for the Church which had condemned Galileo to move as well!
Leo XIII was beyond doubt one of the ablest and most far-seeing politicians who have arisen from the long line of sovereign Pontiffs. He was a political genius who vied with Disraeli as the greatest tactician of the nineteenth century; the social strategy of modern Catholicism dates from this great ecclesiastical statesman. Under his far-seeing leadership, the Church quitted its mediæval moorings and steered into modern seas. In Leo’s numerous encyclicals on modern questions, the main principles which characterise the ‘Catholic Action’ of the twentieth century are already clearly manifest. In particular, in his masterpiece Rerum Novarum (15 May 1891), the Pope proclaimed in a clear and powerful manifesto the principles that were henceforth to govern the new, essentially modern policy of the Catholic Church in its relations with the world of secular affairs. Not for nothing has Leo’s most daring encyclical been styled ‘the Workers’ Charter’, for daring it indeed was, if one takes into account the background of reaction against which it arose: the atavistic Roman Court of the early nineteenth century. With the issue of this epoch-making encyclical, the Middle Ages at last ended in Rome. Henceforth, as far at least as its social tactics and strategy were concerned, the Roman Church was not merely in the New World, but was also of it. (NB: Leo’s encyclicals, the Rerum Novarum in particular, owed much to the remarkable school of Catholic sociologists, of whom Cardinal Manning in England, Archbishop Ketterler in Germany, and M le Play in Belgium were the leading representatives. These men, unlike their mediæval predecessors, were keenly alive to the necessity of ‘reconciling’ Roman Catholicism with the new industrial age, as a sine qua non for its survival in the capitalist era. Leo XIII himself, when Archbishop of Perugia, prior to his election as Pope, had himself expressed his sympathy with these new social tendencies (cf FG Nitti, Catholic Socialism, and GA Aldred, Socialism and the Pope).
In what, especially, consists the epoch-making character of Leo XIII’s social encyclicals and the policy of ‘Catholic Action’  –  to give it the name by which the Church today designates its social policy? Broadly, and when construed against the widest historical perspectives, one must affirm that, for the Papacy, it signified in the first place the acceptance of the capitalist world as the starting point of its public policy; it had finally definitively abandoned its former connection with the vanished world of mediæval times, which the Popes of the Restoration era had vainly sought to restore. Secondly, by offering its services as mediator between capital and labour, it put forward its claim to survive as the third great power in modern society; as a power independent alike of the two classes whose social conflicts made up the new era.
Last, but the reverse of least, the Papacy appealed directly to the masses, advertised its own claims as a more efficacious protector of the working class than were the socialists, whose materialistic philosophy of history it denounced, and whose revolutionary plans it repudiated, as superfluous and suicidal. In fact, Leo XIII adopted officially the ideas of Lamennais of alliance between the Papacy and the masses. Not for the first time in its history, the Roman Catholic Church condemned the innovator and then, when time had proved their value, adopted his ideas. The essence of the new Catholic social policy as conceived by Leo XIII, and as practised today by his successor, was that it seeks to exercise a balance of power in European society. It defends the subject classes against destruction by exploitation and the ruling class from revolution. As the ‘rejoicing third’ in modern class society, the Papacy takes its place in European society. It no longer acts as a mere ‘bailiff’s broker’ for the ruling classes; unlike the earlier Popes, it also recognises that the masses exist and also have rights to defend. Such are the essential principles of modern Catholic social politics. The Roman Church, contrary to many people’s opinion, has no hostility to collectivism as such, provided, of course, that it respects the ‘rights’ of the Church. After all, economic individualism was a Protestant, not a Catholic doctrine.
The successors of Leo XIII, in particular the late Pope Pius XI  –  a very able politician whom future historians may even compare to Leo, whose ‘best disciple’ he proved himself to be  –  have continued this policy of holding the political and economic balance between the great conflicting classes of modern society, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. In his encyclical Quadragesimo Anno (15 May 1931  –  that is, ‘in the fortieth year’ after the Rerum Novarum of 15 May 1891), Pius XI modernised in a lucid and comprehensive manner the social doctrines of Leo XIII. Nor did practice fail to keep step with theory during the dynamic administration of this remarkable Pope. The interest manifested by the late Head of the Church towards ‘Catholic Action’  –  that is, the building up of mass following for ecclesiastical policy  –  is generally known. The present Pope Pius XII may be expected to carry on this policy unchanged. For as Secretary of State under Pius XI, Eugenio Pacelli (Pius XII) was himself largely responsible for its operation.
A cataclysmic event, however, separates the reign and policy of the reigning Pope from that of his great predecessor, the author of Rerum Novarum. The World War of 1914 – 18 and the recent war have, as is now clear, in retrospect, an epochal significance far beyond their military character; they mark the definitive passage of capitalist civilisation from its meridian to its decay, the commencement of ‘The Decline and Fall’ of our ‘modern’ civilisation which arose in the era of the Renaissance and the Reformation. Oswald Spengler, the characteristic philosopher of ‘The Decadence of Europe’, has clearly demonstrated this basic cultural characteristic of our era in his Decline of the West. The ‘infallible’ Papacy knows its European history at least as well as its ‘faith and morals'! It has seen the West ‘decline’ before, and its present symptoms are accordingly familiar to the ancient Pontiff of the ‘Eternal City’. The present policy of the Vatican cannot be understood apart from this fundamental change in the contemporary zeitgeist.
One of the most acute critics of the Roman Court, the liberal historian Luigi Parini, has delivered this pregnant and far-seeing axiom on the permanent policy of the Popes (cf The Roman State, Volume 1, 1850, p 4): 
It is the peculiar nature of the Roman Court that it can acquiesce upon occasion, but never bends in mind before either violence or adverse fortune, and never forgets her claims through length of time.
In the light of this revealing dictum, it will be found illuminating to consider the present policy pursued by the Papacy amid the contemporary crisis of our dying civilisation.
The Papacy pursues today two concurrent policies: a long far-sighted one, and a short make-shift temporary one. The former is motivated, undoubtedly, by one fundamental consideration which is never absent from the mind of the oldest European dynasty: the tenacious political memory of the Vatican has never forgotten that it has ruled Europe before. Now that capitalism is in its death rattle and mankind awaits the coup de grâce of Western civilisation in a proximate world cataclysm, the Papacy foresees a time when a new Dark Age may supervene, as it supervened before after the Fall of Rome. In the fifth century the sceptre of Europe was vacant; Rome tamed the barbarians and plucked a millennial sceptre over Europe from its ruins. What was done once, can be done twice! Particularly by an institution which still repudiates evolution and adheres to the scholastic dogma of the ‘fixity of species’. We have not forgotten the considered judgement of Farini that the Papacy ‘never forgets her claim through length of time’, and, as time goes, the ‘totalitarian’ theocracy of the mediæval Popes is still quite recent. The Papacy, conceiving itself as ‘the pilgrim of eternity’, ‘Sub specie aeternitatis’, [1] has always taken but little account of time! ‘What has been, will be’ the Popes echo the refrain of ‘Koheleth’ (’the Preacher’  –  cf Ecclesiastes, Chapter I). What has been once, that also can come again; the days of Canossa can still recur.
Such is the long-term policy of the Papacy; Rome, which has survived ancient and mediæval, may also survive modern Europe  –  ‘semper eadem’  –  and rule again on the ‘ruins of empires’ as she ruled before. But the day for so grandiose an assertion of ‘The City of God’ has not yet come; the abyss before Europe is proximate, but is not yet actual. Rome today requires a short-term policy for the present era of capitalism. It is this policy that the Rome of Pius XII pursues today.
The nature of this policy can be summarised thus: it is to keep the throne of Western civilisation vacant, so that when the hour of dissolution strikes, Rome can mount to power. Two rivals today threaten this ascension. Revolutionary socialism would destroy the Church in the name of the Future. Tribal paganism, Fascist Cæsarism, would destroy it in the name of the Past. Hitler represented Nero, ‘the beast drunk with the blood of the Saints'; the pagan world and state on whose ruins Christianity arose. The Social Revolution even more dangerously represents a world in which there is ‘ni dieu ni maître’, and where consequently the Vatican becomes merely a museum, and the Pope only a relic of a prehistoric time.
The Papacy recognises these dangers only too well, and sets itself strenuously to combat them. At all costs the capitalist inheritance must not fall either to Communism or to Fascism; to the irreconcilable foes of the Church. Hence, it seeks to play off one against the other. When the Leninist International preached social revolution, the Pope backed Mussolini and Hitler. When, conversely, Hitler paganised Germany and the Stalinist International ‘defends religious freedom’ and, for this end, ‘holds out its hand’ to the Catholic Church, the representatives of the Vatican cautiously returned the proffered salute. At all costs, the dying liberal capitalism, the erstwhile ruler of Europe since the French Revolution, must not leave a successor strong enough to exclude the Roman Court from the succession. At all costs the road to power must be kept clear for the Triple Crown to enter upon its inheritance. Today, it is again Russia that is the danger.
The Papacy is today waiting; it is waiting for chaos, for barbarism, for a Europe from which its present-day rivals have disappeared. It waits for an age of chaos, an age of misery, knowing by long experience that ‘opposites are identical’ and that ages of misery can, yet again, become ‘ages of faith’. A new ‘Middle Age’ presents itself to the Papacy, which does not know the transforming power of the world  –  revolution. The revolutionary movements of our time will do well not to dismiss the Papacy as their ‘liberal’ predecessors of ‘The Age of Enlightenment’ but too often did, as a senile corpse too weary even to die!
They will find it incumbent upon them to recognise Rome as still a hopeful claimant for universal power. To the success of the world revolution a renewed Dark Age now presents itself as the sole realistic alternative at the rate at which we see a moribund civilisation now heading for the abyss. Its limited historical perspectives forbade antiquity to be renewed by revolution. Today such a revolutionary renewal is possible, but is far from being automatically certain. Without its victorious consummation, history may yet again repeat itself, and a new theocracy emerge from the scattered debris of our secular world. The revolutionary thought of our epoch grounded in an accurate perception of history must never make the mistake of regarding the Church of Rome as a mere sect or doctrine like any other. Contrarily, it was never more necessary than now to regard it as what it is in its innermost essence, a crafty and dangerous claimant for universal power, as ‘the ghost of the Roman Empire’ waiting amid the ruins of the dying bourgeois world for its hour of universal dominion to return.
Notes
1. Sub specie aeternitatis  –  Under the sight of eternity, that is, from the point of view of eternity; from Spinoza’s Ethics  –  MIA.
 


F A Ridley Archive




Lunar Voyages. Francis Ambrose Ridley 1977


Francis Ambrose Ridley 1977
Three Lunar Voyages
Source: Pamphlet published in 1981 by the Museum of Labour History, Limehouse Town Hall, London E14. The text was first published as ‘Early Speculations About Selene’, New World Antiquity, Volume 24, nos. 11 and 12, November and December 1977. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
Dedicated to CH Cleaver.
Preface
The extraordinary essay into the realms of science fiction by FA Ridley reveals a hidden, almost mystical side to our author. Well established as an historian and authority on political and ecclesiastical affairs  –  equally at home ‘in heaven as on earth’  –  FA has only twice ventured into the world of fantasy, science fiction. 
The first venture was in 1926 when he wrote The Green Machine  –  a much praised novel published by Noel Douglas  –  and this at the beginning of his formidable literary career. Now, at the zenith of his long, creative journey, we have this delightful Lunar essay. This essay has to be seen as the appetiser for the massive, as yet unpublished novel he has now completed: The Planet Beyond Pluto. We are confident that FA Ridley’s powerful intellect has yet more to offer his ever receptive and widening circle of readers and admirers!
Ellis S Hillman, Science Fiction Foundation
* * *
The earliest speculative work about the Moon, in reality a combination of fantasy and science fiction, was by Lucian of Samosata (120 – 185 AD), a Roman citizen, author of De Syria Dea, the best work on Baalbek. His True History, written about 170 AD, was a satire on the extravagant stories related by his contemporaries, intended to outdo them all. Whether Plutarch’s On the Apparent Face in the Moon’s Orb, written about 100 AD, is not really its predecessor, remains an open question. 
Part of the True History deserves to be classified as science fiction. This is where the narrator is suddenly snatched up by a whirlwind and thrown into a water spout that dumped him upon that ‘shining island’, the Moon. He arrived at an exciting moment in the political evolution of our satellite, when Endymion, King of the Moon, had just declared war upon Phaethon, King of the Sun. The objective of this war of the worlds has a curiously modern ring. The Lunar monarch, as he informed his terrestrial visitors, had ‘assembled all the poor people in my dominion, proposing to send a colony to inhabit Venus the Morning Star’, because it was entirely deserted. However, this laudable design of the Moon monarch to cure his economic depression by this planned emigration was furiously opposed by Phaethon, the King of the Sun, who also wanted Venus for a colony: presumably for the same reason. As a result of this clash between the Lunar and Solar empires, a ferocious conflict followed; described by Lucian in picturesque and extravagant detail. He conjured up all sorts of monsters, from giant unicorns to enormous ostriches with feathers as long as spears, which they presumably used in the battle. After numerous and bloody conflicts, the Sun eventually prevailed. The Lunar monarch did homage to his Solar counterpart, paid tribute and gave hostages. By a pleasant diplomatic touch, Venus was divided between the two contestants and the poorer citizens of both Sun and Moon were given free access to its deserts. Certainly, the conclusion of this celestial exhibition of economic imperialism appears to compare favourably with that of its more recent successor, the Treaty of Versailles. After the conclusion of hostilities, our historian did not prolong his stay in heaven, but, politely rejecting an invitation to visit the Sun, returned to Earth, passing en route the Moon and the famous ‘cloud-cuckoo-land’, the city of the birds, of Aristophanes. The rest of the True History need not concern us, as its sequel transpired on earth, beneath the sea where Lucian encountered a whale that far surpassed Jonah’s Leviathan since it swallowed not merely the crews of the ships, but the ships themselves.
Lucian was perhaps the last of the secular authors of antiquity; at any rate I have no evidence of any successor in the field of science fiction. Neither in the Middle Ages, to which the heavens conveyed a theological rather than the scientific meaning. (Compare St Ambrose of Milan: ‘The motions of the Sun, Moon and planets are of no concern for our salvation.’) With the Renaissance, man’s eyes turned skyward again. By the end of the sixteenth century, the heliocentric theory of Copernicus (1473 – 1543) began to agitate the more advanced minds of the era. This was so in England in particular, where the relatively free intellectual climate of Elizabethan England made this country the headquarters of Copernican study in the still speculative era between the initial publication of the ‘magnum opus’ of Copernicus in 1543 and its empirical proof by Galileo after 1609. During this period, the Italian Copernican thinker Giordano Bruno visited England and strove unsuccessfully to convert the scholastic world of Oxford, already the ‘home of lost causes’, to the new astronomy. Two scientific geniuses, Leonard and Thomas Digges, went far beyond Copernicus, who held that the Sun was the centre of the universe, by boldly proclaiming that our Sun was merely an ordinary star. Among the English converts to this heliocentric astronomy was also a clergyman, Francis Godwin (1562 – 1633), who later became Bishop of Hereford and an eminent ecclesiastical historian. At the end of the century, Godwin wrote his Man in the Moone. This little work enjoys the double distinction of being the first science fiction story in English, and also that of being probably the first defence of Copernican astronomy by a Christian bishop. Godwin, it may be noted, had been a student of Christ Church, Oxford, when Giordano Bruno had made his premature effort to convert the university to the Copernican ideas. Hence the future bishop may have been influenced by the then revolutionary ideas of this great Italian thinker, which included the viability of the other worlds. Had Godwin’s Roman opposite numbers only had the good sense to follow his example, the famous clash between scientific discovery and organised religion might have been avoided: Galileo versus the Inquisition (1616 – 33).
Godwin’s pioneer story, unlike that of Lucian, was a good example of science fiction. From internal references, it appears to have been written between 1596 and the death of Queen Elizabeth in March 1603, as the narrator described the battle fought in the West Indies between the English and the Spanish fleets in the former year. ‘The Man in the Moone’, the Lunar monarch, sends his greetings to the Queen Elizabeth, ‘the most glorious of all women’, a Lunar compliment that would have surely delighted the heart of the Virgin Queen had she survived. As it was, the work was published posthumously in 1638. Galileo and Copernicus had been condemned by Rome in 1633, but their telescopic discoveries had enormously increased popular interest in astronomy, and Godwin’s little work benefited accordingly. Twenty-five editions appeared between 1638 and 1768. Between 1638 and 1659, Godwin’s story was successfully translated into French in 1648, Dutch in 1651 and German in 1659. It probably influenced Cyrano De Bergerac (1619 – 1655) in his L'Autre Monde, and the still more famous Gulliver’s Travels of 1725 by Jonathan Swift, particularly since Swift was related to Godwin.
The full title of Godwin’s work is The Man in the Moone Or the Discovery of a Voyage Thither. It began with a Robinson Crusoe-like touch when the Spanish hero is attacked by the English in St Helena and takes refuge in an obscure area of that still unknown island. Here he trains a flock of wild gansas or swans, and eventually trains them to fly in formation along with a kind of an aerial chariot destined to carry him back to Spain. But his aerial steeds, so to speak, take the bit between their teeth, and hijack him to the Moon. As the Lunar orb comes nearer and larger, while the Earth waxes fainter, Godwin’s hero relieved the monotony of the long enforced trip by meditating upon the twin problems presented by the still unfashionable but increasingly convincing Copernican astronomy; and by the further problems of the Earth’s magnetic field, in reference to which Godwin delivers himself of a dissertation on Copernican astronomy and the views expressed by Dr Gilbert in his De Magnete in 1601. By the time Domingo reached his Lunar destination he had pronounced decisively in favour of Copernicus and his heliocentric theory and against the then orthodox Ptolemaic astronomy. Incidentally, it was perhaps as well for him that his geese took him to the Moon and not to Spain, where such views would have attracted the attention of the Inquisition.
Once arrived upon the surface of our satellite, our hero found himself caught up into a Utopia, a Lunar world of incredible perfection and of even more incredible boredom (why is it that in nearly all Utopias virtue and dullness appear to be synonymous?). In short the Moon was the garden of Eden before the Fall! Crime was unknown and (a pleasant touch) there were no lawyers. But this Lunar Eden, unlike its terrestrial prototype, was immune from the frailty of Eve. For it was entirely monosexual (woman being unknown). The sexual habits of the Selenites were consequently somewhat grotesque, which perhaps explains why the Bishop did not publish his book in his lifetime. However, the presence of a heroine in any science fiction story surely marks the exact dividing line between the science and the fiction. Politically, the Moon was ruled by a feudal oligarchy with a Grand Lunar named Irdonozur, with 30 vassal princes, each with 24 feudal barons. He was a descendant of a long line of Lunar monarchs who had reigned over our satellite for precisely 3777 years, and was as virtuous and as dull as his surroundings. A Lunar Adam before the Fall, endowed with every conceivable virtue. As a theologian, our future Bishop of Hereford probably agreed with his famous Anglican contemporary Robert South, who went on record with a notable pronouncement: ‘Aristotle was but a wreck of an Adam.’
It is scarcely surprising that surrounded by the seraphic boredom of this celestial paradise, both Domingo Gonzales and his wild geese began to long for the more familiar fleshpots of earth. Accordingly, they sought and obtained permission to depart from their Lunar host, and presently took off for Earth, making their entry into the Earth’s magnetic field armed both with the science of Copernicus and Gilbert and also with the perhaps still more potent aid of a magic jewel presented to Gonzales upon his departure. Assisted by these potent allies, the goose-drawn chariot proceeded through space and finally stopped upon a high mountain in China. After sundry adventures Gonzales made his way home to Spain and presumably lived happily ever after. A comparison could be made between Man in the Moone and the Sommium, an almost contemporary work by Kepler, a major piece of science fiction and the only one written by a great astronomer, also published posthumously (1634).
In 1865, the French writer Jules Verne, the Prophet of the Space-Age, published his From the Earth to the Moon, and in 1870 followed it up with a sequel, Round the Moon. Both books received immediately international acclaim and may be said to have inaugurated that modern literary sub-species known as ‘science fiction’. These works, like their successors in this field, took into account both the new technological conditions introduced by the industrial revolution, as also the Copernican universe that two and a half centuries of telescopic research since Godwin and Galileo had revealed in place of the closed universe of earlier astronomy. Thus, Verne had no need whatever of whirlwinds, etc, to transport his space travellers from Earth to the Moon. By 1865 such primitive devices were no longer necessary in that ‘century of stupendous progress’, as the nineteenth century has been aptly termed.
Like his modern successors, Verne employed technological means to transport his pioneer astronauts to and around the Moon. In his first volume that ends with a take-off from Earth, and finally leaves their projectile hurtling around the Moon, the decisive ‘thrust’ into space is given by a giant gun specially constructed by Verne’s Baltimore Gun Club at the conclusion of the American Civil War, which ended in the year of publication. This means of transport was obviously defective, since as one of his editors pointed out, ‘the discharge would not merely have crushed the projectile, but would also have vaporised it’. At the same time, it at least belonged to the dawning technological age. It represented a great advance upon Lucian and Godwin. Verne also knew enough of modern astronomy not to create imaginary Selenites as his earlier predecessors had done. Since 1865, the surface of the Moon was well enough known to realise the sheer impossibility of living organisms inhabiting that arid wilderness.
Verne’s most notable successor in this field, HG Wells, made an attempt to revise the Selenites in his story The First Men in the Moon, written in Verne’s lifetime. By 1865 fiction in the person of Verne had reached exactly the identical point reached in fact more recently by Apollo VIII at the end of 1968! But then Verne was ‘with it'! A pioneer of flight in this world as well as to the Moon. It was one of his disciples who fought the first aerial battle in recorded history, fighting with and intercepting a German balloon while flying in despatches to Paris during the Franco – German War of 1870 – 71. It is interesting to know that Jules Verne himself lived long enough to witness the first flight of the Wright Brothers in a heavier-than-air aeroplane, which marked a decisive step forward on man’s eventual road to the Moon and the planets. Verne died in 1905, and if there is one man who deserves the honorific title of the ‘prophet of the space age’ it was precisely Jules Verne, who was of Polish descent.
In Verne’s pioneer masterpieces the primary interest is not the Moon nor any imaginary Lunar inhabitants. The Endymions of Lucian and the Lunar Emperors of Godwin had long since been relegated to mythology. Verne’s interest was in the would-be explorers of the Moon and in their backers in the ‘Baltimore Gun Club’ which both sponsored and fired off the Lunar trip, to whom the hitherto impassable gulfs of space represented merely so many obstacles to be overcome by Yankee ingenuity and by Yankee technique. The dramatic heart of Verne’s story beats on this Earth: the Moon is merely its predestined goal: ‘To travel hopefully is better than to arrive.’ A very modern attitude? Surely in the light of the recent Apollo flights, Verne qualified for authentic prophetic status with the following observations published in 1865: ‘As for the Yankees, they had no other ambition than to take possession of this new continent of the sky, and to plant upon its highest elevation the star-spangled banner of the USA.’ Evidently, President Andrew Johnson of 1865 was not all that different from President Lyndon Johnson of a century later.
* * *
Ode to Diana, The Moon Goddess
Queen and Huntress, chaste and fair,
Now the Sun is laid to sleep, 
Seated in thy ivory chair, 
State in wonted manner keep, 
Hesperus entreats thy light, 
Goddess excellently bright.
Earth, let not thy envious shade, 
Dare itself to interpose, 
Cynthia’s shining orb was made, 
Heaven so clear when day did close,
Bless us then wish wished sight, 
Goddess excellently bright. 
Lay aside thy silver bow, 
And thy crystal shining quiver 
Give unto the flying hart,
Space to breath, how short so ever,
Thou that makes a day of night, 
Goddess excellently bright.
By Ben Jonson, who died in the year that the Man in the Moone was published.
* * *
The Moon
Twas lunic, and the empty scapes
Did shriek as if to pierce the fasty black,
Intanjubble were the moooving shapes 
And the volo-henges formed a vasty pack.
By Ellis S Hillman
 


F A Ridley Archive




