


LA PAZ, Bolivia. – The tragic events in the 20th Century mine, located in the mining center of Catavi, Bolivia, have received worldwide publicity. [U.S. newspapers also headlined the mine workers’ strike, giving special prominence to the fact that a number of Americans, employed by U.S. mining interests, had been seized by the strikers and killed. – Ed.]
Bolivia, one of the most backward countries of South America, is a producer of almost 40,000 tons of tin a year; and tin is a strategic mineral, contracted almost totally by the United States and Great Britain. Since these buyers have monopolized the tin market, they pay prices in accordance with their own interests and at the expense of the impoverished, hungry Bolivian Indian miners.
This is the permanent cause of Bolivia’s poverty, of the oppression and exploitation of the native miners of the plateau; and as a consequence it provokes periodic uprisings in the mining centers – uprisings which are liquidated with bloody massacres of the workers.
Thus do the main producers of tin (the Patino interests) maintain their economic and political domination of the country with the support of imperialism, which is interested in low prices for tin in the exploitation and colonization of Bolivia.
 
Political Background
At the present time this basic patterm has been clouded and modified by complex political phenomena. Argentine “Peronismo” [the influence of the Peron government in Argentina] the heir of German Nazi influences in South America, is trying to take advantage of the latent rebelliousness of the South American peoples against imperialism for its own political ends, for its own political expansion, in order to sustain a regime that is already trembling.
The MNR (Nationalist Revolutionary Movement) of Bolivia, a native Nazi party which was overthrown in the popular revolution of 1946, uses all means to seek revenge and its own return to power, supported by the powerful aid of “Peronismo.” In addition, the Stalinist policy directed against the United States seeks to utilize all opposition movements, including those that are reactionary, in order to overthrow the pro-American or anti-Russian democratic governments.
When the MNR was in power, it set up totalitarian unions accompanied by the usual social demagogy in the mining and manufacturing centers. Of late, the MNR has succeeded in renewing its attractive power in its opposition to the Hertzog government. On the one hand, the factory workers, mainly in La Paz, are under native Nazi influence. The railroad workers are, on the other hand, controlled by the Stalinists. In this tragic division of the proletariat and its submission to the anti-working-class parties lies the second element of the Catavi tragedy.
In the recent by-elections, in spite of certain successes in the provinces, the MNR suffered setbacks in La Paz, which is the decisive factor in Bolivian politics. It responded by armed struggle well prepared beforehand, but it was thrown back. Then it drew up a plan of general rebellion, counting on the support of the mining and factory centers where the MNR apparatus is excellently set up, having paid agents, armed groups, etc.
 
Workers Caught in Middle
The Republican Union regime wished to behead the planned rebellion and deported the main of the Miners Federation (Lechin, Torres, etc.), which at the time was affiliated with the MNR. As the MNR had foreseen such a move, it had previously prepared a counterstroke, ordering a general strike and the seizure of the American and other engineers as hostages.
Lechin’s lieutenants cruelly assassinated some victims, while on the other side, the government laid siege to the headquarters of the Miners Federation in order to free the hostages. Both workers and soldiers fell in the fratricidal struggle. Since 500 workers had been taken prisoners, the Miners Federation responded with an armed struggle.
As a demonstration of protest against the military measures and the massacres, the strike was extended to the factories and the railroads, the latter controlled by the Stalinists. The situation is grave but the government seems to have control of the situation.
There is no doubt that the class struggle is the core of the tragic situation – the permanent rebellion of the native proletariat against its national exploiters and against foreign imperialism. But this struggle has been deformed and utilized by the native Nazis in order to take revenge and to return to power. In the struggle between the feudal-bourgeois mine interests and imperialism on one side and the Nazified petty bourgeoisie of the plateau on the other side, the proletariat plays the part of the hired beast of burden for the MNR.
The classic example of this is the policy of the parliamentary deputy, Lora, officially affiliated with the Fourth International, who with almost no reservations supports the Nazi, Lechin, and has become his secretary and counselor. Lora and his friends support the theory of the bourgeois revolution in Bolivia and consider the role of the MNR to be revolutionary. For this reason they have allied themselves with the Nazis against the feudal bourgeoisie. The proletariat pays with blood and massacres for this criminal policy.
 
Independent Unions Out
In the revolutionary socialist circles, attempts were made to prevent the tragedy and disaster which struck the Bolivian proletariat. Independent miners’ unions were formed in order to free the mining proletariat from the native Nazi influence. It was all in vain.
The independent union in Catavi was isolated by Lechin’s groups and its leaders threatened with death. On the other hand, the Patino enterprise and the government tried to thwart the independent character of the newly created union organisation in order to utilize it for their anti-working-class purposes.
Although the independent trade-union movement extended to all the mining centers, it lacked leading working-class elements who were class-conscious and incorruptible, in order to strengthen it and keep it firm against the Nazi terror and the governmental pressure. The growth of the independent unions was one of the causes compelling the Nazis to act. The threatened liquidation of its base in the mining centers was the equivalent of a death sentence for the MNR.
The Bolivian government headed by the Republican Union Party is a government more of the center than of the bourgeois right, which has paid more respect to the rights of the working-class parties and organizations than did the MNR government headed by Villaroel. But after the armed struggle during the elections in La Paz, it lost its head and proceeded with hasty brutality without really foreseeing the consequences.
 
Prospect Threatening
Today Bolivia represents a field of open civil struggle between the mining bourgeoisie and the Nazified petty bourgeoisie. The proletariat is the principal army on the side of the MNR. Lora, parliamentary deputy of the POR (Revolutionary Workers Party – Fourth International), has taken his place without reservations in the left wing of the MNR.
We do not know how the struggle will end. But we are afraid that the proletariat will lose whichever way the struggle is resolved. If the Nazi MNR should win, it would lose more than if the government triumphs, because the position of the Bolivian proletariat was always that of opposition both to the Bolivian feudal bourgeoisie, the tool of imperialism, and to the Nazified petty bourgeoisie, the tool of Peronismo.
The position of the Bolivian proletariat was always that of advancing its own independent, working-class and socialist point of view for the social and national liberation of Bolivia, for a Socialist Bolivia within a Socialist South America.
June 1949
 




In December 1948 there took place the “unity” congress between the two “workers’ parties,” the PPR and the pseudo-PPS. [PPR is the Stalinist “Workers Party” and by “pseudo-PPS” the writer is referring to the section of the Socialist Party which went over to the Stalinists and remained legal.—Ed.]
Although the Stalinists declared that the split in the workers’ movement between reformism and Marxism, between nationalism and internationalism, was now healed, the fusion congress in reality represented the funeral of the Polish workers’ movement, crushed by Stalin’s secret police. The role of hangman and gravedigger fell to Boleslaw Bierut, puppet president of Poland by grace of his boss, Stalin. Our readers will recall that Bierut was chief of the Polish section of the GPU, informer and hangman of his former comrades, liquidator of the Polish Communist Party and assassin of all the prominent Polish Marxists and revolutionaries.
It was to this creature that Stalin entrusted the task of teaching “Marxism-Leninism” to the Polish proletariat and of engaging in a critical evaluation of the 70 years of revolutionary workers’ struggle in Poland. It is well known that the Polish workers’ movement divided into two tendencies in the ’80s of the last century: one, represented by the PPS (Socialists), argued for the reconstruction of Poland as the first point in the socialist program and its separation from Russia; the other, represented by the SDKPL (Social-Democracy of Poland and Lithuania), with Rosa Luxemburg as its leader, struggled for the social revolution in all Russia, upheld an internationalist criterion and argued for the union of the Polish and Russian proletariat as a condition for the liberation of both.
In her struggle against Polish nationalism, Rosa Luxemburg fought the program of national independence for Poland, Marx and Engels’ old slogan, and counterposed to it Russo Polish revolutionary solidarity and the autonomy of the historical territory of the Polish-Lithuanian state.
Although Rosa Luxemburg’s opposition to the program of national independence stemmed from her struggle against a diseased nationalism and from her program of international socialist revolution, as the very name of the SDKPL indicates, Rosa Luxemburg defended the historic rights of Poland to all the territories which belonged to her before the partitions beginning in 1772.
 
Purpose of Conference
Now Bierut is attempting to utilize the internationalist program of the SDKPL for the vile aims of Russian imperialist policy, using the “internationalist” banner against the social and national resistance of the oppressed Polish people. The new party, the PZPR (United Polish Workers Party) is usurping not only the inheritance of the SDKPL. but also that of the CPP and the Left-PPS (formed in 1906 by Koszutska, Walecki and others as a reaction against Pilsudski’s faction).
Needless to say, the fusion congress was empty of ideological content and devoid of theoretical discussion, the main “theoretician” being none other than one of Stalin’s police. The ex-secretary general of the pseudo-PPS, Cyrankiewicz, presented some “self-criticism” in the name of the pseudo-PPS, severely attacking the past of the PPS. The secretariat of the “united” party is composed of Bierut, as president, and three secretaries: Zambrowski, Zawadzki and Cyrankiewicz, the first three being members of the defunct Stalinist Workers Party (PPR). In both the politburo and orgburo, as well as in ihe Central Committee, the pseudo-PPS has a minority representation of about 30 per cent. There are no longer any obstacles to hinder the secret police in effecting their frontal offensive against the Polish peasantry, in expropriating and "collectivizing it in the Stalinist manner of the Ukraine.”
This purpose was again confirmed by the new polemic against Gomulka delivered at the “unity” congress by one of his former supporters, Kliszko, by Bierut’s statements and the declarations of Radkiewicz, Minister of Security (Bezpieka), who threatened the “reaction” (the opposition) with reprisals for attempts against the agricultural cooperatives and collectives already established. (It is interesting that the Polish peasantry sees in the state farms a continuation of the hated latifundia system and rebels against them.) Radkiewicz accused the opposition of direct dependence on the United States, and of carrying on espionage in its behalf.
 
Mass Arrests
The reports of the world press confirm Radkiewicz’s threats, since a short time ago new mass arrests of former soldiers in the underground army were made in Warsaw, on the ground that they were preparing new terrorist attempts against the government. Until now, all the opposition parties have abstained from an active and armed struggle against the regime. It would appear that the supposed attempts are the work of the Stalinist police itself.
The class struggle, the social war, grows sharper in Poland. A civil war of the bureaucracy against the worker and peasant masses, with the aim of despoiling them of their remaining possessions and reducing them to the level of slaves, is on the order of the day. It is a war of Russian imperialism against the oppressed Polish people.
*

Threat of New Mass Deportations
Some two months ago Warsaw was the scene of a trial before a military tribunal of representatives of the workers’ opposition, leaders of the authentic Socialist Party, headed by C. Puzak, ex-prisoner of the czar in 1906, in Schlusselberg, former secretary-general of the PPS in independent Poland, ex-president of the National Council (underground parliament during the Nazi occupation), one of the leaders of the Warsaw uprising of 1944, captured and condemned before a Stalinist tribunal in 1945.
Puzak answered the accusations, of the MVD [secret police] with scornful silence, and was condemned to ten years in prison, a sentence which was reduced to five years by virtue of an amnesty. Puzak broke his silence to declare that he could not and would not alter his beliefs. The trial of the PPS accompanied the liquidation of the pseudo-PPS and its fusion with the Stalinist Workers Party (PPR), just as the trial of the Polish resistance government in Moscow in 1945 accompanied the creation of a Polish government of “national unity,” a regime formed under the auspices of the three imperialist powers and which Mikojajczyk, the peasant leader, and Stanczyk of the PPS joined.
The methods of the MVD are contemptible and odious in their cynicism: one hand applies the whip to the rebels, the other scatters crumbs as a reward for capitulation to the cowards and opportunists.
 
Profound Meaning
The trial has a profound political and practical significance: the Polish people have been accused before the bar. of the MVD of aspiring to national independence and social emancipation. With whip in hand, the MVD has ordered it to accept dependence on Russia and national and social servitude as the ideal of “true, national independence.” For this reason, it falsifies and twists history and the glorious tradition of the Polish workers’ movement, especially its revolutionary branch, represented by the SDKPL, the party of Rosa Luxemburg.
The practical purpose of the trial is to aid in the domestication of the proletarian and peasant masses of Poland, with the ultimate aim of incorporating Poland directly into Stalin’s Russian empire. After the “fusion” of the two “workers’ parties,” the most important problem remains the destruction of the economic independence of the peasantry, the expropriation of its means of production by the totalitarian bureaucracy, in order to reduce it to a slave of the Stalinist state.
Although the enormous majority of the Polish peasantry are poor, possess small holdings and need state aid, the Stalinist government strives to destroy the peasantry by all possible means. This reactionary, anti-peasant program is masked by beautiful slogans of “socialist cooperation and collectivization,” when the technical base of Polish agriculture is far from such a possibility.
Poland today possesses between 800 and 1,000 tractors, whereas the socialization of the land calls for around 200,000 tractors. The collectivization of agriculture can only be a product of the technical development of the nation and not of Stalinist “ukases.” But the bureaucracy is implacable in its war against the laboring masses of town and country; its imperialist policy demands complete subjugation and oppression without limits, in order to crush each and every seed of resistance.
 
Calm Before Storm
This resistance on the part of the oppressed people even penetrates the politburo of the official Stalinist party. In a politburo session, the leader of the more capitulationist tendency toward Moscow, Berman, called the attention of the Russian MVD representative, Malinov (always present at the Polish session) to the fact that the return of the deported soldiers of the Polish underground army, the AK, from Siberia to Poland would placate Polish opinion. Malinov cynically told Berman that he did not think it would take place since it would not be in accord with “the interests of the Polish proletariat," because the “AKites” were working well in Russia (“re-educating themselves”), and that Comrade Berman “could study this at first hand in their company.” Thus spoke the representative of the GPU to a puppet leader of Polish Stalinism.
In another session, when the problem was posed of purging the pseudo-PPS before proceeding to the fusion of the two parties, the same Malinov cynically declared: "If the interests of the proletariat demand it, we shall deport 300,000 oppositionists to Russia; I can assure you that the USSR will aid you in carrying out this task.” A sepulchral silence accompanied Malinov’s cynical statement.
Today this sepulchral silence covers the partitioned, subjugated and oppressed country like a mantle of snow. “Order reigns in Warsaw” as in the times of Nicholas I, II and III. But it is the calm before the storm. The bureaucracy is preparing for the final assault on the peasantry.
It is a whim or, more precisely, a paradox of history which has decreed that under the existing conditions the peasant holding should become the last bulwark of national independence and political liberty. The relative economic independence of the poor and middle peasantry stands in the way of the greedy expansionism of reactionary totalitarianism and defends the laboring masses of town and country from the subhuman exploitation, oppression and subjugation by the totalitarian bureaucracy.
Malinov, the cynical Russian overseer and spy at the sessions of the Polish politburo, presents the program of deportation of 300,000 oppositionists to Russia, if “the interests of the proletariat demand it.” The laboring masses of Poland know already what this means.
But the day will come “when the people shall straighten their bent backs, and make the little czar (Stalin) and the other masters run,” as the old Russian song has it. And this day is awaited not only by the mistreated Polish people but by all the peoples subjugated and oppressed by the Stalinist autocracy, including the Russian people.
 




The totalitarian coups in Peru and Venezuela have had repercussions in Bolivia. In the first place, there has been a rapprochement between the Stalinist and Nazi-fascist forces, between the PIR (Party of the Revolutionary Left) and the MNR (Nationalist-Revolutionary Movement). Although the Stalinist leaders deny the existence of a political pact with the MNR, the miners’ and factory trade unions, controlled by the MNR, and the railroad workers federation controlled by the PIR arrived at an agreement to stage a general strike against the Hertzog government. The formal reason for the strike was to force through a voluntary retirement law, a social security law, family aid, and subsidies for workers housing. The Hertzog government responded with the militarization of the railroads, a measure which forced the railroad workers to retreat and call off the general strike, and with the proclamation of a state of siege – a measure that was primarily against the fascists, and was not used against the PIR or the other parties.
The demand far social security laws is a powerful instrument in the hands of the totalitarian Nazi-Stalinist alliance. It is a question of a general program of social security, which includes a voluntary retirement law that would indemnify a worker when he retired in accordance with his length of service, and family and housing subsidies. For a poor country having a semi-colonial character, such a program of social security constitutes a serious economic problem, whose cost has been estimated as being more than 500,000,000 bolivares (about 10 million dollars in American money). This progressive program in the hands of the totalitarian opposition has become a powerful weapon with which to carry out a totalitarian coup d’etat.
The Bolivian Congress approved a voluntary retirement law according to which retiring workers receive a retroactive payment of 25 per cent of their wages from 1939 on, and 100 per cent from May 25, 1948. It is one of the most advanced laws in the world. A housing law has also been approved which compels enterprises employing more than 200 workers to provide them with free housing or pay for such housing.
 
Government Hit from All Sides
The big mining interests and the industrialists are faced with serious problems in the application of these new laws. There is talk of a military coup inspired by the right in order to prevent the application of the social security laws and the “dictatorship of the workers trade unions.” Such a coup is much more probable than one carried out by the MNR or the PIR. The real bosses of Bolivia are the big mining interests, who can easily install a new military regime if they do not wish to conform with the new social security laws. Consequently, the totalitarian forces have the role of provoking a military counter-revolution, in spite of their “social” demagogy.
The Hertzog government bases itself on the PURS (Socialist-Republican Union) which lacks a majority in Congress. The Stalinists frequently unite with the Liberals, who represent the big mining interests, in their struggle against the government. This provokes parliamentary deadlocks that frequently end in Homeric battles with inkwells, chairs, etc., between the Stalinists and the government supporters. The government party is the party of the middle-classes, of the moderate bourgeoisie.
Confronted by an empty treasury, the government has initiated tax reforms which call for greater contributions on the part of the big mining enterprises. It is also favorable to the demand that the mining interests deliver all of their foreign exchange to the treasury, instead of 60 per cent as heretofore. Pressed by the Nazi-Stalinist opposition, the government strives to maintain a centrist position; a fact which arouses the opposition of the capitalist right and encourages the tendencies toward a military dictatorship.
If such a military overthrow has not taken place as yet, it is because of the memories of the July 1946 revolution. A democratic spirit still exists, and in addition there is internal dissension within the army which has declined greatly in prestige because of the support it gave to the brutal Villaroel regime.
 
For Independent Workers’ Front
Within the working-class, one can note resistance to the political adventurism of the Nazi-Stalinist alliance, which in spite of the program of social security laws is really carrying the proletariat toward the disaster of dictatorship which would abolish not only the existing laws but the union organizations and the democratic rights of the workers. In the mining centers of Catava, Llalagua, Pulacayo, etc., independent trade unions have been formed which adhere to the new Bolivian Trade Union Federation, which in turn is linked to the anti-Stalinist Inter-American Trade Union Federation.
This tendency is striving to form an independent workers front which resists both the totalitarian offensive and the threat of a military coup. It is difficult to predict how successful this independent action will be since many agents of the government as well as agents for the capitalists are trying to penetrate its ranks and utilize it for their own aims. Differences as to tactics exist in the left wing of the workers government. While the POR (Bolivian section of the Fourth International) supports the MNR in its struggle against the government, the PSOB (sympathetic to the WP) strives for an independent line of action in the trade unions.
The electoral successes of the MNR in the municipal elections of Santa Cruz demonstrates that a totalitarian victory in Bolivia is an imminent danger. Only a united Socialist front of the proletariat can prevent this victory. But the Stalinist party is under orders to defeat any such front, even at the price of opening the way for the military dictatorship of the capitalist right.
 




After his sensational flight from Poland, the former chief of the Polish London government and ex-prime minister of the Stalinist government in Warsaw, took refuge in the United States, seeking support among Polish-Americans against both his Stalinist ex-colleagues and his former collaborators in the Polish government-in-exile in London.
Mikolajczyk met with strong resistance in the Polish emigration against his policy of collaboration with Moscow, particularly his acceptance of the Yalta and Potsdam agreements,
which divided Poland and handed it over to Stalin’s Russia. He was also reproached with having delivered up the Polish underground resistance movement to the GPU and having helped to liquidate and disarm it; of having weakened the Polish resistance in exile; and of having abandoned the Polish government-in-exile in order to join the Stalinist government in Warsaw.
Although these criticisms contain a great deal of truth in accusing Mikolajczyk of having betrayed the policy of Poland’s national independence, surrendering it at one point to the Anglo-Americans and at another point to the Russians – their political basis is rooted in the desire of the Nationalist right for revenge against the peasant leader whom it had to support for quite a period of time.
The rightist circles in the Polish emigration carried out a palace revolution, refusing to recognize the Socialist, Thomas Arciszewski, as president – a thing agreed upon by the big parties – and named as the president of Poland-in-exile, Zaleski, a “man of confidence” of the rightists and the army of General Anders. The Socialists have left the government-in-exile, which is limited to the Nationalist Party and the military circles. At its recent congress in Belgium, the Socialists called for an agreement among the democratic forces and the creation of a political body to represent it.
 
Form New Movement
A congress has just taken place in Paris including representatives of Mikolajczyk’s Populist Party, of the Polish Socialist Party (the authentic PPS) in exile, and the Labor Party (Christian Democrats). A pact among these democratic parties was agreed upon, and a representative organization set up, “A Committee of the Democratic Parties.” Thus, after a period of isolation, Mikolajczyk has succeeded in breaking through the ostracism and becoming part of an organization representative of Polish political tendencies outside the Russian orbit.
In opposition both to the Polish government-in-exile dominated by the rightists, and the puppet Warsaw government, an organization of the militant petty-bourgeois democracy has been formed, linked with the anti-Stalinist workers’ movement, a fact that will have its repercussions in Poland as well as internationally.
This fact acquires even more importance, inasmuch as in Poland itself, under the heel of the MVD (GPU), the “unification” of the “workers’ parties,” PPR (Stalinist) and PPS (reformist-pro-Stalinist) into a single monolithic party has just taken place and underscores the perspective of the direct incorporation of Poland into Stalinist Russia. The “unification” was dutifully prepared for by great purges which swept up more than 5,000 militants of the pseudo-PPS, among them almost all the old leaders such as Drobner, Schwalbe, Rusinek, etc. Purges of a similar nature have wreaked havoc in the Populist Party and the “Democratic Party,” a shadow-party led by Rzymowski.
 
Adopt Cautious Policy
Confronting the Stalinist government in Warsaw and the exiled government of the right in London, the new committee (supported by Socialists, Populists and Christian-Laborites) represents perhaps the living forces of the peasant, working-class and middle-class opposition against Stalinism in Poland. However, this organization has its dark side in the political history of Mikolajczyk.
Poland was the first to struggle against Nazism and was cynically betrayed. It has lost a third of its population, half of its territories and suffered incalculable economic losses. In spite of its hatred for the invader, the Polish nation has lost confidence in its “generous democratic allies” and has no desire to throw itself into an unequal struggle against Stalinism.
Consequently, the opposition political circles in the country have adopted a policy of caution and of “saving Polish blood.” I believe that this attitude is in accordance with popular aspirations. The worker and peasant masses of Poland demand a true policy of national independence and socialist democracy; a policy of the independent socialist front, free of capitulations or surrender.
 




In the November 1946 issue of the Fourth International
there appears an article by E.R. Frank on The Kremlin in Eastern Europe which is intended to represent the theoretical point of
view of the Socialist Workers Party on the problems of the revolution
in Central Eastern Europe. A resolution by the IEC of the Fourth
International, which appears in The Militant of December 7,
1946, officially confirms Frank’s point of view. The resolution,
which speaks of the proletarian struggle against both camps in
Poland, Stalinism and the opposition, dedicates its entire exposition
to the struggle against the legal and illegal opposition, defending
in reality, the policies of the Stalinist-assassin regime and its
economic and social “reforms.” What a handsome example of
international solidarity with the blood-stained Polish proletariat
and the rebellious poor peasantry! What loyal “critical” support
of the Stalinist regime in Poland, which is as effective as it is
“critical”! For if anything matters to Stalin today, it is not
the support of his fifth columns, but rather the “critical”
support of the “fellow travelers.” The tenor of the official
resolution and Frank’s theoretical commentary places the authors of
both documents in the ranks of the “fellow travelers,” in the
ranks of the “critical” opposition to His Majesty, Stalin.
Let us speak concretely: Frank patiently explains to us various
phenomena and phases of Soviet policy in the “sphere of Soviet
influence.” As a consequence of the inter-imperialist agreements at
Teheran, Yalta and Potsdam, the Red Armies occupy this part of Europe
up to the Trieste-Stettin line. The Red Armies established new
regimes based on the coalition between the collaborationist
bourgeoisie, whom Frank calls “far-sighted” and “progressive,”
and the Stalinist bureaucracy. The economy imposed on these countries
has a mixed and bastard character, being based on a partial or almost
complete state capitalism (Czechoslovakia) existing side by side with
private property permitted by the Stalinists. The nature of the
economic and social policies followed in these countries ranges from
a coalition with the bourgeoisie to a “monolithic” government (my
expression, not Frank’s – A.R.). In spite of the
reactionary role of the Stalinists relative to the situation of the
working class, in spite of a policy of robbery and plunder which
Frank admits, he absolves the “Stalinist reaction” by virtue of
the simple fact that “the overturn in Eastern Europe possesses many
highly progressive features, the redistribution of land, the
confiscation and nationalization of industry.” In brief, Frank
attributes a decidedly progressive character to Stalin’s “social
revolution” in Europe.
“If a social revolution signifies the transfer of power
from one class to another, then certainly a social revolution
(my emphasis – A.R.) was set in motion in Eastern Europe
after the âliberation’.”
A neat example, indeed, of Frank’s “Marxist” reasoning!
In spite of its having realized this “social revolution,”
Frank is not at all satisfied with Stalinism, above all the “Red”
Armies. The advance of these armies awakened, according to Frank, the
revolutionary consciousness of the workers who occupied the factories
and formed workers’ committees in all the countries that the “Red”
Army approached. According to Frank, it would seem that the Red Army
is a revolutionary factor in Europe. But contrary to ordinary logic
and contrary to all Marxist dialectic, this same army which “awakened
the revolution” was transformed into a counter-revolutionary force
which disarmed the workers, protected the bourgeoisie and capitalism,
imposed governments of coalition with the bourgeoisie and the
“bastard” regimes, protected private property and throttled the
very same revolution which its approach accelerated and encouraged.
In spite of all this, after imposing its government, Stalinism
realized “progressive reforms,” a species of “social
revolution” nationalizing industry and distributing the land. Not
only this, it pushes the regimes of coalition toward the “left,”
purging them of the bourgeoisie and the vacillating social-democrats,
peasants, etc., in order to create a more “socialist” regime. To
support this thesis, Frank takes up in detail the developments in all
these countries and above all, in Poland and Czechoslovakia.
 
Hosannahs for the Quislings and the Far-Sighted Bourgeoisie
According to Frank, the Stalinist regime in Czechoslovakia is the
“mildest” and the most “democratic,” thanks not only to the
tolerable economic situation, since Czechoslovakia did not suffer as
much from the ravages of war as the other countries, but above all,
thanks to the “foresight” of the liberal bourgeoisie and the
“progressive” middle class represented by the “far-sighted”
Benes, who collaborates with the Russians in the introduction of the
“social revolution” in Czechoslovakia. In order to support his
“very Marxist” and magisterial thesis, Frank invokes the
testimony of that well-known “Marxist” organ, the Manchester
Guardian, during the period when the liberal section of the
British bourgeoisie had illusions about the possibility of
international collaboration with the Russians in order to save the
British Empire at the expense of the peoples oppressed and subjugated
by imperialism. What was advocated by this organ of British
imperialism was the division of Europe into two spheres of influence,
British and Soviet. Benes, who accepted this point of view, was then
the “far-sighted” and “progressive” favorite of British
imperialism. Today the Manchester Guardian, having lost its
illusions about a “peaceful agreement” with Moscow, looks to a
military alliance between Britain and the United States, and
consequently no longer sings the praises of Benes. Today the very
same “progressive” organ which the Marxist Frank relies on so
much, would welcome more “audacity” and more opposition in the
style of Mikolajczyk from Benes.
Frank’s remarks indicate that he knows as much about
Czechoslovakia, its economic and political structure, as he does of
the Czech and Slovak tongues, and of the principal actors in
Czechoslovakian politics. After the Hussite revolution, the Czech
people suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the Hapsburgian
Catholic reaction, and fell into a feudal servitude for almost four
hundred years. During this period, the Czech nation almost
disappeared, losing almost all of its national consciousness and its
spirit of rebellion. In 1848, when all the peoples of Europe rose up
against Czarism and absolutism, the embryonic Czech bourgeoisie
supported reactionary Pan-Slavism, opposed the Polish and Hungarian
revolutionaries, and defended the Hapsburgs and Metternich. Marx’s
condemnation of this counter-revolutionary attitude is very well
known. Masaryk himself, first President of the post-war Czech
Republic) was a supporter of the Hapsburg monarchy until the years of
Odboj (resistance). The steady decline of the monarchy,
foreshadowing its inevitable defeat, convinced Masaryk of the
necessity of Czechoslovakian national independence. This was the
reason why this partisan of the Hapsburg monarch came to be the
“father of the Czechoslovakian Republic.”The role played by the
Czech legions against the young Soviet Russia should be known to
Frank. The greater part of the Czech bourgeoisie, though not German
speaking, always signed for the good old days of the Hapsburgs,
because in those days Czech industry enjoyed access to wider markets
than the small territory of the republic could provide.
When Hitler occupied the Sudetenland, the greater part of the
Czech bourgeoisie favored peaceful collaboration with Hitler in order
to save themselves from the Soviet Union, and with the hope of
repairing the loss of the Sudetenland with the broader German
markets. The same “far-sighted” Benes did not call the people to
arms but to “order” and to “peace” and to accept the dictates
of Munich. He turned a deaf ear to the outside world and did not
create a government-in-exile before the situation had matured. The
majority of the Czech bourgeoisie, led by Hacha, collaborated with
Hitler, drawing all possible material advantages from the situation.
Benes took upon himself the task of annulling the effects of this
activity by. creating the pro-Allied government-in-exile. When the
Russian Armies approached Slovakia, Benes, knowing the drift of the
imperialist agreements at Yalta, chose to accept the Imperialist
dictate and submitted to Stalin. As a consequence, he was spared a
struggle, was given the post of president, and succeeded in saving
part of the bourgeoisie. But in revolutionary and Marxist language
this is not called “foresight” but naked, unrestrained and
shameless opportunism; it is called the miserable betrayal of the
people and the proletariat of Czechoslovakia, the betrayal of its
social and national emancipation and of its future. An
opportunistic bourgeois organ can call this “foresight” when it
falls in with the interests of British imperialism, but not a Marxist
who pretends to be a theoretician of the vanguard of the world
proletariat. True, the political regime in Czechoslovakia is milder
than in Poland, but it is also true that its control is more
totalitarian. Thanks to the traitorous and Quisling role of
Benes, Stalinism dominates all the key position without any
competition. The elections gave a crushing victory to the Stalinist
party. The old social-democrats have been eliminated. Fierlinger and
Lausman, whom Frank admires so much, do not play any major role in
the Czechoslovakian social-democracy. Hampel, Soukup, Falta and so
many others have disappeared (Soukup was assassinated by the Nazis).
Benes himself is but his own shadow, a puppet who is afraid to open
his mouth. The Czech press writes that he is sick and will probably
step down from the presidency. Frank should not take his own
ignorance for “theory” and inform his readers so bady. Benes is
not “far-sighted” but a Stalinist Quisling, Moscovite Hacha, a
traitor. The “mildness” of Stalinist methods in the
Czechoslovakian Republic is not due to the “foresight” of the
bourgeoisie but to the lack of a revolutionary proletariat, of an
internationalist Communist Party, of an aroused national resistance.
 
Condemnation and Contempt for the Worker and Peasant Opposition
Frank evaluates the Polish situation in accordance with the same a
priori schema, without drawing upon any other sources than the
Anglo-Saxon bourgeois press or the Stalinists in the English
language. The regime of bloody Stalinist terror is not explained as
the product of an imperialist policy and the occupation of Poland,
but as the result of the stupidity and lack of “foresight” on the
part of the Polish bourgeoisie.
“Because the Czech liberal bourgeois is bending over
back-ward to keep on friendly terms with the Kremlin, the People’s
Front government has survived in more or less original form.”
Completely false, because Stalinist totalitarianism is almost as
advanced in Czechoslovakia as in Yugoslavia, but by “cold methods.”
“In sharp contrast to Benes and his policy, the Polish
government-in-exile in London, dominated by the same colonels who
controlled Polish politics for two decades, remained obdurately
anti-Soviet. Even in exile they continued their mad, adventuristic
game of trying to play off the Western powers against Russia.”
This ignorance served up with so much assurance and arrogance to
the poor readers requires historical explanation in order to set the
facts down correctly. For almost four hundred years, Poland was not
defeated by the Russia-German reaction. Not until the end of the 18th
century and the beginnings of the democratic revolution did this
defeat take place. And even then Poland’s defeat was not total in
character, for as an ally of France she could still present certain
conditions to the Congress of Vienna, obtaining a satellite state
with a limited constitutional character. Each fifteen or twenty
years, the Polish nobility and bourgeoisie rose up against the
Russian autocracy, their struggle constituting the hope and
inspiration of democracy and socialism in Europe. Marx and Engels
supported this struggle without any reservations. Lenin gave the
following evaluation of the Polish up-risings:
“While the popular masses of Russia and the majority of
the Slav countries were sunken in a profound sleep,while in these
countries there were no independent movements of the masses, the
liberation movement of the Polish nobility acquired a paramount
importance, tremendous in scope not only from the viewpoint of
Russian democracy and democracy for all the Slavs, but for all
European democracy as well.” (Lenin, Selected Works,
Vol. II, p. 276)
With the defeat of the last revolution in 1894, the Polish
proletariat assumed the role of leadership in the social and national
revolution in Poland.
Although Frank is ignorant of this role, we do not have to explain
to him that this proletariat gave rise to such leaders as Rosa
Luxemburg, Tyszka Jogiches, Unschlicht, Kohn, Hanecki, Marchlewski,
Dzierzynski, Warski, Koszutska, Domski, Dabal, not to speak of the
prominent reformists in the Viennese, Berlin and later Polish
parliaments (such as Daszynski, Lieberman, Purak, etc.). The Polish
proletariat struggled against the Czars, against the “Colonels,”
against the Nazis,and now with heroic valor that has no precedent,
they defy Stalinism. [1] The Polish CP
had to be liquidated and the old Polish Marxists assassinated like
the Russian Bolsheviks. The underground and the Warsaw insurrection,
whose backbone was the proletariat, was assassinated by Stalin-Hitler
with the consent of the imperialists. Stalin could not appear in
Poland as a savior, and had to introduce his government on bayonets.
Frank says that Stalin came to an agreement with a provisional Polish
government in 1944, a government composed of Stalinists, reformists,
democrats and populists. I know all the actors and signatories to
this agreement. There were no Social-Democrats there, outside of
Drobner and Haneman, who could never represent the PPS (Polish
Socialist Party), because they belonged to a small grouping of the
NSPP (Independent Socialists) which they themselves liquidated before
1938. Now both are in opposition, Haneman in prison. There was no
“democratic” party in Poland, its leader is an old “Colonelist”
and apologist for the terror set in motion by Pilsudski and
Rzymowski. The Peasant representatives were hardly there. Only GPU
agents and “fellow travelers” appeared on behalf of the
Stalinists. Such questions. Comrade Frank, must be understood, and if
one does not know them they must be studied.
The “union” between Mikolajczyk and Lublin was dictated by
the imperialists and repudiated by the Polish people. The furious
resistance against Stalinism in Poland was not due to the lack of
“foresight” on the part of the Polish bourgeoisie, nor of the
London government-in-exile but to the revolutionary past and the
revolutionary resistance of the Polish proletariat, whom no one has
been able to subdue until now, neither the Czar nor the Colonels,
neither Hitler nor Stalin. What is historically correct is that
the government-in-exile is not controlled by the Colonels. The
Colonels were overthrown in 1939 by Hitler. What arose was a
government coalition between the national-democracy, the peasants and
the Socialists, headed by Sikorski. After his death there came into
being the Peasant-Socialist coalition, headed by Mikolajczyk. The
government of Mikolajczyk-Kwapinski (PPS) was supported by the
anti-Nazi resistance movement in Poland. The resistance movement
and the Warsaw insurrection were crushed by Stalin, not because they
were reactionary, but because they were to the left of the Russian
bureaucracy. The Reformist-Peasant government, which would have
realized the same state capitalism that Stalin is bringing about, but
within the framework of national independence and respect for the
bourgeois democratic rights of the proletariat, constituted a mortal
danger to the Stalinist reaction and its bureaucratic regime. It
represented a mortal danger because the possibility of opening the
road to socialism would exist.
The opposition of the Polish proletariat and peasantry does not
prove its backwardness, but rather its great historical experience
and its revolutionary consciousness. To identify this opposition with
that of the bourgeoisie is to render excellent service to Stalinism
and the rest of the reaction. Furthermore, it is no longer
certain that all the bourgeoisie supports the London government and
opposes Stalinism. There is a strong group of National-Democrats in
the Warsaw government, led by Grabski, old leader of the reaction,
and a group of “Colonelists” headed by Ryzmowski, Szwalbe (now a
“Socialist”), Kwiatkowski, etc. On the other hand, the government
of London is led by the genuine PPS, ranging from men like
Arciszewski, Kwapinski, over to the left wing of the PPS represented
by Prager, Ciolkosz.
 
The Nature of the Anti-Stalinist Opposition
In Poland there are two kinds of opposition today: 1. The rightist
and remnants of the bourgeoisie, and 2. The peasant-worker, led by
the peasants and supported by the workers. The main forces of the
reaction are to be found today in the Stalinist camp, including the
former bourgeois collaborators. The Stalinist terror is not due to
the reactionary opposition, but in the first place, to the
worker-peasant opposition which threatens the foundations of the
Stalinist regime. Mikolajczyk was ready to play the part of a Polish
Benes, but Stalin required a government that was completely his own
in Poland. Poland is not Czechoslovakia; the contradictions
between the two imperialist camps make of Poland a sensitive
nerve-center, and for this reason Mikolajczyk, with all his “good
will,” who wished to create a government loyal to Moscow, though
autonomous, was defeated. For a thousand years of its history
Poland never engaged in any compromise on the issue of its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. In 150 years of Russian
domination, a pro-Russian government was never established, nor did
the Russians wish to risk such a government, deeming their own regime
necessary. According to Frank’s criteria, which considers it
far-sighted for the Polish bourgeoisie to reach an understanding with
Stalin, Colonel Beck was very “far-sighted” because he desired an
understanding with Hitler and yielded Danzig and the Corridor to the
latter. However, this agreement was rejected by the vast majority of
the Polish people, with the workers and the peasants in the vanguard.
It will hardly be possible to realize such a deal with Stalin either,
even though a good part of the bourgeoisie, perhaps even the
majority, so desires it. The workers and peasants, you see, are “short-sighted.”
It is our belief that the illegal, extreme nationalist right wing
will inevitably be annihilated by Stalinism, not because the latter
plays a progressive role but because its reactionary and imperialist
policies demand such a course of action. Economically, the
bourgeoisie has already been annihilated. The second opposition to
Stalinism, that of the peasants and workers, has a completely
different character. The peasant movement of Poland is one of the
most democratic in all Europe, owing to the agrarian structure of the
country. Apart from the numerous agricultural proletariat, there
exists in Poland an enormous preponderance of poor peasants,
semi-proletarian in type, who account for almost 80 per cent of the
rural population. The “kulak” in Poland was a stratum without
economic importance. Only in Western Poland (Posen) were the rich
peasants strong, thanks to the Bismarckian reforms. The Polish
peasantry was opposed to Pilsudski and the Colonels, struggled
against the Nazis, and now struggles against Stalin and his “state
capitalism” (à la Frank). The “opposition” of the poor
and middle peasantry to the “state-capitalist” monopoly of the
bureaucracy is not reactionary but progressive, because the
weakening of the Stalinist regime does not weaken the development of
Poland toward socialism. The aroused opposition of the peasantry
is also proof that the Stalinist agrarian reform did not have any
great importance in Poland, and that, consequently, the famous
“democratic revolution” is a fraud. The support given by the
workers to the peasants is also proof that the Polish proletariat
understands the reactionary role of Stalinism, a piece of evidence
that supports our point of view. For this reason, we ought not to
permit Stalin to annihilate Mikolajczyk and the peasants, but ought
to defend them from Stalinism.
It is a fact that Anglo-Saxon imperialism tries to take advantage
of the Mikolajczyk opposition for its own ends, but this does not
mean that the worker-peasant opposition is a mere instrument of
imperialism and represents the reactionary Polish bourgeoisie. The
proletariat also has the right to lake advantage of the
inter-imperialist contradictions for its own ends without being bound
to either imperialist camp. The Polish people have no desire to serve
as an instrument of imperialism, nor do they desire a new war which
would take place on Polish soil. The Polish people remember well
the British betrayal of 1939, the betrayal of 1944, when the Warsaw
revolution was drowned in its own blood with the mutual consent of
the imperialists and the advice of the Fourth International that
the Warsaw insurrection subordinate itself to the Russian Army.
But the petty bourgeois and peasant opposition, and even more so the
proletarian opposition, has the right to take advantage of the
inter-imperialist struggle, the Anglo-American pressure on Stalin, in
order to conquer a margin of liberty and to lessen the pressure of
Russian imperialism in Poland. Such a course should not be taken
to represent the pressure of American imperialism. It is well to
remember that Lenin also knew how to take advantage of the Entente’
s opposition to Czarism in 1917.
Briefly then: In Poland there are three broad camps – 1. The
Stalinist reaction. 2. The reactionary nationalist opposition. 3. The
peasant-worker opposition which struggles for a “new Poland,
authentically democratic and socialist.” The rightist opposition is
doomed to annihilation because it is reactionary and utopian. The
peasant-worker opposition is to the left of Stalinism and therefore
its defeat signifies our defeat. The opposition, whether it wills it
or not, opens the road for Europe and Poland toward socialism.
Our task is to combat the petty bourgeois-peasant illusions on the
possibility of “peasant democracy,” that is, petty bourgeois, and
to give a socialist and revolutionary consistency to this movement,
laying bare the vacillations and ambiguities of Mikolajczyk. Behind
Mikolajczyk’s back an anti-Stalinist, independent Socialist Party
has been formed with a centrist-reformist character. It is our duty
to fight at their side and to give them a developed revolutionary
program. If we isolate ourselves from this movement and declare it
“reactionary” we give aid to the Stalinists and close the road to
revolutionary developments in Poland. This, the Fourth International
and Comrade Frank ought to understand.
 
What Kind of “Social Revolution” Is Taking Place in Central Eastern Europe?
Analyzing Russian economic policy in occupied Europe, Frank
arrives at the conclusion that generally speaking, a “state
capitalism” of various degrees of perfection and completion is
being set up. He attributes “highly progressive” virtues to the
Stalinist nationalization of industry, forgetting that this
nationalization is reactionary because it serves the aims of Russian
imperialism: plunder, robbery and spoliation for the purpose of
“primitive accumulation” of capital (courageous Frank! He always
sees some progress). He also estimates the progressive worth of the
Stalinist agrarian reforms to be considerable, arguing, however, only
on the basis of the figures emanating from Stalinist sources and
taking the official declarations of the Stalinist ministers for good
coin. For these reasons, Frank, though he analyzes the political
crimes of the “Stalinist reaction” (bravo, bravo), absolves them
for the fundamental reason that Stalinism realizes, in the Marxist
sense, a “social revolution,” “if the social revolution
signifies the transfer of power from one class to another.” (Here
Frank recognizes the Stalinist bureaucracy as a new social class,
thus tacitly accepting Shachtman’s theory, nothing more and nothing
less!) For this reason, Frank gives “critical support” to the
Stalinist bureaucracy’ against the anti-Stalinist opposition (Frank
does not distinguish between the reactionary bourgeois opposition and
that of the worker-peasants) classifying the entire opposition as
“reactionary.” Accepting for a moment Frank’s logic, we ask:
What kind of “social revolution” occurs under Russian
occupation? Are there two kinds of revolution in our time –
socialist and bourgeois-democratic? The Stalinists proclaim that they
are realizing a phase of the “democratic revolution.” If Frank
accepts this point of view, he ought to demand the liquidation of the
Fourth International and request admission into the Stalinist Party
in order to aid with his critique the realization of this so “highly
progressive” social revolution. If the GPU does not accept him,
then he ought to transform the Fourth International into a
pro-Stalinist party, which from the “critical” point of view will
support Stalin’s so “highly progressive” historical
realizations.
A considerable Marxist political literature and the experience of
the most important Communist parties of this region of Europe, the
Polish, German and Czech parties, teach us that the democratic
revolution terminated in these countries in 1918–20, with the
liquidation of the Russian and Austro-Hungarian feudal empires, with
the setting up of the national bourgeois states, with the agrarian
reforms in Poland, Lithuania, Finland, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, etc.
The figures of the agrarian reform in Poland demonstrate the much
greater sweep of the bourgeois agrarian reform than that of the
Stalinists. The Polish Republic distributed more than 3,000,000
hectares, the Stalinists only 1,300,000. The Polish agrarian reforms
began in the Western part in 1821, in Austria in 1848, in Russia in
1864. There were much larger estates in Eastern Prussia, Pomerania
and Mecklenburg than in Central Poland, yet no one dares affirm that
Germany was a feudal country. The agrarian reforms in the Baltic
countries, in Rumania and in Czechoslovakia were much more “radical”
than in Poland itself. The first regimes established in these
countries were bourgeois-democratic, for the first time in history.
In Hungary, a short-lived socialist regime was established. In
Germany, attempts were made to put such a regime in power. The
programs of the Communist Parties in their best days, whether Polish,
Czechoslovakian or German, were: The socialist revolution is on
the order of the day. If Frank accepts the Stalinist theory of a
“democratic revolution” then he betrays the Marxist program. The
truth is that Frank is simply impotent before this crucial problem.
With his theory of “mixed economies” and the “bastard” regime
of property forms, and the Stalinist “social revolution,” Frank
has stumbled into a blind alley. What kind of a revolution is it,
Comrade Frank, socialist, bureaucratic or bourgeois? The workers of
Europe as well as ourselves desire an answer.
We believe that the democratic revolution was completed in
Poland, Czechoslovakia, Eastern Germany, Rumania, Hungary and
Yugoslavia in the years 1918–20. The weak and sickly native
bourgeoisie and its capitalism gave way to twentieth century
Bonapartism in these countries and evolved toward an imperfect
totalitarianism which fell under the influence of German fascism
(Pilsudski in Poland, Horthy in Hungary, the dictatorship of King
Alexander in Yugoslavia, etc.) This type of regime was not pure
fascism because it lacked the capitalist and imperialist base, par
excellence, of fascism as in Germany. The German occupation signified
the “totalization” of this reactionary process. However, the
German defeat liberated the social movement of the masses which
tended toward socialism. What kind of a movement was this? Frank
himself replies, a socialist movement, a forerunner of the “socialist
revolution.” it would seem. It was not Stalin’s army, then,
which liberated the social movement of the masses, but the historical
situation, the completed democratic phase and the necessity of the
socialist revolution which liberated this movement. The “Red”
Army represented the march of the “Stalinist reaction,” the march
of the Stalinist counter-revolution which replaced the Nazi
counter-revolution. The ingenuous belief of the masses in the
revolutionary role of the Red Army cannot be identified with the
real, reactionary role Of this army, Comrade Frank. The role of the
Red Army was clearly counter-revolutionary, its mission was to crush
the social movements of the masses which tended toward a socialist
revolution, the only revolution possible in any part of Europe.
This approaching, almost imminent, socialist revolution was
repulsed by the counter-revolutionary leagues, this time the
Stalinists, and a “bastard” regime installed with “mixed
economies” and a coalition between the “far-sighted”
bourgeoisie (how nice) and the Stalinist bureaucracy. If this regime
cannot be democratic because the democratic stage has already been
concluded, according to Marxist theory and program, then it can only
be a socialist revolution or the counter-revolution. We affirm
that it is a Stalinist counter-revolution which realizes this “state
capitalism,” the rule of Russian imperialism which carries out
the sack and spoliation, the “primitive accumulation” of capital;
it is the reactionary Stalinist dictatorship which engages in the
persecution of the worker and peasant masses, the savage terror
against the Trotskyist opposition and the elemental opposition of the
workers and peasants. For us, the “capitalism of the state,” with
its “nationalization of industry,” with its “agrarian reform,”
signifies neither “progress” nor a “highly progressive social
revolution,” but the only possible form of the imperialist
counter-revolution which can forestall the socialist revolution in
this part of the world. For this reason, we distinguish between the
reactionary and bourgeois opposition and the socialist,
worker-peasant opposition, albeit elemental, to Stalinism. For the
same reason, we consider the Stalinist regimes, “combined” with
the “far-sighted” bourgeoisie, as centers of reaction and
counter-revolution, which we must combat tirelessly and without truce
until the death. We support the elemental opposition of the
proletariat, peasantry and lower middle classes against this
Stalinist “revolution,” with the aim of opening the way toward
progress, toward a socialist revolution that is the antithesis of Stalinism.
The same Comrade Frank who admitted the “capitalism of the
state,” the “primitive accumulation of capital,” the “Stalinist
reaction,” fell into a lamentable eclecticism, attributing to these
phenomena a “highly progressive” role. Worse still, the Marxist
who aspires to lead the world movement against Stalinism, gave frank
support to Stalinism against the workers’ opposition, the
progressive opposition of the workers and peasants. This high
dignitary of the socialist revolution, this Marxist “without stain
or fear of reproach” turns out to be an eclectic centrist, a
“conciliator” in the style of a Kautsky in the year 1947, an
objective ally of the world counter-revolution, represented in
Central Eastern Europe by the “Stalinist reaction.” For him the
counter-revolution is identical with the “socialist revolution”
and the worker-peasant opposition, still elemental, still groping,
and still without revolutionary leadership, is synonymous with the
“bourgeois-capitalist reaction.”
This is indeed a lamentable tragedy, or tragi-comedy of errors,
Comrade Frank. Were you to lead the struggle of the Polish or German
anti-Stalinist and potentially revolutionary workers and recommend
that they support Stalinism because it fulfills a “highly
progressive” mission, a mission that is in its essence a “social
revolution,” these workers would give you a thrashing, and with
good cause. Unfortunately, it is you who at this moment administer
the blows, treacherous blows (although we acknowledge that it is done
without conscious intent) to the proletariat and poor peasantry of
Poland who, for the moment, support Mikolajczyk because he is the
only one who resists the very Stalinism which the “Marxist” Frank
supports. It is to end this tragi-comic situation that we must try to
knock some sense into his thick and stubborn skull. Perhaps the stars
that will light up under his skull will bring some light into his
blind alley. If our effort succeeds It will help prevent the defeat
of the revolutionary proletariat and rebellious peasantry who
struggle against Stalinism, and against whom Frank wishes to strike a
mortal blow because he cannot distinguish them from the capitalist reaction.

Footnote
1. For Lenin, the Polish nobility’s
movement of liberation against Czarism was revolutionary in “gigantic
form”; for Frank, the worker-peasant opposition, basically
revolutionary against the “Stalinist reaction,” is
counter-revolutionary, is an agent of American imperialism. What an
aberration of logic, an aberration toward Stalinist reaction, an
anti-working class and anti-socialist aberration.
 







In accordance with its policy of printing articles by revolutionary socialists from every part of the globe, Labor Action is pleased to print here this highly informative article by Comrade Luis H. Velasco, a South American socialist. It provides information and analysis in harmony with the article of Anthony Ferrara in last week’s Labor Action. Especially striking is its report on the role of the South American Stalinists who have turned to the support of such reactionaries and semi-fascists as Peron in Argentina. – Ed.



*
THE South American continent is a virgin territory of enormous natural resources, rich in basic materials, but until recently poor in industry and capital; hence a rich and savory dish for imperialism. Outside of the most advanced countries (Brazil, Argentina and to a certain extent Chile), the major part of this continent is submerged under a semi-feudal economy and social structure, without revolutionary changes since the Spanish-colonial era. Only Brazil and Argentina succeeded in recent decades in making important progress in the industrialization of their countries, which was so important that it changed their economic and social structure.
Both Brazil and Argentina today possess industry which is of great weight in Squth America. Thereby political and social convulsions are being prepared in these countries. The European wars and the self-destruction of the European imperialisms allowed Brazil and Argentina to achieve a certain degree of national economic independence. But this breathing-spell has already ended. In our times there are neither countries nor continents which are isolated. In the mortal inter-imperialist struggle, the Western Hemisphere is another battleground between the United States and Stalinist Russia.
The “good neighbor” policy of Roosevelt established strong support for American imperialism. The credits bestowed on Brazil are simultaneously the basis for the “continental defense” and North American economic penetration. The important obstacle in this path is Argentina, whose growing industry is opposed to the colonial methods of Wall Street, having been buttressed by the political and economic support of German imperialism before the war’s end. As a result of her defeat In the war, Germany’s positions in Argentina have been largely lost, as is the case with the French and partially the British. Today the rival suitors for the rich “creole virgin” are Yankee capitalism and the bureaucratic imperialism of Stalin!
Yankee imperialism wields powerful economic weapons in its penetration; loans, export of commodities, money, purchase of basic materials and South American products. During the war the United States developed all of’ South American rubber, primarily Brazilian and Bolivian. It also bought minerals, primarily Bolivian tin. Isolated from European industry, the South American countries had to buy the surplus of North American industry, often at higher prices and of poorer quality. This Yankee “commercial” policy causes much anti-American reaction among the Latin American peoples, thus facilitating the subsequent penetration of Russia, which is trying to replace German imperialism in South America.
 
The Growth of the Stalinist Parties
In the course of the late war the Stalinist parties succeeded, thanks to the growth of Russian military prestige, in winning relatively strong positions. This process was favored still further by the defeat of Nazism. The mestizo [white and Indian hybrid – tr.] petty-bourgeoisie suffers from a sickly nationalism and therefore first threw itself into the arms of Nazism and now native Stalinism. The South American workers do not have class traditions, since the social Strata still are in the process of formation and therefore are easy prey for fascism and native Stalinism, as in Argentina.
South American national politics is not based on the struggle of political programs which correspond to consistent social relations and definite social classes. Social relations in South America lack consistency and firmness. The struggle for power reduced itself, until recently, to the struggle of segments and cliques of the feudo-bourgeoisie and the military. Thus the notorious native “caudillismo” [fuehrer-principle – tr.]
There are no programs or firm political movements with a long perspective, but native caudillos who in stall the bloody dictatorships and govern the country according to their “seignorial” pleasure. It is therefore a fertile soil for penetration of Stalinism which, by leaning on caudillism, knows how to nourish the hopes of the petit-bourgeois masses by “progressive” and “anti-imperialist” phrases, in order to raise social armies in the service of Russian imperialism, just as Nazism knew how to raise its fifth columns in the service of German imperialism.
Native Stalinism, not burdened by a revolutionary tradition, has no need for ideological or moral scruples. It therefore proceeds with complete cynicism and unlimited opportunism, to poison the workers with synthetic nationalism (in South America there is no natural, historical nationalism), with up-to-date caudillismo “à la russe” and with ersatz, “made-in-Moscow” socialism.
 
How Prestes Sold Out for a Plate of Lentils
The industrial development in Brazil created a relatively strong labor movement which knew how to emancipate itself from the influence of the dictator, Getulio Vargas. The Communist leader, Carlos Luis Prestes, formerly called the “knight of hope,” who spent nine years in Vargas’ prison, sold out his glorious past and the “hope” of the “cariocas” proletariat to their persecutor for a miserable plate of lentils – his freedom and the “legalization” of the Communist Party. In the Brazilian elections, where the candidate of bourgeois “democracy,” Gomes, ran against General Dutra and against Vargas, the Communists supported Vargas and indirectly the ex-fascist, Dutra. Now, seeing the pro-Yankee policy of Dutra, they go over to a noisy opposition, characterized by declarations “against imperialism” and oaths of loyalty to Stalinist Russia. The knight of hope became a hireling of Stalinism and Vargasism.
In Argentina the Stalinists, headed by Geronimo Ghioldi, unleashed a campaign of resounding phrases against “Nazi-fascist Peron,” forming the “democratic front” with the bourgeoisie and the reformist socialists of Palacios, sponsored by the unsuccessful politician from the United States, Braden.
But when Peron won, the master in the Kremlin ordered a change of front and the Argentine Communists ordered their adherents to support the “progressive” policy of Peron. The GPU caught poor Braden in a trap, thus undermining the Yankee “good neighbor” policy. Now the same Stalinists combat “Bradenism.” The Stalinist maneuver prepares the ground for the resumption of political and commercial relations between Argentina and Stalinist Russia. Nevertheless, in spite of the promises of the Stalinists, Peron feels himself strong and admits no partners; the social base of Peron is broad and that of the Stalinists narrow. They are reduced to a policy of adulatory phrases and sterile courtesies toward the Nazi-fascist regime of Peron.
The Chilean Stalinists have had the greatest successes in the last presidential elections, where in a coalition with the radical party, Gabriel Gonzalez Videla was elected as Stalinist candidate. [1] The new Chilean regime, supported by the Stalinists, affirmed a commercial treaty with Peron’s Argentina, obtaining a loan of 300,000,000 Argentine pesos. It is the first success of the Kremlin, which is trying to form an anti-Yankee bloc around Argentine fascism, but a very dubious success, since Peron does not intend to submit to Russian penetration. He is merely playing the Muscovite card in the game of blackmail against North American capitalism.
 
The Stalinist Policies in Bolivia and Peru
Now the Stalinist penetration tries to ally Bolivia with the Peron bloc. The fall of Villaroel brought very sour comments in Moscow as a “Yankee plot,” in spite of the ingenious enthusiasm of the Chilean and Bolivian Stalinists. Villaroel and Paz-Estenssoro, high Peruvian Nazi-fascist, were allied with Peron and therefore with Stalin. The PIR (Stalinists), expelled from the Bolivian bourgeois democratic front, tried to join the proletarian “left front.” Receiving a kick from the Bolivian proletariat, they joined a coalition with the Bolivian liberals to assure the electoral triumph of the liberal, Guachalla, former Bolivian ambassador to the United States.
In Peru, the Stalinists are of no importance, being reduced to a “tail” of APRA, the petty-bourgeois party of Haya de la Torre.
The Stalinist policy in all of South America has two aims and two “principles”: (1) to serve Russian imperialism and (2) to get the seat of power at all costs, even in a minor role, in order to accomplish the first task assigned by Moscow.
The cynical policy of native Stalinism produces among the conscious proletarians and the Marxist intellectuals a spontaneous resistance which is being transformed into a left-labor current. The growth of the left wing all over South America is associated with the loss of reputation of Stalinism.
 
Two Currents of Revolutionary Socialism
The left-wing current is divided in all countries into two branches: the official Trotskyists and the revolutionary socialists. In Brazil both groups exist, the revolutionary socialist party in our opinion developing a more agile political activity and theoretical work of some prominence. In Argentina, aside from the Trotskyist organization, there is a strong left wing in the socialist party, primarily in the youth, led by the Marxists who edit The Initiator, youth organ, and Socialism, organ of left socialism in Jujuy, one of the centers of the sugar proletariat. In Chile also, aside from the able Trotskyist organization, there are the left socialists who combat Stalinism. In Peru the left-wing intellectuals are grouped around the review, Continental, while the section of the Fourth International publishes Revolution.
Nevertheless, incredible as it may seem, the left-wing labor movement is strongest in Bolivia. This phenomenon is a result of the unilateral Bolivian economy which rests upon mining development, primarily tin. Utilizing the fall of Nazi-fascism, the Bolivian Trotskyists who make up the FOR (Revolutionary Workers Party) knew how to lead the mining proletariat and to direct the magnificent miners’ congress. On the initiative of the miners’ union, the Workers’ Center, a new class union center, was formed.
The Bolivian bourgeoisie is very frightened, for the 60,000 mine workers can paralyze the entire national economy. The Stalinists offer their services as hangmen to the mining magnates against the mining proletariat. In addition, the PSOB, the Socialist Workers Party of Navarro, edits a newspaper, Batalla, adding to the practical work of the POR consistency of doctrine and agitation. The Bolivian Trotskyists are the first in all of South America to lead a mass movement. They are the first on the whole American continent to win Trotskyist parliamentary seats.
The task of the North American Marxist parties consists in tying themselves with fraternal bonds to the left Latin-American currents, giving them theoretical consistency and practical help of class solidarity, in order to build the American proletarian third camp against imperialism and Stalinism. In order to accomplish this task it is necessary to unite both left currents into a single party, conquering all the sectarianisms and prejudices of groups and leaders.
*
Footnote
1. The three Chilean ministers are the first American Stalinists with state portfolios. Of course, their conscience does not bother them in forming a coalition with the bourgeoisie, something greatly, condemned by the Stalinists themselves in their early years.
 







 


Since 1905, Poland and the Baltic countries have
been the firmest and most powerful centers of the revolution. In
them the Socialist proletariat has played an outstanding role.
– Rosa Luxemburg



The Polish Socialist movement is the oldest in all of Central
Europe, including Russia. Born in the shadow of the great Reform of
May 1791, it grew, developed and matured within the framework of the
bourgeois revolution. whose main phases were the national revolutions
of 1831 and 1863 and whose principal object remained-the reconquest
of national independence.
After the defeat of 1831, it was among the Polish émigrés in.
France and Great Britain that the first Socialist groups took shape.
The exiled soldier-peasants filled the ranks, while the
utopian-socialist intellectuals provided the leadership. In 1836
these nuclei formed the organization Polish People, which had
a marked utopian-socialist character, and which combatted with fervor
the feudal-bourgeois Right. Leaving aside the various revolutionary
forays into Poland that were directed by this group and the different
peasant uprisings, 1846 marks the outbreak of the democratic
revolution proper, led by the utopian socialist, Dembowski. As we
have said before, Marx considered this revolution the historic
turning point with which the history of revolutionary “agrarian
democracy” in Poland begins. The leaders of the 1863 revolution
were also under the influence of Marx and Western Socialism. It is a
well-known fact that the generals of this revolution later directed
the defense of the Paris Commune. Walery Wroblewski, a general of the
Commune, was a member of the Executive Committee of the First
International as a representative of the Polish Socialists.
The first workers’ party among the masses, Proletariat
(1878–86), based itself on Marxist doctrine and differed from the
Russian Narodnik movement, with which it was contemporary, in
that it used the tactic of mass action, leading the workers in
Warsaw’s first strikes that frightened the Czarist authorities so
much. Although Proletariat fell under the influence of
Narodnaya Volia after the death of the party’s theoretician,
Lukwik Warynski, the workers’ movement turned in a “Western”
and Marxist direction once more with the birth of the Social
Democracy of Kingdom Poland and Lithuania (SDKPL), which came closer
to Austrian and German Socialism, then in full tide of development.
This tendency found its personification in no less a person than Rosa
Luxemburg, founder and leader of the SDKPL.
 
Native Characteristics and Contrast with Bolsheviks
As we have seen, Polish Socialism was much older than Russian
Socialism. It had its own roots and received its Marxist traditions
at first hand, since its leaders developed under the direct and
personal influence of Marx and Engels, who gave so much importance to
the Polish question. Surely, these are the reasons why Polish
Socialism always maintained its own independent personality expressed
through its independent organizations, the SDKPL and the Polish
Socialist Party (PPS), in spite of the fact that Poland constituted
part of the Czarist Empire. So too, despite the intransigent
internationalism of Rosa Luxemburg, the Lithuanian Social-Democracy,
led by Tyszka J ogiches, did not incorporate itself into the Russian
Social-Democracy but entered the SDKP, forming the SDKPL. Although
the SDKPL considered itself a part of the Russian Social-Democracy by
virtue of its internationalist principles, it submitted neither to
the leadership of the latter nor to its program, maintaining always
its own doctrine, which differed from that of the Bolsheviks. At the
Second Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Party, the SDKPL
delegation voted against the program of national
self-determination and abandoned the congress, without thereby
signifying any intention of breaking with the Bolsheviks.
The political doctrine of the SDKPL was Luxemburgism, not
Leninism. Its fundamental theories were set forth in Rosa
Luxemburg’s Development of Capitalism in Poland, written in
German and published in Switzerland at the end of the last century,
and in her Accumulation of Capital.
“From the historical point of view. the accumulation of
capital constitutes the process of an exchange of values between
capitalist and pre-capitalist systems of production.” (R.
Luxemburg, Die Akkumulation des Kapitals, page 297)
It was on this premise that she based her opinion that the
pre-capitalist market of Czarist Russia was indispensable for the
capitalist industry of Poland. Hence Rosa”s classical phrase,
“Poland is bound to Russia with chains of gold.” From that same
premise was also derived the repudiation of the struggle for national
independence. For Rosa Luxemburg:
“The national state is only an abstraction ... which
does not correspond to the reality.” (Przeglad
socjaldemokatyczny, theoretical organ of the SDKPL, 1908; page 499)
“Not the national state, but the state of rapine,
corresponds to capitalist development.” (Op. Cit., No. 6, 1908.)
It was for this reason that Rosa Luxemburg rejected the program of
national self-determination, arguing that “it does not provide any
practical guide for the daily political struggle of the proletariat,
nor any practical solutions to the national problem.” As a
consequence, Luxemburg counterposed to the slogan of the independent
Polish republic put forth by the PPS, the idea of the common struggle
of the Russian and Polish proletariat for a Russian democratic
republic, in which Poland would have national autonomy.
Lenin skillfully explained the SDKPL point of view by setting it
against the proper historical background and traditions. Polish
Socialism developed in the shadow of the bourgeois revolution and
national uprisings which ended in defeat. In order to break with this
past. and at the same time break with the dominant classes of its own
nation, the Polish proletariat put the main emphasis on the
international struggle. It was not only Rosa Luxemburg, but Warynski
before her who declared, “Our country is the entire world,”
considering the old struggle for independence as outlived. Lenin
considered Rosa”s point of view narrow and “Cracowvianu (at that
time the political émigrés of 1905 were gathered in Cracow, among
them the Russians). He explained it as a reaction to the
petty-bourgeois nationalism of the Fraki (PPS revolutionary
fraction, led by Pilsudski.) With biting irony, Lenin wrote, “They
say that for the mouse the most terrible of wild beasts is the cat.
For Rosa Luxemburg there is no wild beast so enormous as the Fraki.”
In reality these divergencies reflected the differences between
the completed democratic revolution in the West and the actuality of
this revolution in Russia, as posed in the “in-between” territory
of Poland, which through its industrial development and its past
belonged to Western Europe but which was politically incorporated
into Russia.
The second fundamental question which differentiated the Polish
Social-Democrats from the Bolsheviks was the agrarian question. The
capitalist development of agriculture was more advanced in Poland
than in Russia. After the reform of Alexander II, the peasants had
been despoiled of their land and had been compelled to transform
themselves into a factory and agricultural proletariat. In this
fashion a strong layer of agricultural day-laborers was formed,
landless proletariat of the countryside, contracted by the
landlords for a year at a time, who received most of their wages
in the shape of natural products. This layer of agricultural
proletariat was unimportant in Russia, where almost every peasant was
a petty proprietor, including the landless ones.
Among this agricultural proletariat, as extensive in numbers as
the factory proletariat, the SDKPL had considerable influence and led
its daily struggles against the bosses. This too was the basis for
the agrarian program of the SDKPL, which established as its central
point the problem of the day laborers, the proletariat of the
countryside. It also corresponded to the classic scheme which
Kautsky developed in his Agrarian Question. The latter was
based on the capitalist development of German agriculture. Lenin, on
the other hand, found himself confronted by a reality that was
distinctly Russian in its entirety, and was compelled to compromise
with the Populist program of the Social-Revolutionaries, due to the
feudal and petty-bourgeois reality of Russian agriculture, so
different from that prevailing in the West. This was also the reason
why Rosa Luxemburg opposed the slogan of “land to the peasants,”
and proposed the direct nationalization of the land, and its
administration by the state or other organs of Socialist self-government.
The seizure of the landed estates by the peasants
according to the short and precise slogan of Lenin – “Go and take
the land for yourselves” – simply led to the sudden, chaotic
conversion of large landownership into peasant landownership ...
Through this mass seizure and the chaotic and purely arbitrary manner
of their execution, differentiation in landed property, far from
being eliminated was even further sharpened. – The Russian Revolution
Analyzing the anarchic partitioning of the land in the Russian
Revolution and the growth of the power and influence of the rich
peasant, the kulak, Rosa Luxemburg correctly wrote: “The
shift of power took place to the disadvantage of the interests of the
proletariat and of socialism.” (Op. Cit., pages 23–24)
In the agrarian program, so differently viewed by the Bolsheviks and
the Polish Social-Democrats, we see reflected the real contradiction
between the completed democratic revolution in the West and the
actuality of this revolution in Russia. Poland constituted the real
theater of these contradictions.
 
Differences on “Spontaneity” and “Party Direction”
The third very important question that divided the Polish and
Russian Marxists was the “spontaneity” concept of the former
versus the “party directive” concept of the latter. The
Bolshevik Party was subjected to an iron discipline, centralized
under the leadership of a Central Committee that was all-powerful in
the periods that elapsed between congresses of the party. Against the
Bolsheviks’ theory on the preponderant role of the will of the
party in the preparation of the social revolution, Rosa Luxemburg
expounded the free and spontaneous initiative of the masses in the
revolution and the workers’ state, insisting that the class control
the initiative and leadership of the party. Rejecting the criticisms
hurled against the Bolsheviks by Kautsky, Rosa showed the dangers
that threatened the Russian Revolution from the side of the
dictatorship of the party, which she called “a dictatorship in the
bourgeois sense, in the sense of the Jacobin power.”
Criticizing the Bolsheviks, Rosa wrote:
“The socialist society can and should be the product of
history born out of its own experience, in the hour of historic
realization of the process itself, of living history ... Socialism
cannot be decreed or enforced by ukase.”
Underlining the spontaneity of the historic process in this
fashion, Luxemburg attributed the decisive role to the free
initiative of the masses.
“All this shows that the cumbersome mechanism of
democratic institutions’ possesses a powerful corrective –
namely, the living movement of the masses, their unending pressure.
And the more democratic, the livelier and stronger the pulse-beat of
the political life of the masses, the more direct and complete is
their influence – despite rigid party banners, outgrown tickets
(electoral lists), etc.”
Luxemburg’s criticism was severe, despite her ardent support of
the Bolsheviks, and history has shown the inspired Rosa to have been
right in many respects. Here, also, two concepts clashed, reflecting
the real contradictions between the activity of the proletarian
masses in Poland, educated as they were in the school of politics,
and the need for constant direction by party workers in Russia, faced
with the lethargy and passivity of the masses at the end of the last century.
 
Structure and Internal Democracy in SDKPL
The structure of the SDKPL was different from that of the
Bolsheviks. The latter, as we know, based itself on the secret cells
of active and disciplined militants who submitted to the leadership
of the Central Committee. The Polish party based itself directly
on the proletarian mass, resting on the illegal organizations of the
unions and the factory groups. Thus the SDKPL grew organically from
below, from the proletarian mass itself. Although it possessed a
well defined doctrine and an excellent nucleus of theoreticians, the
latter democratically submitted their concepts to democratic control
by the workers. The theoretical work harmonized well with the forces
in the party, and through these with the workers movement in general.
The SDKPL was, like the Bolshevik Party, illegal, but given the
education and political schooling of the Polish proletariat, it could
support itself on much broader groups than the closed Bolshevik
cells. The illegal unions provided the foundation for the SDKPL
and through them the party directed the mass movements. Its structure
approached closer to the structure of the German Social-Democratic
Party, while at the same time retaining fully its revolutionary
and clearly working-class character. In the SDKPL the role of the
proletarian base, the direct intervention of the proletarian mass,
had the decisive weight.
In addition, the Polish Social-Democracy understood and practiced
internal democracy and democratic centralism differently from the
Russians. The ideological struggle developed freely within the party,
with both groups having official recognition. The majority of the
Central Committee was led by Rosa and Warsky; the minority the
so-called “secessionists,” by Radek, Lensky, etc. Fundamental
questions were not involved, as was the case between the Bolsheviks
and Mensheviks, but merely shades of interpretation of the national
program and the question of Polish independence.
 
Struggle Between Leninism and Luxemburgism in the CCP
From the union of the SDKPL and the PPS~Left (not to be confused
with the Fraki) in 1918 was born the Communist Party of
Poland. But the merger was not organic, and did not proceed from a
firm acceptance of the principles of the SDKPL by many militants of
the PPS, who still retained many remnants of opportunism. On the
other hand, the “Luxemburgists” stubbornly refused to revise the
program of the SDKPL on the national, agrarian, and organizational
questions, and fought against Lenin’s compromise with the Left
Social-Revolutionaries. The history of the CPP constitutes a struggle
between “Luxemburgism,” Leninism, PPS-Leftism and Stalinism. This
struggle can be divided into three principal periods: (1) 1919–24,
supremacy of the “Luxemburgists” of the SDKPL. (2) 1925–29,
supremacy of the PPS-Leftists of the “Majority.” (3) 1930–36,
the victory of the Stalinists and the degeneration and dissolution of
the party.
In the first phase; after a period in which the leadership was
shared jointly by both fractions (SDKPL and PPS-Left), the SDKPL
group, headed by Domski (Henry Kamienski) and Sofia Unschlicht,
daughter of the old SDKPL fighter J. Unschlicht, was victorious. Its
principal strategy was based on the rejection of the democratic
revolution as the goal of the Polish proletariat, in sustaining
firmly the program of a workers-socialist government, and in
organizing the workers councils (rady robotnicze) which sought
to take power. For this reason the first elections were boycotted
by the CPP, given the strong socialist feeling among the workers.
In the second elections, the strategy of the CPP was “the union of
the urban proletariat and the day-laborers of the country-side”
(Zwiazek proletariatu miast i wsi), that is to say, the
proletariat of town and country, without considering the peasantry.
This, of course, corresponded to the CPP’s opposition to Lenin’s
program: “land to the peasants.” It was because of this
opposition on the part of the CPP that the Bolsheviks did not
partition the land in occupied Poland in 1920. The “Luxemburgists”
resisted recognizing the independence of the country, faithful to the
fundamental conception of Rosa Luxemburg. They opposed any Bolshevik
intervention in party matters, and also protested against “the
revolution brought on the point of the bayonet” (referring to the
Russ~Polish war of 1920). Since they held fast to the perspective
of socialist revolution and the workers government, the Luxemburgists
divorced themselves from the Polish reality, where the bourgeoisie
had made its power secure, thanks to the support of the reformists
and the peasants. Their previously correct tactic left them
hanging in mid-air and degenerated into ultra-leftist actions, and
culminated in the uprising of Cracow in 1923, which the bourgeoisie
crushed. Clearly, this deviation was due in large part to the
intervention of Zinoviev, and was analogous to the “strategy”
adopted in Germany. There are no documents at hand to confirm this
thesis, nevertheless the development of the Domski group toward
“Trotskyism,” its support of Trotsky, and its seizure in Russia
support this thesis. Domski and Sophia Unschlicht, ousted from the
central committee of the CPP, were never able to return to Poland and
from 1924 on lived in Russian prisons and Siberian exile. They
disappeared in the great purges of later years.
The second period is characterized by the victory of the PPS-Left
opposition, led by Koszutska, Walecki, Wroblewski and Warski. The
latter was an ex-member of the SDKPL, one of its founders and a loyal
friend of Rosa Luxemburg. This phase corresponded to the period of
the Bucharin-Stalin coalition against Trotskyism and Luxemburgism.
Its principal advance was the definitive recognition of the
Bolshevik program on the national and agrarian questions. The old
controversy had ended in the defeat of the Luxemburgists. The content
of this revision) however, deviated from the classic Leninist content
of 1918, adapting itself to the new reality and approached the Right
Wing Bucharinist concept. Hence there was introduced the famous
theory of “two stages” of the revolution, a theory long outgrown
by the Polish reality. This theory served as the theoretical basis
for the support of Pilsudski in 1926, describing the Pilsudski coup
d’etat as a “petty-bourgeois” revolution, a “Polish
Kerenskiad.” It was, however, not a “Polish Kerenskiad” but a
reactionary Bonapartism. The party's strategy tended to support the
reformists and populists, expressing itself in the slogan of a
“Workers-Peasants Bloc” (not a union of the urban and country
proletariat as before), whose object was to achieve a “democratic”
worker-peasant government – that is to say – to realize the
bourgeois-democratic revolution. In spite of these errors, the CPP
made much progress among the workers, the peasants, and the national minorities.
 
Stalinist Intervention
This group supported the Bucharin-Stalin coalition against
Trotsky, and shared the fate of this coalition. The Russians took
advantage of the defeat of the Luxemburgists in order to strengthen
their intervention in the CPP and little by little introduced
“Bolshevik monolithism.” The existence of the “Minorityites”
headed by Lenski, Rying, Spis, Rval, old members of the SDKPL, who
criticized the theory of the “two stages” was used to disorganize
the CPP. The struggle between the two fractions was “balanced” by
a Russian representative on the CC, who at times voted in favor of
one, and at times in favor of the other fraction in accordance with
instructions. On crushing Bucharin, Stalin decided to crush his
Polish allies and installed the Lenski group in power.
With this begins the era of Stalinist domination in the CPP.
The return of the “Luxemburgists” was no return to the old
Marxist tradition, but a frightful caricature which took a Stalinist
form. Although the criticism of the “two stages” was correct, it
took the grotesque and degenerated form of the theory of
“Social-Fascism.” The CPP fought the “Centrolev”
(concentration of PPS and peasants against Pilsudski), supporting in
this fashion the growth of dictatorship in Poland, just as
Thaelman supported Hitler against the Social-Democrats in Germany. In
separating itself categorically from Trotskyism and lending itself to
servile support of Stalin, the group lost all ideological
independence and succumbed completely to Stalinism. The leaders of
the “Minority” entered into a servile competition for Stalin’s
favor, proclaiming the theory of a Polish “imperialism” which
“threatened” Russia, and proclaiming the Poles of Silesia and
Pomerania “independent nationalities.” Hitler’s rise to power
in 1938 did not awaken any reaction on the part of the “Minority”
leadership. Henrykowski and the others praised Thaelman and Neuman,
affirming that, Hitler’s conquest of power brought nearer the
victory of the proletariat. The party had speedily and completely
decayed at the top.
But at the bottom there was a strong critical reaction. The
Trotskyist opposition grew from these foundations, forming notable
groups in Warsaw, Lodz and Dombrowa, old fortresses of the SDKPL. Its
weakness lay in the fact that it did not divorce itself decisively
from the degenerated CPP and did not declare itself in favor of an
open and frank struggle. The old “Majorityites” were also in
opposition. Although the leaders had handed the party over to the
Comintern, the rank and file were opposed to Stalinism. Some sectors
of this opposition came close to the Trotskyists. But the
oppositionists were ruthlessly expelled. Denounced and isolated, they
had no great influence on the course of the official policy and could
not save the CPP. Since the entire apparatus was illegal and
dependent for funds on Moscow, the Stalinists were victorious all
along the line.
 
The Annihilation of the CPP
The party died gradually, degenerating like a useless organ that
is inherited from the past and is quite outlived by the present
reality. Under the pretext of “police connections,” entire
organizations and militants of proven worth and great merit were
isolated. The militants who came from the prisons were isolated
and spied upon by the party’s GPU. In these same prisons, under the
pretext of Communist organization, the thinking of the political
prisoners was controlled by the party whips. Those who resisted were
subjected to a boycott and were denied aid in the way of food, money,
and reading matter, which was provided by the “communal”
organization in the jail.
In addition to the official delegates of the Comintem, officials
of the GPU were introduced into the Central Committee of the Party.
These GPU officials were at times Poles who had long ago lost contact
with the country, and with the workers movement in both Poland and
Russia. It was at this time that Bierut, now President of Poland by
grace of Stalin, began his career. Bierut was sent into the CPP by
the Polish section of the GPU to purge all those suspected of
opposition. Also employed for this purpose was Gomulka-Wieslaw, a
relatively young militant of inferior status, without any theoretical
ability, who had played no role in the previous struggles. His sole
virtue was his absolute loyalty to Stalin and Bienkowski (Bierut).
The GPU prepared “provocations,” complete frameups, in order to
demoralize not only the CPP but also the PPS. Denounced by the GPU
were old and well-known militants: Wroblewski, editor of the party
organ; Winiarski, leader of the KPZU (Party of the Western Ukraine,
autonomous section of the CPP); Dombal, famous leader and founder of
the Red Peasant International and former deputy in the Polish Diet,
who enjoyed a considerable reputation throughout the country;
Wojewodzki, former deputy in the diet for White Russia; Tarski,
former deputy for Warsaw, and many others. The other leaders were
deported to Siberia where they were islated and watched so that they
could not transmit any messages to Poland. The prominent leaders of
the PPS were also accused of serving as agents of the Polish Police,
as was, for instance, Zaremba, leader of the left wing of the PPS.
But the PPS knew how to resist these barefaced slanders. The CPP,
however, caught between two fires, persecuted by the Polish Police
and the GPU, was unable to defend itself. To use a phrase of Rosa
Luxemburg’s, it was a “rotting corpse.”
The last murderous blow came in 1937 with the turn toward the
right that prepared for open collaboration with the bourgeoisie
through the Popular Fronts. In the abused, degenerated,
GPU-controlled CPP, faint echoes of old traditions were heard in the
whispered opposition to the Popular Front. Since the party was
isolated from the masses, and its leaders were paid employees of
Stalin living in Russia, the final blow was easy. It was simply a
matter of officially proclaiming the death of a party that for some
time now had been a corpse. The burial was accompanied by the
sound of the assassin’s gun in the dungeons of the GPU. The
principal victim was the secretary-general, Lenski, Stalin’s man of
confidence in 1930, “purger” of the party, now accused of
being a spy for Pilsudski during the entire period of his militancy.
Many of his collaborators followed him.
With the dissolution of the CPP, the GPU officially took over the
leadership of the Communist part of the Polish workers movement,
preparing adequate cadres for new infamies and betrayals. The loyal
Stalinists were sent into the unions, the PPS, the legal workers’
organizations, in order to penetrate and demoralize the entire
workers and peasants movement as well as the Marxist intellectuals.
The GPU operated now in the peripheries of the PPS, the unions, the
Socialist workers youth, the university groups; penetrated the
peasant organizations, the middle-class, the intellectual circles,
the literary periodicals, forming everywhere nuclei of decomposition
and demoralization. It succeeded in creating a pro-Stalinist wing
in the PPS, headed by Szczyrek; it succeeded in grouping the
leftish intellectuals who had no political traditions around the
literary congress of Lvov, headed by Wasilewska and Jedrychowski, who
from morning until night wallowed in self-anointed glory as the
“workers leaders.” The GPU strove at all costs to create a
Popular Front, flattering even Pilsudski and Rydz-Smigly, forming
“democratic clubs,” deceiving the innocent and naive old
professors. The new reformist tactic attracted many opportunists,
job-seekers, careerists and downright scoundrels to Stalinism,
forming a vast Fifth Column that was later to play an infamous role
in the service of the Kremlin against the interests of the workers
and the country as a whole. Thus Stalin prepared years in advance
the annihilation of the CPP in order to forestall any protest from
the proletariat and have a free hand for his infamous imperialist policy.
 
Annihilation of the PPS, the Unions and the Underground
With the dissolution of the CPP, that section of the Comintern
most dangerous to Stalin had been wiped out and the way lay open for
his imperialist program in Poland. But there still remained the PPS,
the unions, and the peasant left, all of which represented a danger.
When the Russian troops, together with the Nazis, ravaged Poland in
1939, they proceeded to deport Poles, Ukrainians, White-Russians,
Jews, and Lithuanians; the total number of victims reaching between a
million and a half and two million. The GPU, which had been securely
established in Poland long before this, jailed and deported above
all the Communist and Socialist workers and intellectuals and their
sympathizers. Only those elements the GPU trusted remained free
in the annexed territories, to consolidate the occupation and serve
as deputies to the Soviets in the new territories. The PPS, the
Jewish Bund, and ex-Communists were persecuted savagely. It is
sufficient to record the declarations of Lucian Blit, a Bundist
militant, according to which political prisoners for months on end
could not go into the prison yard for a breath of fresh air; were
subjected to hermetic isolation without books and letters from their
families; were unable to receive any relief in the way of clothing or
food; and were punished cruelly with tortures that utilized water and
electric lights; were mistreated physically without mercy, and
finally condemned by the GPU to forced labor or death. (see
Koestler – Yogi and the Commissar.) Lucien Blit was saved
thanks to the agreement between Stalin and Sikorski, but this was not
the case with the prominent leaders of Bund, Erlich and Alter,
assassinated by the GPU without any explanation despite the insistent
requests for the latter by the Polish government. Those leaders of
the PPS discovered by the GPU were jailed and deported. C. Puzak and
Kwapinski, old prisoners of the Czar, visited Siberia once more and
had to be rescued by the Polish government in 1941. (Puzak was put on
trial again in Moscow in 1945 and is now again a prisoner after
having completed his first sentence.)
The GPU which compelled the Communists to support the Nazi
occupiers in 1939–41, began to infiltrate the workers and peasants
underground in 1941 in order to demoralize it. Unlike the tactic in
Western Europe, where the Stalinists supported the Resistance, they
never became part of the “National Unity” in Poland, and fought
the government and the leadership of the underground with all the
means at their disposal. It is enough to record the fact that
after the death of Sikorski, the leadership of the Resistance passed
to the Populists and Socialists. The Communists hardly
participated in the AK (home army), but formed their own unimportant
groupings which attempted to provoke premature uprisings in order
to unleash the Nazi terror, and thus annihilate the powerful
underground. The Moscow radio continually called for the uprising of
Warsaw, Stalin having personally promised all aid to Mikolajczyk in
Moscow. But when the insurrection of Warsaw broke out, Stalin decided
to settle his accounts with the underground by permitting its
liquidation by the Nazis. The AK (home army) was dissolved in the
Russian occupied territories, its members seized en masse, and
the most “dangerous” ones assassinated, in spite of the fact
that the AK had valiantly aided the Russians by engaging the Nazis in
rearguard actions. The bulk of the underground was annihilated at
Warsaw, with the “Red” army collaborating tacitly with the Nazis
in exterminating the resisting Poles. Enough to record the fact that
the PPS, the unions, Trotskyists and rank and file Communists had
constituted the backbone of the Warsaw insurrection. When Warsaw
had been crushed by the Nazis, the Russians continued to strike out
mercilessly at the Polish underground.
With the Red armies came the GPU detachments of “bloodhounds”
to seek out and seize the workers, peasants and intellectuals of the
Resistance, first of all, fastening on the Leftists of all shades.
Those put on trial in Moscow were headed by the Socialists (Puzak)
and Populists (Baginski), but the GPU gave major importance to the
military figures of minor rank (Okulicki) in order to confuse the masses.
With the Lublin committee entered the hangmen of the GPU,
specialists in purges and liquidations en masse. To meet the
problem of ruling a conquered country, the Polish Workers Party (PPR)
was created, absolutely subject to Moscow, without tested leaders,
and ruled by the agents of the GPU (Bierut). The Polish “Underground
Labor Movement” in which the Socialists and opposition communists
were grouped, was exterminated. With elements who had succeeded in
infiltrating, a new pro-Stalinist PPS was formed, led by Stalin’s
creatures (Osobka, Matuszewski, Szwalbe). Not one of them had played
any previous role in the PPS. Some, like Szwalbe, had been adherents
of Pilsudski and had never belonged to the PPS. The old leaders of
the PPS had been assassinated in part by the Nazis (Niedzialkowski,
Czapinski, Barlicki), while others (like Kwapinski, Prager, Ciolkosz)
emigrated to London; the rest formed an opposition inside the PPS in
Poland. The GPU roundly rejected Zulawski’s request to form an
independent Socialist party. Thus the GPU annihilated all the old
workers’ parties in Poland, first the CPP, then the PPS and the Bund.
The unions which existed illegally under the Nazi occupation were
now in the name of legalization transformed into state organizations
after the Soviet fashion, organizations designed to exploit and
oppress the working class. The old union leaders (Zulawski,
Puzak, Stanczyk) were pushed aside, and Stalinist agents named by
Moscow put in their place. GPU detachments were used against these
Polish workers who had no desire to renounce the right to strike.
The tribunals condemned striking workers to decades in jail. Yet in
spite of all their totalitarian power, the Polish Stalinists did not
succeed until the very end in defeating the Polish workers’
movement in the Russian manner. This is explained by the independent
traditions of Socialism in Poland, and the enormous capacity of
resistance inherent in the workers movement, demonstrated so many
times against the Czar, against the Polish “Colonels,” and
against the Nazis. The Peasant party of Mikolajczky also
constitutes a barricade against Stalinist totalitarianism. Behind
it, the workers opposition is regrouping itself once again, led by
Zulawski, Drobner and others. True, it is a vacillating opposition,
in part reformist, in part centrist, but its existence demonstrates
the evident resistance of the Polish workers at the present time.
 
Some Conclusions
The native traditions of the Polish labor movement, as much in the
sphere of theory as in that of organization, constitute a permanent
threat to Stalin. The role of the CPP in the life of the Comintern in
Lenin’s day was very important. By virtue of personal ties and
revolutionary orientation, the Polish Marxists belonged to the
intimate circle of Lenin’s co-workers and old Bolsheviks. It
suffices to mention the role of Dzierzynski, Unschlicht, Radek, Kohn,
Marchlewski, Mienzynki, in order to confirm this assertion. Outside
of the Russian Bolshevik party, the KPD (Communist party of Germany)
and the CPP were considered the most important in the Comintern: the
first being called the “biggest,” the latter being called the
“best.” (Die Deutsche, die Groesste, die Polnische, die
Beste.) Stalin always feared a renewed opposition within the CPP.
That is why the annihilation of the CPP was the first to take place
in the Comintern, paralleling the annihilation of the old Bolsheviks.
For this reason, too, the dissolution of the CPP presaged the
dissolution of the cadaverous Comintern.
Despite all this, in Poland more than in any other country
occupied by the Russians, we note a spontaneous workers opposition.
There too, we see the attempts to organize this opposition
politically. Although it is the reformists and vacillating centrists
who are engaged in these attempts at the moment, it is our task to
support them, to give a greater programmatic consistency and
revolutionary firmness to this opposition. The theoretical study of
the heritage of Polish Marxism can aid greatly in reviving the Polish
revolutionary and international movement. The Stalinists popularize
vulgar notions on the differences between Leninism and Luxemburgism
and reduce this problem, so highly important for Marxism, to a
mechanical and vulgar negation of “Luxemburgism” as an
Ultra-leftist “deviation.”
In reality, these differences reflected the very real
contradictions between the tasks of Western and Russian Socialism.
They constituted, also, a reflection of the different stages in the
development of world socialism, since the “Western” Socialists
were intent on realizing the Socialist revolution, the Russians on
realizing the democratic revolution. Only by taking into account
these differences in their process of historic development can we
understand them. The tragic fate of the Russian Revolution, its
degeneration into a hateful totalitarian tyranny confirms the
prophetic criticism of that inspired Socialist Cassandra, Rosa
Luxemburg. The only answer of contemporary Marxism to the vulgar
fables of the Stalinist “theoreticians” is to restore Rosa
Luxemburg to her rightful place in the traditions of the movement.
 




THE Bolivian elections are very typical of South American countries. Out of three to four million inhabitants, only some 90,000 citizens voted, that is, about 2.5 per cent of the total population. These figures show in the best possible manner the feudal and aristocratic exclusiveness of the Bolivian bourgeoisie and the isolation of the native peasant and laboring masses from the political life of the country. These figures prove more than anything else the colonial and semi-feudal structure of Bolivia. While in other South American countries the number of electors increases in proportion to the total number of inhabitants, the low number of electors stands as a characteristic of “creole democracy.” In Bolivia, only the citizen who knows how to read and write has the right to vote. The overwhelming majority of the workers and peasants are illiterate and thus excluded from electoral participation.
Therefore, the eulogies of the bourgeois press of Bolivia, Chile and Argentina on the “victory of the plateau democracy” seem somewhat strained to us. The results did not give a decisive majority to any of the competing bourgeois factions. On one side, the three republican parties united in a Republican Socialist Union, with Enrique Hertzog heading its slate as candidate for the presidency. On the other side, a liberal-Stalinist bloc was formed, in the Chilean fashion, headed by the former Bolivian ambassador to Washington, Luis F. Guachalla. The Stalinists were defeated in their attempt to form a “left front” in order to deliver the workers to the mining bourgeoisie, and were expelled by the republicans from the FDA (Democratic Anti-Fascist Front). They succeeded in cooking up in the nick of time the bloc of “national conciliation.” The main object of the latter is to stabilize the capitalist restoration, which came to power over the body of the popular revolution of July 21, and externally to form a South American bloc around Peron under the good auspices of the “little father,” Stalin. The electoral results gave the republican Hertzog a small majority, but the Stalinist-liberal bloc does not want to recognize it and, hoping to get a majority in congress, demands that parliament resolve the presidential question definitively – of course, as in Chile, in favor of the Stalinist candidate.
 
Background to Elections
Without pre-judging the final result, we consider that the elections, through their lack of a decisive majority for one or the other faction, demonstrate the division of the feudo-bourgeoisie into two factions, and therefore the incapacity of the bourgeoisie to govern the country and resolve the pressing problems. The division of the bourgeoisie into two factions, republican and Stalinist-liberal, reflects the grave economic and social problems of the country, the misery and discontent of the exploited masses. Bolivian politics is determined by the annual production of 40,000 tons of tin, which is determined in turn by a single capitalist, the tin king, Simon Patino. On his decisions depend hundreds of thousands of working class families who live from mine labor, the national budget, and hence the struggle of the bourgeois factions, the fate of the middle class and the public servants.
The second characteristic of the Bolivian elections is the growth of the Stalinist PIR. The PIR will have a fraction in the congress as strong as the traditional right-wing, composed of about 31 deputies and five senators. The growth of the PIR reflects the political evolution of the formerly pro-Nazi, pro-Hitler and anti-Semitic middle class which is now disillusioned and in search of a new totalitarian master. It must be admitted that the plateau Stalinists demonstrate great ability to conquer the middle class with their slogans of “national conciliation,” fraudulent “democratic revolution,” etc. They also knew how to frighten the bourgeoisie with the fantasy of a “miners’ revolution,” for which they offered their services as hangmen and condottieres. Simon Patino, the tin king, favored the “national conciliation” of the Stalinists in the hope that the new regime would have a sound social base and would also have the necessary forces at its disposal to defeat the mine workers and solve the crisis in tin at the expense of the blood and lungs of the native mine workers.
But the growth of the PIR brought to the fore other phenomena: the Stalinists lost out in the mining and industrial districts of the country like Oruro, Potosi and La Paz; on the other hand, they won in the rural districts of Cochabamba, Santa Cruz and Beni, where there are no industries and hence no industrial proletariat. The PIR herewith ceases to be a working class party as it was two years ago, and becomes a bourgeois party which operates among the middle classes and the backward proletariat. Therefore, there is a danger to the Stalinists that the bourgeoisie which works with them may give them the boot since the Stalinists no longer represent the working class masses and cannot “discipline” them in the interests of the bourgeoisie.
The third most important consequence of the elections is the attitude of the industrial- proletariat. Of course the figures already cited at the beginning of this article demonstrate how narrow was the layer of the proletariat which intervened in the elections: only those workers who know how to read and write, which means the urban and mine workers who are already integrated in cultural and political life. In spite of this obstacle, the labor movement of the plateau region made important steps forward, steps which deserve analysis by politically awakened workers of the entire world.
New Labor Center
The miners’ congress of Pulacayo, which offered a platform of class struggle, was the first stage in the rebirth of the Bolivian labor movement. The second stage was the new labor formation, THE LABOR CENTER, composed of miners, cereal workers, railway workers, chauffeurs and mechanics of Oruro. In spite of the rabid opposition of the Stalinists who headed the CSTB (Union Confederation of Bolivian Workers), affiliated to the CSTAL (Union Confederation of Latin American Workers), led in turn by the servant of Stalin, Lombardo Toledano – the organization of a new revolutionary union center is already a fact.
The revolutionary workers and the revolutionary socialist organizations of both Americas ought to make an example of the valiant action of the Bolivian Trotskyists, who are opening new roads for the trade union movement and freeing it from the opportunist and traitorous Stalinist influence. The action of the plateau mine workers against the Stalinists is not isolated from the rest of the continent. From Chile comes the report that the Chilean socialists threaten to organize a new union movement if the Stalinists do not cease to monopolize the unions for the ends of their Muscovite high priest.
The miners’ congress and the formation of the Workers’ Center prepared the formation of the “Proletarian United Front,” which presented its own candidates in the industrial and mining districts of Potosi, Ouro and La Paz, capturing thus far two senatorships and about six deputies. These deputies will be the first Trotskyist deputies in the entire world.
 
Weaknesses of Movement
Unfortunately, the workers’ victory in Bolivia is not without its dark side. The plateau proletariat is very weak numerically, lacking genuine socialist traditions and without political experience. In past years it was divided between the democratic-PIR influence and the Nazi influence of the MNR (National Revolutionary Movement). The revolution therefore took it by surprise, without a clear understanding of the program and real aims of the proletariat. Now, in a brief post-revolutionary period the proletariat, led by the miners, overcame its backwardness and went on to great victories. But we do not know if these electoral victories have class consistency or if they will be lasting.
Even the POR, section of the Fourth International, has neither ideological nor programmatic consistency, as we have analyzed before. It is the exponent of a semi-Stalinist program of bourgeois-democratic revolution, realizable under the proletarian dictatorship. Furthermore, in spite of the miners’ congress and the creation of the Workers’ Center and the “Workers’ Front,” habits and traces of Nazi-fascism still exist in the mining districts. In Llalagua, where the Trotskyist deputies come from, thousands of votes went to the Nazi candidate for president, Victor Paz Estenssoro, the old “theoretician” of the regime of Villaroel, who was hung. The candidate for senate of the Proletarian Front, Juan Lechin, is an ex-member of the movement who also received votes for the vice-presidency from the defeated MNR.
In La Paz, the POR formed a bloc with the PSOB, also a Trotskyist party, and accepted the candidates of the latter as a common slate. But at the last minute the POR arbitrarily imposed the doubtful candidacy of Lechin for senator of La Paz. The militants of the PSOB complain of the lack of loyalty of the Poristas and their Stalinist opportunism for the purpose of achieving electoral successes. The POR contends that it dominates the mines; nevertheless, it cannot eliminate the thousands of pro-Nazi votes and has to accept Lechin as head candidate of the Proletarian Front. All of this obscures the great Trotskyist victory in Bolivia. Time will tell if our reflections are justified. Let us hope not.
In any event, Trotskyism in Bolivia is leading a movement of proletarian masses and will undoubtedly have some genuine labor deputies with a Marxist doctrine and program. (January 1, 1947, La Paz)
 




HAROLD LASKI, the traveling salesman and lawyer for Stalin, advises the Polish “socialists” to maintain their union with the Communists because “if they separate from the Communists they will be victims of the peasants.” –  (Ona  –  Overseas News Agency). This same Laski writes:
“My opinion is that it would be more intelligent on the part of London and Washington to recognize that the opportunity has not yet arrived for the return of ‘classic’ democracy in this country. They are a sick people and health must be restored to them by degrees.” (The Danger of Civil War, H. Laski. –  Ona.)
Who does not recognize in this petty-bourgeois charlatanism the echo of the conversations which the “great Marxist,” Laski, held with the “great Stalin”? Laski’s mission to Moscow was not merely to bring about an understanding between British and Russian imperialism at the expense of the international proletariat, but also to avoid a rupture between the pro-Stalinist reformists and the Stalinists in Poland at the expense of the Polish proletariat. The cynical declarations of Laski, which differ in no respect from those of the ancient feudal seigneurs who justified their opposition to universal suffrage by the “lack of maturity” of the masses, are a traitorous stab in the back of the Polish proletariat and the revolutionary anti-Stalinist opposition which tries to defend it against Stalinist reaction and oppression.
Let us speak the facts to this insolent trafficker in socialism. Laski must know that in 1937 the CPP of Poland [Communist Party – tr.] was dissolved by Stalin because of the whispered opposition to the popular fronts. The leaders of this party, among them various Communist deputies and collaborators and disciples of Rosa Luxemburg, were assassinated without any kind of judicial hearing, accused of being spies of Pilsudski. If perchance Laski was pleased by the extermination of the Communists, let us give him the facts of the cruel and furious persecution of the reformist socialists, Laski’s comrades: Alter and Ehrlich, leaders of the Bund, the Jewish socialist party of Poland, criminally assassinated without trial by Stalin; K. Puzak, general secretary of the PPS (Polish Socialist Party – tr.) underground (the underground movement of the working masses of Poland between 1939–1945), tried in Moscow and now once more imprisoned by the puppets of Stalin. According to eye-witness testimonies, the underground PPS was persecuted more severely by the Russians during their occupation between 1939–41 than by the Nazis themselves.
 
How the Stalinists Won
When the imperialist armies of Stalin entered Poland in 1944, the agents of Stalin, Russian citizens like Osubka and Szwalbe, ex-collaborators of the colonels, organized on September 11–12, 1944 in Lublin a "national reunion" of their creatures, calling it the twenty-fifth congress of the PPS. In the same manner they began to print a newspaper under the old name Robotnik (Worker). All this occurred when the Warsaw proletariat was bleeding In the insurrection, having been handed over to the Nazis by Stalin, while in Warsaw the authentic Robotnik, organ of the PPS underground, was being printed.
The Lublin committee entered Poland and destroyed Warsaw on the bayonets of Stalin’s victorious army over the dead body of the Polish underground, which was led by the workers. Lublin was imposed on Poland by the imperialist decree of Yalta. All this does not in the least impress the “socialist” Laski. But he ought to be impressed by the fate of his comrades. On June 29 and 30, 1945, over the ruins of heroic Warsaw, there met another usurping “congress of the PPS,” called the twenty-sixth, in which none of the old recognized socialist leaders took part but only the Stalinist quislings, ex-fascists, obscure figures without a past like Osubka-Morawski and M. Szwalbe, to whom Stanczyk, the old traitor and sell-out artist of the Polish miners, bowed. Thus outfitted, the PPS received six ministerial posts, including the presidency of the cabinet which was occupied by Osubka, the Soviet citizen.
The president of the “underground movement of the working masses of Poland,” Zygmunt Zulawski, ex-president of the executive committee of the Polish unions and considered the leader of the left wing of thie PPS, addressed himself to Bierut and Osubka in 1945 (September) “revealing” the names of the leaders of the authentic Polish Socialist Party and asking for its legalization under the name of PPSD (Polish Social Democratic Party). In a memorandum addressed to Bierut, Zulawski says:
“I did not conceal for a moment that the Polish Socialist Party which I have represented for years is an entirely different organization from the one represented by Comrade Stanislaw Szwalbe and Comrade Premier Osubka-Morawski ... Therefore, in view of the time limit, I notify you for formal reasons of the existence of our organization and I declare that if intends to avail itself to the full of political rights which have been guaranteed it at Yalta as one of the ‘anti-Nazi’ parties ...”
Bierut passed the responsibility to his agent, Osubka, and of course the Central Committee of the compromising PPS turned down the request of Zulawski to legalize the PPSD, the independent socialist party. Then a delegation of the PPSD, composed of Bien, Garlicki and Zdanowski, presented itself to Osubka to deal with the legalization of the party. Osubka categorically refused. to do it, declaring to the delegation that he considered them representatives of the WRN (Liberty, Equality and Independence) group and that he was going to treat them the same as the NSZ (nationalist armed forces – military organization of the right). The delegation insisted that it represented only the Polish Social Democratic Party, not the WRN; nevertheless Osubka denied the concession of political rights to the old social democrats. In November 1945, the National Council (puppet parliament) denied also the admission of the social democrats into legal political life, their motivation being, “by the existence of six political parties a further differentiation of political opinion may cause an unusually dangerous pre-eminence of party discord in regard to the national joint aims.”
 
Smashing the Opposition
Fearing the creation of an illegal workers’ party, on December 23, 1945, the Stalinists invited the members of the authentic PPS by radio to unite with the official PPS, in order thereby to control the movements of the opposition. The party of Zulawski had to accept this to avoid extermination. In his declaration, which was not published in the central organs, Zulawski underlined the necessity for democracy in Poland for which he had fought in the times of the Czar and Pilsudski and is also going to fight for now. The Stalinists of the PPS answered with violent attacks against the pre-war Socialist Party and that of the underground, accusing it of a hostile attitude toward Russia and toward unity of the working class. Nevertheless, they did not dare to take immediate reprisals on account of the opposition of the working masses.
In the factory elections to the workers’ committees, an old working class institution in Poland, out of 928 seats, the PPS won 556 (64%); the official Stalinist PPR, 193 (21%); the democratic party, 14; the Christian party, 10. Gomulka himself, secretary of the Stalinist Poland Workers Party, was so impressed with this defeat that he declared the PPR has scarcely 250 persons in the Cracow factories.
The regional congress of the industrial districts of Cracow and Katowice was unanimously opposed to the electoral bloc of the PPS with the PPR against the PPL (Mikolajczyk). The central committee of Osubka replied with an abrogation of these resolutions, suspending all the functionaries of this region and naming new ones servile to Stalinism. Furthermore, Gomulka and his adherents of the PPR reproached Osubka with a lack of energy and began the campaign against him through Matuszewski, ex-minister of propaganda. The masses of the Polish Socialist Party, the regional congresses demanded a break with the Stalinists and support to Mikolajczyk. This strong pressure opened up a conflict between Osubka and Szwalbe and their patrons of the PPR for the reapportionment of positions in the government and seats in parliament.
According to PAT (Polish London telegraph agency) the conflict was solved by a compromise between Osubka and the PPR. Both parties agreed to fight “against reaction and the PSL, which was transformed into an instrument of the reactionary underground.” The PPS receives a ministry without portfolio for Cyrankiewicz (a puppet of no importance) and vice ministers in security and foreign relations. For one of the vice ministries they named Leszcycki, completely unknown before the war (he was not a member of the PPS), whose merit was that of participating in the commission which delimited the new frontier between Poland and Russia. The PPS will also obtain posts in diplomacy, industry, etc., where up to now the official Stalinists held the monopoly. The key to the reapportionment of seats in the future parliament has been defined on the basis of the complete exclusion of the PSL (peasants). The distribution of seats in the government has also been defined without taking into account the populist ministers. This is the “democracy by degrees” prescribed by Moscow and confirmed and defended by the servant, Laski.
Neither we nor the workers of America are interested in the bureaucratic arrangements between the Stalinists of first and second rank. We are interested in the struggle of the Polish workers against Stalinist reaction.
 
The Movement Fights On
The conflicts between the pro-Stalinist reformists and the Stalinists demonstrate one hundred per cent the weakness and the vacillation of the social base of the Stalinist regime in Poland, likewise being a reflection of the cruel class struggle between the working masses and the Stalinist bureaucracy. This battle is attested to not only by the regional congresses of the official PPS, where the worker-delegates vote in favor of opposition to Stalinism and in favor of support to Mikolajczyk in their struggle against totalitarian oppression. It is demonstrated by the mass votings against the government in the industrial districts and cities in the referendum; it is demonstrated by the strikes in Silesia, Pomerania and Lodz, the sentences of the strikers, etc.
The workers of Poland know by their experience and their class instinct where the main enemy of the working class, the main reaction, is, and they proceed in an entirely different way from that which the “Marxist” Laski wishes, by fighting openly with every means against Stalinism and by assisting the democratic-peasants.
For this reason we support the elemental working class opposition against Stalinism and its aid to the petty bourgeois peasants. Thanks to the populist opposition the workers can also form centers of opposition to the pressure of the regime.
Stalinist totalitarianism suffers misfortunes for the first time in history and is forced to maneuver and permit working class opposition. The concessions of the GPU to the pro-Stalinist reformists try to broaden the social base of the regime, thereby demonstrating its weakness and unstable equilibrium.
The international proletariat must increase its pressure against Stalinism by assisting the working class opposition, even though the latter is led by the reformists and centrists, for in the unfolding of the struggle the working masses will find their own road, that of the inevitable and cruel struggle against Russian imperialism and Stalinist reaction, the road of the socialist revolution.
(Quotations are from The Expropriation of a Socialist Party by A. Ciolkosz.)
 







The dispatches of A. Rudzienski, we believe, have been unrivalled in the American press for their presentation of the facts about Poland and their detailed examination of that nation’s political life. While we do not necessarily agree with every formulation which they hove contained, we believe that his dispatches have gone far to dispel the cloud of lies about the Stalinist claims to popular support in Poland. He has been the only correspondent who has offered detailed Information and Marxist analysis of the anti-Stalinist struggle.
The article printed here provides information about the Polish underground. Contrary to the Stalinist attempt to smear all oppositionists in Poland as fascists, this article offers evidence that there is not one but many underground groups battling against the Stalinist terror in Poland; that there are socialist groups in opposition; that the underground as a whole is a bloc of heterogeneous groups whose common aim is the achievement of democratic rights. We have requested Rudzienski to write further on this subject and as soon as he does, we will print his dispatches. – Editor



*
January 10, 1947 – In previous articles we informed our readers of the “expropriation” of the Polish Socialist Party by the Stalinists, who stole the name of the old and genuine socialist party, the title of its central organ Robotnik (Worker) and even the national congresses. This bureaucratic-totalitarian expropriation of a party and of the unions of the workers has no precedent in political history.
In spite of having GPU agents imposed as leaders of the expropriated party and in spite of having this organization dominated by police measures, the Polish workers did not submit. When the old genuine Polish Socialist Party was denied the right to legality, the militants and leaders of this party entered the Stalinist-dominated “Socialist Party” and began opposition work inside of it.
The regional congresses of the Socialist Party in the industrial districts opposed the totalitarian Stalinist policies, the persecution of the peasants, the elections “bloc” and demanded electoral freedom and the right of strikes and union organization for the workers. The representative of this tendency in the party’s national council, Zulawski, protested against the Stalinist terror. The pressure of this group, supported by the working-class base, of the party, caused a conflict between the Stalinist Party and the conciliatory Polish “Socialist Party,” a conflict that threatened the basis and even the existence of the Stalinist regime in Poland. The quarrel was resolved in Moscow, under the personal auspices of the “great Stalin.”
The results of this understanding are personal concessions to the Stalinist-reformist bureaucrats and a pact directed against the working class opposition. According to dispatches from PAT (Polish telegraphic agency in London), the socialist oppositionists within the legal Polish “Socialist Party” were excluded from it.
Still they did not submit. Zulawski and his comrades formed groups of independent socialists in various industrial districts of the country. His principal base is Cracow and the industrial region around Cracow, especially Chrzanow, an industrial city near Cracow, which manufactures locomotives. (Cracow is a traditional fortress of the Socialist Party.) The independent socialists formed an electoral bloc with the Mikolojczyk peasants in the spirit of the best traditions of the worker-peasant alliance in Poland. In Cracow the workerpeasant opposition slate was headed, not by Mikolajczyk, but by the socialist leader, Zulawski. Still other slates of the socialist-populist opposition bloc were circulated through Chrzanow, Chorzow (chemical industrial district), Radomsk (metallurgical manufacturing) and throughout the city of Warsaw.
The significance of this accomplishment is of enormous importance not merely for Poland but for the entire working class movement in the Russian zone. In none of the countries dominated by Russia – Yugoslavia, Rumania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia or Hungary – has anyone dared to attack the Stalinist regime so strongly as has the Polish opposition. In all of these countries the socialists remain, in greater or lesser degree, submissive to Stalinism.
 
Form Open Opposition
Only in Poland, after two years of terror, persecution, imprisonment, shootings and deportations, do the workers openly dare to oppose Stalinism, to form an independent socialist party of opposition and to ally themselves with the peasant opposition against the governmental bloc in the elections.
We have no illusions about the electoral results. According to the declarations of Mikolajczyk, 50,000 members of his party were jailed. In its best days, the illegal Peasants Party had 20,000 militants. The imprisonment of 50,000 populist militants signifies therefore the complete paralysis of the Peasant Party.
In addition, many socialists are prisoners, including Puzak, ex-president of the National Council of the Resistance and political leader of the Warsaw insurrection. But the reprisals of the “security police” fall in the first place on the workers and peasants at the bottom accused of being contacts with the illegal underground.
In twelve districts the electoral slates of populist candidates were cancelled on the grounds that they were suspected of being contacts of the underground.
 
Inter-Imperialist Conflicts
The governments of Great Britain and the United States are attempting to utilize the Polish situation. The “Western Allies” who sold out at Yalta and Potsdam in total disregard of the Polish resistance which menaced their imperialist rule, are today attempting to foment a civil war in Poland. But if the Polish people hate the Stalinist occupiers like a plague, they do not intend to shed their blood in behalf of the Anglo-American imperialists nor to pull their chestnuts out of the Russian fire for them. The Polish people will take advantage of the Anglo-American pressure against Russia to win a certain margin of political and economic freedom from Stalinist totalitarianism, without losing sight of the British betrayal in 1939 when the Polish people were left to their own fate, nor the miserable betrayal of the Warsaw insurrection of 1944, which was handed over to Hitler and Stalin by the Western imperialists. Nor will the Polish workers and peasants forget this election easily, even though the proverb says that in Poland memory does not exist.
The proletariat of Poland and the poor and rebellious peasants, however much they hate Russian imperialists, do not want a new war and do not want to be used as a spearhead of American imperialism. The Polish proletariat, in alliance with the radical peasants, is fighting for a socialist Poland, for a socialist Europe without spheres of influence and imperialist zones.
The formation of the independent socialist party and the worker-peasant bloc openly opposed to Stalinism, demonstrates the sound class instinct of the Polish proletariat, its enormous revolutionary dynamism and its inexhaustible capacity for resistance. Even if this movement is for the moment led by political centrists, it merits the warmest support from the international proletariat because its social and political implications are revolutionary.
 







The following article,written by our Latin-American
correspondent, analyzes the Manifesto of the Peruvian Section of the Fourth International. This Manifesto
is one of the first important studies of the nature of socialist
revolution in semi-colonial Latin America. It appeared in English
in the April issue of the Fourth International
and for that reason we do not reprint it here. The article of
Velasco, while indicating the false position of the Manifesto
on Russia and Stalinism, nevertheless indicates its importance as
a noteworthy Trotskyist document. – Editors



*
The development of the workers’ movement in America is daily
acquiring more and more importance. Faced with Europe in its death
throes, both North and South America are becoming the continents of
the future for socialism. The phenomenal development of North
American capitalism and imperialism constitutes the prime event of
our time. The formidable growth of the American workers’ movement,
still trade unionist in its first stage, follows it like a shadow.
But North American trade unions, which have more than 20 million
members, (USA, Canada and Mexico) are something without precedent in
the history of the international working class movement. Even in the
backward and semi-colonial Latin American countries, the workers’
movement is acquiring day by day more importance and historic weight.
The development of industry in Brazil and Argentina is awakening the
consciousness of the Latin American continent, pushing forward “the
slow nag of history.” The Latin American working class, which
until now was almost nil as an independent factor, appears in the
arena as a young and aggressive force, sometimes emerging under the
yoke of Stalinism, but in many countries with the real banner of
revolutionary Marxism.
While in Europe the old-time formations, anachronistic social
democratic reformers and Stalinists, still dominate and the
regenerating currents grouped around the Fourth International are
reduced to an insignificant minority, in Latin America, the new
internationalist Left, followed by sympathizing trends inside the
Brazilian and Argentine Social Democracy, are becoming an independent
and sometimes important political factor. It is characteristic
that precisely in the most backward countries of the Pacific coast,
Chile, Bolivia and Peru, the movement led by the Fourth International
is growing relatively faster and acquiring better theoretical
preparation than in the advanced countries on the Atlantic seaboard,
Argentina and Brazil. The weak and rickety native bourgeoisie on the
Pacific coast is not capable of exerting so much influence or
ideological pressure on the proletariat as is the dynamic and
vigorous bourgeoisie of Brazil and Argentina. The social and
political weight of the working classes in the Pacific countries is
relatively much greater than in Brazil or Argentina. For this reason
the two capitalistic republics produce the totalitarian dictatorships
of Vargas and Peron, which confront the tempestuous awakening of the
working masses, absorbing and channelizing it, sometimes with a
policy of social reforms and fascistic demagogy.
In the Pacific countries, the Chilean, Peruvian, Bolivian or
Paraguayan bourgeoisie is not capable of forming such “solid”
regimes and has to alternately allow democratic, petty bourgeois
government and short-lived military and Bonapartist dictatorships,
with bloodthirsty methods, such as the regime of Villaroel in
Bolivia, Morinigo in Paraguay and the Apra in Peru. Chile,
occupying an intermediate position in this mosaic, has managed to
form a coalition “leftist” government with the support of the
Stalinists. The pattern of Latin American regimes is the boiling
lava of the economic and social transformations of our continent and
at the same time it is the proof of the semi-colonial and semi-feudal
character of Latin America. The rapid and almost daily changes in
these regimes characterize the impotence and weakness of the native
bourgeoisie faced with social transformations and the emancipation
movements of the working masses.
 
Peruvians Show the Way
It is therefore of prime importance when the Marxist doctrine,
raising its sonorous voice in this noisy and living whirlwind of
history, tries to give historic direction to this burning and as yet
formless lava. It is a voice, a living expression of the rhythmic
march of the South American industrial proletariat which is trying,
still instinctively, and sometimes unconsciously, to give organized
forms to this spontaneous historic process. This honorable and
important role is undoubtedly being filled by the manifesto of the
Peruvian Trotskyists, published in the Fourth International
(April 1947).
In our former articles we have frequently analyzed the problem of
the democratic revolution in Bolivia, Peru and the Argentine. The
Marxist theory in South America is seeking its historic path, like
the working masses, through the chaotic jungle of history. Some
sectors of the Argentine Trotskyists feel overwhelmed and
defenseless, faced with the phenomenon of industrial development in
Argentina and the swashbuckling despotism of Peron. These sectors bow
to the pressure of Peronism, proclaiming it the realization of the
democratic bourgeois revolution, not only in Argentina, but in the
whole of Latin America.
The Bolivian miners, in their congress at Pulacayo, proclaimed a
formidable revolutionary thesis in which they showed the democratic
bourgeois revolution as the proletariat’s immediate task. Both the
miners’ congress and the thesis were under the auspices of the
Revolutionary Workers Party (POR), a section of the Fourth
International. To do them justice, one should explain that the
contents of the democratic bourgeois revolution of the Bolivian POR
is fundamentally different from the Stalinist contents of the same,
and considers that the revolution can only be carried out under the
dictatorship of the proletariat, through the alliance of the
proletariat with the peasants, whereas the Stalinists propose
alliance between the “progressist” liberal bourgeoisie and the
proletariat. But the POR’s thesis does not underline the
international character of this revolution, but treats it as an
isolated phenomenon, thus slipping toward the concept of revolution
and socialism in just one country. For this reason the voice of
our Peruvian comrades is of fundamental importance in clearing up and
solving this central problem of Marxism in South America.
 
How the Problem Is Posed
How do the Peruvian comrades pose this problem?
“The Latin American revolution will be a stage, a phase of the
world revolution, and nothing else. It will be purely and simply the
socialist revolution” (Mariategui) This classic thesis of the
quoted master is the central idea, the axis of the manifesto. Like
all great things, Mariategui’s thesis has the simplicity of genius
and leaves no room for any doubts.
“The international character of modern economy permits
no country to escape from the process of transformation which
originates in the present-day conditions of production ...
Imperialism bars the economic program of nationalization and
industrialization in every semi-colonial country which it exploits as
a market for its capital and commodities, and as a source of raw materials.”
“We cannot solve democratic revolution within the
national or international framework of bourgeois society .... We are
a semi-colony of Yankee imperialism.... The Peruvian bourgeoisie is
closely bound to North American imperialism ... The fate of our
weak-jointed national bourgeoisie is intimately bound up with the
fate of the entire world capitalist system ... The real big
bourgeoisie is not in Peru but in Wall Street, this fierce enemy of
democratic and national revolution.” (Manifesto)
We have not much to add to these lapidarian phrases. In the
Pacific coast countries the exploitation of guano and salitre
in Chile and Peru, of tin in Bolivia, has been the work of European
imperialist capitalism and has replaced the colonial feudal formation
of Spanish economy. The age of gold and silver has been replaced
by the age of guano, salitre, tin, copper and lead! This was the
stage of liberal capitalism when Great Britain penetrated the
countries of Latin America. In the imperialist stage of capitalism
between the First and Second World Wars, British capitalism was
displaced by North American expansion and forced to take second
place. The whole of Latin America, especially the small.
countries, has reached a state of being semi-colonies of the USA.
North American capital today occupies all the key economic positions.
The slight mining bourgeoisie of Peru, Bolivia or Chile is bound up
with North American capital. The middle bourgeoisie depends partly on
mining interests and partly on the semi-feudal economy of the land,
where the big haciendas are still run on a feudal-slave
system. “Peruvian plutocracy is really subordinate to Wall Street
finance capital.” Therefore, all the Peruvian bourgeoisie belongs
in the counter-revolutionary camp.
 
Petty Bourgeois Nationalism
The petty bourgeoisie which, around 1920, raised the
anti-imperialist banner, passed over with its most representative
party, the Apra, and its leader, Haya de la Torre, by an
evolution toward frank reaction. Apra, which was demanding
Indo-American unity, the internationalization of the Panama Canal,
nationalization of big industries and feudal haciendas, and was
fighting against imperialism, forgot its own program on taking power
and capitulated both before Yankee imperialism and native plutocracy.
“The petty bourgeois anti-imperialists of the 20’s have been
transformed into the bourgeois pro-imperialists of the 40’s.” (Manifesto)
The democratic revolution is the task of the proletarian
revolution is the title of the corresponding chapter in the
Manifesto. “The country’s economic emancipation can be
achieved only through the action of the proletarian masses in
solidarity with the world anti-imperialist struggle.” (Mariategui)
In view of the close ties between native feudo-bourgeoisie and
imperialism, and the capitulation of the petty bourgeoisie, only the
proletariat, allied with the peasants, can carry out a social
revolution in Peru, the fundamental contents of which would be
socialist and proletarian, although in its first stages it would
accomplish the tasks of the democratic revolution, such as the
economic and national emancipation of Peru and the agricultural
revolution in the country. The Peruvian comrades pose the problem of
the democratic revolution in a completely opposite form from certain
sectors of Argentine Trotskyism, which consider the reactionary
policy of Peron as the realization of the belated democratic
revolution in Latin America. The Peruvians, like Mariategui, layout
the perspective of the internationalist socialist revolution, which
will solve the backward democratic problems on its way. The motor
force of this revolution is the Latin American proletariat and not
the bourgeoisie or the petty bourgeoisie. This viewpoint is also
different from the Bolivian POR’s formulation and from that of the
miners’ congress in Pl1lacayo, which considered as their immediate
stage the realization of the democratic bourgeois revolution under
the dictatorship of the proletariat, forgetting the international and
permanent character of the revolution. The Peruvians, disciples of
the great Mariategui, declare plainly that “in the course of its
development the democratic revolution passes into the socialist
revolution and thus constitutes itself the permanent revolution.”
(Trotsky) They also declare that “the socialist revolution is
international. or else is not socialist at all.” Therefore the
national and economic emancipation of Latin America can only be
carried out along the path of the international socialist revolution,
beginning with the defeat of North American imperialism, which today
is the fortress of world capitalism.
 
Role of the Manifesto
The Peruvian Trotskyist Manifesto means, to our way of
thinking, an event in the life of the Latin American proletariat,
being a chain in the social and political process of our continent.
Under the pressure of the masses, Vargas’ regime falls in Brazil, a
“leftist” government is set up in Chile, Benavides’ military
dictatorship falls in Peru, and the Apra comes to power,
Villaroel’s regime falls in Bolivia, Morinigo’s dictatorship
becomes shaky in Paraguay.
The fall of Villaroel’s regime in the popular revolution
produces a revolutionary upsurge of the working masses, led by the
Fourth International. Of course, this movement is fairly complex, it
has many weaknesses and lacks theoretical quality. The decadence of
Apra’s dictatorship in Peru produces the birth of the GOM
(Marxist Workers’ Group) in the face of Stalinist treachery. If
this group lacks influence over the masses, it nevertheless
represents the outstanding school of Marxist theory in South America,
led by Mariategui. It stands at the head of the Trotskyist movement
in matters of theory and makes plain the tasks of the revolution,
which have been wrongly posed in Argentina and have become foggy in
the section of the Fourth International in Bolivia. The Fourth
International movements in Peru and Bolivia complement each other
reciprocally, being links of the same revolutionary chain which sets
its seal on the tortuous historical process.
In Brazil, the powerful and dynamic bourgeoisie transmitted its
pressure upon the proletariat by means of the Stalinists, who in the
wartime interests of Moscow hailed Vargas as the source of the
democratic revolution. This same pattern repeats itself today in
Argentina where the Stalinists support Peron as an anti-imperialist.
In the Cordillera countries, which centuries ago were the center of
the collectivist empire of the Incas, the petty bourgeoisie embraces
a Nazi ideology, like the NMR in Bolivia, or a nationalist one like
the Apra in Peru, demagogically hailing the “national
revolution” and the “anti-imperialist program.” But on arriving
in power, these movements failed since they capitulated before the
native feudo-bourgeoisie and American imperialism. The Bolivian NMR
lasted only a few years. The Peruvian Apra struggled for
nearly a quarter of a century to take power. But neither of these
two movements was able to expropriate the bourgeoisie, carry out
agricultural reform or maintain the struggle against imperialism.
The failure, the Canossa of the native petty bourgeoisie faced with
imperialism, constitutes the best proof against the Stalinist
“theory” of the bourgeois revolution as a stage in itself and
against the reflections of this theory in the Marxist camp, the
Fourth International. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. The
social revolution in Latin America must be one, it must be
continental and international, a socialist revolution which carries
out the democratic tasks as part of the chain of revolution in both
Americas. The Peruvian Trotskyists, in making this clear, did an
important theoretical labor.
 




The impressions of Liston Oak, editor of the New York New
Leader, on the situation in Poland completely confirm our
information and analysis published in Labor Action and the New
International. They bring many details and political declarations
which make clear to the American and international public the
problems of Poland and of the Russian zone in general. In spite of
his reserve and criticisms of the Stalinist system, the author,
however, makes some fundamental errors in his appreciation of the
nature of the regime and the perspectives of political development in
Stalinist Poland.
If we speak on this subject, it is not from any mean desire of
finding holes in the author’s exposition, but in order to clear up
problems of general international interest for the workers’
movement and Marxist doctrine.
“The sentiments of the nation, the political and
economic currents, the behavior of the bureaucracy, the declarations
and program, all this recalls Moscow in the early days of the
Revolution, between 1917 and 1925.”
The analogy is not however complete in view of the existing
differences between Leninism and Stalinism. Russia, in the Leninist
period, was a country of hope,something which is totally lacking in
Stalin’s Russia or in Poland under Stalin’s control.
“In Warsaw, as in Moscow in 1946, a growing abyss can
be seen between the masses and the bureaucracy. The workers are told
that the factories belong to them, but the worker has no conviction
of this, since neither he nor the old leaders have much to say. The
new masters are the political commissars .... One of the differences
between the Russian and Polish revolutions is the destruction of the
whole bourgeois state apparatus in Russia, while in Poland the power
is in the hands of the Communist-Socialist coalition. The workers’
councils in the factories in Poland have no real power, in relation
to the soviets of revolutionary Russia. The present government of
Poland recalls Kerensky’s government bctween February and October
1917. It is not very probable that Poland will experience anything
like the October Revolution. It is to be supposed that the Communists
will gradually take over all the power.” (Liston Oak in the PAT
agency version, Polish Tel., London. My emphasis – A.R.)
In this quotation, which seems to me to be the author’s most
fundamental political conclusion, the grain of sand of truth is lost
in the desert of false political doctrine. To prove our affirmation,
we have to submit Liston Oak’s most fundamental affirmation about
the Kerenskyist character of the present Stalinist regime in Poland
to a real historical analysis. But the good and ingenuous Liston Oak
allowed this thesis to be suggested to him by the Stalinists, who
must be very pleased that having made use of such an excellent
propagandist and one, besides, so removed from Stalinism in putting
forward its program. The thesis of present Kerenskyism in Warsaw is
nothing but the Stalinist concept of the “democratic-bourgeois”
revolution in Poland.
 
When Was the “Democratic Revolution”?
In our article, The Problems of the Polish Revolution (New International, August–September 1946), we submitted this
muddled theory to severe criticism, laying it bare before Polish
reality. We will recall the matter again. The democratic revolution
in Poland was exhausted in national risings against the Czar and was
not able to carry out its program of creating the national
independent state of Poland as a base for the development of Polish
capitalism. After the defeat of the last national revolution in
1863–64, capitalism rose in Poland inside the feudal Czarist
structure. The 1905 and 1917 revolutions put an end to Czarism,
burying it in the swirl of the democratic revolution, which in Russia
became transformed into a socialist revolution. Poland shared with
Russia the democratic revolution of 1905.
In 1917 nearly the whole of Poland was occupied by the
Austro-Germans and isolated from the Russian Revolution.
Nevertheless, on October 7, 1918, the democratic, independent
Republic of Poland was proclaimed in Lublin, headed by the government
of the PPS and the Populists, by the Social-Democrat Daszynski and
the Populist Witos.
This government carried out: (a) National independence as a
fundamental postulate of the democratic revolution. (b) Set up a
parliamentary-democratic regime of the “popular” republic as an
adequate base for the development of capitalism in Poland. (c)
Proclaimed the eight-hour day, the right of the workers to form trade
unions, and all the modern conquests and social rights of the
proletariat. (d) Posed the immediate need for radical agricultural
reform, without indemnities. These fundamental points exhaust the
program of the democratic revolution in Poland, parallel to that of
February 1917 in Russia.
The democratic revolution in Poland did not pass on to the
socialist stage. The Polish bourgeoisie buried its revolutionary axe
in 1864, after the national defeat, and passed on to the stage of
“organized work” and later to direct collaboration with the
Czarist autocracy, which was evidenced in anti-worker actions and
anti-Semitic pogroms.
The bourgeoisie boycotted the democratic petty bourgeois
government of Lublin and under this pressure the Social Democrats and
Populists handed over the government to its “confidence man,” to
Pilsudski, who formed a government of national concentration with the
right.
Thus ended Polish “Kerenskyism” and the Polish Kerensky was
none other than Pilsuclski himself, the ex-Socialist and “confidence
man of the Polish left,” later dictator and marshal of Poland,
leader of the Polish counter-revolution.
 
Preparing Stalin’s Dictatorship
Bourgeois democracy wore itself out in 1926 and it was the Polish
Kerensky, Pilsudski, who installed a Bonapartist dictatorship on the
corpse of democracy. From 1930 onward the Bonapartist regime acquired
eminently totalitarian features, under Stalinist and Nazi pressure,
and that of the Polish bourgeoisie itself. In 1939, the year of
Poland’s national defeat by German imperialism, Polish reaction was
replaced by much deeper and more consistent Stalinist and Nazi
reactions. The national resistance, and especially the illegal
struggle of workers and peasants, constituted the germ of social
revolution in Poland. The revolution in Warsaw was the most finished
expression of this movement of social and national liberation.
When Stalin stopped the Russian offensive at the gates of
Warsaw, to give the Nazis time to crush the Polish rising, this was a
new Ribbentrop-Molotov pact, supported by the “democracies” and
directed against the embryonic social revolution in Poland. The
Russian armies which invaded Poland over the dead body of the Warsaw
insurrection and the illegal struggle, brought with their bayonets,
not liberation and “democratic revolution,” but a Stalinist
counter-revolution, national oppression and Russian imperialism.
The last stage of the democratic revolution in Poland was carried
out from 1918 to 1926. Later came the counter-revolution in its
various stages until the Nazi occupation. The only revolution which
would have been able to defeat reaction was the international
socialist revolution, whose seed was destroyed in Warsaw in 1944.
What is taking place in Poland now is neither “Kerenskyism” nor
another “democratic revolution,” but a Stalinist
counter-revolution acting under the mask of “popular democracy,”
“nationalization of industries,” “democratic agricultural reform,” etc.
The nationalization of industries is an instrument in the hands of
Stalinist imperialism for exploiting and sacking the Polish people,
and has nothing in common with socialist nationalization. The
agricultural reform is lacking in any economic importance, since
central and western Poland had a typically capitalist agricultural
structure, even more capitalist than Eastern Germany. The policy of
state capitalism, officially proclaimed, serves to cement the
Stalinist bureaucratic dictatorship brought in with the Russian
bayonets. “The agricultural reform” is an instrument of this
bureaucracy for despoiling the peasant masses of the produce of their
work and reducing them to the condition of the bureaucracy’s
slaves. “Popular democracy” is merely a cynical mask [or the
Russian GPU dictatorship. To speak of a “socialist-communist bloc,”
as Liston Oak does, is to make a bloody mockery of the Polish proletariat.
 
The Way of Bourgeois Criticism
The Stalinist party has nothing in common with the old party of
Rosa Luxemburg and her disciples; it is a police fabrication of the
GPU. The permitted PPS (Socialist Party) has nothing in common with
pre-war social democracy, nor with the illegal and heroic PPS of the
underground and the Warsaw insurrection. Cyrankiewicz and Osybka are
a couple of poor devils, absolutely unknown before, who are puppets
of the GPU. There is no political democracy in Poland, not only in a
“Kerenskyist” sense, but not even in the sense of the most
moderate bourgeois democracy. Therefore, to speak about “Kerenskyism”
in Poland is to make good propaganda for Stalinism.
If the Warsaw insurrection contained the seed of socialist
revolution, the Stalinist regime represents the march of
counter-revolution, the setting up of a Stalinist Thermidor in
Poland. Liston Oak, in spite of his liberal and bourgeois repudiation
of Stalinism, thinks in a nineteenth century fashion and cannot
understand new phenomena, such as Stalinism, which he identifies with
the socialist revolution. From this comes the rather grotesque
consequence that an old anti-Stalinist liberal is doing good
propaganda for Stalinism. The Moscow bureaucrats and their Warsaw
puppets must be having a good laugh about it.
It is true, and in this Liston Oak is right, that there is
little probability of the socialist revolution developing in Poland.
The Stalinist regime closes the way to this revolution) opening
instead the road toward the complete incorporation of Poland into the
Stalinist empire, that is to say, to a complete Stalinist
counter-revolution, or toward a capitalist restoration, in case of
the defeat of Russia in Europe and the incorporation of Poland in the
Anglo-American orbit.
Both forms of reaction, capitalist and Stalinist, may be overcome
and vanquished only through the European and world socialist
revolution. The workers’ socialist opposition, the illegal struggle
of petty bourgeois and peasants in certain sectors, represent the
seeds of this revolution, the only one possible, not merely in Poland
but in the whole of Europe.
 




Dear Editor:
I am in complete agreement with your correct reply to the criticism, or more accurately speaking, the misunderstanding
displayed by Comrade Findley toward my article on anti-Semitism in
Poland. Although your reply exhausted the matter, I desire to
contribute some points of clarification which can help in the
understanding of this thorny and bloody problem. Comrade Findley
reproaches me for my “generalizations,” “simplifications,”
and “distortions” of the anti-Semitic problem in Poland. I, as
well as your readers, would welcome proof demonstrating the accuracy
of his easily made and more than abundant charges.
The strongest accusation made against me by Comrade Findley is
that I underestimate the anti-Semitism of the Polish
petty-bourgeoisie and even the Polish proletariat. It seems to me
that my entire work demonstrated the growth of this anti-Semitism
as a historic process among the bourgeoisie and the petty-bourgeoisie
of Poland. The greater part of my work dealt with pre-Stalinist
anti-Semitism. Any desire on my part to underestimate, hide or defend
anti-Semitism would be a grave disservice to the Socialist cause. My
intention was to uncover, analyze and condemn it, but not in the form
of a moral, ecclesiastic and idealistic anathema, but in a scientific
and materialistic form, laying bare its roots and historic
development. Unfortunately, many Marxists are more in love with moral
preachments than with the surgical scalpel of historical materialism.
This and the accusation of Stalinism as the principal factor in the
Kielce pogrom (and not only in Kielce) brought Findley to some
conclusions and accusations which seem to me to be hasty and unjust.
Findley puts himself in the easy position of identifying my point
of view with that of the PPS and then of putting “us” in the same
line with Stalinists under the rubric of the “theory of
provocation.” In the first place, the Stalinists never propounded
such a theory, but accused the Polish people in general of being
responsible for the pogroms in almost the same form as Findley.
In the second place my point of view differs fundamentally from that
of the PPS since the latter really underestimates anti-Semitism as a
historic process and reactionary sentiment of the petty-bourgeoisie,
reducing it to a question only of Stalinist provocation, while I
affirm that in the present phase the principle factor in the
pogroms is Stalinist provocation and tolerance without
underestimating “spontaneous anti-Semitism.” And Findley himself
supports my thesis saying,
“For seven hours, this mass, calmly and without haste,
in broad daylight and in the center of the city, sadistically
tortured to death several dozen Jews who had been disarmed and
turned over to the mob by the Stalinist militia without
interference or intervention by any police, military or political agency.”
 
A Government Policy
History shows that there never were and there are not nowÂ·
pogroms without the tolerance and intervention of an anti-Semitic
government. The pogroms of Czarist Russia were instruments of
struggle against the proletariat. The pogroms in Rumania, Poland and
Germany were tolerated and even instigated and prepared by the
respective governments in accordance with its degree of fascization.
I state that the recent pogroms in Stalinist Poland were carried
out with the toleration and preparation of the government and the
GPU. The reactionary Stalinist government uses them as a weapon
against the spontaneous workers movement which has an anti-Stalinist
character. The Stalinist government skilfully took advantage of the
organic anti-Semitism of the nationalist bands of the NSZ, giving
them free reign and lending them the collaboration of its army and
militia. Kielce is the capital of the province with a military
garrison and many police. To demand the intervention of the Peasant
party in a city, or of the illegal PPS against the Stalinist militia
is difficult under a Stalinist regime. The Stalinist party should
have intervened but did not. Why? The answer is easy.
However, without the existence of established “spontaneous
anti-Semitism” the tragedy of Kielce would not have been possible.
But “spontaneous anti-Semitism” is not a monopoly of either
Poland or Russia; it exists in England and the United States, in
Latin America, in France, etc. If the United States government had a
political stake in preparing pogroms in the Jewish sections of New
York, it would find the mob ready for this purpose. The
agreement between the Stalinists and the important section, almost
the main section, of the NSZ confirms my thesis. The top leaders of
this organization, few in numbers when compared with the other
sectors of the armed underground (3,000 men as against 200,000 of the
A.K.–Home Army), Piasecki and Dziarmaga now edit a legal paper
which collaborates with the government, It should also be pointed out
that the commander of the NSZ collaborated with the GPU and was a
Stalinist tool. In a series of political trials, the “repentant”
accused of the NSZ accused the opposition of contact with the NSZ and
of collaborating in the anti-Semitic pogroms directed against the
“popular Polish Democracy.” Does Findley prefer to put faith in
the GPU before accepting the criticism and analysis of a comrade?
 
Biological Anti-Semitism?
Comrade Findley considers it demagogy to refute the notion of the
biological anti-Semitism of a people. And in refutation presents as
an argument the lack of documents and acts demonstrating Polish
workers’ solidarity with the Warsaw ghetto, an argument that indeed
falls short of the truth because there is abundant documentation to
prove the contrary. The PPS and the underground unions not only
solidarized politically with the martyrs of the ghetto, but did
everything possible to provide them with arms, ammunition and even
military instructors, not to speak of the refuge given en masse
to the Jewish victims. Ignorance of these facts is not to be
condemned, but Comrade Findley can request the indicated
documentation from Felix Gross, Jewish member of the PPS, and author
of the Polish Worker who resides in New York. Findley is not
convinced by the almost complete absence of anti-Semitic pogroms
under the German occupation in spite of all the efforts cf the Nazis
to organize them. Does not Findley know that the guards and militia
in the Ghetto and death camps were, aside from the Jews, the
Ukrainians, the Letts and Lithuanians, the German storm troopers, and
not the Poles?
My intention, dear Comrade Findley, was not to underestimate, or
worse still, to hide or defend Polish anti-Semitism, but to seek it
out and accuse the principal evil-doer, criminal Stalinism. And along
this road, I was preceded by no-one less than the “organizer of the
proletarian victory,” Leon Trotsky, himself of Jewish descent. In
order to accuse reactionary and criminal Stalinism, I had no other
recourse than to set it on the first plane. It is to be regretted if
Findley understood it in any other fashion. I know the anti-Semitism
of the provincial Polish bourgeois and petty-bourgeois very well
indeed, since I have spent most of my life fighting it, struggling
without truce against the bourgeois reaction and now against the
Stalinist reaction. The nationalism of the Stalinist press in Poland
constantly foments anti-Semitism, and reminds one greatly of the
period of the National-Democratic anti-Semitic press. However, they
carry it out much more “skilfully” and subtly than did the
bourgeois beasts.
I consider Comrade Findley’s article hasty and unjustified. I
would gladly accept his criticism as a compliment and deepening of my
work were it not so poor in ideas and so rich in prejudice.
Andrzej Rudzienski
 




In defending the democratic peasant movement against the terror of the NKVD (Stalin’s secret police), we have always maintained the thesis that behind the fighting lines of the peasant trenches stands the line of the anti-Stalinist workers. While the Stalinist secret police were engaged in the destruction of the peasant party, the workers’ movement enjoyed a relative “pieredishka” (breathing spell), since the Stalinist bureaucracy was incapable of attacking on all fronts at once. With the liquidation of the independent peasant movement, the Stalinist reaction struck out directly against the remnants of the independent workers’ movement. Now we are witnessing a naked frontal attack against both the illegal opposition of the authentic PPS (Polish Socialist Party) and the pseudo-PPS, a shadow-party created by the Stalinists themselves.
When the Lublin Committee was created in 1944 as an instrument of the Russian invasion and occupation of Poland, it had to support itself on usurping groups selected by the NKVD. These groups adopted the names of the traditional parties in Poland, that is to say, of the Communist, Social-Democratic, Populist, and Democratic Parties. Notwithstanding the fact that there existed an authentic resistance movement supported by the main political tendencies in the country, these usurping groups, with the aid of Russian bayonets, imposed the falsified and artificial political structure of shadow parties with the aim of demoralizing the masses and disorienting and breaking the anti-Nazi resistance movement of Poland.
Thus, in place of the dissolved CPP (Polish Communist Party), whose leaders had been assassinated by the NKVD, there was formed the PPR (Polish Workers Party), led by none other than the head of the NKVD and hangman of the old Communists, the current “President” of Poland, Bierut. Similarly, the pseudo-PPS was formed even while the authentic PPS in Warsaw shed its blood in struggle, even while it continued to issue its traditional organ Robotnik. This artificial political structure manufactured by the police, this work of provocation brought into being by the Stalinists was imposed on the proletariat and the Polish people as an “ersatz” (substitute) for the authentic political structure elaborated at the end of the last century. This work of the Stalinist “Okhrana” was necessary in order to give “political” veneer to “popular democracy” in Poland. In reality, we can objectively say that the PPR is not a political party but a police organization. As for the pseudo-PPS, instead of being a real party, it can be more accurately described as a shadow party by means of which the Stalinist police tried to deceive, demoralize and oppress the Polish proletariat. All of this artificial structure is a gigantic provocation, an enormous Stalinist fraud.
 
Liquidate Shadow Parties
Nevertheless, in spite of this police fraud, a social phenomenon without precedent in the history of the Stalinist counter-revolution occurred in Poland. The elemental peasant opposition succeeded in breaking the police-fostered peasant organization and forming its own legal party. The old PPS attempted to do the same, trying to form an independent socialist party, but the NKVD forbade it. Nevertheless, the spontaneous opposition of the working-class masses filled the shadow party of the pseudo-PPS with a spirit of opposition, a spirit of struggle, which threatened the bases of the regime and the police structure of the shadow parties. Although in the beginning, this creation of the Russian police served the regime as a means of breaking the underground resistance, with the passing of time, with the growth of a new workers’ opposition to the regime, it became a danger to the Stalinist dictatorship. This phenomenon proves that there is no totalitarian terror, Nazi or Stalinist, which cannot be overcome by a workers’ opposition, whether spontaneous or organized. Precisely this fact was demonstrated in both Poland and Czechoslovakia, to cite the clearest examples.
For this and other reasons, the NKVD was compelled to liquidate its own work of provocation, to liquidate the artificial structure of the shadow parties, in order to erect on their ruins the absolute rule of Stalinist totalitarianism. If on the one hand this signifies a step further along the road of Stalinist reaction,on the other hand it reveals the weakening, the narrowing of Stalinism’s social base as it faces the growing workers and peasants’ opposition.
For these reasons, at the last congress of the pseudo-PPS in Wroclaw (Breslau), Stalin’s police agent, the secretary-general of the PPR, Gomulka raised the question of the fusion of the PPR and the pseudo-PPS in a “single workers’ party.” This Stalinist offensive met with open opposition on the part of the delegates. It is noteworthy that these delegates were, of course, carefully chosen before their election. Thus, one of the government parties created by the NKVD transformed itself into an exponent of the spontaneous, silent opposition of the worker masses to the regime of occupation and oppression. So paradoxical was the situation that the present Stalinist agent in the pseudo-PPS, Cyrankeiwicz, also puppet-premier of the Warsaw government, was compelled to recognize the fusion of the pseudo-PPS and PPR as being premature in order not to engage in open conflict with the delegates to the congress. After this cynical maneuver, the congress was cynically deceived by the naming of a secretariat composed of Cwik as secretary-general, and Reczek and Rusinek, who gave the NKVD full guarantees of blind obedience.
 
Qualified Assassin
This “secretary-general,” Cwik, is an old “friend,” an old member of the CPP, later an agent of the GPU in the left-PPS, and finally an agent of the same GPU in the London PPS during the war. Now he continues his role as an agent-provocateur in the pseudo-PPS. There are men born to be puppets, and to this class of human instruments belongs the unfortunate Wlodyslaw Cwik. Under his police rule, the pseudo-PPS will soon end in the Stalinist gas-chamber or in front of the “stienk” (wall) as a target for an assassin’s bullet. And this police agent, this puppet without brain or heart, has the insolence to write in the organs of the pseudo-PPS that, the “development of the party is leading to a careful scrutiny of the activities of diversionist elements recruited from the underground circles of WRN (Freedom, Equality and Independence) which will end in their complete elimination and isolation from the masses.” (Robotnik – Warsaw)
How smooth is the professional jargon of the expert assassins and hangmen, of Stalin’s police-dogs! Even without personally knowing this “gentleman” be spattered with Stalinist filth, by reading his writings one can at a distance detect the odor of a “technically qualified” and highly expert assassin.
While the miserable dog, Cwik, is assigned the concrete police job, the “theoretician” of the PPR, Zamborowsky, member of the Politburo, declares in the official organ that the fusion of the PPR and the pseudo-PPS will constitute a new stage of unification for the workers’ movement, indispensable in the march toward “popular democracy.” And the other puppet-member, Cyrankiewicz, against his own position taken at the congress, declares the necessity of a rapid fusion and attacks the authentic leaders of the real PPS, Ciolkosz and Zaremba, as “spies,” “fascists” and “right-wing socialists.”
 
Mass Arrests
All of this is carried out to the accompaniment of the arrests en masse of the independent socialists, of “Moscow Trials,” assassinations and tortures in the prisons. The leader of the Polish trade unions in the pre-war period, Zdanowski, the PPS underground activist, Janina Paydak, wife of one of the 16 resistance leaders condemned in Moscow, Bryja, peasant leaders and many others less well known, have been assassinated by the “security” and their remains returned to their families in sealed coffins.
The physical “liquidation” of the authentic socialists and leaders of the real PPS is a preliminary condition for the “purging” of the shadow PPS, for the carrying out of the police“scrutiny” decreed by Cwik. Horrible and loathsome is the picture presented by the Stalinist regime in Poland.
With the Stalinist turn “toward the left,” which for us is only an even more profound turn toward Stalinist reaction, the Stalinist regimes in the occupied zone of Europe are moving toward a “monolithic” structure, toward an open police dictatorship. The police structure of the shadow parties, agencies of the NKVD, has been outgrown by the spontaneous opposition of the masses who unmasked the Stalinist deception; has been outgrown by historical development, and now the NKVD is compelled to “liquidate” its own police creation.
 
Support Opposition!
Years ago, the Trotskyist and Bukharinist opposition was liquidated without awakening spontaneous opposition among the masses. Now it is different; the liquidation of the pseudo-PPS in Poland, of the Czech Social-Democracy, is provoking an oppositionist reaction among the workers. The authentic PPS continues to struggle as much inside as outside of Poland, and has the spontaneous support of the masses. The Social-Democrats have constituted an international socialist bureau of the parties in the Soviet zone.
It is the obligation of the revolutionary Marxists to support this movement of opposition and to defend the Social-Democrats against Stalinist persecution. It is our obligation to fight against the liquidation of the pseudo-PPS, which has become dangerous for the Stalinist dictatorship. But it is also our obligation to teach the masses that the resurrection of the old Social-Democracy is impossible, since this political force is being absorbed on the one hand by the Stalinist bureaucracy, and on the other by the pro-capitalist Labor Party, and reduced to an agency of capitalism.
Only the program of the third socialist front, the program of world socialism, can open new roads after the defeat, each day more imminent, of Stalinism.
 




Despite many laborious international conferences, all attempts to revive the Second (Socialist) International have failed. The principal cause, perhaps, of this failure has been the division of the old European Social-Democracy into a “Western” wing under the leadership of the British Labor Party, and an “Eastern” wing in the countries dominated by the Russian invaders. Until a short time ago, the British Laborites were still trying to maintain relations with the Social-Democratic parties of Yugoslavia, Hungary, Rumania, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, and not only invited delegations from the Russian Zone to the international congresses, but refused admission to the representatives of the Social-Democratic Parties in exile from these same countries. Thus, in the last international conference in Belgium, the delegates of the PPS (Polish Socialist Party) were refused admission. The PPS has a considerable organization among the Polish workers of France, Great Britain and Belgium, leaving aside the illegal workers’ organizations in Poland. It is the only organized working-class force which opposes the Stalinist government in Poland.
The Social-Democracy of the Russian Zone took the road of collaboration with the Stalinist invader, just as the Western Social-Democracy took the road of collaboration with its own and American capitalism. In the first period the Stalinist police permitted the collaborating Socialists a certain autonomy of organization, under the condition of collaboration. But the more the process of disillusionment advanced among the workers and peasants with regard to Stalinism, the wider the scope of political “totalization,” the greater grew the political pressure on the Socialists, and with it the danger of absorption by the Stalinist organizations.
Although in Rumania and Yugoslavia the Socialists did not play a major role, this process was clearly demonstrated in Hungary and Czechoslovakia. In Hungary the Social-Democrats were “expropriated” and compelled to accept Stalinist orders. In Czechoslovakia the Socialists were the victims of an internal coup by means of which the anti-Stalinist leadership was deposed and a new leadership under Zdenek Fierlinger, Stalinist collaborator, was installed.
In Poland the old PPS, according to the words of A. Cliokosz, “was expropriated from its own organization, press, program and emblems.” While the authentic PPS fought heroically in the Warsaw revolution, the agents of the GPU organized a “congress” in Lublin of collaborating elements, who formed the pseudo-PPS, led by Russian agents. The real PPS was exposed to savage persecution, and every attempt to legalize an independent Socialist Party was roundly frustrated by the “popular government.” The “independence” of the pseudo-PPS was due to the opposition of Mikolajczyk’s Peasant Party. Now, after the liquidation of the peasant movement, the GPU has proclaimed the necessity of “fusion” between the “two workers parties.” In a word, the doom of the pseudo-PPS has been sealed.
 
Indict Collaborators with Stalinists
The destiny of the Stalinist-collaborating Social-Democracy is determined by the progress of Stalinist totalitarianism and reaction in Europe. The old workers’ organizations are being absorbed and subjected to a single command. The formal “independence” of the Social-Democratic organizations in Poland as well as in Czechoslovakia was the consequence of a Stalinist maneuver and their liquidation is only a matter of time. The elements in opposition to Stalinism must flee into exile, “submit” politically, or be assassinated, as was the case of the Polish Socialists, Zdanowsky, Pajdak and others.
Given these conditions, the Social-Democratic opposition of the Soviet Zone, threatened with physical “liquidation” by the GPU and rejected by their British colleagues, remained without any possibilities and international representation. To find away out of this blind alley, an international conference of representatives from the opposition Social-Democratic groups in the Russian Zone was recently held in Paris. Ciolkosz and Zaremba represented the Polish Socialists; Topalovic and Drazkovi, the Yugoslavs; Karol Peyer, the Hungarians; and Yancu Zissu, the Rumanians.
The political declaration of the conference attacks Russia’s economic policy in the occupied countries, accusing it of extracting goods without any sort of equivalent exchange through economic agreements dictated to the puppet regimes.
“In addition, the governments, with their policy directed toward a forced and accelerated industrialization, maintaining armies which are much too large, and fostering the incredible growth of a bureaucracy, exhaust the resources and productive forces of the worker and peasant masses.
“The incorporation of these countries into the political orbit of the USSR is an obstacle to peaceful relations and prepares a new war, and is a brake on the economic reconstruction of these countries ...
“Consequently we witness the fact that these countries, rich in the sphere of agricultural production, die of hunger, those having an abundance of coal die of cold, because exports to the East devastate the internal market.”
The declaration comes out in favor of American aid for Europe and European unity without “limiting the liberty of the peoples.”
“The current policies of our governments inevitably lead to a lowering of living standards to the Soviet level. The policy of low wages and Stakhanovism constitutes a pronounced expression of this tendency.
“We protest against this policy, which, being in the service of foreign interests, rejects the Marshall Plan, putting obstacles in the way of the reconstruction of Western Europe and destroying international collaboration.
“Europe is one unit from the economic point of view, and the reconstruction of Western Europe can only be carried out with a maximum of difficulty if Eastern Europe remains isolated,since its economy has a complementary character, if the products of Eastern Europe required by Western Europe, are by force directed toward the East instead of finding their traditional outlets in the West.”
The declaration asks for international pressure on the satellite governments of the Soviet, to force them to respect those obligations and international agreements according to which “democratic institutions and agreements” were guaranteed.
“Only firm and swift action directed toward wiping out police policies, the liberation of political prisoners, and the organization of free elections under international control can bring about the unification of Europe and free the world from the prevailing fear, saving it from ultimate disaster.”
The declaration cites the events in Czechoslovakia as an example of the abandonment of democratic policy in Central Europe and the tactic of appeasement followed by the “Communist” governments, and also indicts the Social-Democratic parties for having supported groups with are “Socialist” in name only, being in reality subordinated to the dictate of the “Communists.”
The conference ended by forming an international socialist bureau of the Social-Democratic parties which are in opposition to the Stalinist regimes, “whose main aim is the restoration of national independence and the realization of democracy and socialism, which does not mean a return to the pre-war regimes.” Zygmunt Zaremba, the PPS representative, was chosen as secretary-general of the bureau.
*
Tendencies Revealed in the Resolution
Analyzing the resolution of the Social-Democratic opposition parties, we can discern two tendencies: the old Social-Democratic tendency which defends a democracy that rises “above classes,” that is, bourgeois democracy; which gives complete support to the Marshall Plan, that is, to the imperialist policies of the United States; which calls for the realization of the Atlantic Charter, whose program was not taken seriously by its own authors, Roosevelt and Churchill; which desires that the UN be an effective force for intervention, that is, desires the revival of the defeated program of the League of Nations; a tendency which for all these reasons gives support to capitalist restoration and the penetration of American imperialism in Eastern Europe without setting into motion an independent revolutionary policy of the proletariat. This pro-capitalist tendency appears to us to be reactionary and harmful for the interests of international socialism.
But the resolution also presents another tendency, that of criticism of the economic policy of Stalinism, criticism of the exploitation of the peoples in the occupied countries, of the lowering of the living standards of the workers and peasants to the Russian level; criticism of the totalitarian persecution of the workers and peasants’ opposition, of the police regime, of the reactionary economic autarchy, and the division of Europe into two opposing blocs; criticism of economic imperialism and the existing threat to world peace.
This criticism of Stalinism, its economic policy and its totalitarian regime, contains elements that are undeniably new, almost “Trotskyist,” which are not subordinated to the pro-capitalist line of the other tendency. Since the Social-Democratic oppositionists are an important workers’ force in the Russian Zone of Europe, the Marxist movement, whether it wants to or not, must support them in the struggle against the Stalinist reaction, insofar as this struggle develops within the framework of the struggle of the workers against the bureaucratic regime. We, the revolutionary socialists, support the workers’ criticism of Stalinism. We support the workers’ struggle against Stalinism to the degree that this serves the interests of the working class, the interests of world socialism, and the socialist revolution; but we oppose the tendency which would subject this workers’ struggle to the interests of capitalism, to the tendencies of capitalist restoration in Eastern Europe, to American imperialist penetration.
We understand the difficult situation of the Polish, Hungarian, Yugoslavian, Rumanian and Czech Social-Democrats. Every day the proletariat and poor peasantry of these countries increase their hatred of the Stalinist bureaucracy which exploits and oppresses them, reduces their living standards to barbarous levels. The Social-Democratic opposition to Stalinism sees no other real force, no other ally against the Stalinist bureaucracy than the capitalist ally, the United States.
 
Defeat of One Will Defeat the Other
But we, the heirs of the Russian Revolution, the exponents of Marxist revolutionary thought who have cast off the Stalinist chains, we know that capitalist restoration signifies a historical retrogression, that it also signifies exploitation and oppression;we know that the only solution for the countries of Eastern Europe and for all humanity is an integral world socialism, the permanent socialist revolution which will do away not only with Stalinism but with capitalism as well.
We know that the defeat of European socialism conditioned the historic existence of Stalinism as an expression of the post-revolutionary reaction; as the negation of an isolated, interrupted, and betrayed revolution. We know that the existence of capitalism in the rest of the world conditions the existence of the Stalinist reaction in the country of the buried October Revolution. We know that the existence of Stalinism, on the other hand, conditions the growth of capitalist reaction in its fascist and imperialist forms; and that in the last analysis the defeat of Stalinism will weaken capitalist reaction and unleash the revolutionary forces of the working class.
Nothing of this is understood by the Social-Democrats because they are not the products of the revolutionary socialist tendency. They reject the inheritance of the Russian Revolution and remain bound to traditional petty bourgeois reformism. For this reason the only salvation they can find is in alliance with Western capitalism.
We are against the alliance with capitalism and shall fight Stalinism under our own banner, the banner of the socialist revolution. We shall continue along the socialist road. We shall support the anti-Stalinist criticisms of the Social-Democrats from the point of view of the aims of revolutionary socialist policy, opposing collaboration with capitalism and forming our own third camp of the socialist revolution. And if today this camp is weak because of the supremacy of Stalinism in the working class, tomorrow it will be strong when this supremacy is destroyed.
 
Revolutionary Socialism Is the Only Way Out
The old Social-Democracy suffers the sclerosis of old age, loses its own physiognomy and is divided into two camps: the pro-capitalist camp of Attlee and Blum, and the pro-Stalinist camp of Nenni, Fierlinger and Cyrankiewicz. The pro-Stalinist Social-Democracy is doomed to absorption and irremediable political liquidation. The “Western” Social-Democracy is chained to the chariot of Wall Street, capitalist restoration and the new imperialist war. The Social-Democracy of the Russian Zone, opposed to Stalinism, tries to avoid the fate of both twin sisters; tries to give the new tendency its own expression, but its political declaration contains theoretical contradictions which undermined the political life of the Second International and what remains of it. If this criticism of Stalinism is subjected to a reformist, pro-capitalist policy, then our op- [a line of text was repeated here and a line was omitted – Note by ETOL] formed into bearers of capitalist restoration under the scepter of Wall Street.
The sad spectacle of the remains of the Second International divided between two bosses reminds us of those Roman gladiators who marched to their death shouting, “Ave Caesar, imperator, morituri te salutant.” (“Hail Caesar the emperor, in dying we salute you.”)
Marxist revolutionary thought does not play the part of gladiator to any emperor, but forges its own future, the glorious and victorious future of the world proletariat; it does not go toward death as do the sclerotic and outdated movements, but even in the gray days of defeat marches toward the green and triumphant life. The road to victory is the revolutionary independence of the workers’ movement.
No masters for the proletariat and the Marxist intellectuals. Against Moscow and against Wall Street. For the victory of world socialism built on the defeat of both reactionary camps, capitalist reaction and Stalinist cannibalism. For the third independent camp of the triumphant world socialist revolution!
 

   Stalinist policy is driving towards the liquidation of the PPS (pseudo-Socialist Party of Poland) and its incorporation into the Stalinist Party, the PPR. The realization of this program signifies a complete “Gleichschaltung” of the Polish proletariat and the introduction of “monolithic” dictatorship in Poland. The Stalinists met with strong opposition among the workers in the pseudo-PPS as well as from the real Polish Socialists, the anti-Stalinist irreconcilables in and outside of Poland. It is from this point of view that we wish to discuss the recent congress of the PPS in England and Belgium. The PPS congress in Great Britain had a preparatory character, preceding the general congress of this party in Belgium. Although the PPS in Great Britain has the oldest cadres and is the center of the party’s activities, its congress only embraced the PPS organization in Great Britain. Important sections of the PPS exist in France, Belgium, Germany, etc. The Polish population in France and Belgium is proletarian in its overwhelming majority, with the miners standing in first place. In Great Brittain, the Polish ex-soldiers, who have no desire to return to Poland today, have been incorporated in the mining as well as other industries, forming their own trade-union which is affiliated with the British trade unions. The growth of the PPS among the Polish working masses in Western Europe and the British Isles is very significant, since the old Communist Party always had an important sector of its adherents among the Polish miners of France and Belgium. In the pre-war period, the mining areas of Northern France constituted a stronghold of the Communist Party, in which the Polish miners played an important part. * The importance of the PPS Congresses is indicated by the messages of solidarity sent to the British congress by the various Socialist parties, among them the Socialist parties of France, Holland, Rumania, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Lithuania, Latvia, the Russian Mensheviks, etc. Such Socialist figures as Saragat, Lombardo, Garosci, Marceau Pivert, sent letters of greeting to the congress in Britain. * The congress in Belgium called on the working class to resist the totalitarian “Gleichschaltung” and Russian imperialism, and maintain its loyalty to the independent PPS, leader of the democratic camp in Poland, in order to conduct a. struggle for “national liberation and social change in accord with the interests of the laboring masses.” In a resolution on the defense of human rights the congress protested against the forced labor camps in Russia, the Franco terror in Spain, and the white terror in Greece, calling for the liquidation of the concentration camps, the liberation of political prisoners, and the respect of human dignity and human rights. In its international resolution, the congress condemned the Yalta and Potsdam Agreements, asking a return to the Atlantic Charter. “The struggle for the liberty of Poland is a struggle for the construction of the world according to the Atlantic Charter, which the workers’ movement accepted as its own, and is in accordance with the Four Freedoms which were proclaimed as the aim of the Second World War.” The congress condemned the reactionary tendencies among the Poles, a product of the national defeat, and on the other hand also condemned “the betrayal on the part of the Western Democracies of those ideals for which the people fought Hitler and fascism, their indifference to the fate of the nations of Eastern Europe, who made great sacrifices in the struggle against Hitlerism.” In order to maintain peace, the congress called for the following:  Transformation of the United Nations into an association of the peoples, with executive power and the capacity to adopt resolutions by majority vote, without having to bow to the veto power.  Restoration of national independence to the oppressed peoples and their self-determination.  The unification of Europe within the framework of the UNO.  Extension of social changes.  Elimination of wars of aggression and control of atomic energy (Baruch Plan).  The congress also went on record as opposed to the differentiation among the Socialist Parties, demanding the recognition of the parties of the Russian Zone, and the reorganization of the Socialist International. As for the political tasks of the Polish Emigration, the congress opposed any change in the western frontier of Poland on the Oder and Neisse, at the same time rejecting the Eastern frontier embodied in the Curzon line, and demanding the reconstruction of Poland between its present Western boundaries and the Eastern frontier of Riga, that is, the 1939 boundary. The PPS considers the incorporation of German territories in Poland as just indemnification for the economic destruction of Poland by the Nazis. On questions of internal policy, the congress declared the current president of the Polish government-in-Exile to be holding office illegally and against the will of the working people, and called on the Polish democracy in exile to reconstruct the democratic bases of political representation in the Polish emigration. However, the congress did not challenge the present London regime, and did not call for the formation of a second government or national committee. The congress considered the principal tasks in the emigration to be:  To unite all the Socialists in the PPS.  To develop a free Polish and International Socialist thought.  Unification of the Polish democratic camp as a guarantee that after the liquidation of the puppet regime there shall be no return of the political and social reaction.  To carry to a finish the unbreakable struggle against Russian imperialism and its agencies in order to restore the independence and liberty of Poland.  In conclusion, the congress greeted the creation of the State of Israel and called for an end to the spilling of blood and the establishment of fraternal relations between the Jewish and Arab peoples. * Having reviewed the most essential parts of the resolutions of the PPS congress in Belgium, it is not difficult to see that these resolutions have a typical social-democratic character, with all the corresponding mediocrity, half-remedies and petty-bourgeoisie illusions. However, what is important in these resolutions is the call for an open and unbreakable struggle against the Stalinist reaction and Russian imperialism in Poland, and against the national enslavement of the country, worthy of the revolutionary traditions of the Polish working class. But in order to realize these aims the congress turns to the UNO and calls for its transformation into an association of free peoples so that the world may be reconstructed according to the Four Freedoms and the principles of the Atlantic Charter. How incurable remains the innocence of the social-democrats! They still want to reform capitalism and imperialism notwithstanding all the kicks they have received. We lament this tendency very much since it means that the PPS is irremediably sliding into the capitalist camp, although it strives to “unify Polish democracy as a guarantee against capitalist restoration in Poland.” In any case, the PPS remains a bastion in the struggle against Stalinism in Poland, a very powerful factor, the only real force in the camp of the petty-bourgeoisie and the working-class. On the domestic terrain, the PPS struggles on two fronts, against Stalinism and against the Polish Right. International Marxism will undoubtedly view this position with sympathy and will support it despite all the vacillations and opportunist errors. But on the field of international politics, the congress did not maintain a “third position,” sliding into the capitalist camp. And here we must define the positions and combat the pro-capitalist positions of the PPS, explaining them to the Polish workers in the United States and Europe. * The resolutions are the result of the struggle and compromise between two factions in the party – Arciszewski’s right-wing and Zaremba’s “left.” In spite of the revolt of the Right against Thomas Arciszewski, ex-chief of the Polish government, the congress did not decide to join Mikolajczyk in forming a national committee in the United States, dependent on the American State Department and opposed to the present right-wing London regime headed by Zaleski. Mikolajczyk’s stock is not very high at the present time, and is opposed by the “independence” faction because of his capitulation to Moscow. Capitulation to Moscow has an odor which kills. This is why the PPS refrains from entering into alliance with Mikolajczyk and maintains an independent position towards the right wing London regime. There is much sympathy for Mikolajczyk and the Feasant Party in the PPS, but the decision of the Congress reveals Mikolajczyk’s political isolation. Similarly, the pre-congress proposals made by Zaremba for accepting the revision of Poland’s Eastern boundary as a basis for an understanding between the Poles and the Ukrainians and White Russians was rejected by the congress which called for the Eastern frontier of 1939. Nevertheless, Zaremba was elected President of the Party Council and a member of the Central Committee, which is composed of the following: Arciszewski, Pehr, Kwapinski, Ciolkosz, Drawiec, Bialas, Mrozkiewicz, Zagorski and Polowiec. Outside the old guard, there are many new names hitherto unknown in Polish national politics. * In order not to abuse the readers patience, we leave for another time a detailed analysis of the role of the PPS and its activities. But one thing is certain, the congresses of the PPS were a tremendous challenge to the Kremlin and a severe blow to Polish Stalinism.   






Editorial note: While it is impossible for the author of this article or Labor Action to vouch for the authenticity of the “Rancagua document.” the central and unimpeachable fact remains that Stalinism has entered into an open alliance with the military and feudo-bourgeois reaction throughout Latin-America. This coalition of native totalitarianism and Stalinism represents a serious danger to the very existence of the organized Latin- American working class movement. Yesterday, Stalinism supported American Imperialism and its “Democratic” colonial agents; today it supports the anti-American sector of the feudo-bourgeoisie – but always the Stalinist line conforms to the reactionary interests of the Russian ruling class and its foreign policy. – A.S.



*
Three revolts have shaken Peru in the last few weeks: 1) that of Colonel Llosa in Arequipa province; 2) the Callao uprising, ascribed to the APRA; 3) the revolt led by General Odria which terminated in the ousting of President Bustamente. The military counter-revolution was the consequence of the political defeat of the APRA, in particular, of the abortive Callao “revolution,” ascribed to the APRA by the Bustamente government. Although our evaluation that this abortive “revolution” ended in a counter-revolution is correct (see last week’s Labor Action – Ed.), we must complete our analysis with new facts received from trustworthy sources, which throw much light on the reactionary role of Stalinism, and particularly on the intense and effective work of Eudocio Ravines, prominent Peruvian Stalinist, suspected of being the secret agent of the MVD (GPU).
The Chilean Socialists, headed by Bernardo Ibanez, have published an extensive Rancagua Document, discovered in a local branch of the Chilean Stalinist party long before the Peruvian events. This document reveals an extensive and secret plan directed against the APRA as well as against the Chilean, Bolivian, and other governments; the point of the plan being to crush the anti-Stalinist working class and petty-bourgeois democratic forces, and to overthrow the governments of Peru, Chile and Bolivia in order to install, totalitarian dictatorships even though they might be rightist or militarist in character.
The Chilean Minister of Interior after reading the document declared that:
“This information indicates that E.R. (Eudocio Ravines) is pursuing a wide plan of bringing together all the anti.-Aprista, anti-government, and anti-American forces. His influence in the rightist group is strong and proven by the large contributions of money which he receives.” ... “R. (Ravines) thinks that money and ‘action’ will do the trick, and counts on the unmistakable readiness of the Peruvian government to engage in anti-Aprista acts.”
 
Directed Against Anti-Stalinists
Ravines is a mysterious personage. After his stay in Moscow, he became the supervisor of the Communist parties in Central America and Mexico. In 1936 he came to Chile as supervisor of the CPCH, and became its boss and “purger.” In 1945 the dictator Manuel Prado brought him to Lima to counteract the power of the APRA. Since then, Ravines (with government support) has dedicated. himself to fabricating crimes and attacks on the union movement and the APRA.
According to the Rancagua document, the Stalinist effort has been directed mainly against the anti-Stalinist working-class forces, especially the Peruvian APRA, Chilean Socialism, the CIT (Inter-American Labor Federation), as well as the bourgeois democratic and anti-Russian governments. The document states “The situation is splendid and the plan is developing normally. This does not mean that we can rest content and that we shall not give R. (Ravines) the aid he requests, particularly with respect to the task entrusted him by L. (presumably Lombardo Toledano). We must cooperate and see to it that the congress is defeated as it should be” (here the reference is to the CIT congress held in Lima). The document recommends that the actions of the leaders of the Peruvian Federation of Labor, Sabrosa and Aliaga, and Ibanez of Chile, be watched because “they continue to harm the Continent with their betrayals.”
Without being able to quote more extensively from the Stalinist document, we can say that events completely confirm its plan, directives and program. In Peru three revolutions have taken place secretly directed by Ravines. When the Llosa uprising was defeated in Arequipa, an “opposition” group was formed inside the APRA which incited a revolt in Callao. Trustworthy sources reveal that the central leadership of the APRA knew nothing of the Callao action, but that it was the work of an opposition group led by Ravines’ agents. Haya de la Torre, leader of the APRA, was surprised in bed by the police in the middle of the “revolution.” All that Ravines needed was the “action,” since he had the money and the “willingness” of the Bustamente government to engage in anti-Aprista actions.
The Bustamente government persecuted the APRA, declaring it outside the law and blaming it for the aborted revolution, while the secret Russian agent Ravines rubbed his hands, feeling sure of “control of the rightists.” A few days after the Callao incident the Odria revolution broke out. Bustamente was forced to leave the presidential palace. In La Paz, Bolivia, Colonel Llosa declared that Ravines was with the military junta. The Odria government has outlawed the Peruvian Communist party, but Ravines has
been invited to collaborate, assuming the role of the counselor and “gray eminence” of the Peruvian military government. It appears that the persecution of the APRA and the entire Peruvian working-class left is due to the plan elaborated by Ravines.
 
Repercussions on Continent
The events in Peru have had their repercussions on the entire continent. In Chile, connections between the Stalinists and the military circles have been discovered; in Bolivia the leaders of the Stalinist PIR planned a coup, in an understanding with ex-president General Toro. Besides this, a wide totalitarian plan, supported by a general strike of miners, railroad and factory workers, was prepared in order to overthrow the Hertzog government. The miners and factory workers are controlled by the MNR (Nazi) party; the railroad workers under Stalinist control. The Nazi-Stalinist blow failed but the danger continues to exist.
The plan against the APRA was linked with workers’ actions to take place in Bolivia, particularly in the mines, and in northern Chile which is also a mining district. In Paraguay a totalitarian military coup was also prepared. The famous assassination of the newspaperman Grana Garland in Lima (ascribed to the APRA) which touched off the campaign of the Peruvian reactionaries against the APRA and the workers’ movement, was really the work of the MVD and Ravines, according to the Rancagua document. The Peruvian government attorney-general, who knew about the assassination, worked as the tool, perhaps indirectly, of Ravines and tried to blame Bernardo Ibanez, president of the CIT and head of the Chilean Socialist Party as “author” of the Rancagua document. But recent events, the Stalinist alliances with the totalitarian parties, and Ravine’s activities tend to confirm and prove that this document contained instructions from the central Stalinist leadership in Latin-America which is located in Mexico.
The Stalinist document reveals only the personal and concrete details of the political tactic outlined: the alliance with the native-Nazi and totalitarian forces in Latin-America against the anti-Stalinist workers’ movement and the anti- Stalinist bourgeoisie. It must be admitted that the MVD and Ravines have had complete success in this action. The campaign against the APRA initiated with Grana Garland’s assassination in Lima set the Peruvian reaction and its military circles into motion. The same Bustamente government which emerged from the elections thanks to APRA support was pushed toward an anti-Aprista and anti-working class policy, a policy which ultimately brought about its downfall. Lacking a working class base, Stalinism knew how to manage and direct the Peruvian feudo-bourgeoisie and militarists against the petty-bourgeoise democracy represented by APRA, and the workers’ movement.
A similar series of events seems to be occurring in Chile, where the reactionary militarists are acting as the instruments of Stalinism. In Bolivia, the party of Liberalism, the party of the big mining interests acted in conjunction with the Stalinist PIR. In the service of the most reactionary right-wing elements, the Stalinist “political line” does not shrink from provocations, assassinations, “revolutions” and penetration of the United States intelligence service, which has often fallen into the traps set by the MVD and acted as its instrument. If it is true that the American embassy had a hand in the Callao events (the American ambassador in Lima having been asked to leave Peru) then he played the part of Ravines’ puppet. On the other hand, we have much information which proves that the American secret service in Bolivia also plays the part of a tool in the hands of the MVD, favoring the PIR and the MNR in their joinLaction against the government, and combatting the anti-Stalinist sectors of the working class. It is not however our task to teach the American diplomatic service and the FBI the methods of struggle against the MVD. They learned enough at Bogota.
 
Against Stalinism and Bourgeoisie
Our task consists of tearing away the mask and exposing the reactionary politics of Stalinism in Latin-America, which, lacking its own bases and incapable of independent action, gives all its support to the most reactionary Nazi and military groups on the continent, trying to “maneuver” them against the anti-Stalinist workers’ movement. We believe that the activities of the Stalinist agent Ravines in Peru will convince many workers of this.
Our second task consists of forging an independent working-class front directed against both the feudo-bourgeoisie as well as against the totalitarians, and giving support to the APRA, the Chilean Socialists, and the CIT. in its struggle against the Stalinists. Part of this task is the initiation of a campaign in defense of the APRA leaders, the trade unions, and the APRA prisoners in Lima who are threatened wifh capital punishment by the hangman, Odria, and his native Machiavelli, Ravines.
Liberty for Haya de la Torre, leader of the APRA, Sabrosa, leader of the Peruvian Labor Federation, and hundreds of other union and labor leaders being tortured today in Lima’s jails.
 




The offensive of Russian totalitarianism in the countries of “popular democracy” flows from the imperious economic necessity of incorporating all of Eastern Europe directly into the Soviet Union. From the socio-political point of view, it is the Kremlin’s answer to the Yugoslavian resistance, and to the anti-Russian opposition in all the subjugated countries, bourgeois as well as proletarian. Precisely here the Stalinist regime of conquest exposes its weak and vulnerable sides.
The Tito schism in Yugoslavia not only could not be subjugated and liquidated, but resists and attacks, giving rise to repercussions and echoes in all of Soviet Europe. Tito has shown himself a worthy disciple of the GPU of the Wyszynski’s, Beria’s, etc.; his secret police have defeated all the efforts of the GPU to liquidate and eliminate his regime; his party has been “consolidated” in the Stalinist manner, the proof being provided by the national congress which suppressed the opposition fomented by Russia, resisting the attacks of the Cominform and the Soviet press.
Now the Yugoslavian press has embarked on an open attack on the Russian press, including the sacrosanct organ, Bolshevik, deploring its low level and tone, etc. A political emigration of more than 500 oppositionist Communists has gathered together under Tito’s protection, and threaten to transform themselves into a center of anti-Stalinist political action. According to press reports, Tito has concluded a pact of secret aid with the American government in case of aggression by Russia. The Soviet press has ceased its furious attack on Tito’s “nationalist” deviation, leaving this job to the Cominform press. In Pravda there appeared an article signed by “Ceka,” very conciliatory in tone toward Yugoslavia, and attributed to Stalin himself. For the first time in history the Stalinist bureaucracy has been forced to tolerate resistance and come to terms with it.
 
Repercussions in Other Lands
The Yugoslavian schism is not a purely national phenomenon, but has had very serious repercussions in other countries. In Czechoslovakia, the Stalinist coup d’etat and the elimination of Benes’ party were but preventive measures against the anti-Russian schism. In spite of completely dominating the police apparatus, the Stalinist regime was at the edge of the abyss. Both in the days of mourning for Benes, and during the anti-Russian demonstrations of the “Sokol,” the police minister, Nosek, was afraid that the Stalinists would lose control of the situation. He declared that thousands of agitators were calling on the masses “to attack the headquarters of the National Committee, the Communist Party, and the police.” Purges and suppression of the opposition parties, purges of the “Sokol” and the army, and even a purge of the ruling Stalinist party did not suffice.
A special law in defense of the Republic had to be passed, and its scope widened even further by another law in “defense of the Soviet Union.” Thousands of persons have been arrested under these new laws, and dozens accused and condemned far ‘subversion and espionage on behalf of the Americans. But in spite of these measures, the Czech and Slovak peoples have lost all sympathy fqr Russia, and hatred for the Russian occupier is uncontainable. In Slovakia, the situation is still worse. The Slovakian Communist Party had to be liquidated and incorporated into the Czech party in order to assure better totalitarian control over Slovakia.
In Poland, directly controlled by an important Russian occupation force and by the MVD (GPU) organization, the anti-Russian resistance penetrated the government party in the form of the Gomulka schism. Although the schism has been brought under control and its “leader” has confessed and recanted, the situation of the regime continues to be insecure. All the purges of the shadow-parties (PPS, two populist parties, democratic and labor parties) have aimed at exterminating the heresy and preparing the way for the formation of a monolithic Stalinist party.
The “economic genius,” Minc, continued to accelerate the economic offensive of the statified sector against the artisan and the peasant, but the struggle, especially in the countryside, is extremely difficult. The Polish state possesses scarcely more than 1,000 tractors which can work hardly 1 per cent of the farms. This technical poverty limits the anti-peasant offensive of the regime. This is perhaps the reason why it is said that Minc will be the first sacrificial lamb handed over to the Kremlin since his “successes” do not satisfy Moscow. Minc is one of the few members of the old Communist Party. He belonged to the “Majority” faction liquidated by Bierut, whose theory of “two stages of the Polish revolution” was stolen and rehabilitated by Stalin, notwithstanding the fact that the latter condemned this theory in 1929–30.
 
National Resistance Seethes
More than 11 members of the Central Committee of the Pseudo-PPS have been expelled from the party for various deviations, the most important being the theory of the “third force.” According to this theory, the PPS Would constitute ’ an intermediate factor between the PPR (Stalinist party) and the PSL (Mikolajczyk’s peasant party). In addition, the Populist parties have been purged of the old peasant leaders, such as Kiernik, Putek Wrona. etc.
The tightening of the screws in the totalitarian machine in Poland have not remedied the situation, and according to trustworthy sources, the anti-Russian underground is growing in strength and attractive power. This underground may very well turn out to be a time-bomb, which will explode against Russia in line with the old traditions of Polish national resistance. Its temporary calm can be explained by the disillusionment of the masses with the “Western Allies” who so cynically sold Poland (“the inspiration of the peoples,” according to Roosevelt) to Russia.
However, in the camp of the resistance, both left and right, the program of “saving Polish blood” prevails. But in the region of Plock, attempts against the functionaries of the regime have once again occurred. It is quite possible that this is the work of the GPU itself, since Stalin fears the Polish resistance and its action in case of war, and would like to provoke it beforehand in order to carry out a bloody slaughter. The situation is further characterized by the effective and planned desertion of many Polish diplomats in the United States, Latin-America and Europe.
 
Theatre of Silent War
All of Eastern Europe is the theatre of a silent war between the bureaucracy and the oppressed masses. It is a social war, a war of the classes under new economic and social conditions. Although both the Stalinist and bourgeois sources present it as a war between “communism and capitalism,” between the proletariat and the elements of the displaced bourgeoisie and petty-bourgeoisie, in reality this schema does not at all correspond to the new economic and social structure of Europe. The outstanding characteristics of this new economic-social structure are:

The liquidation of big private capitalism and the displacement of the bourgeoisie as the dominant and possessing class.
The introduction of statified property in big and middle industry.
The existence of private property in almost all of agriculture, the former having a minority status in petty commerce, smalt industry and handicrafts in the cities.
The dictatorship of the bureaucracy, whose power is rooted in the disposition of the nationalized property and the police apparatus of oppression.

The economy of Eastern Europe is a combined economy, composed of socialist elements, a state-capitalist sector, and a petty-bourgeois sector. But the bureaucratic state directs the economic evolution not towards socialism, but towards bureaucratic totalitarianism, which liquidates both the socialist as well as the petty-bourgeois sector, leaving only the state-capitalist sector. Clearly, we are far from the final stage.
[Readers of Comrade Rudzienski’s work are undoubtedly familar with his views on “state capitalism” in the Stalinist countries, as expressed in the above lines. – Ed.]
With the bourgeoisie ousted as the dominating exploitive class, its place has been taken by the bureaucracy which directs the nationalized economy in its own interests. Consequently, the principal social antagonism lies between the bureaucracy and the proletariat, and petty-bourgeoisie (mostly peasant). The ex-bourgeoisie has been pushed back to the periphery in this war of the classes. Although the disorganized and disoriented proletariat does not present any organized resistance to the bureaucracy, leaving the leading role to the peasantry, its future historic role will be much greater than the capitalist politicians and ideologists think. The rebellion of the bureaucracies in the satellite countries against Stalin, aside from their own economic interests, has its roots in the resistance of the masses in the war of the classes which continue to be the motor force of this new society, and must lead to the annihilation of this class society, the annihilation of reactionary Stalinism.
 




The deviation of Gomulka, ex-secretary-general of the Stalinist Party, has ended “peacefully” without any Moscow Trials or assassinations. Gomulka remains what his name indicates (Gomulka: piece of cheese), a man of ... cheese. He admitted his errors, confessed his nationalist deviation before a meeting of PPR “activists,” and his life was spared. On the other hand, tens of thousands of militants have been purged and expelled from the party. The faction of Gomulka, Kliszko, Kliscko, Kowauski, Sokorski, etc., is under strict “vigilance.”
Although Gomulka’s schism slowed down the process of fusion between the PPR and the pseudo-PPS (Socialist Party), the MVD (GPU) is taking punitive measures against all the members of the shadow-parties who are considered “suspicious.” Cyrankiewicz, Prime Minister, docile instrument of the MVD, proclaimed a campaign against the partisans of the “third force” between the PPR (Stalinists) and the PSY (Mikolajczyk’s party). Among those purged have been Hochfeld, because of the thesis he presented at the Wroclaw Congress of the pseudo-PPS, demanding more democracy than Stalin thinks necessary for Poland; Osobka and Schwalbe because they “slowed down Socialist construction in Poland” – poor Osobka served faithfully in installing the dictatorship and the Russian occupation of Poland, was “trusted” by the MVD and has now fallen into disgrace; Drobner and Wachowicz, also have been purged, the former a “Leftist” and ex-leader of the Independent Socialist Party in pre-war days.
To this list we can add the names of Kurylowicz, secretary of the railroad workers union, Topinski and Rusinek. In a word, all these groups within the pseudo-Polish Socialist Party who have not submitted 100 per cent to the MVD, who have an opinion which differs by so much as a hair’s breadth from the official Stalinist line, are being eliminated. This political liquidation is in obedience to the directives issued by the Kremlin to speed the fusion of the “workers’ parties” into a single monolithic organization.
 
Nothing Helps
The same process is taking place in the peasant camp, which includes the pro-Stalinist SL, and the remnants of the PSL (Mikolajczyk’s Peasant Party), which has been “adapted” to “popular democracy.” It seems that the Stalinization of the SL was not sufficient, it being necessary to expel from the party Putek and Wrone, old peasant demagogues and opportunists.
Both, in the period of the Pilsudski dictatorship, supported the government, betraying their party; afterwards they offered their services to Moscow. But one mild criticism by Putek of the servile Stalinist parliament sufficed to bring about their expulsion from the party. Until then, Putek had held the Postal ministry in the Warsaw cabinet.
From the PSL (formerly Mikolajczyk’s party) Kiernik has been expelled. He is an ex-minister in the government of 1923, who ordered the slaughter of the Cracow workers. Representative of the Peasant Right, tending toward an alliance with the Right, Kiernik betrayed Mikolajczyk and offered his services to Moscow. The Stalinists utilized his services and are now “liquidating” him as a dirty, worn-out rag.
The pro-government Catholics have also been attacked. The priests, Kacyznski and Piwowarczyk having been arrested, and the Catholic publications suspended. The regime increases its offensive under pressure from Moscow.
 
Basis of Purges
The inquisitorial action is headed by the “President of Poland” himself, Bierut, a Stalinist Torquemada. Catherine II had less cynicism and more pleasure in installing her ex-lover Poniatoswski as King of Poland, than Stalin had when he named as president of a “People’s Poland” his ex-policeman, ex-hangman of the Polish section of the GPU, the informer and assassin of his own comrades, Bierut. For Bierut is an old agent of the Russian secret police, of Stalin’s “Okhrana,” a hangman of the proletarian vanguard of Poland. Now this police “leader” is instructing the “workers’ parties” in the interpretation of “Marxism-Leninism-Stalinism.”
“The transition between popular democracy and Socialism is not a spontaneous but a directed process,” according to the policeman, Bierut ... “It is directed by the proletarian party and the apparatus of the popular state.” In a word, we are marching toward the illustrious kingdom of bureaucratic despotism. “The future united party of the proletariat must be based unshakably on a single revolutionary ideology of Marxism-Leninism ... which is directed and enriched by the great world leader of the proletariat, Generalissimo Stalin ...”
Now we know everything, toward what the purges of the shadow-parties are leading. Admitted for some time, their purpose is to disarm and destroy the national underground resistance in Poland. All roads, therefore, lead to Moscow. The process of incorporation has profound economic roots, based on the imperialist expansion of Russian Stalinism.
 




LIMA, Peru – The defeat of Nazism, in the Second World War inspired a series of popular movements, of anti- totalitarian, anti-capitalist “revolutions” in South America. In Peru, the bloody military dictatorship of Benavides was liquidated. Under the transitional regime of Manuel Prado, the powerful popular movement, the “APRA” (Popular American Revolutionary Alliance), led by Haya de la Torre, won legality. In Venezuela, the Democratic Alliance of Betancourt and Gallegos eliminated the corrupt Medina regime, and installed a transitional dictatorship which paved the way for elections and guaranteed the ensuing regime.
In Chile, the leadership of the popular, anti-Nazi movement fell into the hands of the Stalinists who favored the candidacy of Gonzale Videia for president, with the hope of using him as a puppet to bring about a Stalinist dictatorship in a South American country. In Paraguay, several revolutions against the regime of the tyrant Morinigo broke out, the latter finally being compelled to abandon the country and take refuge in Buenos Aires. In Bolivia, a popular revolution overthrew the native fascist regime of the MNR (Revolutionary Nationalist Movement), hanging the president, Villaroel, and his aides from lampposts in front of the government palace.
In Colombia, the masses under the leadership of the Liberal leader, Gaitan, hoped to eliminate the government of the semi-feudal Conservative party. The weak link in this chain was the defeat of the Radicals and Socialists in Argentina, and the victory of Colonel Juan Domingo Peron.
All these movements were the consequence of the defeat of Hitlerism in Europe. Among the masses there existed the fervent belief that the victory of “Democracy” and Stalinist “socialism” had opened a new epoch of social and national emancipation in Latin America for the working- class and the popular masses; that imperialist oppression was at an end, and that a new epoch of Pan-American fraternity had begun. In essence, the wave of popular rebellions in South America was a distant echo of the splintered, subjugated mass upheavals in Europe that was cut in half by the iron curtain.
The Second World War did not resolve any of the fundamental problems of humanity, did not bring forth any new ideas, or deliver to the light of day any social revolution as did the First World War. Nothing occurred in the West. A brief Capitalist-Stalinist idyll was replaced by open reaction both in the United States as in Russian and Eastern Europe. The reaction in the United States sapped popular hopes in Latin America, caused an ebbing of the popular wave, and brought the advent of a strong social and political reaction.
What we are witnessing, therefore, is a series of reactionary, anti-popular, anti-democratic movements in Latin America. Their main aim is the liquidation of the popular movements of a few years ago.
*
The political alliance between the APRA and ex-president Bustamente y Ribera in Peru was dissolved by the bourgeois sector, and the regime established in the 1945 election liquidated. The Bustamente government immobilized the parliament with its Aprista majority, and initiated rule by decree. The APRA went over into opposition, trying to force the government to retreat. But instead of preparing a broad, popular movement, whose backbone would have been a general strike directed by the APRA-controlled Peruvian Federation of Labor, and supported by the native peasant movement, Haya de la Torre’s party aborted the great movement of popular opposition with a military uprising in the port city of Callao in traditional Latin American style.
The entire political strategy of the APRA has been an error, beginning with the Bustamente alliance and ending with the still-born Callao “revolution.” If it is true, as the Peron controlled press asserts, that Haya de la Torre had a tacit agreement with the American State Department and the American Embassy in Lima, then we have a new example of the political incapacity of the “Yankees” in South America.
The revolutionary legend of Haya de la Torre and his party have not stood up under practical examination. For many years the Apristas played with the fantasy of the “democratic revolution,” but they did not know how to realize it when the hour struck. This defeat may very well finish off the Aprista movement.
The aborted revolution has ended in a counter-revolution. In Peru, the Colonels Llosa and Odria have harvested the fruits of the revolutionary make-believe of the APRA. A military counter-revolution, totalitarian in character, has triumphed under the fascist slogans of “order, work and progress.” The links between the Peruvian militarists and Argentine’s Peron are pretty evident. The Peruvian proletariat led by the APRA and the CTP (Peruvian Federation of Labor) has been defeated and delivered up to the soldiery, thanks to the “heroism” in words of the petty-bourgeois revolutionaries. The Peruvian Stalinists have much cause for their cursed joy. According to the statements of Colonel Llosa (leader of the first attempt at counter-revolution), the Stalinist chief, Rabines, supported the totalitarian coup. Peru has sunken into the night of terror and totalitarian reaction.
*
In neighboring Bolivia, the totalitarian forces are conspiring against the constitutional regime of Dr. Herzog. The initiative is being taken by the MNR, which was overthrown and defeated in 1946. The MNR enjoys the support and financial aid of Peron. After several thwarted attempts to overthrow the government, the Bolivian Nazis have arrived at an agreement with the Stalinist party, the PIR (Party of the Revolutionary Left). The Nazis control the factory and mining unions, the Stalinists the railroad unions. At the instigation of the two totalitarian parties, these unions signed an agreement to organize a general strike whose formal aim was to be the enactment of a workers retirement law, and a family aid law.
The retirement law is an old demand of the Bolivian working class, which is terribly impoverished and enslaved by the large enterprises. But the Nazis and Stalinists abuse the demands of the workers, transforming them into a reactionary political weapon for their own purposes. The government resorted to a state of siege against the revolutionary plan, and to military mobilization against the railroad workers’ strike. The Nazi leaders have been deported to the fever-ridden, unhealthy regions of Beni. The state of siege permitted the government to do the same with members of the Stalinist parliamentary group.
It is certain that the Stalinist deputies sensed the danger involved to themselves, because they retreated. The railroad union has come to an agreement with the government and called off the general strike. The government, in turn, has revoked the military measures on the railroads, and sent a draft of a retirement law to the Bolivian parliament. The totalitarian offensive based on the workers’ organizations controlled by the Nazis and Stalinists was forced to retreat. But the danger remains latent, in view of the fact that these two forces control a majority of the organized working class. The remedy lies in liberating the Bolivian workers from the Nazi-Stalinist influence, encouraging a union movement free of totalitarian influences, and developing a true revolutionary Socialist part.
The totalitarian offensive creates the danger of a rightist dictatorship of the big mining interests, or of a military-bonapartist dictatorship. There are signs that the present regime, based on an equilibrium of social forces, no longer satisfies the capitalist right, which demands a “strong government.”
*
In Chile, the Stalinists are constantly preparing to bring off a coup against the regime of their candidate and ex-ally, President Videla. But lacking a Nazi ally rooted in the masses, they have least chance of success in this country. In Paraguay, a “revolutionary” movement with Peronist ties has taken power.
*
We are confronted by a chain of reactionary movements, totalitarian in character, whose focal point is Argentinian Peronism. Over and beyond the general causes which we have already partially analyzed, the main aim of this movement is to form a Peronist bloc in South America against “Yankee Imperialism.” The Stalinist Fifth Column plays along with this tendency, and in view of its own impotence supports the totalitarian Peronist movement. This is especially evident in the declarations of Colonel Llosa on the support given by the Stalinist leader, Rabines, and in the PIR-MNR agreement in Bolivia, as well as Stalinist benevolence toward Peron. The growth of native totalitarianism is due in large part to the failures of the APRA, its political defeats, and the arrogant, stupid intervention of the American Embassies and the FBI. After the Braden affair in Buenos Aires, of Yankee impotence in Bogota, come the latest intervention in Lima and Bolivia, which is as stupid as it is disastrous.
*
Revolutionary working class socialism in South America combatting Peronism and Stalinism, must oppose the arrogance and domination of Yankee Imperialism, forming a third front of authentic national and social emancipation in Latin America.
 




In the revolution of July, 1946 the Bolivian people overthrew the native fascist dictatorship, hanging President Villaroel and his collaborators from the lampposts. Since the political revolution was not transformed into a social revolution and social reforms were not initiated, the reaction staged a quick comeback; first, in the form of Stalinist Bonapartist attempts, and afterwards in the collaboration between the Republican Union and Stalinist parties. As the reaction continued to take hold, the Stalinists themselves were eliminated from the government. The latest municipal elections revealed the resurgence of the defeated MNR (National Revolutionary Movement), this party gaining an absolute majority of undeniably working-class votes in the mining city of Potosi. Now, the MNR represents an imposing force of reactionary opposition, threatening new military uprisings and political overthrows. How did this happen?
The MNR is the party of the Bolivian middle class, discontented with the government of the traditional bourgeois parties. It is linked to, and supported by, the military lodge "Radepa" which consists of nationalist officers educated in the school of German Nazism which was directed personally by Captain Roehm and General Kundt. The civilian leaders of the MNR, Paz, Montenegro, Andrade, etc., are also disciples of the Nazi ministers.
Had there not been this Nazi influence in Bolivia, a middle class party of the Peruvian APRA type would have sprung up. The personal factors play an enormous role in the small South American countries. The course of history in Hispanic-America was many times decided by battles of thirty to fifty men. The MNR, formed in the Nazi school, always constituted a reactionary force in the middle class and among the workers, being directed first of all against revolutionary Socialism. On coming to power it counted on the support of Hitler and Peron, and served the capitalist enterprise of Patino and North American imperialism. Now, after the destruction of Nazism, the MNR does not seek an alliance with the APRA of Peru, but unconditionally serves the totalitarian reaction of Peron and his local sub-imperialism, which tries to subjugate the neighboring countries economically and politically.
 
Buttressed on All Sides
All the political forces in Bolivia collaborated in the growth and restoration of the MNR which had been condemned and punished by popular anger in the July revolution of 1946. In order to fight the Stalinists, the Republican Union of President Hertzog made agreements with the MNR and even encouraged its revival by tolerating its activities. The Stalinists of the PIR (Party of the Revolutionary Left) massacred the miners of Potosi while they were part of the governmental junta; thus, both the bourgeois right and the Stalinist left worked zealously towards the revival of the native fascists.
But the Fourth International forces are hardly without guilt. The official section of the Fourth, the POR, evaluated the MNR as a “reformist” force and not as counter-revolutionary. Starting from the premise of the democratic revolution as the immediate stage ahead, it considered a limited collaboration between the POR and the MNR to be possible. Although this collaboration was officially denied, its evident proof resides in the formation of the “miners bloc,” composed of the Trotskyist and Nationalist deputies in parliament. Although this tactic might have justification at a certain political stage, in order to facilitate the access of the POR to the miners dominated by the MNR, events prove that the MNR continues to control the mines and the Miners Federation, while the majority of the POR in the parliamentary fraction of the Miners Bloc is purely illusory, and only serves as a shield for the actions of the MNR. The best proof of this evaluation is afforded by the Potosi elections, where the workers voted en masse for the MNR and not the POR.
The false theory of the "democratic revolution" engenders a false political tactic, and this leads finally to the defeat of the revolutionary workers movement. Under the leadership of the deputy, Lora, the POR came to the political position of the Argentine "Octobrists," who counsel the Fourth International to support Peron as the realizer of the democratic revolution on the South American continent. Only the PSOB (Socialist Workers Party of Bolivia), in spite of all its errors, vacillations, and ineptitudes of organization, has always tenaciously fought the MNR and the erroneous concept of the democratic revolution in Bolivia.
Now the MNR threatens not only the Hertzog government with a military uprising, but the workers movement as well with the annihilation of its cadres and the introduction of state control of the unions. The Stalinists, of course, are interested in military coups and “revolutions” in America. The Nazi-Stalinist war cry of nationalizing the mines, under a capitalist regime, signifies the creation of a tremendous totalitarian power, better able to exploit and oppress the proletariat, and to hand Bolivia over to Peron.
Only socialist nationalization based on a continent-wide revolution under workers power can resolve this problem in accordance with the Marxist program. The proletariat can gain nothing from military seizures of power. Aside from the fact that it will have to bear the cost of such actions, it can only expect greater exploitation and oppression.
For this reason, it is necessary that the Fourth Internationalist movement clarify its program and revise its tactic, putting forward a completely independent political line of the proletariat. The POR must combat not only the bourgeois government but also the growing strength of the reaction, of the MNR. The time has arrived when the Miners Bloc must be dissolved and the POR must form its own parliamentary fraction without the participation of the nationalist deputies, organized members of the MNR. It is time to stop being a shield for the activities of the MNR.
Not only the Bolivian proletariat, but all of South America and the entire Fourth Internationalist movement is interested in this question. Happily, there are comrades in the POR who understand these errors and wish to force Lora to break with the nationalist deputies and revise his tactic, which is so harmful to the Fourth International and the workers movement in Bolivia.
The rapprochement between the left-wing of the POR and the PSOB will help resolve this question on the road of the third proletarian front.
 




Following the assassination of Zdanowski, secretary-general of the Polish trade unions in the pre-war period, the terrible news has arrived of the death of Janina Pajdak in the jail of the GPU in Cracow, Poland.
Janina Pajdak was the wife of Antoni Pajdak, railroad worker, leader of the Cracovian proletariat, and leader of the PPS (Polish Socialist Party). In 1930 Pajdak belonged to the leading group which organized the famous Left-Center Congress directed against the Pilsudski dictatorship. Deputy to the Polish Diet (parliament), he represented in the PPS the proletarian element, inclined toward the left.
During the period of Nazi occupation, he belonged to the leadership of the WRN Group (Freedom, Equality and Independence), hated by Stalinism. As the representative of the underground PPS, he was a minister in the underground government which led the armed insurrection.
When the Russians occupied Poland and imposed their puppet-government, the government of national resistance continued its work. Stalin invited the 16 members of this government, through the intermediary of one of his generals “to negotiate” the formation of a “new Polish Government” together with the Stalinists. The invitation was guaranteed with the “word of honor of the Soviet general” and the “guarantees” of Roosevelt and Churchill, given to the Poles.
When the leaders of the resistance emerged from illegality in order to participate in the conference with the Stalinists, they were carried off to the prison of the GPU in Moscow, AND TRIED BY A RUSSIAN TRIBUNAL FOR THEIR ACTS AGAINST THE USSR. Among the 16 abducted was Antoni Pajdak, the railroad worker of Cracow, an authentic proletarian. He did not appear with the others at the trial, since his “treatment” during the investigation was so “scientific” that until now he continues sick in the Russian prison.
His wife, Janina, was a brave leader of the PPS under the German occupation. She distinguished herself, among other things, by her activity in aiding and hiding the Jewish victims of the ghetto.
She was arrested last year together with her daughter. After several months, Radkiewicz’ hangmen were forced to admit her death, refusing, however, to yield up her mortal remains, and forbidding publication of news of her death. Nevertheless, the news has been gotten out of Poland.
Together with the pressure for the unity of the pro-Stalinist PPS (Polish Socialist Party) with the Stalinist PPR (Polish Workers Party), the GPU proceeds to the assassination of the most prominent Social-Democrats opposed to Stalinism. The assassination of Janina Pajdak is the first murder of a woman Socialist in Poland.
However, the political assassinations reveal the political tension against the regime and the conscious and stubborn opposition of the working class to the Stalinists. In Poland, we are at the beginning of that stage which corresponds to the Stalinist offensive against the Communist opposition in Russia in the years 1928–1938.
Then, the Social-Democrats like everybody else abandoned the Russian Left Opposition to the tender mercies of the assassin, Stalin. But now, it is different. Now we, the revolutionary Socialists, shall not abandon our comrades-in-struggle, although they are Social-Democrats, to the hangman of the proletariat, but shall strive to succour them with international solidarity.
The revolutionary left of the United States must take the initiative in starting broad international action in defense of the Socialists of Poland.
Death to the hangmen of the Stalinist GPU.
Eternal glory to their victims, Janina Pajdak, Zdanowski, Bryja, and thousands of unknown others.
 




We have received news of the assassination of Antoni Zdanowski, one of the 200 opposition Socialists arrested and put on trial in Poland. For some time now, we have been calling the attention of the American workers to the offensive of the Kremlin against the workers’ opposition in Poland.
After the wave of strikes in Poland’s industrial centers, principally the last strikes of the textile workers of Lodz, the GPU decided on the “destruction” of the cadres of the workers’ opposition in Poland. The arrests embraced hundreds of socialist and trade union leaders and militants, among thepi prominent leaders of the PPS and the anti-Nazi resistance, like Puzak, Zdanowski, Dziegielewski, Cohn, Obarski, Galaj, etc.
The news which came from behind the prison walls was terrible. The leaders of the workers’ opposition were maltreated in a form worthy of the hangmen of the GPU. At the public trial, the leaders of the Peasant Party appeared without teeth, maltreated and physically broken.
 
Leading Unionist
Antoni Zdanowski was a prominent figure of the Social Democracy in Poland. Deputy to the Parliament in the pre-war period, he was, at the same time, leader of the trade unions as secretary-general and editor of the union magazine.
During the Nazi occupation he belonged to the leadership of the workers’ resistance movement against the Nazis. After the Russian occupation he belonged to the opposition PPS, whose legalization was prohibited by the NKVD. Under the pressure of Zulawski, only Socialist representative in the Stalinist Parliament of Warsaw, Zdanowski entered the pro- Stalinist PPS and led the opposition against the Stalinists.
In 1945, the Warsaw workers elected him president of the Warsaw PPS Committee against the will of the NKVD. It was at this time that he aroused the ire of the Stalinists.
In 1945 Zdanowski and Zulawski left the pro-Stalinist PPS and presented their candidacies as Independent Socialists. The government’s electoral commission cancelled Zdanowski’s candidacy, fearing his electoral success among the Lodz weavers and the proletariat of Warsaw. When the NKVD (Security Police in Poland) decided to “liquidate” the Socialists of the opposition, Zdanowski headed the black list of victims. He was arrested in June of 1947. He was very badly treated during the questionings.
 
Sealed Coffin
Now the news arrives that he was assassinated by the “Bezpieka.” His remains were handed over to his family in a SEALED COFFIN; as was the custom of Hitler’s hangmen, his family was prohibited from announcing his death. The death of Zdanowski is kept in strict secrecy.
Even now the Stalinist hangmen do not dare to kill the Socialists openly in prison. They killed the militants of lesser importance “accidentally.” The assassination of Zdanowski, a. leader of international reputation, constitutes the signal that the GPU intends to proceed to the liquidation en masse of the workers’ opposition in Poland. Zdanowski refused to “go soft” under torture and, consequently, it would have been dangerous to have had him stand trial with the other members of the PPS.
At the same time news has arrived, that the peasant deputy, Bryja, who fled with Mikolajczyk and was captured by the Czech Stalinists and returned to Bierut’s Security Police, committed suicide in prison after being subjected to torture.
These assassinations signify that in the countries of the Soviet zone, the era of the extermination of the workers’ and peasants’ opposition, the era of the “Moscow Trials,” is beginning.
Those assassinated by the NKVD were not our comrades either in terms of doctrine or party. Nevertheless, they were our comrades in the struggle against Stalinism.
For this reason, we, the revolutionary socialists, must address ourselves to all the workers’ tendencies in the world, especially in the United States, so that they may raise their voices in protest against the NKVD terror in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia [1], Russia, etc.
Comrades, American workers, raise your powerful voice of protest, regardless of differences of political belief. The cause of the assassinated and persecuted workers is your cause. Long live the international solidarity of the proletariat against the capitalist reaction and the Stalinist barbarism! Long live the socialist world front!

Note by ETOL
1. “Yugoslovakia” in printed original.
 




In 1938, at the time of the Munich Pact, Czechoslovakia’s
“allies” capitulated to Hitler’s dictate and accepted the
dismemberment of this small country. The representatives of the
Daladier and Chamberlain governments in Prague awakened President
Benes at midnight in the ancient residence of the old kings of
Bohemia, Hrad, demanding his signature to the imperialist
document which dismembered his country. Benes, who for several days
had been under the constant pressure of his generous “allies,”
signed his own capitulation and that of the Czechoslovakian republic.
On the following day he called his people to “calm” and “work.”
The people wept in the streets of Zlata Praha (Golden Prague)
but obeyed the president. Thus ended Masaryk’s republic.
A few days later Benes resigned the presidency and went into
exile. Scarcely half a year later, in March 1939, the columns of
German steel entered Czechoslovakia, putting an end to the Second
Republic of Munich, born with Benes’s signature, and proclaiming
the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. In September of that
same year the Nazis invaded Poland. We recall these facts in order to
familiarize our readers with political atmosphere of Czechoslovakia,
and in order to indicate the historic importance of the latest events
in this country.
*
This February, a stunned world stared with astonishment at the
march of the Stalinist cohorts through Prague. As we know, since the
invasion of the Russian troops, this country had been governed by a
“popular democracy” of a type standard in Eastern Europe. The
governmental coalition consisted of Stalinists, pro-Stalinist
Social-Democrats, Catholics, Benes’s National-Socialists, and the
Slovak Democratic Party. However, the key positions, such as the
police and the Ministry of Interior, were in the hands of the
Stalinists. The Social-Democratic Party, was “reformed” in the
Stalinist manner, that is to say, a pro-Stalinist leadership was
imposed, headed by Zdenek Fierlinger, Benes’s former ambassador to
Moscow. The old Social-Democratic leaders disappeared from the scene.
Benes’s party accepted collaboration in view of the Kosice pact,
where Benes, unlike the Polish government-in-exile, accepted
Stalinist “liberation.”
 
Back to Czarist Pan-Slavism
Czech nationalist sentiment against the Germans and a reactionary
Pan-Slavic feeling, along with a nationalist sympathy for Stalin’s
Russia, served to knit the coalition together. It is strange that
in this very small Slav country, which until lately was quite
Germanized, reactionary Pan-Slavism has very great strength. The new
government nationalized the industries, effected an agrarian reform,
introduced a system of state capitalism, and proceeded to the
expulsion of all Germans and Hungarians from the national territory.
In Czechoslovakia, Stalin’s “democratic revolution” took the
form of a nationalistic and Pan-Slavic reaction, dreamed of for
decades by the reactionary Right under the leadership of Karel
Kramarz, leader of the National-Democracy, friend of the czars and
enemies of socialism as well as of Masaryk and Benes.
The Sudetenland, annexed in 1938, was completely depopulated. The
Sudeten Germans had to abandon their possessions, their homes, and
their country, and depart in a few hours for Bavaria. The tragedy
struck the old Social-Democratic workers, who with great sacrifice
had fought against Heinlein and his Nazi Party of Sudeten Germans and
against Hitler. The German Social-Democratic Party of Czechoslovakia
ended up in concentration camps for loyally defending Masaryk’s
republic and combating the German Nazis. Such was the cruel and
bloody fate of all German anti-fascists and revolutionary secialists.
The nationalist anger reached such a point that all German-speaking
Jews were considered Germans and suffered the consequences.
University professors were expelled from their posts, doctors and

lawyers were prevented from practicing their professions, etc.
It is necessary to explain that before 1914 Czechoslovakia was
part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy of the Hapsburgs, in which the
German language and German culture dominated. Consequently, the whole
bourgeoisie and members of the middle class spoke German, the Czechs
as well as the Jews. Now the German-speaking Jews must be purged for
the “crime” of having been horn in the circle of German culture.
This is how Stalin’s “democratic revolution” manifested
itself in the heart of old cultured Europe.
 
Old Hands at Capitulation
In contradistinction to Poland, neither the bourgeois nor workers’
opposition offered any resistance to the Russian invasion. The Czech
bourgeoisie and middle class have a collaborationist and opportunist
tradition. In 1938 Benes surrendered the power to the executed
President Hacha; Hacha in turn tranquilly handed the Second Republic
over to Hitler and Baron Neurath, the Fuehrer’s second lieutenant.
Only the women of the people wept in the streets when the martial
footsteps of the gray legions sounded in Vaclavske Namiesti
(the Plaza of Wenceslas).
The Czech bourgeoisie collaborated with the Nazis, saving their
fortunes and goods. Even the Social-Democrats submitted to the
totalitarian pressure. The Stalinists followed the directives of the
Stalin-Nazi Pact, aiding Nazism to carry out the conquest. Soon after
the invasion of Russia, “Comrades” Gottwald, Slansky, Zapotocky,
et al. discovered the Nazi invasion of Czechoslovakia and
began to organize the resistance.
The Czech bourgeoisie accepted collaboration willingly, because
the incorporation of Czechoslovakia into the “Greater Reich”
represented enormous markets for Czech industry, while the expense of
occupation had to be paid for by the people. Raised in the school of
Austrian and German Social-Democracy, the Czech Social-Democracy had
no knowledge of revolutionary traditions and bent peacefully before
the Nazi barbarism. The Stalinists, true to their master, followed
the orders of the Kremlin.
After signing the capitulation, Benes collaborated tranquilly with
Roosevelt and Churchill and signed agreements with them accepting the
program of Central European federation with Poland. But when the
Russians intimated they were opposed to such a federation, Benes
facilely refrained from this program and accepted Stalinist policy.
When the Russian armies occupied Eastern Europe, he hastened to
dissociate himself from his allies and protectors in England and
America, and signed the pact of Kosice which accepted Russian protection.
Thus the Stalinists had no need to uproot the opposition because
there was no dangerous opposition. They entered Prague as triumphant
“liberators.” The Stalinist government was “democratic”
because it had no need for terroristic measures. In reality, from the
first moment, this government was far more totalitarian than in
Poland, for example, because the nation surrendered and submitted
voluntarily, corrupted and demoralized by the capitulations of Benes,
Hacha, and the Stalinists.
How, then, are we to explain the latest Stalinist coup and the
political crisis in Czechoslovakia? By the popular disillusionment
with the Stalinist regime.
Two years of Russian government in Czechoslovakia demonstrated to
the Czechs the “virtues” and “advantages” of the Stalinist
dictatorship. The products of Czech industry had to be delivered to
Russia at a low price, thus depriving the people of their principal
source of income. Even before the war the Czech worker had been
cheaper than the German, without his product being inferior in any
way. Now, the level of wages had to be forced even lower, as in all
the eastern countries of Europe.
The discontent of the proletariat found its distant expression in
the change of Social-Democratic leadership not so long ago, when the
more independent elements replaced the pro-Stalinists. The middle
class and the peasantry were also discontented and disillusioned with
regard to the totalitarian expansion of state capitalism. The popular
discontent penetrated the leaderships of the parties collaborating
with the Stalinists, the former demanding that the Stalinists give
them a greater measure of control.
 
Drive Behind the Coup
On the other hand, the international tension and the political
preparations for the war against capitalism in the Kremlin do not
allow the existence of a country in the Soviet zone whose proletariat
receives better wages than obtain in Russia, Rumania, Hungary,
Yugoslavia, and Poland; it is necessary to lower the living standards
of the Czech people and to force developed Czech industry, in the
first place the war industries, to work for the Stalinist
bureaucracy. The relative equilibrium between the Stalinist party and
the other collaborating parties did not permit the realization of
this new task. On the other hand, the ties of the bourgeois and
Social-Democratic parties with the Anglo-Americans not only weakened
the solidity of the Stalinist dictatorship but endangered new plans
and even political and military secrets of the “Soviets.”
Thus these three factors forced the Stalinists to “consolidate”
their dictatorship at any price. The discovery of the arms stored by
the Stalinists in Olomuc exposed the preparations of the Stalinists
for the elimination of their collaborators. The Stalinists responded
with complete domination of the police apparatus, from which they
excluded all their collaborators. The Stalinist Minister of the
Interior, Nosek, prepared to play the part of the “bloodhound,”
like the notorious Noske of Germany. The night of the long knives approached.
Seeing this situation, the Social-Democratic, National-Socialist,
Catholic and Slovak ministers resigned in order to isolate the
Stalinists and force them to retreat, as is the custom in
parliamentary democracy. However, there was no parliamentary system
in Czechoslovakia, nor had there been one since 1938. The proof of
this was given by the actions of Nosek, who, while Benes was
rejecting the resignations of the non-Stalinist ministers,
arbitrarily raided the local headquarters of the parties of the
governmental coalition and arrested the officials and leaders of
these parties. Nosek, of course, carried out these actions at the
express order of the Kremlin and the GPU.
The police actions were supported by a general strike and the
public demonstrations of the Stalinists. The unions, previously under
the leadership of the Social-Democrats, had been taken over by a
Stalinist leadership after “liberation,” beginning with the
omnipotent general secretary, Zapotocky. According to the press
reports, the strike was of short duration and not very solid. It
would seem that the “popular pressure” was in reality more of a
bureaucratic device than a spontaneous movement. Nevertheless it
fulfilled its function and gained the desired end.
 
Stalinists Held All Power
All this proves that the coalition regime was neither a
parliamentary nor a democratic regime, but that all the power was
held by the Stalinists, supported by the Russian Army and the GPU,
who followed orders in ceding a part of the power to their
collaborators. Now, when the Kremlin deemed it necessary to
“consolidate” its dictatorship, the Stalinist puppets proceeded
with complete and open brutality to do as they pleased.
When Benes rejected the formation of a purely Stalinist
government, the political bureau of the Czech CP clearly gave him to
understand that the Stalinists were going to form the government they
wanted without his permission and acceptance. In the personal meeting
between Gottwald and Benes, the former assumed a dictatorial pose to
such a degree that even Benes, accustomed to political humiliations,
dramatically exclaimed, “You speak to me just as Hitler did.” The
“friendly persuasion” of Gottwald was accompanied by Stalinist
street demonstrations and demonstrations of the power of the
Stalinist Action Committees and police. This was “popular
democracy” in Czechoslovakia.
Benes finally yielded to the Stalinist ultimatum, accepting the
cabinet they proposed. For Gottwald, Kopecky, Slansky & Co., it
was convenient to retain some puppets of other parties in order to
keep up the appearance and farce of “parliamentary
democracy.” The symbol of the arrangement was the return of Zdenek
Fierlinger, pro-Stalinist Social-Democrat, to the government. Drtina,
secretary to the president, friend of Benes and his party colleague,
unaccustomed to the political pirouettes of his chief, tried to
commit suicide. Nosek not only seized the secretaries of the
collaborating parties but proceeded to arrests en masse.
Protesting the Stalinist coup, Czech students carried out an
imposing demonstration. The police dispersed them with drawn arms.
Many people went in the streets as in 1938–39. Perhaps Benes too
wept in his bedroom. To this we can only say with the mother of the
last Moorish king of Granada, who also wept when the Spaniards ended
his reign: “You weep like a woman, not being able to defend what is
yours like a man.”
The theoreticians of the Fourth International applauded Benes and
the Czech bourgeoisie as “prudent” because they accepted
collaboration with Stalinism. Now, perhaps, they will say that the
“democratic revolution” in Czechoslovakia is being transformed
into the “socialist revolution,” although “deformed and
degenerated.” In reality, the democratic revolution was consummated
in Czechoslovakia in 1918–21 with national emancipation from the
German yoke, personified by the Hapsburg monarchy, and the creation
of a democratic republic with the Social-Democrats playing the
dominant role. The counter-revolution began with the predominance of
the Agrarians, the party of the landlords, who replaced the
Social-Democrats in power. The Nazi counter-revolution imposed the
dictate of Munich and dismemberment; then, to carry dismemberment
still further, the Nazis set up the “Protectorate.” The
Protectorate was terminated by the war, but only to be replaced by
Stalinist occupation; the government of Hacha gave way to the new
Stalinist-Benes government.
Undoubtedly the pressure of national resistance in all of Europe
compelled the Kremlin bureaucracy to engage in “democratic”
maneuvers. But all the economic and social changes did not conform to
the program of a socialist revolution, but served the bastard
interests of a counter-revolutionary force, the Stalinist bureaucracy
and its bureaucratic imperialism. The Anglo-American bourgeoisie and
the Social-Democrats permitted themselves to be deceived by Stalin’s
“democratic” maneuver and now cry to high heaven because of the
Stalinist coup.
But the real facts of the matter are somewhat different. The
Stalinist coup was accomplished with the Kosice pact of 1944, when
the Stalinist Fourth Republic was created, camouflaged by Benes’s
presidency and a coalition government. Now the Fourth Republic has
been succeeded by a Stalinist protectorate, and events demonstrate
that in 1944 Benes played the role that Hacha did in 1939, just as
the latter played the role that Benes did in 1938.
The government was and continues to be Stalinist. It is only a
question of the degree of Stalinization and not of the change from a
democratic government to a totalitarian government. It is a question
of a government that is ready for the emergency of war.
 
Benes – “Mädchen fur Alle”
Benes has passed through all the phases of political development
of European reaction. He served the Czech bourgeoisie and the
agrarian reactionaries; he capitulated before the European reaction
of Munichism, calling his people to calm and peaceful submission to
Nazism; after giving this counsel he escaped into exile, offering his
services to Roosevelt, as he declares with cynical frankness in his
memoirs. He headed the resistance against the Nazis only in order to
deliver it to Stalin with the pact of Kosice. Now he has declared
that the “parliamentary regime continues,” and that he has
accepted the new solution “conscious of his duty.” In a short
time Benes will once again be in exile, and will offer his services
to Truman.
The opportunists are tenacious of life; they have seven lives
while revolutionists only have one. The opportunists and capitulators
have many alternatives; the revolutionaries only one: to conquer or
die. Benes knows how to crawl on his belly: the Liebknechts die
standing up. Such is the despicable character of our times.
Stalin’s clique governs Czechoslovakia brutally, crushing the
democratic rights of the people, introducing totalitarian
“monolithism,” persecuting the Social-Democratic workers, the
National-Socialists, the peasants and intellectuals. All this has as
its aim the enslavement of the Czech and Slovakian people in the
service of Stalinist imperialism. It signifies a new advance of the
Stalinist counter-revolution to the right, camouflaged as a “left
turn” and accompanied by the barking of the bourgeois hired press
against the new “conquest of Communism.”
In our world, reaction is concentrated at both poles of
contemporary society, at the capitalist and the Stalinist poles: at
Washington and Moscow. But in spite of the mortal antagonism between
both imperialist blocs, the two objectively complement each other,
each from its own point of view combating revolutionary Marxism.
*
The events in Czechoslovakia are symptomatic: in 1938 the
dismemberment of the republic signified the approach of the Second
World War; in 1939 the occupation of Czechoslovakia brought the world
to the brink of war. Now the “totalization” of the Stalinist
regime undoubtedly signifies the growing danger of the third world
war. The motor force of the Stalinist coup is to be found in that danger.
 
Tasks of Revolutionary Socialists
The Marxists and revolutionary workers throughout the world are
under the obligation of unmasking the Stalinist reaction and
defending the democratic rights of the Czechoslovakian people and
proletariat; of defending the Social-Democrats and Benes’s
National-Socialists from the ruthless persecutions of the Stalinist
“bloodhound,” Nosek. Of defending the right of the peasants and
Catholics to criticize the regime; to defend the struggle of the
Czech workers for free unions and against Stakhanovism and the
dictatorship of the bureaucracy in the factories; to defend the right
of the Czech students and intellectuals to free and democratic
expression of their views; to defend our Fourth Internationalist
comrades, who are fighting in the ranks of the Social-Democracy, and
whose lives and freedom are undoubtedly threatened; to defend the
comrades of the Alarm Group, also Fourth Internationalist in
tendency, who carried on an heroic opposition to the Stalinists and
Nazis from 1936 on.
The road of Benes is not the road of the Czech and Slovak people,
because the people do not crawl on their bellies but struggle. The
road of the Czech and Slovak people was not capitulation to Munich
nor collaboration with the Nazis: it was the road of Lidice, the road
of heroic and self-sacrificing struggle, the road of the Rehenes and
the Yanosiks.
Though the Zapotockys now boast of the “general strike,”
though they invoke the “proletarian majority,” their road is not
the road of the proletariat nor of the people. The road of the people
is that of the conscious minority, our road, the road of
revolutionary Marxism, of the third proletarian front which bows its
head neither to the tyrants of Moscow nor the gangsters of Wall
Street. It is not the road of Benes, who first capitulated to Stalin
and will soon crawl before Truman, but the road of the revolutionary
workers who struggle always for their program, who conquer, or if it
is necessary, die standing up.
It is the road of the third proletarian front, the only
alternative to capitalism and Stalinism, which leads to victorious
world socialism.
 




The strike of the Polish workers of Lodz, one of the most important centers of the cotton weaving industry in Europe, was not only the largest of all the workers’ strikes against the Stalinist assassin regime, but the most revolutionary as well.
The strike broke but as a protest against the government decree that four looms be assigned each worker instead of two, as has been the case until now. The government argued that the productivity of the Lodz weaver was 35 per cent below the level provided for in the three-year economic plan. For this reason the factory administration ordered that each worker be assigned four looms. Whoever is acquainted with the textile industry of Lodz knows very well that the machines are old and that not only is it impossible to fulfill the government’s decree, given the technical conditions of the industry, but that any attempt to comply with this decree exposes the health and life of the Polish proletariat to danger.
Besides, the economic situation of the Polish proletarian is desperate as never before. His wage vacillates between 3,000 and 8,000 zlotys, when a pair of shoes costs 5,000 to 10,000 zlotys, a suit of clothes 30,000 zlotys, and a kilo of bread 80 zlotys. Recently rationing was liquidated. According to the official organ of the Stalinist trade unions, Workers Review, the basic wage has practically disappeared, and has been replaced by piecework, premiums and overtime. Under the whip of inhuman exploitation, the badly dressed and poorly fed Polish worker does what be can to avoid death by hunger.
In Lodz, strikes had already occurred in the Crusche-Ender, JOHN and other factories against the unfulfilled promises of the Stalinist administration and in order to increase rations. The new decree of the Stalinist satraps filled the workers with such despair, that the day shift in the Posnansky factory, one of the largest, went on strike. Its strike action was continued by the night shift which numbers 6,000 workers. The workers occupied the factory all night. The Bezpieka (Polish GPU) surrounded the factory with a police cordon and proceeded to the arrest of the strike leaders, 80 being seized. In spite of this terror, unknown in Poland even in the worst days of the “Colonels reaction,” the indignation of the textile workers was so great that in the course of the next few days, other important factories such as Bwehle, Biederman, Campe, Albrecht and other smaller ones joined the strike begun by the Posnansky factory. In spite of the arrests, the strike continued. There were direct struggles between the GPU and the strikers, in which there were many wounded and some dead.
The workers came to a silent demonstration, which was dispersed by the GPU and which, according to Polish sources, numbered 40,000 people. Half the textile workers participated in the strike. Fifty per cent of the Lodz textile workers are women. Due to the GPU terror, the strike was partially broken. But in spite of everything, the Posnansky factory maintained its action for several days, defying the Stalinist security police.
The Polish press hermetically isolated the strike from the world. Nobody in Poland spoke about the strike. The police surrounded the factories and maintained a surface calm in the city. The workers themselves did not want to give anybody the facts about the strike for fear of reprisals or betrayal into the hands of the GPU. In spite of all this news of the strike circulated through all the workers’ centers and outside the country. We are not in a position to say how much of a role the clandestine organization of the PPS played, in the strike. The official Stalinist circles blame the strike on the influence of “reactionary centers,” attributing the strike to political causes. Backed by the GPU, the representatives of the Stalinist PPR (Workers Party), the pro-government PPS, and the trade unions rushed to the strike-bound factories in an attempt to pacify the workers.
 
Fall of Textile Wages
The fundamental cause of the strikes in Poland is the misery of the proletariat, whose wages have fallen to a level that is 30 to 50 per cent below the pre-war wage. The cancellation of the basic wage rate for a day’s work and the liquidation of rationing have brought despair to the workers in the statified industry. The cost of living is rising, and the government takes advantage of the misery and hunger to introduce “Stakhanovist methods” into Poland, forcing the workers to toil longer hours and increase their productivity. But the backward technique of the industry and the misery of the workers acts as an obstacle and pushes the working class toward desperate resistance.
In addition, the strike wave occurs in Poland’s largest industrial centers and signifies the opposition of the most conscious layers of the proletariat to the regime. After the defeat of Mikolajczyk’s party, a defeat accomplished along the road of terror and electoral fraud, the Stalinist regime is preparing to come to grips with the working class, which quite frequently, without political leadership and in spontaneous form, resists the government.
Experienced in long revolutionary struggle, the Polish workers know full well that the primary cause of their misery is not so much the economic destruction of Poland as the imperialist policy of the Russian occupiers, who deliver 20 million tons of Polish coal to Stalin, the greater part of the iron and steel, as well as the lion’s share of Polish textiles.
In spite of its spontaneous character, the strike of the Lodz textile workers has a primary political importance, since it is a question of the first workers’ strikes in the zone occupied by the Russians, an unusual and new phenomenon, which signifies that the united action of the proletariat is capable of breaking even the grip of Stalinist terror. For all these reasons, the strike deserves the support and aid of the proletariat of the United States, England and Western Europe. It is a living example of the socialist third front, which in the countries under Russian occupation is directed first of all against Stalinist reaction.
 




A short time ago Warsaw witnessed the opening of a political trial directed against the Polish resistance, particularly the WIN organization (Freedom and Independence), involving on the one hand the American and British Embassies, and on the other some prominent members of the Polish Socialist Party (PPS), headed by A. Obarski, one of the 23 Socialist leaders threatened with the death penalty. This cynicism of Stalinist justice compels us to lay bare to America’s workers and Marxist intellectuals the true physiognomy of Stalinist barbarism in Poland.
On entering Poland, the GPU directed its first blows against the Warsaw Insurrection and the heroic Armia Krajowa (Home Army), notwithstanding the fact that this underground army collaborated with the Russians, attacking the Nazi rear guard. In 1944–45, around 150,000 resistance soldiers disappeared into Stalin’s Siberian concentration camps.
The second wave of terror occurred during the period of the “popular referendum” and the “free elections.” In both instances, the reprisals were directed against the entire resistance, principally against the peasant movement. As an epilogue to the arrests en masse, which reached into the hundreds of thousands in a country of 24,000,000 inhabitants, various political trials took place before military tribunals, with hundreds of death sentences being handed down against the accused. The trials were aimed primarily at the WIN, the resistance organization of the middle class, which collaborates with the PPS, against the PSL (Mikolajczyk’s Populist Party) and against the WEN (illegal organization of the anti-Stalinist PPS). The preparation for these trials is far more important than their actual public unfolding. The “questionings” went far beyond all we know of the trials conducted by the Holy Roman Catholic inquisitions in Spain against the Moors, Jews and the heretic sects. Physical and moral torture are the principal method of the Stalinist “questionings.” The accused are subjected to hermetic isolation which lasts entire months until the accused give way. Isolation is accompanied by a regimen of hunger and refined physical and moral torture. Aside from mistreatment during questioning, the accused are subjected to tortures of high and low temperatures in their cells, to ice-cold baths with the water reaching up to their mouths, to tortures with strong reflectors for days and nights in succession, to the torture of going without food and sleep for many days, etc.
There are very few men who can resist this modern inquisition. General Anders himself, of the Polish army, was subjected to the torture of reflectors to the point of having his eyes take on the appearance of big bloody wounds. The literature of the Polish emigration is full of memoirs and accounts of the tortures in the jails of the GPU and the methods of “re-education” in the forced labor camps. We recommend the book Soviet Justice by two Polish ex-prisoners, Zwierniak and Mora, which contains hundreds of accounts by prisoners of Stalin for those who wish to grasp the magnitude of this modern barbarism, which, in its refinements, goes even beyond the methods of the Nazi Gestapo. In addition to the original Polish, this book is available in a French translation.
 
GPU Prepares Trials
With these methods the GPU “prepares” the political trials against the Polish resistance. The accused present the lamentable aspect of broken and exhausted men. The prosecuting state attorneys and the judges openly play the part of hangmen. The “public,” which appears in the courtroom wearing typical “workers’” clothing and carrying national banners, tries to humiliate the poor victims even more, and as a rule demands the death penalty for the judged.
The most important trials were those of the WRN (illegal PPS) and the WIN, in Warsaw last July, and those of the PSL (Populists) and the WIN in September, 1947. In the first trial the chief accused, Gaiaj, an old leader of the PPS, hero of 1905–06, leader of the anti-Nazi resistance, and the other well-known and self-sacrificing Socialist, Dziegielewski, were accused of underground espionage activities and of preparing the “physical liquidation” of leading personages in the government. As the Minister of Labor declared officially, this trial was the prelude for the big trial of Puzak. and his comrades, secretary-general of the PPS and members of its Central Committee. The trial against the PSL in Cracow was primarily directed against the resistance wing of the Peasant Party, the editors Augustynski, Buczek and Mierzwa, all leaders of the peasant resistance movement against the German occupation in Poland. The accused appeared well “prepared,” the editor, Mierzwa, sick, exhausted by the “questionings” and without teeth. Although they did not call themselves “mad dogs,” as did the victims of the Moscow Trials, some of the accused admitted their “errors” and recommended a change in Mikolajczyk’s policies. This trial was the prelude for the indictment of Mikolajczyk and his collaborators.
However, there was one group of those on trial headed by Professor Stalmach, son of a humble peasant, who defied the pressure of the prosecuting attorney; the judgment of the tribunal and the enmity of the Stalinist “public.” The entire Stalinist and collaborationist press began to bark madly against this one man. The professor’s council of the old University of Cracow was forced to adopt a cowardly resolution condemning the accused. The Stalinist hangmen in Poland must have a bad conscience if they need this kind of argument against the rebellious opinion of the people.
In the recent trial of the WIN in Warsaw, the chief accused, Katowski, accused of espionage and sabotage, confessed crimes as witches in the Middle Ages confessed their sexual relations with the devil. In keeping with the entire proceedings was the manner, in which some of the Socialists of the group of 23, headed by Obarski, were presented at this trial. International action on behalf of the Polish Socialists forced the GPU to divide the accused into various groups and to indict them as spies in order to avoid greater protest. We can assure the GPU that we shall expose their dirty methods before the opinion of the international proletariat.
All these trials serve as a prelude to the decisive and final battle against the anti-Stalinist workers’ opposition in Poland, against the illegal PPS, just as in Russia the trials of the engineers, of the military, of the bourgeois and petty bourgeois opposition served to prepare the liquidation of the workers’ opposition, in the first place, the Trotskyist opposition. However, there are fundamental differences between the Moscow Trials and the Stalinist trials in Poland:

Being completely isolated from the masses, the accused in the Moscow Trials confessed as a rule, while in Poland some of the accused reveal themselves as unbreakable, having the fervent support of the anti-Stalinist opposition.
 
At the time of the Moscow Trials, Stalin, had the support of the international bourgeoisie, of corrupted writers, “Socialists” and “Communists,” who formed a common front against the “diabolical Trotskyists.” Now times have changed: Not only in that the bourgeoisie, frightened by Stalin, criticizes his persecutions, but also there are signs of an awakening in the left wing of the working class, which does not intend to tolerate further Stalinist terror, nor lend its moral support to the infamous, Stalinist reaction in Russia.

For this reason the GPU is forced to act cautiously and maneuver in preparation for the big trial of the Socialist opposition in Poland. This opposition is far more dangerous to Stalinist rule in Poland than Mikolajczyk’s Peasant opposition. The political solidarity of the Polish workers with the arrested Socialists is demonstrated in a clear manner by the wave of strikes and mass demonstrations which took place in Lodz, Poland’s industrial capital. The solidarity of the international proletariat with the workers’ opposition in Poland is demonstrated by the broad international action in defense of the Polish Socialists. The united action in their defense in Chicago caused an enormous impression among the Polish workers’ circles in France, Great Britain, Belgium, etc.
Nevertheless, Stalin cannot retreat in his attack against the Polish working class. Having defeated Mikolajczyk, the regime is now turning its face squarely against the revolutionary proletariat of Poland. The defeat of the Polish working class would signify the defeat of the international proletariat, the new victory of Stalinist reaction over the working class.
Comrade workers and Marxist intellectuals of the United States, the cause of the Polish workers and Socialists, threatened with the death penalty by the GPU, is your cause. The victory of the Stalinist terror and reaction in Poland would mean a victory for reaction in the United States, would mean more anti-strike and anti-working class laws in the United States. Our cause, the cause of international socialism, is indivisibly one in the United States and Poland for both the Polish and North American workers.
The totalitarian inquisition of Stalin strikes down your class brothers, your Polish comrades, and drowns the whole Polish people in its own blood. The political “witchcraft” trials which began in Moscow constitute the greatest infamy of our times. Raise your powerful voice in protest against the infamous assassin, Wyszynski, who cynically declares that the millions of prisoners in Stalin’s concentration camps are “Trotskyists.” These workers, whether they be reformists, trade unionists, Trotskyists or Stalinist sympathizers, are in action one single thing, the revolutionary proletariat. Only your solidarity action can save the Polish proletariat from the medieval “witchcraft” trials, and the world from infamous Stalinist barbarism.
 




Mikolajczyk has received a hearty welcome in the British and American press. The British Parliament heard his story and in official session granted him the right of asylum. It is known that the British authorities aided him in his flight from Poland. The gratitude of the English bourgeoisie is understandable: Mikolajczyk served them well, helping to liquidate the thorny and troublesome Polish question and the Polish government in London, which did not wish to recognize the new partition of Poland. Besides, the government of the United States and the United Kingdom have probably decided to use Mikolajczyk for new tasks, not only in Poland but in Central-Eastern Europe as well. At the present time Mikolajczyk is in the United States engaged in the pursuit of his political activities.
The émigré Polish press in England did not prepare so warm a welcome for Mikolajczyk as did the Anglo-American press. Not only the official press of the government-in-exile, supported by the rightist coalition, but the “democratic coalition” as well, which is led by the PPS (Polish Socialist Party) in exile, subjected the policies of the peasant leader to a severe criticism, demanding of the ex-Premier a frank confession of his mistakes. The leader of the PPS, Kwapinski, Vice-Premier in Mikolajczyk’s government, asked for a clarification of his ex-chief’s policies. In his recently published book, Kwapinski also criticized the vacillations and zig-zags of Mikolajczyk’s policies, reproaching him for his lack of firmness and political character.
The rightist coalition concentrated its fire on the peasant leader for fear that he would take over the government-in-exile. The criticisms of the PPS stemmed from its belief that Mikolajczyk had betrayed the policy of Polish national independence with regard to Russia. Kwapinski went to the extreme of hinting that Mikolajczyk could only leave Poland thanks to the tolerance of the GPU.
 
Switches Policies
Before such a concentrated offensive in England, Mikolajczyk departed for the United States and in an interview granted to the Buffalo Polish language newspaper, Everybody’s Daily, stubbornly reaffirmed his “faith” in the Yalta pact, his acceptance of Poland’s eastern frontier and his recommendation that “friendly relations with Russia” be maintained.
This declaration aroused such a violent reaction in the Polish emigration that Mikolajczyk’s political position became untenable. But the astute peasant surprised his adversaries with another zig-zag by coming to an agreement with the Polish-American Congress in Chicago. The Congress represents all the Polish-American organizations and claims to represent six million Americans of Polish origin. The most important parts of the agreement signed by the Peasant Party representation, headed by Mikolajczyk, Baginski and Koronski, and the Council of the Polish-American Congress, headed by Rozmarek, was the condemnation of the Yalta policy, the present eastern frontier (the Curzon Line) and the agreement to defend the present western frontier and to struggle for a democratic and independent Poland between the limits set by the Riga Line (1920) and the Oder-Neisse. With this declaration, Mikolajczyk revoked his Buffalo statement, condemning his recognition of the Curzon Line, thus taking up new political positions which are decidedly anti-Russian.
But much more important than the question of frontiers was the fact itself of the political agreement between the PSL (Peasant Party) and the Polish-Americans, since with this a new center of Polish politics in exile is created, opposed to the Polish government in London. This new center, will probably assume clearer forms, will surely be able to count on the good will of the American State Department and the British Labor government. For these governments, the peasant with a backbone of rubber is much more easily dealt with than General Bor, hero of Warsaw, or the Polish Socialists, intransigent on the question of national independence, or the National-Democratic right which does not have any great political possibilities. Besides, Mikolajczyk’s future Polish government fits in well with Washington’s political program for Eastern Europe, which is based on the peasant opposition.
The agreement between Mikolajczyk and the Polish-Americans constitutes a fact without precedent in Polish politics since it admits the intervention of American citizens, who although of Polish origin, are Americans who support either the Democrats or Republicans, instead of adhering to the usual Polish political affiliations, those of the Rightists, Populists and Socialists of various shades. With this intervention, Mikolajczyk’s policy will reveal itself as under open American control.
Popular Polish opinion, not merely in the Polish emigration but in Poland itself as well, will hardly greet this with welcome eyes. The Polish people remember very well the sellout of Poland at Yalta and Potsdam by Roosevelt’s policy, which first called Poland the “inspiration of the peoples” and afterward went ahead with the cynical partition.
With all their hatred of Stalinist Russia, the Polish people have no desire to fight Stalin for the benefit of Anglo-American imperialism, which has sold them out twice. Among the masses in emigration, the program of an independent policy with regard to the Anglo-Americans is very popular now.
 
Agent of Capitalism
For a long time we defended Mikolajczyk’s opposition to Stalinist totalitarianism as a symbol of the popular workers and peasants’ resistance to the Stalinist reaction in Poland. In the same manner we also defended the workers’ opposition, which represented the second line of trenches of the opposition to the Stalinists and which has now become the first line, as is shown by the workers’ strikes in Lodz and other places, and the trials and reprisals against the Independent Socialists. Now, after the defeat of the peasant movement and Mikolajczyk’s flight, it is time to strip the peasant leader bare, whose rustic “toughness” turns out to be very smooth, very soft and very much like ... rubber, whether in dealing with the capitalists or the Stalinists; a phenomenon typical of the intermediate classes, of the peasant petty bourgeoisie.
In Poland, where five generations grew up in the shadow of Czarist and later Nazi gallows, where the youth were educated in prison and viewed the world from behind bars, there did not exist the environment for the skillful politicians of compromise, the political traders, the traveling salesmen of “pieces of paper” as at Yalta or Potsdam. No politician who sought to compromise with Czarism, as did Czartoryski after the Congress of Vienna, or Wielopolski in the period of the last national revolution in 1863, played a decisive role. The people scorned them and refused to follow them. In Poland there was only room for tough and self-sacrificing men of struggle. We cannot take into account the present Stalinist government, as it does not include any national political figures, but puppets and secret agents who act as Stalin’s police.
Mikolajczyk, leader of the peasants, represents the tragedy of his social class, which is fated to be crushed between the Stalinist and capitalist colossi. He represents the custom-bound world of the peasant dwarfed by the giant shadow of industrial civilization. We have defended and shall continue to defend, in the person of the peasantry, men of hard labor and democrats, but we do not intend to defend the agents of capitalism.
 
Workers Continue Fight
Mikolajczyk has already lived out the best of his political life; we do not foresee any great political future for him in spite of the support of Washington and the English Labor government. Peasant Poland will be absorbed by Stalinist totalitarianism unless the Anglo-Americans quickly come to its defense. But a workers’, a proletarian Poland will remain, an intransigent Poland as always in its program of national independence, which today signifies social emancipation, a Poland of the third front.
In this new Poland which will arise from the Stalinist inferno there will be no room for leaders with spines of rubber ... like Mikolajczyk.
 

   As we informed the readers of Labor Action last week, the division in the politburo of the Polish Stalinist party has become public knowledge. (Last week’s Labor Action carried a detailed story by Comrade Rudzienski and a front page news item on the latest developments, including Gomulka’s recantation. – Ed.) The London Daily Telegraph printed a story of Gomulka’s confinement which was denied by the Observer, whose correspondent readily accepted the official version that Gomulka was suffering from “neurasthenia” and a “throat ailment.” Of late, there are a great many sick people in the Stalinist camp: Zhdanov, Benes and Gomulka, not to speak of the lesser fry. However, the official communique of the PPR (Stalinist party) has lifted the veil of rumors, and without circumlocution of any kind or medical diagnosis reveals that the ex-secretary general of the PPR and vice-premier of the government represents a nationalist-right wing deviation which has been expressed in the following points: 1. Refusal to condemn Tito and to support any drastic measures against Yugoslavia by the puppet government of Poland; 2. resistance to the collectivization of the Polish countryside and the “socialist offensive” put forward by the “left” faction of Berman, Mine and Zambrowski; 3. revelation of the “secret” that Gomulka voted against the majority in the sessions of the politburo. As a consequence, Wladislaw Gomulka, the unfortunate candidate for the role of the “Polish Tito,” has been demoted and replaced as secretary general of the PPR and vice-premier of the puppet government. The Warsaw politburo has instructed “President” Bierut to “assume an active role in party work and reintegrate the ranks of the buro.”  Historic Background In our previous article, we explained the economic basis for the “schism.” Now we must review the historic antecedents. In the old Polish Communist Party there were two factions, the “majority” and the “minority.” The first supported the thesis of “two stages of the revolution,” and the second favored the complete “Stalinization” of the party and the “revolutionary offensive.” The GPU first destroyed the majority in 1928–29 because, in spite of its false theory of two stages, it represented the independent tradition of the Polish workers’ movement and wished to maintain the independence of the party against the GPU. The second tendency was destroyed in 1936 under the accusation of being a “Trotskyist opposition” after having allowed itself to be used to liquidate the independence of the CPP. Yet when the Russian army invaded Poland, the old theory of the “historic right wing” of the CPP on “two stages” was taken out of the archives, dusted off and proclaimed “popular democracy.” Stalin has no scruples about appropriating the heritage of his victims and profaning their corpses. In this climate of “Stalinist magnanimity,” the role of the mediocre Gomulka grew to the skies as the leader of “popular democracy.” In his youth Gomulka had belonged to the majority faction of the CPP, and after its condemnation had obediently passed over to the position of “consolidation” of both factions ordered by Moscow. As an epigone of the “majority,” Gomulka knew better than others how to interpret and execute the phase of “Stalinist magnanimity” toward the Poles, in order all the more easily to destroy and decompose the Polish underground resistance which was led in the main by the Populists and Socialists of the real PPS. As in Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia, Gomulka wished to form a “national democratic front” but did not succeed in realizing his “great idea.” A mediocre little man, a failure in college, a man pushed toward the proletariat through lack of intellectual capacity, afterward a union bureaucrat and CPP functionary, he reached the dizzy height of having a compilation of his writings published under the title Struggle for Popular Democracy in Poland, a book which will surely be used as evidence against him. His is the typically ephemeral career of the Stalinist puppet. Threatened by Tito’s resistance, Stalin now demands the complete incorporation of Poland into Russia, thereby overthrowing Gomulka and elevating his adversaries, Berman, Mine and Zambrowski. To justify this turn, Moscow has drawn from the archives the “minority” theory of the “socialist offensive” and, going even further, the. revolutionary traditions of the SDKPL (Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania) and the heritage of Rosa Luxemburg.  Moscow Offensive Now Polish nationalism and poor, mediocre Gomulka are the target of a furious Moscovite offensive. The ideological execution of the new turn is entrusted to Berman and Zambrowski, both “minorityites.” Zambrowski and his obedient follower, Cyrankiewicz, secretary of the pseudo-PPS, proclaim “internationalism” against “limited Polish nationalism.” They proclaim the “national independence of the new type” consistent with “national sovereignty supported by the USSR.” The readers of Labor Action will agree that this is truly a strange sort of sovereignty. Stalin’s noisy bullies and hirelings invoke the glorious tradition of the SDKPL and the CPP, as well as the teachings of Rose Luxemburg against “Polish nationalism.” They seem to forget that the leaders of the CPP and the disciples of Rosa Luxemburg were assassinated because, in the name of internationalism and the revolutionary traditions of the Polish workers’ movement, they tried to conserve the independence of the Polish working class against the Stalinist counter-revolution in Moscow. The Stalinist dogs lie when they argue that the SDKPL, the party of Rosa Luxemburg, favored the incorporation of Poland into Russia. Rosa Luxemburg never proposed the subjection of Poland to Russia but called for the unity of the Polish and Russian Revolution. The very name of the party, “Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania,” sharply underscores the political, economical and cultural unity of the territories historically Polish since 1772, that is, the territories bounded by the Dnieper. And this was the point of view as well of Marx and Engels. The traditions of the SDKPL, the teachings of Rosa Luxemburg and the program of Marx and Engels were all opposed not only to the Russian penetration of Poland but to partition of Poland, which ultimately took the form of the famous Curzon line invented by the British imperialists and demanded the complete independence of Poland, Lithuania, the Ukraine and White Russia, and their complete separation from Russia. To carry out its reactionary offensive against the Polish working class. Polish socialism and an entire oppressed and exploited people, the GPU uses the “minorityites” Berman and Zambrowski, invokes the “glorious traditions” of the CPP which Stalin himself buried, and even resurrects the ghostly shades of the assassinated CPP leaders. It tries to unleash an offensive against “nationalism,” against the “reformism and social-patriotism of the PPS” when the latter strives to struggle precisely against the Great-Russian nationalism and imperialism headed by the Stalinist reaction.  Enter the Police Agent The Warsaw puppet politburo has instructed “President” Bierut to take Gomulka’s place. Bierut (Bienkowski-Rutkowski) is Stalin’s ex-police agent, chief of the Polish section of the GPU in Moscow, betrayer and hangman of the leaders of the CPP, Varski, Horvitz-Walecki, Koszutska, Zarski, Zdziarski, Wojewodzki, Dombal, Lenski, Prochniak, Huberman (brother of the musician) and so many, many others. The hangman, Bierut, has been instructed to skillfully “liquidate” the “Polish nationalist deviation,” “Polskaya miatiez” (Polish rebellion) so hated by the Czars and the Stalinists. We are, therefore, confronted by a police offensive, a Stalinist “purge” in Poland. Proletarian and petty-bourgeois resistance in Poland penetrates the ranks of the Stalinist party, proving the social and political weakness of the invader’s regime. Although this resistance, this popular rebellion, cannot attain the Yugoslavian level, threatened as it is with physical destruction, its presence constitutes the proof that the crisis of the regime has penetrated to the “ruling heights.” Until now the Stalinist regime has no more succeeded in destroying the underground resistance than did the Nazi regime. It seems that no matter how perfect a police regime may be, it cannot destroy the will of a people to struggle. Benes, Gomulka, Zhdanov and Tito are names and phenomena that mark the rifts and perhaps the decomposition of the Stalinist regime. In any case, they prove the existence of its crisis and its transitory character. There would appear to be a contradiction between Zhdanov’s death and the Stalinist offensive in Poland, Czechoslovakia and the Balkans. Zhdanov’s death would seem to indicate a Russian withdrawal in Western Europe, particularly in Germany, and concessions to capitalism. Stalin enjoys offering heads on a platter to his “Wartime Comrades,” to his adversaries whom he wishes to deceive. War in the immediate future not having been decided upon, Stalin offers Zhdanov’s head in order to deceive the Anglo-Americans. He may perhaps make concessions in Berlin and Western Europe. And he may try to “arrange matters” with Tito in the Balkans. But meanwhile he consolidates his positions in conquered Europe. The complete incorporation of Poland, Hungary, Rumania and Bulgaria constitutes the condition sine qua non of a new offensive against his imperialist rivals, perhaps a world war which can be precipitated by the process of decomposition in the Stalinist empire.   
   The aggressive course in Russian foreign policy represented by Zhdanov has been imposed on all Eastern Europe. After the liquidation of the peasant opposition in Poland, the Polish Stalinist bureaucracy considered that the incorporation of the pseudo-Socialist Party into the Stalinist party was the most urgent task. At the conference of the pseudo-Socialist Party “activists,” the present puppet premier of Poland, Cyrankiewicz, proclaimed that “the workers’ party, whether it be Left Socialist or Communist, cannot bring its development to a halt; similarly, popular democracy is a transitory creation, a stop on the road.” (Polish Worker in Great Britain, No. 8, August) The unfortunate Oscar Lange, known to the American public as the puppet ambassador of Poland, has also declared that “We Socialists consider popular democracy as only a point of departure on the road toward socialism and not a definitive and final regime.” (Ibid.) “Left to its own. fate,” he said, “popular democracy can slide back toward capitalism, which is why it requires the leadership of the working class, the most politically conscious class of the nation [??], which consciously tends toward the realization of socialism.” Lange repeats all the inspiration and wisdom of Stalinism. As Adam Ciolkosz (leading theoretician of the genuine Socialist Party-in-Exile) quite correctly points out, these declarations signify the “end of a phase begun in 1944 at Lublin,” and the liquidation of the fake Socialist Party in order to create a monolithic Stalinist party. How do the puppet leaders think they are going to realize their “socialism” via the path of Stalinism? It is better to seek the answer in the statements of the leaders of the Polish Workers Party (Stalinist party) than in the declarations of their followers.  Economic Offensive At the meeting of the Stalinist activists, Zambrowski, member of the political bureau, declared that today in Poland there exist three elements, three economic formations: socialist, capitalist and petty-bourgeois. The socialist sector consists of the nationalized industries, banks and means of transportation, penetrating wholesale commerce and in part retail commerce, but without influence in the rural economy. The capitalist sector consists of 18,000 private enterprises, private wholesale commercial enterprises, retail commercial establishments, artisan enterprises in part, and capitalist farms. The petty-bourgeois sector rests on the 140,000 artisan shops, retail commercial establishments and 90 per cent of the rural production and economy. Zambrowski declares war on the capitalist and petty-bourgeois sector, recalling that small-scale individual production “gives birth to capitalism and the bourgeoisie, daily, hourly, spontaneously.” In order to arrest this tendency, the bureaucratic state must increase its control over the capitalist enterprises which from now on are to receive their raw materials from the state and deliver their products to the state as well. As for the artisan sector, Zambrowski proclaims the need for a cooperative system which will completely control the artisan shops, reducing their owners to the role of wage earners who work at home. The capitalist enterprises are to be subordinated to the state by means of contracts and completely isolated from the market. In addition, private wholesale commerce is to be liquidated and incorporated into state-owned commercial enterprises. The most difficult task consists in eliminating the petty-bourgeois system in the countryside. It appears that the offensive is to begin against those farms having more than about 50 acres of land, of which there are less than 10 per cent in Poland. The Stalinist rural paper, Chlopska Droga (Peasants’ Road), proclaims the tendency toward “socialism, that is, communal economy in the countryside and the city.” And “the peasants will achieve well-being only through the collective farm system,” declares this organ.  To Greater Exploitation It would therefore seem that the Polish Stalinists intend to proceed against the peasants in the same barbarous and reactionary manner that was followed in Russia and the Ukraine. They are going to collectivize the peasants’ poverty and misery in order to increase their inhuman and more-than-capitalist exploitation in favor of the bureaucracy. In contemporary Poland, the greatest rural proprietor is the bureaucratic state and the Russian army. The state employs 160,000 day laborers on about 6,000 big farms with an area of almost five million acres that in no way differs from the capitalist-landlord system, and goes far beyond it in the cynical exploitation of the rural proletariat, The state industries also administer their own farms, the sugar industry controlling 104 large farms, the coal industry 60 farms, etc. The Russian army administers 200 large estates with an area of almost two and a half million acres. Finally, there are the cooperatives monopolized by the Stalinist bureaucracy, which dispose of 130 large farms and about 3,000 “remains” of the old estates which have not been parceled out. The so-called agrarian reform has been realized under the totalitarian-bureaucratic sign, a thesis which has been presented in my work on the agrarian question. “The collective system” in agriculture signifies the expropriation and spoliation of the peasant masses in favor of the bureaucracy. The “socialist offensive” in the urban economy signifies the spoliation of the poor artisans in favor of the bureaucracy. In order to justify this bureaucratic-totalitarian policy, the Stalinists draw from the archives the forgotten and dust-covered theories which Lenin elaborated in the period of the New Economic Policy when the problem of liquidating capitalism in favor of socialism was at issue. Lenin’s theories were directed toward the abolition of the exploitation of the proletarian and semi-proletarian classes by capitalism; Stalin’s theory serves to increase this exploitation by the bureaucratic monopoly of the means of production. This economic offensive finds its main source in the expansionism and greed of bureaucratic imperialism, and its preparations for the Third World War. The exhausted Russian economy, having reached the ultimate limit of exploitation of the impoverished worker and peasant masses, no longer offers major possibilities for increasing the primitive accumulation of capital by the bureaucracy. Consequently Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary, Rumania and Germany constitute a field of colonial exploitation for the Stalinist imperialists. The prior condition for exhausting these resources and of liquidating the higher standard of living of the proletariat in these countries is the complete economic and political incorporation of these countries into the USSR. Only from this point of view can we really understand the events in Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Rumania, Hungary and Poland. Only by thoroughly analyzing the Stalinist economy can we comprehend the rebellion of the impoverished and exploited masses against Russian Stalinism and the rifts in the bureaucratic Stalinist camp. That is why the economic offensive in Poland, whose imperialist and colonial character is undeniable, has its Tito-like consequences within the Polish Stalinist party. No one less than Gomulka – secretary general of the Stalinist party, leader of the “popular democracy,” the vice-premier and the real leader of the government until 1948 – is the representative of this tendency and now appears to be a victim less fortunate than Tito. At the last meeting of the party Central Committee, Gomulka was “absent” due to “reasons of health.” This meeting condemned Tito and the “Yugoslavian nationalist deviation. But it was not so long ago that the Polish press was praising Tito to the skies. Gomulka represented the tendency of “introducing communism in Poland under the white and red banner” (Poland’s national colors). It is an open secret that two factions existed inside the Polish Stalinist party: that of Gomulka and that of Berman-Minc-Zambrowski, who argued for the immediate incorporation of the country into the USSR. When faced with the underground resistance and peasant movement in 1943, Stalin chose Gomulka as the realizer of his imperialist and colonial policies in Poland. But times have changed: “Communism under the white and red flag” represents a danger for Russia. The Polish Tito-Gomulka has bad luck. Poland is too near Russia, is too firmly held in the grasp of the Russian army.  Resistance Grows The rifts in the Stalinist regime constitute a new phenomenon. The more the totalitarian offensive increases and the more its reactionary character, directed against the proletarian and semi-proletarian masses, that is, against socialism, becomes evident – so much the more does the rebellion of the oppressed and exploited masses increase. This social antagonism, this war of the classes, finds its expression in the rifts within the regime, in Tito’s rebellion, in the rebellion of the Czech Social-Democracy and of the Polish Stalinists. The police regime, the regime of the prison and the concentration camp, does not permit any other manifestation of this permanent social war of the masses against the exploiting bureaucracy. The resistance; of the working-class masses, the artisans and peasants against the Stalinist economic offensive has a progressive, democratic character in the new meaning of this word, a socialist meaning, because it defends human labor against the exploiters, because it defends human liberty against the oppressors. The transformation of this spontaneous rebellion of the exploited and resisting masses into a broad and popular political tendency, headed by the Marxists, leads over the corpse of Stalinism toward real socialism. But if, in the absence of Marxist leadership, the spontaneous struggle of the masses is utilized by the reactionary and bourgeois political tendencies, it can lead backward toward capitalist restoration. So much the greater, therefore, is our historic and political responsibility before the proletariat. We are witnessing a new phenomenon in the Stalinist, regimes, which are incapable of completely dominating popular resistance. We are witnessing the first signs of the decomposition of the Stalinist regime in Europe, outside of Russia. The mysterious death of Andrei Zhdanov, considered the boss of the Stalinist offensive in Europe and of the “left turn,” of the war, against Tito and Benes, is very significant for the process of decomposition which is also beginning in Russia itself.   






Comrade Rudzienski’s study of The Ukrainian Problem – Past and Present in last month’s issue
brought the question up to the period of Stalinist
counter-revolution and domination. In this concluding section, the
author continues with the eve of World War II. – Ed.



*
Stalin’s reactionary policy in the Soviet Ukraine prepared the
ground for the fascist reaction of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie in
Poland. The nationalists, led by Colonel Konovalec and supported by
the Communist Party, finally surrendered to Hitler, becoming the Nazi
vanguard in the Polish Ukraine. “Without Stalin,” said Trotsky
(that is, without the Comintern’s criminal policy in Germany),
“there would have been no Hitler; without the Stalinist repressions
in the Soviet Ukraine there would not have been any Hitler Ukrainian
policy.” (On the Question of the Ukraine)
Caught between two fires, between the oppression of the Polish
bourgeoisie and the Stalinist terror, the proletarian and peasant
masses lost their political balance, their revolutionary momentum,
making possible the advance of the fascist reaction, headed by
Konovalec and his clique. To unleash a war against Russia and deprive
it of a military base and a rich source of grain, Hitler raised the
slogan of a “Greater Ukraine,” that is, of a fascist Ukraine, a
colony of the “Greater German Reich.” The Ukrainian bourgeoisie
accepted this program and the role of lackey to Nazi Germany, hangman
of its own people and betrayer of its nation.
But for Hitler as for Stalin, the Ukrainian question was simply
“small change” in the imperialist war market. When Hitler
occupied part of Czechoslovakia in 1939, he gave
Transcarpatho-Ukraine to the Hungarian barons, without thinking that
a “Ukrainian Piedmont” was thereby created for the Konovalec
clique. Stalin interpreted Hitler’s act against the Ukrainian
people as an evident gesture of peace, as a common alliance of
tyrants and totalitarian hangmen against the oppressed peoples. The
best proof of this statement is provided by the consequent
Stalin-Hitler pact.
But the toilers of the Ukraine drew their own conclusion from
these acts. They understood that the Nazi program of a “Greater
Ukraine” was as much a cynical fraud as Stalin’s position.
Perhaps for this reason the Ukrainian regiments fought loyally beside
the Poles against Hitler, in spite of the Polish pacifications. There
was hardly any great enthusiasm in the Polish Ukraine for the Russian
invasion in 1939. In Stalin’s totalitarian plebiscite almost fifty
per cent of the population in the countryside and twenty-five per
cent in the cities abstained from voting, that is, from voting in
favor of Russian annexation. Almost ten per cent of the population
voted openly against the occupation.
It is hardly strange that Stalin answered with terror and
reprisals, not only against the Polish population in these
territories but first of all against the Ukrainian population. All
the politically active elements in the Ukraine were summarily
deported, jailed and assassinated by the GPU. The terror was directed
primarily against the leftist intellectuals, workers and peasants,
whether they were ex-Communists or Social-Democrats under suspicion
for their independence. It was also directed against the bourgeois
politicians who had collaborated with Poland, and against the
nationalists who in past years had been protected and praised by the CP.
Out, of almost two million people deported from the Polish
Ukraine, thirty to forty per cent were Ukrainians. In spite of the
Soviet restrictions, forty per cent of General Anders’ Polish army
consisted of Ukrainians who came from Russia in order to struggle
against Hitler. Now these Ukrainian soldiers have no desire to return
to a Polish Ukraine dominated by Russia. The Polish bureaucracy was
replaced by a Russian Stalinist bureaucracy. Lwow, capital of
Galicia, was scoured clean of its Polish majority and its Ukrainian
minority and was repopulated with Russians.
This policy prepared the action of the Ukrainian fascists when the
Nazi invasion of Russia began in 1941. This policy created the
conditions that led hundreds of thousands of Soviet Ukraine soldiers
to surrender to Hitler.
Later, the Nazi terror in the Ukraine impelled them to struggle
once again. This policy created the Ukrainian quisling, General
Vlasov, a Soviet militarist, who went over to Hitler and formed a
Ukrainian army which fought against Russia. The Stalinist occupation
of Galicia and Volhynia in 1939–41 also created Ukrainian
collaborationism with Hitler, the Ukrainian police who assassinated
Poles and Jews, the collaborationist periodicals, and the puppet
’authorities in Galicia. It is clear that this collaboration did
not have the popular support of the laboring masses or the peasants.
Hitler’s Ukrainian policy very quickly dissipated the illusions
of the Ukrainian fascists. In spite of having occupied almost all of
the Ukraine territories, Hitler did not even think of creating a
puppet “Greater Ukraine.” Only Galicia had a puppet “Ukrainian”
administration in part, controlled by the Germans, while the whole of
the Soviet Ukraine formed the district of the “East” administered
by a military governor. The Galician administration never took on the
aspect of an autonomous or independent organism. The Ukrainian Nazis
were used simply as executioners of the Poles, Jews and Russian prisoners.
Hitler’s “Greater Ukraine” turned out to be a fraud like so
many others. The disciples of Konovalec, the Nationalists and
fascists, the Germanophiles, divided into two groups, one of which
continued to collaborate with Hitler and another (headed by Bandera)
which took an anti-German position. The policy of Nazi imperialism
was the most potent factor in disorienting Ukrainian fascism and
demonstrating the impotence and the defeat of the Ukrainian
bourgeoisie which had turned toward Berlin.
 
The Second Stalinist Invasion
To some (perhaps to many) Marxists and liberals it may seem that
the Curzon line is, in spite of everything, an act of historic
justice toward the Ukrainian people because it unites the Ukrainian
territories which have been divided for centuries. Besides, it may
seem that this program – even though realized by Stalin –
“corresponds” to the old Bolshevik program of self-determination,
the union of all the Ukrainian territories with the Soviet Ukraine.
But everything depends on who performs the task: whether it is
carried out by the socialist revolution or the Stalinist
counter-revolution. In the first case it is a progressive work, an
act of justice toward the Ukrainian people, because it signifies its
free self-determination, its social and national emancipation. In the
second case it is totalitarian oppression under Stalin’s boot.
From this point of view, the partitioning of the Ukrainian
territories between Poland, Russia and Czechoslovakia gave the
Ukrainian people a greater possibility of struggling for its
emancipation, since Stalin favored the Ukrainian opposition against
Poland and Czechoslovakia, and on the other hand, Poland favored the
anti-Stalinist irredenta in the Soviet Ukraine. The Ukrainian
Nationalists considered it a “Ukrainian Piedmont.” The Communists
and revolutionaries had a greater possibility of developing their
political struggle against Stalin in Poland than they have now in a
Ukraine dominated by the hangman of the peoples.
The Stalinists argue that they have “solved” the Ukrainian
national problem by uniting all the Ukrainian territories under
Stalin’s sway. The partition of Poland and the annexation of
Galicia and Volhynia is for them the final stage of the democratic
revolution from the national point of view, the completion of the
program of the Russian Revolution. They adduce the fact that they
have liquidated Polish feudalism, distributed the land and
nationalized the industries. In another place (in an article on
Poland) we have demonstrated that Stalinist nationalization of
industry and Stalinist agrarian reform do not signify the
socialization of the means of production nor the emancipation of the
peasantry, but the victorious march of the Stalinist counter-revolution.
Now we must examine the “realization of the national program”
in the territories behind the Curzon line. The Stalinist invasion in
1939 began with the deportations en masse to Russia. The
Stalinist invasion in 1944 began with the deportation of millions of
Poles, native to the region, to the west. Since the Poles comprised
an urban population of workers, professionals, bureaucrats and a thin
layer of landlords exempted from previous deportations, this meant
stripping the region of the best productive and social forces, rooted
there for centuries.
Almost the whole of the industrial proletariat in these
territories was Polish. These masses of the population were sent
to Silesia and Pomerania in order to replace the German industrial
population. That is to say, this movement of the peoples of the East
toward the west is not only reactionary from the national point of
view but reactionary as well from the productive and social point of
view, reactionary from the point of view of the interests of the
proletariat and the socialist revolution. This does not mean to say
that the Polish population is less cultured than the German, but
undeniably the German industrial worker is more efficient and has
more experience and industrial tradition than the Polish.
No bourgeois revolution ever created such an emigration of the
peoples as did Stalinist “national” policy. No settlement of the
national question until now ever required drastic measures of such a
reactionary nature. These measures are the conclusive proof that in
Eastern Europe there took place not a Stalinist “democratic”
revolution but an imperialist and totalitarian counter-revolution.
The Ukraine suffers under the weight of this counter-revolution in
a far more tragic manner than does Poland, because Poland possesses
political leadership in the camp of the bourgeoisie as well as in the
camp of the workers and peasants. This political leadership is old,
experienced in the struggle, and has the firm support not only of
certain sectors of the proletariat but the “conjunctural” support
of a sector of imperialism. The Polish question for more than a
century was the touchstone which divided the forces of reaction from
those of democracy in Europe, and which now divides the imperialist
forces from those of revolutionary socialism. The Ukraine is isolated
and abandoned to its own fate.
To wind up his crime, Stalin proceeded to deportations en masse
of the Ukrainians native to Western and Central Poland since the
world began, that is to say, who had lived there century on century,
loyal to the Polish state and in harmony with the Polish majority.
Now hundreds of thousands of these Polish-Ukrainians had to abandon
the homes of their fathers and grandfathers to be deported behind the
Curzon line.
What was Stalin’s intent in pursuing such a policy? To sow hate
among the Poles and Ukrainians because the deportations were carried
out by the Warsaw puppet government; to isolate the Polish and
Ukrainian peoples, not permitting the Ukrainians who were filled with
hatred against Stalin to be infected by the rebellious Poles. Not
even a small portion of the Ukrainian population was able to escape
from Stalin’s clutches. There was to be no “Piedmont,” no isle
of relative liberty for the Ukrainians that might threaten the
security of the Stalinist autocracy. The districts of Sanok,
Przemysl, the Carpathian regions near Cracow were “cleaned out”
of Ukrainians to the last soul.
 
The Ukrainian Resistance Movement
If the Stalinist Thermidor speeded the growth of Ukrainian
nationalism and fascism, the second totalitarian and imperialist
Stalinist reaction impelled the Ukrainian masses in the direction of
revolution. Hitler’s defeat and the defeat of Germanophile
Ukrainian fascism, the degeneration of the bands led by Konovalec and
General Vlasov inexorably pushed the people towards a social
struggle. In the last stage of the German occupation, Ukrainian
detachments were created which struggled against the Nazis. The
Stalinist invasion of Eastern Poland, of the territories with a
Ukrainian majority, did not cause great joy among the Ukrainians; the
underground did not disperse but instead consolidated its forces.
When the deportations of Ukrainian peasants to the east began, the
Ukrainian resistance movement took on broader, almost gigantic forms.
The armed Ukrainian detachments were so strong that they could face
not only the police but the regular Polish and Russian armies. The
danger was of such a nalure that the Russians asked collaboration of
the Polish and Czech armies.
The strangest thing is that the Ukrainian resistance, in spite of
struggling against the Poles, could count on the support and
solidarity of the native Poles, who sheltered their Ukrainian
neighbors threatened with deportation, even though they were
scheduled to receive the abandoned lands of the Ukrainians. In the
southern part of Poland, the Warsaw government had to mobilize
several divisions of the Polish army and local militias in order to
combat the Ukrainian bands who were protected by the solidarity of
the Polish-speaking population. The government engaged in reprisals
against the Polish population, deporting it to Eastern Prussia and
Western Pomerania. The war of the Warsaw government against the
Ukrainian population, and the native Polish population which
solidarized itself with the former acquired alarming proportions
after the death of the Stalinist general, Swierczewski, assassinated
by the Ukrainians.
Never did Pilsudski’s government or the government of the
Colonels send a regular army so armed to the teeth against the
Ukrainians as did the Stalinist Warsaw government. The Ukrainian
people will never forget this when the hour of settlement and
vengeance arrives. Nor will they forget the solidarity and protection
given by the Polish working-class and peasant population to the
persecuted Ukrainians.
The Russian and Polish Stalinists justify these punitive
persecutions on the grounds of the “fascist” character of the
Ukrainian bands. As we have already said, it is certain that there
was a Germanophile, pro-Hitlerite orientation among the Ukrainian
nationalists of the Konovalec group. But it is also certain that a
sector of the resistance fought against Hitler before his defeat. Not
receiving the illegal Ukrainian press from Poland, we lack concrete
data, but the problem is not as simple as the Stalinists would paint it.
In the first place, it is a fact that there is peasant resistance
to the deportations, a resistance which merits the support of all
socialists and all those who struggle against barbarism and injustice.
In the second place, the Ukrainian movement is supported by
important sectors of the Polish population, in spite of the fact that
the communiquÃ©s of the official press assert that the Ukrainians
struggle against the Polish population.
In the third place, we know that the Polish underground entered
into contact with the Ukrainian resistance movement, and that they
are collaborating in the struggle against the Russian and Polish
Stalinist military detachments. This fact explains more to us than
all the Stalinist theoretical “theses” on self-determination. The
Polish underground is not at all anxious to support Ukrainian
fascists who devastate Polish communities.
In the fourth place, the underground cannot all be cut from the
same cloth; of necessity it, has a varied character and takes in all
political positions, from that of the Nationalists to that of the
peasants and workers. But its substantial character is that of
national resistance to the policy of deportations en masse, to
the plundering of the Ukrainian population, an armed resistance to
the terror and oppression of Stalinist imperialism.
 
Road to Ukrainian Freedom
In his authoritative 1939 article, Trotsky had already said:
“The Fourth International has the obligation of clearly
understanding the enormous importance of the Ukrainian problem, not
only for the destinies of Southeastern and Eastern Europe, but also
for all of Europe. It is a question of a nation which has
demonstrated vital strength, equal in numbers to the population of
France, which occupies an exceptionally rich territory, extremely
important besides from the strategic point of view. The question of
the destiny of the Ukraine, is posed in all its force. A clear slogan
is necessary ... A Workers’ and Peasants’ Soviet Ukraine, united,
free and independent.”
The separation of the Ukraine from Stalinist Russia has much
greater importance and actuality today than at the time when Trotsky
wrote these lines. It is as fundamental to the socialist
revolution as is the independence of Poland. For this reason we must
define our position toward the Ukrainian revolution, the underground,
and the national resistance to Stalin. If deportations en masse
and the national oppression of the Ukraine are the characteristics of
a “democratic revolution” even though “degenerated,” then we
must support Stalinism against the “reactionary” resistance
movement. If, on the other hand, we have a Stalinist
counter-revolution and imperialist oppression in the Ukraine, then we
must support all progressive forces and not just the socialists, that
is, we must support also the peasants and the democratic petty
bourgeoisie against Stalin. This seems to me to be the correct
Marxist position.
The only remedy for the Stalinist counter-revolution is, and will
continue to be, the socialist revolution; the road to it passes
through the complex struggle of the popular masses, the national
resistance of the Ukrainians to Stalinism. We not only do not wish to
give support to the fascist elements but wish to isolate and fight
them in the course of the struggle against Stalinism. Neither do we
desire to give support to capitalist imperialism which dreams of
using the Ukrainian question as “small change” in the manner of
Stalin and Hitler. The Ukrainian bourgeoisie, decimated and defeated,
may perhaps offer its services to this imperialism. But the Ukrainian
bourgeoisie is very weak, without political importance, without a
tradition of struggle, and lacks the confidence of the masses.
The Ukrainian proletariat is strong, although leaderless and
quiescent. The Ukrainian proletariat is our hope, the hope of the
socialist revolution and of the unhappy Ukrainian nation. Its program
is the socialist program, the program of Leon Trotsky for the
Ukraine: a Workers’ and Peasants’ Ukraine, united, free, and
separated from Russia. The separation of the Ukraine from Russia
means the destruction of a fundamental stone in the structure of the
Stalinist tyranny. But this will not be effected in the process of
capitalist restoration or of North American intervention. “The
program of the independence of the Ukraine in the epoch of
imperialism is directly and indissolubly linked with the program of
the proletarian revolution.” (Trotsky)
“This program,” said Trotsky, “will not leave one stone on
another in the repugnant edifice of Stalinist Bonapartism.” This
program signifies the destruction of Stalinist Russia and the
construction of the Socialist United States of Europe. This program
signifies the fraternal alliance of the Ukrainian and Polish
proletariat, of the Ukrainian and Polish peoples, in their struggle
against the Stalinist tyranny.
To bring about the Socialist United States of Europe it is
necessary not only to have destroyed German imperialism, but also to
destroy Stalinist imperialism which inherited the historic mission of
being the prison of the peoples. The separation of the Ukraine from
Russia is the condition sine qua non of this program. The
alliance of the peoples oppressed by the Stalinist tyranny, in the
first place the Poles and Ukrainians, is a powerful weapon in opening
the road of the socialist revolution in Europe.
For this reason we applaud the collaboration of the Polish
resistance with the Ukrainian resistance movement. We applaud and
support the protection given by the Polish population to the
Ukrainian resistance and the deported Ukrainian peasants. We are not
frightened by Stalinist denunciations about supporting Ukrainian “fascists.”
Long live a free, independent, workers’ and peasants’ Ukraine,
separated from Russia! Long live the Socialist United States of
Europe! Down with the pestilential corpse of Stalinist reaction!
October 1947
 




LA PAZ, Nov. 15, 1946. – Although Bolivia is a small, semi-colonial country of 3–4,000,000 inhabitants, of whom 80 per cent are native peasants completely isolated from civilized life, the development of the Bolivian labor movement is worthy of being studied and utilized by the American working class.
After the political revolution of July 21, in which the people of La Paz destroyed the creole Nazi-fascists, hanging President Villaroel from a lamp-post, the tri-partite committee of workers, teachers and students handed the power over to the supreme court of the district, “to constitutionalize the country” and convoke the elections. This committee, led by the Stalinists of the PIR (Party of the Left Revolutionaries), was totally unable to control the new government assembly and ended up in complete impotence by handing power over to the capitalists.
In spite of the fact that the PIR defended the slogan of “national unity,” in spite of having been the initiator of the Democratic Anti-Fascist Front (DAF), an alliance of the PIR with the capitalists, the Stalinists have been kicked out of the DAF. Thus forced into isolation, assuredly on the orders of the Kremlin, which is trying to build a strong fifth column in South America, the Stalinists called for the program of a UNITED FRONT OF THE LEFT through the CSTB (Bolivian Workers Federation of Labor). They invited the Marxist parties, the PSOB (Bolivian Socialist Workers Party), and the POR (Revolutionary Workers Party, section of the Fourth International), together with the university federation and the miners’, builders’ and railroad workers’ union, to form a front around the PIR. The purpose was to enable them to launch the presidential candidacy of Jose Antonio Arze, the Stalinist leader, by proposing the vice presidency for G. Navarro (Tristan Maroff), leader of the PSOB, according to unofficial accounts. Nevertheless, the Stalinists did not break with the ruling class but used the fantasy of the left front as a shadow-boxing maneuver.
 
The Miners Fight Back
Meanwhile, very important events were taking place in the Bolivian labor movement. The crisis in Bolivian mining – the lack of a market for tin – forced the mining capitalists to close some of the mines and the mine workers faced the prospect of hunger. One of the Hochschild mines, “San Jose” in Oruro, did not wish to pay the legal indemnities owing to the workers. Other mines also threatened the workers with lay-offs.
The workers responded with the threat of occupying the mines and operating them for their own use. The miners’ congress meeting in Pulacayo came out in favor of the sliding scale of wages and the forty-hour work week and expressed its lack’ of confidence in the government assembly and especially in the “labor” minister, the Stalinist Alcoba. The delegates from the labor ministry, dominated by the Stalinists, were expelled from the miners’ congress. The delegates resolved to fight for a workers’ government, which alone can emancipate the working class. The congress declared the Stalinist PIR, a party of the middle class, thus unmasking even the Stalinist union bureaucracy as an instrument of reaction and of betrayal of the working class. The miners’ congress proposed the creation of a WORKERS CENTER, a new union form, directed by the union of mine workers. The congress also proclaimed as a program the nationalization of the mining industry by a workers’ government and the taking over of all the mines which do not conform to the labor legislation and which threaten the workers with lay-offs.
The action of the miners was inspired and led by the POR (Fourth International) which took advantage of the defeat of the Nazi regime and succeeded in gaining influence among the miners, heretofore dominated by the Nazi-fascist bureaucrats and bullies. By this mass action the Trotskyist movement made itself a political factor of great importance, the first Trotskyist movement in Latin America which leads the mass labor movement and openly opposes Stalinism and the capitalist class. The valiant action of the native Bolivian miners is also worthy of note as an obvious proof that Stalinism is losing the proletariat as a social base and sliding toward the skilled workers and the middle class.
The picture would be incomplete if we did not consider the dangers which lie in waif for the young Bolivian working class. The leaders of the POR propose the slogan of a bourgeois-democratic revolution, realizable only under the dictatorship of the working class, a revolution which in its development will pass over to the socialist stage.
In a pamphlet titled Ends and Means of the Bourgeois-Democratic Revolution, the POR author quite reasonably submits to severe criticism the concept of the democratic revolution defended by the Stalinists, which they believe can be realized in alliance with the bourgeoisie through the medium of the “National Union.” Citing the Two Tactics of Lenin, the author argues quite correctly that the middle class is incapable of accomplishing the democratic revolution in Bolivia against the feudo-capitalists and that the feudo-capitalists, allied with feudalism and imperialism, do not want to undertake this revolution. Only a workers’ government, the dictatorship of the proletariat, can realize this revolution. The author, however, makes the error of considering the situation in Czarist Russia before the revolution as parallel, or almost identical to, the actual situation in Bolivia, a very great error, because Russia was an independent feudal empire with capitalism sufficiently developed, and a country of enormous expanse and enormous resources of its own. Bolivia is a poor, small, semi-colonial country, without capitalist industry and politically and economically dependent on imperialism.
 
Role of Trotskyists
In analyzing the situation in Bolivia and the working class movement, the other revolutionary party, the PSOB, came to the conclusion that only the socialist revolution can realize the delayed tasks of the bourgeois revolution, the nationalization of the land, the emancipation of the Indian and the conquest of real national independence, economic as well as political. Since the Bolivian feudo-capitalists are neither able nor willing to develop the capitalist industries, the democratic revolution will not be realized in Bolivia by the capitalist class, and still less by the completely impotent middle ciass. The Stalinist slogan of the democratic revolution as the next step, realizable by them in alliance with the progressive bourgeoisie is a political fiction. Only the socialist revolution, synchronized with the proletariat and South and North America, can end feudalism and introduce socialism in Bolivia.
Therefore, we see that the PSOB differs fundamentally from the POR in its estimation of the revolutionary perspectives. While the POR believes in the possibility of the democratic revolution under the dictatorship of the proletariat, almost without taking into account the international situation, the PSOB considers only the possibility of a directly socialist revolution, realizable only with the aid of the American working class, or at least the South American. The concept of the POR appears to us to be circumscribed by the theory of the possibility of socialism in a single country. It therefore runs the danger of falling into a political adventurism, isolated from international working class action. Thence derives the slogan of occupying and taking over in the mines by the workers inside the system of capitalism. Even the militants of the POR are not clear on this problem: some confine themselves to the taking over of the inactive or sabotaging mines, others are for nationalization of the mines under a workers’ government. Thence stems the danger of isolating the mining proletariat from the rest of the working class and exposing itself to a bloody defeat, thus fomenting Bonapartist and reactionary tendencies. The Bolivian proletariat is therefore not confronted only with the weak Bolivian bourgeoisie, but with powerful imperialism, which has its interests in mining and which dominates Bolivia economically and politically.
The revolutionary movement of the miners ought to begin by grouping around itself the entire working class, the native peasants, the middle classes and the artisans of the city, under the program of a working class united front, which would out-maneuver the Stalinists and later bring about a workers’ and peasants’ front. By eliminating creole Stalinism, the labor movement advances further toward final victory over the capitalists than by venturing a miners’ rebellion, isolated from the rest of the working class and peasant masses.
The immediate task is to cut off the Stalinist initiative of the left front by transforming it into a workers’ front, destroying Stalinism and isolating it from the working class. The nucleus of the workers front must be collaboration between the POR and PSOB, together with the miners, in order to attract the left-wing students, the building workers and the railroad workers, eliminating the Stalinists from the unions.
The workers’ front is a force capable not only of keeping in line the attacks of Nazi-fascist, feudo-capitalist and Stalinist reaction, but of maintaining political democracy and the social conquests of the workers, extending them and, rousing the native peasantry to reach the final victory together with the American proletariat.
 




THE coalition in the name of “national unity” imposed on Poland at Yalta has suffered a complete rout. The Mikolajczyk Populists (PSL – Polskie stronnictwo ludowe) refused categorically to participate in the united electoral bloc. The Stalinists answered first with the Bonapartist plebiscite and later with the approval of the new electoral law. Whereas the Communists recognized the democratic constitution of 1921 in order to remove the legal bases of the London government, they did not recognize the democratic electoral law which was based on the direct, secret suffrage of all the population over twenty-one years of age. Under this electoral law the Stalinists ran the risk of being defeated by the Populists, who are supported not only by the peasants, but by the middle class, the ex-bourgeoisie and wide strata of workers who are disillusioned with the economic situation and the servile policy of the Stalinists toward Russia.
The new electoral law is a mockery of political democracy and of the rights of the working class masses. The government has absolute control of the elections. It can exclude inconvenient electors en masse on the pretext of their having collaborated economically and politically with the Nazis or being in contact with the “fascist underground.” Similarly, it can exclude candidates on the same pretext. In the electoral commissions the Stalinist puppets have an absolute majority with the delegates of four government parties, all Stalinists under different names: PPR (official Stalinists, Polska partia robotnisza – Polish Workers Party); PPS (Polish Socialist Party), diluted and compromising; SD, the democratic party of Rzymowski; and SL, the Stalinist diversion in the countryside. But this is not enough.
 
Totalitarian Terror
Poland has today 23 million inhabitants instead of the 34 million of 1939. The country supports a burden of several armies and militias: the Russian army, half a million soldiers; the Polish puppet army, 300,000; the security police (bezpieka), 200,000; and clouds of bureaucratic locusts which ruin a country exhausted by war and devastation. These figures are enough to demonstrate the reactionary, parasitic and imperialist character of the Russian occupation in Poland.
The people defend themselves with arms. It is estimated that there are still around 100,000 guerrillas, among whom the strongest organization is the WIN (Liberty and Independence), led by the ex-Pilsudskists, the NSZ (nationalist armed forces), whose right-wing and anti-Semitic character is of minor importance. There is also the resistance of the AK (home army), the remains of the famous Polish underground army which was annihilated in the Warsaw insurrection. There are detachments without leadership, which sometimes degenerate into banditry. It frequently happens in Poland that the underground detachments succeed in controlling entire districts of the country, as occurred in the districts of Bielsk, Radom, Sanok and Bialystok. In Cracow a short time ago, the “Men of the Forest” (guerrillas) opened the jail of St. Michael in broad daylight and freed all the political prisoners, who were transported openly in army trucks throughout the city.
The peasants aid the underground in order to defend themselves against the punitive expeditions of the Russians. In exchange, the Russians engage in reprisals worthy of Hitler. In the village of Wawolnica in the department of Lublin, all the inhabitants were assassinated and the village was leveled to the ground. Wawolnica is a “Lidice” of Poland and there are dozens of these “Lidices.” Oppositions of lesser rank are lost like pebbles in a lake. They disappear. The Vice-Minister of Bezpieka, Wachnowicz, denounced the government assassins and was forced to resign. We know only of the arrests of the very well known Populists, those who cannot “disappear.” Augustynski, editor of Mikolajczyk’s organ, was arrested on the charge of “espionage in behalf of a foreign power.” The editors Buczek and Mierzwa were accused of contact with the underground. The old leader of the Populist left wing, Casimir Bakinski, former member of the government of national resistance, formerly accused in Moscow, is a prisoner accused of having printed “the underground fascist organ.” They mean the internal bulletins of the PSL.
In Bytom and other places in the carboniferous valley of Dombrowa, the security police began a human round-up, and hundreds of qualified workers, young women and technicians were rounded up and deported to Russia. In Riga the deportees tried to escape and brought on machine-gun fire by the GPU. Dozens of bodies lay on the ground. Short trials condemned to death dozens of those rounded up and hundreds of oppositionists and members of the armed underground. The demonstration trials were effected against the activists and entire organizations of the PSL (Mikolacjzyk’s Populist Party) to “prove” collaboration between the PSL and the “fascist opposition.” The reprisals also fall on the workers. In Gdansk (Danzig) the workers’ strike was machine-gunned. In Lodz, the Polish Manchester, the worker, Boroweic, was sentenced to ten years for “strike agitation.” Strikes are, of course, severely forbidden in the “democratic Poland” which made a “democratic revolution.”
The prominent member of the PPS, Puzak, former president of CK, former member of the resistance government in 1944, formerly accused in Moscow, is again a prisoner. The old union leader, Zulawski, had to resign his seat in the Cracow Rada – the puppet national council – passing to legal opposition. Drobner, ex-member of the Lublin committee, is also exiled in Cracow. Zaremba, of the “PPS left wing,” fled abroad and published in the Portuguese press a series of articles: The Truth About the Warsaw Insurrection.
Of course, there is no Trotskyist opposition. Everyone suspected of Trotskyism was assassinated in Russia, the last in 1944, when the Russian army “liberated” Poland. The members of the Bund, the reformist left wing Jewish party, were rounded up and persecuted. There also exists the compromising puppet-Bund, which assists Stalinism; Such then is the tragic situation of the Polish people and the Polish proletariat, threatened with biological extermination if they oppose Russian policy. The city of Cracow, where a majority voted “No” in the plebiscite, is threatened with mass deportation. Deportations of the “suspicious” have already begun. On May 3, anniversary of the great constitution of 1791, the “workers’ ” government mobilized all its police forces, armed with tanks and machine guns against the hungry and exhausted students of Cracow.
 
Opposition to Stalinists
The Stalinist government suffers reverses and defeats in Poland, just as the government of Hitler suffered them. The opposition of the PSL, in spite of all the imprisonments and terror, in spite of the dissolution of organizations in whole districts of the country, has been a defeat of Stalinist totalitarianism, the first defeat of importance since the times of the Trotskyist and right-wing opposition in Russia. Its historic and political importance is enormous and cannot be appreciated at the present time. We know well that the latter will not influence the elections, which will be “won” by the government, but the mere fact of the existence of so strong a legal opposition bridles Stalinism and forces it to maneuver and delay. An enormous importance attaches to the Catholic opposition, under the patronage of Cardinal Hlond, which, nevertheless, does not actively combat the government.
The valiant opposition of the PSL presses on the government bloc, causing divisions and disagreements between the PPR and the PPS (capitulating reformists). The Stalinists of the PPR, led by Gomulka, are discontented with the directive of the PPS, headed by “Premier” Osubka, St. Szwalbe, Curankiewicz and Rusinek. Of course, these men are creatures of Stalin and did not play any role in the pre-war PPS. Nevertheless, they do not satisfy “Comrade” Henrykowski, the most cynical and impudent Stalinist, and “Comrade”: Gomulka, who consider them an impediment to the success of “Bolshevik monolithism.” At the command of the Stalinist politburo, the latter formed an “opposition,” headed by Ministers Matuszewski and Swiatkowski, which tried to demolish Osubka’s group. Osubka and Szwalbe went to Moscow and succeeded, it would appear, in convincing Stalin that they are loyal to Russia and that it is desirable to Russia that “they be maintained in power. As a consequence, the too-loyal “fifth columnists,” Matuszewski and Swiatkowski, were destroyed when the former returned from Moscow.
Of course, the differences between the PPR and the PPS do not have a revolutionary character, nor even an anti-Stalinist one. They are concerned with bureaucratic conflicts, with the fight for posts, power and favors from the Muscovite “patron.” Nevertheless, they reflect the social conflicts and the crisis, of the government apparatus, which is incapable of subduing the opposition and the open discontent of the “bases” of the PPS. The opposition of the PSL has its serious consequences. If the reformist Stalinists agree with the PPR, which will “allow” the populists only 12 per cent of the deputies, the bureaucrats of the PPS, in order to reaffirm their posts and positions in the apparatus, are concerned that the organization of Mikolajczyk continue legal as a counterpoise and safeguard against their “colleagues” of the PPR.
The Osubka group [of the PPS – Ed.], which still enjoys favors from the Kremlin, is pressured not only by the PPR, but by the bases of its support and by the left-wing Cracow opposition, headed by Zulawski and Drobner, who Jare exiled from active politics and unburdened of bureaucratic posts. In the underground there is the PPS of Arciszewski, a resistance group WRN (Liberty, Equality, Independence). We have no knowledge of the existence of any organized Trotskyist groups. The divisions and conflicts between the Stalinists of Zezpieka (security police) and the reformist-Stalinists will not reach the stage of a rupture of the government bloc, nor prejudice the electoral bloc. They are only trying to find a solution to the electoral problem. The PPR proposes 25 per cent of the seats for each one of the two workers’ parties, reserving 40 per cent for the SL (peasants – a Stalinist creation) in order thus to assure itself absolute control in the future Sejm (Diet). The PPS fears the “security” comrades and asks 40 per cent of the seats for its candidates. In spite of these “divergences,” we are of the opinion that the “united workers’ front” in defense of the imperialist occupation of Poland and the Stalinist counter-revolution will stand.
 
Some Conclusions
The political conclusions of this tragic situation are the following:

The elections will change nothing in Poland. Aside from the rightwing nationalist, illegal opposition, there exists the powerful peasant opposition. The spontaneous working class opposition of the left, led for the moment by the centrists and reformists of Zulawski and Drobner, is in the process of formation.
 
The existence of this strong opposition succeeded, for the first time in history, in making Stalin recognize it and deal with the leading group of the PPS, which is opposed to the “security policy” and the march of unbridled totalitarianism.
In spite of the pro-Russian loyalty of Mikolajczyk and of the PPS, Stalin cannot yield the government to them because a Poland situated in the doorway of the Stalinist empire is a “sine qua non” of the existence of the bureaucratic regime. Stalin cannot admit a petty bourgeois, peasant Poland of Mikolajczyk, because he needs a Poland submissive to the economic and political monopoly of the Kremlin. A Poland of Mikolajczyk would be transformed into a “time bomb.”
 
The western imperialists try to take advantage of the illegal opposition of Mikolajczyk in their maneuvers against Moscow. In a situation favorable to them, they would perhaps again decide to let Polish blood be shed against Stalin and to cause the “time bomb” to explode.

The Polish people have no interest in bleeding for the “democracies.” Naturally, they should take advantage of the differences among the Big Three to utilize the occasion for an anti-Stalinist opposition, even a revolutionary opposition. But to fall into the trap of the security police, who desire to provoke a popular uprising, would be an adventure and even a crime.
The Polish working class, the poor and rebellious peasantry, await solidarity and assistance from the international proletariat. The Polish proletariat is in a certain sense a spearhead of the international proletariat in its struggle against the Stalinist reaction. To sharpen this spearhead, to strengthen it with a powerful revolutionary doctrine, is our task.
 




July 20, 1946
The Warsaw correspondent of the London Sunday Times, Serek Delby, writes:
“The referendum in Poland proved to the leaders of the peasant party of Mikolajczyk the danger of traps which await them in the next elections. The political situation in Poland is unquiet and the attitude of the ‘men of the forest’ (armed groups) is growing. The most prudent people are opposed to methods of violence, adducing that the greatest flow of blood will provoke only the armed intervention of Russia.” (Sunday Times)
This same organ writes that Mikolajczyk affirms that 60 per cent of the votes were in has favor, proving this affirmation with documents supplied by representatives in the electoral commissions, by members of the Christian Party of Work and even by the Socialists. Mikolajczyk continues to re-assemble the proofs of falsification and abuses in the referendum. The general commissar of the referendum, Barcikowski, (puppet of the government – A.R.) denies the whole declaration and throws back accusations.
 
Facts and Figures
The correspondent of the Associated Press writes that “The success of the government in Warsaw is equalled by the success of the opposition in Cracow,” where 70 per cent of the voters supported Mikolajczyk. This same correspondent writes that in Wojewodztwo (department), Bialystok (on the Curzon line) 90 per cent of the voters voted “No” (against the government) to the first question, throwing into the urns ballots with the slogan: “Return to us Vilna and Lvov.”
The Dziennik Polski (Polish daily) of London says that, aside from Cracow and Bialystok, the government has been defeated in Posnan, where according to the Warsaw radio itself 610,000 voted “Yes” and 715,000 voted “No” to the first question. According to accounts from the circles of the PSL (Mikolajczyk’s party), even in the industrial districts of Pabianice and Piotrkov, in 27 commissions 107,000 persons voted “No” and only 23,000 “Yes.” According to the correspondent of the AP in Lodz (Polish Manchester), the security police carried off 31 urns of votes, without counting them. In Warsaw thousands of forms with “No” votes were found thrown away.
Dziennik Polski of July 8, 1946, and PAT (Polish Telegraph agency) report that at the time of the plebiscite they counted 250 assaults against 65 electoral sites, 70 agents of security and of the PPR (Stalinist party) and 37 >members of the electoral colleges; 14 persons losing their lives. In Starachowice, near Warsaw, a group of 60 persons attacked the site of the plebiscite, carrying away the urn. In these fights and attacks 300 of the attackers were wounded, and 67 attackers and 60 “security” agents were killed. According to an official communication of the PSL, 14 members of the peasant party were assassinated in the department of Kielce.
 
The Politics and the Vote
The official Warsaw government circles affirm that 80 per cent answered “Yes" to the first question and 20 per cent “No” in favor of Mikolajczyk. Mikolajczyk himself claims that the situation is the reverse.
Polska Zbrojna (Armed Poland) accused the inhabitants of Cracow of being “Hitlerites,” threatening them with reprisals. This accusation ought also be directed against the inhabitants of Posnan, Bialystok, Pabianice, Piotrkov and the most industrial city, Lodz. Actually, Cracow has important industry and is the cradle of the socialist movement. Posnan also has important industry, and the writer knows well the class sentiments of the workers of Posnan. Bialystok, Pabianice, etc., are very industrial cities. In reality, Warsaw is now a city of bureaucracy and public officials.
From the facts and figures cited, the falsification of the plebiscite by the government seems indubitable to us, because the acceptance of an open majority of the opposition would bring Stalinist politics in Poland to a catastrophe without precedent. Poland is for Russia more important than Austria or Hungary, it is a key position, where Stalinist imperialism cannot admit its defeat.
Nevertheless, this defeat shows behind the Stalinist fraud. The New York Times of July 3 comments:
“The truth seen even by the most partisan on,the left says that the voting – even without major violence – constitutes a farce and a fraud.” (emphasis – A.R.)
“The electors have been terrorized by the police; the PSL (peasant party), which represents the majority of the people, has been in reality suspended, castigated and tortured with arrests, to the end that the government supporters controlled the majority of the local electors. The government cannot lose, except in the case that the number of votes against the government were so great, that even the abuse would be impossible to conceal.
“In the fullest sense of the word the government lost the fight, even without taking into account the result of the vote. For it lost the confidence of the Polish people and of world public opinion.” (NY Times – translated from Polish to Spanish – A.R.) [Translated from Spanish to English – tr.]
We agree with this conclusion, although the NY Times draws it in the interest of North American politics and we solely in the interest of the proletariat and peasantry of Poland. The Warsaw government lost the referendum in reality and had to concede an opposition of importance, not only in the rural areas, where the “security police” had an easy task against the peasantry – dispersed, weak, frightened and disorganized, without a press or instructions from its leaders – but also in important industrial centers, where the Polish, proletariat, adhering in its majority before the war to the BPS, voted “No” en masse against the government; not feeling itself in any way partisan to a bicameral parliament. It voted in reality against the Stalinist dictatorship, against the Stalinist reaction, against Russian imperialism, Russian occupation and the colonial exploitation of the Polish people. Cracow, Posnan, Bialystok, Piotrkov, Pabianice, etc., were the traditional fortresses of the PPS (Socialist Party), the motor force of the anti-Nazi resistance in Poland and of the Warsaw insurrection of 1944.
The problematical majority of the government in Warsaw itself does not repair the mischief, because Warsaw has scarcely 500,000 inhabitants, entirely bureaucrats and functionaries, and is no longer the city of the glorious Polish proletariat. The strikes in Dombrowa (coal mine), Silesia and Pomerania show the opposition of the proletariat against the Stalinists. We do not know by what means this opposition would be organized by a communist opposition, which before the war had its nuclei in the great industrial centers, in Lodz, Dombrowa and Warsaw, and which supported the thesis on the resistance, according to published documents which have a revolutionary and not a reformist content. But we know for certain, that aside from the foreign arm of the PPS, directed from London, there exists an acknowledged left wing in the PPS which is opposed to the politics of Stalinism. For understandable reasons, we cannot cite the names of the leaders.
 
Revolutionary Prospects
According to all these facts, the Polish proletariat must have played a quintessentially important role in the opposition of votes against the government of quislings, executioners and colonial overseers. Neither can we identify the PSL (party of Mikolajczyk) with rightwing reaction. The peasant of Poland, in his majority very poor, is different from the peasant of Germany, Czechoslovakia or France. It is a peasantry clearly democratic, at times revolutionary, allied to the proletariat, the salaried worker in the city, railroad worker, etc., through aid to its struggle and through a long political tradition of common struggle against csarism, against Polish reaction and against the Nazis. The Polish peasantry approaches the Russian left Social Revolutionaries, but undoubtedly has mare experience and does not want to be the victim nor the “Turkish head” of the Stalinist counter-revolution. For this reason it is completely false – worse, it is a crime – to aid the Warsaw government against the worker and peasant opposition, identifying them with the right and with the old Polish reaction. The most important, the most dangerous reaction in Poland is the Stalinist counter-revolution, which constitutes the greatest and most dangerous enemy of the Polish and the world proletariat and peasantry.
For this reason the proletariat, the Polish working people in general, expect on the part of their class brothers of America and Europe, not calumnies, vacillation or “advice” that they “understand” the Stalinist executioners, but comprehension, assistance and solidarity in their struggle for a socialist Poland and a socialist Europe.
 




August 24, 1946
“Since 1925 and above all since 1926, anti-Semitic demagogy, well camouflaged, unattackable, goes hand in hand with symbolic trials against avowed pogromists.”
Thus Leon Trotsky defines the anti-Semitic politics of Stalinism in his article On the Jewish Problem. (Fourth International [1], Dec. 1945.)
There is no better key to decipher the phenomenon of the anti-Semitic pogroms in Poland, especially the pogrom in Kielce, than this opinion of the old master.
The pogroms which are now taking place in Poland are the greatest in our tragic history. As is known, the first pogroms were “imported” to Poland by the “Black Hundreds” of Tsarism to combat the growing socialist movement in Poland. Polish reaction, then personified by the National Democratic Party, which stood for the submission of Poland to Tsarism, embraced the pogroms as its very own and as an excellent instrument to combat Polish socialism. The pogroms reached their climax in the process of decline of the 1905–06 revolution in Russia and Poland. The second wave of pogroms broke out in the independent Polish republic when reaction, frightened by the specter of the socialist revolution, loosed the pogroms in Lwow. But none of the pogroms of that period, or of the period of the Bonapartist dictatorship of the colonels, went to such lengths or covered so many victims as the pogroms under the “democratic” and “left-wing” government imposed on Poland by Stalin.
The tragic pogrom in Kielce confirms completely the point of view of Trotsky. According to the New York Times of July 6, the crowd began to assemble at 8:30 a.m. in front of the building of the Jewish community in Kielce, growing in half a day to several thousands. The crowd, according to the same source, could not enter the building; but the officials who arrived from the Polish army (Stalinist) entered the building and under false pretext took the Jewish victims outside and handed them over to the mob. The official version of Warsaw is that the “bandits of the NSZ” (national armed forces) assaulted the city and killed the Jews.
It is only too clear to us that the mob assembled without any intervention of the militia or the Russian and Polish armies, for the space of a few hours, in a city department (Woyewodia) where there are strong Russian and Polish garrisons, several kinds of police and militia and the notorious “security” police of Radkiewicz, controlled by the NKVD. There is no doubt of the intervention of the Stalinist officials on the side of the mob.
Furthermore, the circles of exiled Polish socialists inform us that Kielce has always been the fortress of the Socialist Party and that the democratic and progressive population of Kielce never knew pogroms there. These same circles contend that the Kielce pogrom was the work of agents provocateurs of the “security” police to counteract the reports of the foreign press on the referendum fraud and to appear in the eyes of proletarian opinion as “defenders” of the oppressed Jews against the reactionary Polish opposition, underground and legal, the latter represented by the party of Mikolajczyk.
This thesis is certainly confirmed by the earlier pogroms which occurred in Lodz, the most industrial city of Poland, and in Cracow, the old capital, in broad daylight under the noses of the “Red Army” – which declared in answer to passers-by that it could not intervene in the “internal affairs” of Poland. The judicial hearing before the military tribunal in Cracow revealed that the Polish soldiers accused of intervening in the pogrom declared that they had been instigated by the police agent Skrypek, who had been absolved.
The “demonstration” trials in Kielce which terminated with shootings only confirm the thesis of Trotsky, i.e., they serve as a camouflage. Beneath this camouflage are enacted the biggest and bloodiest pogroms in the history of Poland. The government reactionaries have; tolerated the pogroms “unofficially,” but the police, however sympathetic to the anti-Semites, intervene against the anti-Semites under the pressure of “the “left.” The notorious minister of Pilsudski, Slavoy-Skladkowski, has been widely attacked for his statement that the economic fight against the Jews will be tolerated, but not the pogroms; the Stalinist “democrats” instigate the greatest pogroms without public opinion or the free workers’ and peasants’ press being able to intervene and unmask the Machiavellian puppets. Under .the reactionary governments there were three and a half million Jews in Poland – and the Jewish press attacked the anti-Semitism of the Right and the government. Now there are only 150,000 Jews. There is a government of “Judophiles,” and the Jews hear beautiful declarations against “anti-Semitic reaction,” but behind this curtain of smoke occur the greatest pogroms organized by the police agents provocateurs, reminiscent of the times of Stolypin and his “Black Hundreds.”
 
What Do the Rulers Want?
Many readers will ask, “What ends does the Warsaw government pursue with the pogroms, which lower the prestige of the government itself?”
In the first place, they utilize the pogroms in the fight against the legal opposition of Mikolajczyk and his peasant party, supported by the worker masses who are outside the reach of the Stalinist party machine, and also by the bourgeois opposition. The presentation of the worker-peasant opposition as “reactionary” and “anti-Semitic” in its entirety and its identification with the nationalist and reactionary opposition will facilitate for Stalin the “liquidation” of the Peasant party, the introduction of the totalitarian police dictatorship in Poland and will justify the occupation of Poland by Russian troops and direct military intervention in the case of a civil war against the occupiers and their puppets.
In the second place, the toleration of the pogroms causes an exodus en masse of the Jewish population, which pleases the traditionally anti-Semitic bourgeois rightwing and reconciles it with the Stalinist regime. The Stalinists are bringing to a conclusion Hitler’s work of exterminating the Jews in Poland and east-central Europe. This point of view is confirmed by the exodus of the Jews from Russia itself and the mass desertion of the Jewish soldiers from the Russian army.
In the third place, they serve the ends of Russian international politics which wants to foment an exodus of the Jews of Europe to Palestine, in order to cause difficulties to British politics. The recent declarations of LaGuardia that the Russian agents in UNRRA are fomenting and organizing the Jewish emigration from central and eastern Europe confirm this thesis. And on the other side the Russian government foments Arab resistance against the Jewish immigration and Arab anti-Semitism, declaring that they should open all the frontiers to the Jews, with the exception of those of Russia and its sphere of influence in Europe.
The Polish nationalist reaction and the Catholic Church in part assist the Kremlin in this reactionary policy with their declarations and their attitude. But this role is secondary; their master and director is in the Kremlin. In the armed underground movement only the NSZ (armed nationalist forces) professes any anti-Semitism. But these forces number scarcely 1500 men and in the past their principal centers were liquidated. This organization is very easy to liquidate. The fact is that the Stalinist police tolerate, facilitate and instigate its anti-Semitic excesses in order to “repudiate” them politically. The “Home Army” (Cracow Army), the remainder of the powerful Polish underground army, condemns anti-Semitism officially. The declaration of Cardinal Hlond which tries to justify the pogrom – by the presence of the Jewish Stalinist executions in the Warsaw government – only adds grist to Stalin’s mill, and corresponds to the point of view of the old rightist reaction in Poland, which also collaborated with Tsarism and embraced the anti-Semitism of the “Black Hundreds.” But it is necessary to add that the majority of the Jews saved from the ghettos have survived thanks to the aid of the workers, the Polish peasants and many of the Catholic clergy which hid the Jews in convents and churches.
The anti-Semitic pogroms in Poland are the best proof of the counter-revolutionary politics of Stalinism. History does hot know mass pogroms effected against the will of a regime. Pogroms exist in Poland because the Stalinist regime permits them and desires them. The anti-Semitic politics of this regime is proof that it is the advance guard and the main body of reaction in Poland, with the old clerical and anti-Semitic nationalist reaction playing a secondary role as instrument of the Kremlin in order to facilitate the complete domination of Poland.
The international left wing of the working class must open fire against Stalinist anti-Semitism, visible to the eye in Poland, thus aiding the fight of the working class and the peasantry of Poland and defending the Jewish victims.
* * *
Footnote by ETOL
1. In the printed version incorrectly “New International”.
 




The repeated partitioning of Poland between 1772–1795 by Russia, Prussia, and Austria constituted a great victory for European reaction, represented by Russia, and a defeat for the bourgeois revolution, represented by France. The French Encyclopedists, precursors of the revolution, found many readers, and a very fertile soil for their ideas, in Poland. Simultaneously with the French revolution there began in Poland the long parliament which proclaimed, in 1791, the equality of the bourgeoisie with the nobility, and the political reform of the old Polish feudal state. Catherine II, under the pretext of protecting the old prerogatives of the nobility, suppressed the party of reform with Russian weapons, abolished the Constitution of 1791, and proceeded in 1793 to the second division of Poland. The party of reform answered with the revolution of Kosciuszko in 1794, which was the first attempt to carry out an agrarian-democratic revolution in Poland. Kosciuszko, friend of Washington and. Lafayette, general of the American revolution, understood that the problem of a democratic revolution in Poland centered on the abolition of the privileges of the nobility and the consummation of agrarian reforms. In his manifesto to the Polish people, Kosciuszko called all the peasantry to arms against the Russian oppressor, and promised the insurgent peasants freedom, and the abolition of serfdom. Being under the powerful pressure of the nobility, Kosciuszko could not offer all the peasantry land, limiting this offer only to those who participated actively in the revolution. This was one of the causes leading to Kosciuszko’s – and Poland’s – defeat. In 1795, following the defeat of the Polish insurrection, the third and final division was carried out. But though defeated, the Polish insurrection gave much comfort to the French revolution in its struggle against European reaction.
The defeat of Poland was the defeat of the bourgeois revolution in Central-Eastern Europe. The creation of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw furthered the work of the democratic reform of 1791 and the insurrection of 1794. But the defeat of Napoleon in Russia decided the fate of the revolution in Europe, and in Poland as well. The Congress of Vienna created a mutilated “Polish Kingdom” whose hereditary king was the Tzar of Russia. The forced union of the mutilated remnants of Poland and Tzarism terminated in a Polish national revolution in 1831, which had as its consequence a savage Tzarist repression, a government that ruled over defeated Poland and Lithuania with the aid of the gallows and, exile to Siberia. On the left of the extensive Polish emigration having its headquarters in Paris, “The Democratic Society” was formed, possessing a bourgeois-democratic character, and in 1835 the utopian-socialist organization “Polish People” was created. The young Marx and Engels maintained direct relations with both organizations. In 1846–48, another revolution took place in Poland, headed by the Socialist, Edward Dembowski, who had much influence among the Polish-Carpathian peasants. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung of Marx and Engels wrote on August 1, 1848:
“Since the insurrection of Greovia in 1846, the struggle for the independence of Poland is also the struggle for agrarian democracy, the only democracy possible in Eastern Europe against patriarchal-feudal Absolutism.” [A]
The final Polish national revolution against Russia broke out in 1863, and had as its consequence the liquidation of feudalism in Poland and the tempestuous development of industry and capitalism. As a result of this attempt, Tzarism felt compelled to realize the program of the defeated revolution, to carry out the agrarian reform and emancipate the peasant, a reform which created the economic and social bases for capitalism in Poland.  
European Labor and Poland’s Restoration
Marx and Engels unambiguously defended the cause of Polish independence against Russia. The first International, founded in 1864, inscribed on its banner, “Resistance to Russian intervention in Europe; restoration for Poland.” (Engels – The Working-Class of Poland, The New International, July 1944.) The workers’ movement of Europe, the English Chartists as well as the French and German workers demanded the restoration of Poland, and in 1848–49 Marx and Engels demanded a German war against Russia for the restoration of Polish independence. Marx roundly declared that “without an independent Poland there can be no liberty in Europe.” In 1848 Marx demanded the creation of “not merely any kind of a Poland, weak and impotent, independent on paper only, but a strong state, really independent, resting on healthy foundations. Poland must receive the territories she possessed before 1772.” (The First Division of Poland – K. Marx, Neue Rheinische Zeitung)
Lenin and the Russian Bolsheviks inherited this point of view. Lenin always defended the slogan of Polish independence against Rosa Luxemburg, leader of the SDKPL (Social-Democracy of Poland and Lithuania), who was of the opinion that the slogan of Polish independence was “reactionary” and”petty bourgeois.” The Council of People’s Commissars of Soviet Russia passed the following resolution on the 29th of August, 1919: “All the treaties concluded between the government of the old Russian Empire and the government of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, dealing with the division of Poland are being considered abrogated once and for all from this moment on, being contrary to the principle of the self-determination of all peoples, as well as to the revolutionary ideals of the Russian people, who recognize the right of the Polish people to unity and independence.” Thus spoke the Russian Revolution.
Stalin proceeded otherwise. In 1939, by agreement with Hitler, he participated in the division of Poland, occupying 51 per cent of Polish territory, with its 13,200,000 inhabitants. Historic experience teaches us: when there is freedom in Russia, there is freedom in Poland; when the reaction conquers in Russia, Poland loses its independence and national freedom. Engels asserted that the workers’ movement in Europe would be interrupted and checked while this question remained unresolved. “In the present state of affairs in Central Europe and especially Germany, Polish democracy is more than ever necessary.” (F. Engels, The New International, July 1944)  
The Problem of the Bourgeois-Democratic Revolution
Leading the way in all of Central-Eastern Europe, the Polish democratic revolution, with its program of reform and the Kosciuszko insurrection, began simultaneously with the revolution in France. However, Poland was a feudal country, without industries, without capitalism, and without a conscious and revolutionary bourgeoisie. As for the party of reform, the participants in the insurrection of 1794, they were moderates, bourgeois reformists, monarchists, akin to the French Girondists. Polish Jacobinism was very weak and was to be found mainly among the artisans, the petty bourgeois and the people of Warsaw. The events of 1831 also developed within the limits of a conservative reformism which was formed by the “progressive” nobility and the moderate bourgeoisie. The left bourgeoisie, represented by the “Patriotic Society” under the command of Mochnacki, theoretician of the revolution, could never maintain a decisive influence over the revolution beyond its very first stages.
A new turn became manifest in the Cracow revolution of 1846, led by the Utopian Socialists. This revolution had been prepared by the “Polish People” organization in Paris and carried out by means of a series of actions and agrarian uprisings in Poland and Lithuania under the leadership of Konarski and the curate, Sciegienny. In the year 1846, according to Marx, the struggle for independence took on a decided democratic-agrarian character. But the tragedy of Poland consisted of the lack of a developed industrial capitalism and of a formed and conscious Polish bourgeoisie which could carry to a conclusion the agrarian and national revolution against Czarism and the Polish nobility. The Polish bourgeoisie was then in its infancy, without class-consciousness, without any roots in the economic and political life of the country, was closely linked to the nobility, and was incapable of playing the role that history had assigned to it.
This state of affairs was confirmed by the revolution of 1863, prepared and initiated by the party of the radical bourgeoisie, known commonly as “The Reds.” Its central committee, headed by the future generals of the Paris Commune in 1871, Jroslaw Dombrowski and Wroblewski (the latter was also a member of the First International and a friend of Marx), proclaimed the agrarian revolution and the emancipation of the peasantry. Due to the weakness of “The Reds” and the revolution, the decree could not be realized, and only in isolated regions did the peasant masses respond to the call of the revolution and take part in the revolutionary struggles. The leadership of the revolution fell from “The Reds” into the hands of “The Whites,” that is, the reformist nobility and the moderate bourgeoisie. The only possible form the national revolution in Poland could have taken was a “Jacquerie,” a peasant war against Czarism and the Polish feudal aristocracy, under the leadership of the revolutionary bourgeoisie. But the part of the bourgeoisie was played by the “intelligentsia” (intellectuals). Stemming in the main from the impoverished nobility, this intelligentsia was incapable of casting aside its social and political traditions. Here was another reason for the defeat suffered by the Polish Revolution.
Tzarism, after putting down the revolution, felt compelled to realize the latter’s program to carry out the agrarian reform. On this economic and social foundation, capitalism acquired not only a market for its products but also the indispensable labor power for industry. In 1870 the “Kingdom of Poland” had only one worker for every 95 inhabitants, in 1882 one worker for every 62 inhabitants, in 1897 one worker for 38 inhabitants, and in 1910 one worker for every 30 inhabitants. These statistics characterize in the best possible form the industrial development of Poland following the revolution of 1863, the agrarian reform and the changes in the social structure of the country. [1]  
Rise of the Labor Movement
Paralleling this development, a Polish working class movement began to take shape from 1870 on among the various emigre groups; and in 1880 the first workers’ party, “Proletariat,” came into existence and carried on its struggles under the banner of Marxism.
After the last revolution of 1864, the Polish bourgeoisie became “practical,” ridiculing the struggle for national independence as an idle “dream” and idealizing the “peaceful” pursuits of commerce, the development of industry and capitalist agriculture as the true national task. The proletariat, on the other hand, pursued the course of revolutionary strikes. In 1890, after the decline of “Proletariat” under the Czarist terror, the SDKPL (Social-Democracy of Poland and Lithuania) was formed under the leadership of Rosa Luxemburg and A. Warski, and in 1893 the PPS (Polish Socialist Party), led by J. Pilsudski, Perl, Narkiewicz, Daszynski, etc.; typical petty bourgeoisie. The PPS struggled first of all for the independence of Poland while the SDKP flatly rejected the slogan of independence as “reactionary,” and struggled for the revolution and the democratic republic for the whole of Russia. It is well known that Lenin opposed Rosa Luxemburg’s point of view and declared himself in favor of the struggle for Polish independence. Frightened by the development of the workers’ movement, the Polish bourgeoisie moved from their “peaceful” pursuits to the formation of the National Democratic Party. The creation of this party marked the passing over of the bourgeoisie to the side of reaction and proclaimed its complete subjection to Czarism. The new party not only rejected the slogan of a democratic republic for Poland which had been taken up by the Socialists, but swore loyalty to Czarism, and limited itself to petitioning for the .autonomy of Poland under the sway of the “Czar of all the Russias.” Rosa Luxemburg had reason enough to affirm that Polish capitalism was “bound by chains of gold to Russian capitalism.” (Die Industrielle Entwicklung Polens)
After the First World War and the Russian Revolution, an independent Poland came into being, but it was not the federated state of different nationalities that Engels had outlined. It was, instead, a national Polish state with national minorities. A popular government was formed in Lublin on November 7, 1918, under the presidency of Daszynski, which with one stroke proclaimed popular, democratic suffrage, with equal, direct and proportional rights for all citizens over 21, a democratic government responsible to the Parliament, a popular Polish republic, the social rights of the working class and the eight-hour working day, and promised a radical program of agrarian reform. The government lasted but a few days, but its program could not be wiped out in Poland no matter what the political changes. With this program and with the national independence of Poland, the bourgeois-democratic revolution comes to an end in Poland. The following statistics illustrate this affirmation:  
Economic Development of Poland
In 1921 in all of Poland (not only the old “Kingdom of Poland,” the most industrialized region) 15.4 per cent of the population was employed in industry and mining; 72.3 per cent of the population was engaged in agriculture; the remainder was found in other occupations or in the employ of the state.
In 1931, however, industry and commerce employed 26 per cent, 12.6 per cent in other occupations (state employees, liberal professions, etc.) and 60.6 in agriculture. As the reader can see, there was an enormous leap forward in the industrial development of the country.
National production was valued at 19 billion zlotys in 1921. Of this total, 13 billion zlotys, that is, 68 per cent, derived from agricultural production. In 1939, however, agriculture yielded only slightly more than half of the value of the national product. These simple statistics prove that Poland in its period of independence achieved a full capitalist development; contrary to the vulgar notions propagated by the Stalinists, industry played a powerful part quantitatively almost equal to that of agriculture.
Polish agriculture hardly possessed a feudal structure and in any case was less feudal than the agriculture of Germany or England. The percentage of land held by farmers owning more than 50 hectares (120 acres) was about 20 per cent of the cultivable surface of the country, and at the most 25 per cent, while in Mecklenburg the same type of landholders owned 63 per cent of the arable soil, in East Prussia 52 per cent and in all of Germany more than 30 per cent. In England the landlords control more than half the arable land.
Out of 25,589,000 hectares of arable land in Poland in 1920, 6,900,000 hectares were held by landowners in plots greater than 50 hectares. By 1939, 3,000,700 hectares had been distributed among the peasantry, that is, 15.6 per cent of the nation’s arable land, comprising more than 40 per cent of the land of the large landowners.
As we see, the bourgeois revolution carried out the agricultural reform in the “Prussian” manner, not as was necessary in Poland, in the revolutionary “French” way.
The conservative Polish bourgeoisie, grown old without having known any youth, received national independence as a gift from history and from the socialists and populists (peasants). It took this gift with distrust and opposed with all the means at its disposal the full development of the democratic revolution, whose basis, according to Marx, was the agrarian revolution. The bourgeoisie set itself in opposition to the agrarian revolution, to the “French” road, since this would have created a new peasant, radical petty-bourgeois strata, capable of separating itself from the government of the traditional bourgeoisie and of creating a democratic republic of workers and peasants in Poland. For this reason the bourgeoisie chose the “Prussian” road of moderate agrarian reform which assured its political and economic power. At the same time the bourgeoisie sounded the death-knell for democracy in Poland, since the only form this democracy could take was “agrarian democracy,” which would struggle to the end to realize the full program of the bourgeois revolution even against the bourgeoisie itself.
By curbing the agrarian revolution, the bourgeoisie prepared the way for the dictatorship of Pilsudski. The degeneration of bourgeois democracy took the concrete form of a totalitarian dictatorship.
It can be said, therefore, that pre-war Poland was not a feudal, but a capitalist country; that the agrarian reform extended the foundations of capitalism in Poland; and that the Pilsudski dictatorship gave Poland a decisive impulse in the direction of industrial and capitalist development, at the expense of the peasantry and the working class.  
The Communist Party and the Problem of the Democratic-Socialist Revolution
With the revolution of 1905 the differences inside the workers’ movement between the PPS and the SDKPL grew more profound. Together with Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg posed the problem of the workers’ government, while the PPS raised the slogan of the independent Polish republic. The SDKP followed the proletarian tactic of struggle, of strikes, of working class action, while the right wing of the PPS proceeded to attempts at bomb throwing against the crimes of Czarism. This tactic of individual terrorism isolated the party from the masses and provoked an internal crisis in the party, bringing about the creation of the left PPS, led by Koszutska, Walecki, Krolikowski, etc. The new organization rejected the terroristic tactic and the exaggerated nationalism of Pulsudski, it also rejected the national nihilism of Rosa Luxemburg. For this reason, the left PPS and the SDKP continued as separate organizations until 1918, even though they had much in common. At the beginning of 1919 the two organizations united and became the Communist Party of Poland, affiliated with the Third International. The union, however, was mechanical, lacking an ideological foundation. Led by Marchlewski, Radek, Kohn and Dzierzynski, the SDKP group viewed the fundamental questions of the Polish revolution in a manner peculiar to itself, denying the existence of the national question, the question of Polish independence. As far as they were concerned, the agrarian problem was the problem of the agrarian proletariat, agricultural workers without land, among whom the SDKP had a powerful organization. As for the peasantry, they did not exist for the SDKP’ers, and if they did exist, they formed a reactionary mass.
For this reason, the Polish SDKP’ers opposed Lenin’s program of “land to the peasantry,” advocating the nationalization of the land and its direct cultivation by the workers’ state itself. The left PPS understood the weak sides of this theory but was incapable of formulating its own program, given the preponderance and the theoretical prestige of Rosa Luxemburg’s disciples. As a result, the traditions of Luxemburgism triumphed over the national and agrarian program of Lenin in the Communist Party of Poland. The KPP, therefore, was incapable of winning the peasant masses to a social revolution. When the Russian armies stood outside the gates of Warsaw in 1920, the Bolsheviks did not divide the land among the peasants of Poland, as they had done in Russia, because such a course was opposed by the Polish Communist Party.
The Russian Bolsheviks pointed to this as the cause of their defeat. In reality, the majority of the Polish proletariat and peasantry observed the Russian advance with distrust, fearing a foreign invasion and the loss of their newly won national independence. This feeling was summed up by the Communist leader, Warski, an old collaborator of Rosa Luxemburg, when he remarked that the Polish proletariat did not desire “a revolution brought by foreign bayonets.”
The events of this period, distorted by the official Stalinist interpretation, must be studied and re-evaluated anew. What can be said in any case is that the Polish Communist Party did not understand the fundamental problems of the democratic revolution as Lenin understood them, and gave proof of its ultra-left bias by abstaining from the general elections of 1919. Instead of pushing the democratic revolution on the road of proletarian power, it isolated itself from the masses. Its politics degenerated into a series of actions without the support of the workers. This debilitating tactic did not and could not push forward the democratic revolution; instead it made possible a bourgeois counter-offensive and the deflection of the agrarian revolution into the channels of capitalist reform.
As a reaction against these policies, the majority group, known in the Comintern as the “right wing,” was formed. Led by Warski, formerly of the SDKP, Koszutska and Wlaceki, formerly of the left PPS, it revised the program and the policies of the party at the third congress of the KPP, putting forward a program on the national and agrarian questions in accordance with Lenin’s views. “The Majority” formulated the famous theory of two stages of the Polish revolution, the democratic and the socialist stages. Taking as its point of departure the premise that. Poland had as yet to complete the democratic revolution, whose historic task it was to solve the national question and carry out the agrarian revolution by means of a democratic worker-peasant government, the majority advocated supporting the PPS and the peasant parties in order to carry out the program of the first revolution. In reality, it understood the fundamental problem of state power in far different fashion than Lenin, who demanded a government of the Soviets. Led by the majority, the KPP thought the first revolution would be carried out under the leadership of the reformists and the populists, and the job of the working class lay in then “pushing” them toward the socialist revolution. The theory had its practical consequences. When Pilsudski carried out his counter-revolutionary action in 1926, the KPP evaluated it as a “petty bourgeois” revolution, and offered him its support! The theory was wrong because the democratic revolution in Poland had been completed in 1919–20, a fact which the Communists had not taken into account. The theory of “two stages” looked to the past, since on the order of the day in Poland, as in Russia, and in all Europe was the Socialist revolution or the counter-revolution. Although the agrarian question had not been completely solved in a revolutionary manner, it could not serve to bring an already outlived democratic revolution back to life. Only a socialist revolution was capable of solving the problems bequeathed by the bourgeois revolution.  
From Opportunism to Ultra-Leftism
The opposition which arose between 1927–30 in the party, calling itself the “minority,” was led by Lenski, Rying, Henrykowski. This opposition fought fiercely against the “historical right wing” and the “theory of two stages.” But being a Stalinist opposition, it fought bureaucratically, mechanically and without achieving any revolutionary consequences; it degenerated into the theory of “social fascism,” combatting, as in Germany, the Social-Democrats and the Populists first of all, instead of fighting the party of Pilsudski. This policy helped Pilsudski defeat the democratic opposition, the famous “Centrolev,” a coalition of Catholics, Populists and Socialists, in 1930. Stalin fomented the struggle of the factions inside the KPP in order to further his struggle for power inside the Soviet Union. He stood to gain from the weakening of the KPP, whose revolutionary traditions of Luxemburgism and independent Bolshevism always represented a potential danger to the Stalinist counter-revolution. Fearful of any possible source of opposition, Stalin dissolved the KPP in 1937.
None of the factions within the KPP had been able to correctly solve the problems of the democratic-socialist revolution, viewed as an uninterrupted and permanent revolution carried to completion by the dictatorship of the proletariat, or as Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky put it, by a workers’ government. The merit of the majority lay in the fact that it posed the fundamental problems of the democratic revolution: the agrarian and national questions. But what it lacked was a revolutionary perspective, since it posed on the order of the day the democratic revolution, when this was already an accomplished fact. It lagged behind with a theory that did not correspond to reality. The other faction, the “minority,” criticized the theory of “two stages,” but its criticisms were eclectic and Stalinist in kind, lending themselves to the domestic use of the Thermidorean clique, which feared the leadership of the KPP. Lacking an historic perspective besides, this criticism degenerated into the notion of “social fascism,” which isolated the party from the masses and objectively gave support to “Pilsudskism.” It must be recognized that the historic situation and the march of the counter-revolution in Russia, Germany and the rest of Europe excuses in part the errors of the Polish Communists. Under the strong pressure of Stalinism which was interested in the dissolution of the KPP, persecuted savagely by the reaction in Poland, the party degenerated. But the ultimate blow was not struck by the Polish bourgeoisie; it was struck by Stalinism. In the same cold-blooded manner, he assassinated the prominent Polish Communists as he had assassinated the Russian Bolsheviks.
(Our next issue will carry a second article from the pen of Rudzienski dealing with the Russian occupation of Poland. – EDITORS)

Footnote
1. S. Koszutski: Industrial Development of Poland.

Note by ETOL
A. The article was actually written on August 19 and published on August 21:
The struggle for the independence of Poland, particularly since the Cracow uprising of 1846, is at the same time a struggle of agrarian democracy – the only form of democracy possible in Eastern Europe – against patriarchal feudal absolutism. (Friedrich Engels, The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish Question III, Neue Rheinische Zeitung No. 81, August 20, 1848.
 




The Quisling government of Warsaw was implanted in Poland after the bloody “liquidation” of the Warsaw insurrection in which the Nazis had the collaboration of the Stalinist armies. The Lublin government was not made up of the prominent leaders of the old Communist Party (KPP), nor of the Socialist Party. The former were liquidated in bloody purges in Russia, the latter are either in the Russian prisons (Puzak, general secretary of the PPS – Polish Socialist Party – and vice-premier of the underground government of Poland; Paydak assassinated by the GPU, etc.), or in emigration (Kwapinski, Ciokosz, Prager, etc.). The leadership of the government belongs to the ex-agents and officials of the GPU; Bierut-Bienkowski-Rutkowski, “president” of Poland; Radkiewicz, White Russian GPU official, now “minister” of interior; Gomulka, vice-premier and secretary-general of the Polish Workers Party (Stalinist), a little-known leader of the KPP.
The PPS is represented by Osubka-Morawski, an obscure individual without a political past, appointed by Stalin as leader of the PPS; Szwalbe, known before the war as an adherent of Pilsudski; Rusinek, an obscure union bureaucrat of no importance, etc. Aside from the popular party of Mikolajczyk, there are in the government reactionaries of the stripe of Rzymowski, Chancellor, ex-adherent of Pilsudski, defender of the “pogrom” against the democratic opposition in 1930 in Brest-Litovsk; in the national council, St. Grabski, old leader of the National Democratic Party, the most right-wing in Poland, former servant of the Russian Czar; Kwiatkowski, Strasburger, Kirtiklis, Zeligowski, high dignitaries around the government, ex-leaders of the “Saneaja” of Pilsudski.
The Polish people supported the government of national resistance, the government of the Warsaw insurrection, in spite of all its faults. When, through the machinations of Big Three imperialism, the government of Stalinist police puppets, accompanied by the old reactionaries, was imposed, a wave of violent indignation ran through the country. The new Stalinist government began its activities with the cruel persecution of the underground resistance and the remains of the Warsaw insurrection.
Neither the nationalization of industry nor the agrarian reform could calm this opposition, because the new government obeyed the interests of Russian imperialism and not the interests of the Polish people. Stalinist imperialism destroys the remainder of the bourgeoisie and the Polish latifundists, but not in the interest of the workers and peasants of Poland, but in the interest of the Russian bureaucracy. The “socialist” reforms of Stalin are transformed into imperialist instruments for the exploitation, expropriation and colonial exploitation of the Polish people. The political terror and cruel persecution of all the oppositionists is only the consequence of this, imperialist politics.
Hence, because the Lublin-Warsaw government governs Poland by means of Stalinist bayonets, two years passed without elections of any kind. Hence, before holding the elections, they proceeded to the grandiose fraud of the “popular referendum” in Poland.
The referendum was supposed to answer three questions: (1) in favor of or against a unicameral parliament (abolition of the Senate); (2) in favor of or against the “nationalization” of industries and the “democratic agrarian reform”; (3) in favor of or against the new western frontier of Poland. Already, the most superficial analysis of the formulas of the plebiscite will show us the gigantic Thermidorian fraud.
The traditional position of the proletarian and peasant left wing in Poland was for the abolition of the Senate. But, in the conditions of the Stalinist dictatorship in Poland, the abolition of the Senate would tend to introduce a police-totalitarian dictatorship without any restraints or control. The national council of Poland is composed of figureheads appointed by the GPU who guard Russia’s imperialist interests in Poland. The fraudulent plebiscite is to legalize this crime against the Polish people.
The socialization of industry and the agrarian reform was in the program of the leftists and the anti-Nazi national resistance. But, the same reforms in the hands of the Stalinist bandits are converted into a reactionary imperialist instrument and serve to reduce the country to the status of a colony of “Holy Russia.” The popular plebiscite can only legalize the robbery of the national Polish landed property, approve the slave status of the Polish peasant workers.
 
The Border Crimes
The Curzon line, which is identified with the Molotov-Ribbentrop line, constitutes an international crime, a new partition of Poland once more perpetrated by Russian and German imperialism. The Oder line is a crime not only against Europe, but it makes of Poland a country on wheels, pushed from east to west and back again. Approving the Oder line, the “silent plebiscite” must not only approve the partition of Poland but the division of Europe into two imperialist spheres, thus rendering to international reaction incalculable services.
Under Catherine, Peter and Alexander, Poland knew “silent parliaments,” which under the bayonets of the “soldateska” approved the partitions of Poland. Under Stalin, not only deputies, but the whole people must approve not only the partition, but must declare agreement with the STATUS ESCLAVORUM and the robbery of the national land; under Stalin, the “silent parliament” is not enough – it is necessary to have a “silent referendum.”
According to official data, 68 per cent of the voters voted the first question affirmatively, that is, in favor of the government; 32 per cent against the government. The entire international press openly doubted these results. To better illustrate the fraud of electoral arithmetic, we record the figures of the Polish Diet:



 


1920


1923


1928


   1931*




Right (National Democrats and satellites)


142


126


  37


  62




Bourgeois Center (Christian Democrats and satellites)


  79


  61


  37


  49




Peasant Parties


121


122


  90


  48




“Sanacja” of Pilsudski


 


 


122


247




Socialists (1919)


  35


  41


  63


  24




Communists


 


    2


    7


    4



* The Polish Worker – F. Gross, p. 134. Roy Publ., N.Y.


Electoral Abuses
The opposition to the Stalinist regime of Poland embraced not only the traditional rightists and peasant parties, but also a large part of the worker and peasant left. It suffices to analyze the figures cited to understand the Stalinist fraud. The “socialist” reforms and the partition of the country could not in any case conquer the majority for Russian imperialism.
This majority is explained not only by the barbarous, totalitarian terror but by arithmetical juggling. According to the declarations of Mikolajczyk, thousands of leaders and activists of his parties had been seized, their meetings banned, their delegates expelled from the electoral colleges, their press censored.
The electoral abuses in the departments of Cracow, Pulawy, Silesia, Pomerania and Lublin, according to the same declaration, ARE ENOUGH TO SHOW THE OPPOSITION WAS IN THE MAJORITY. According to reports in the Polish press in America, in Warsaw, Cracow, etc., mountains of burned ballots were found; the government was not anxious enough to hide them. In some districts, according to Homer Biggart and English correspondents, the presidents of the electoral commissions threw out the ballots of the opposition, filling the urns with blank ballots, which, according to the rules of the referendum, were considered as affirmative votes.
Furthermore, “anyone who wished” could vote “publicly.” Of course, all the public employees, who now constitute the majority of the voters in the city, voted thus. The “secret” voters were led to a special compartment. Of course, the “Bezpieka” (GPU of Radkiewicz) surely got hold of these surnames. In Praga the school children found mountains of torn ballots.
The objections of Mikolajczyk have not been heeded and the referendum will not be repeated in any province. The Stalinist dictatorship needs the legalization of the “silent referendum” and cannot permit itself the luxury of repeating it.
 
Who Is The Opposition
In spite of all frauds and all pressure, terror and “electoral arithmetic,” the quislings have to admit the considerable opposition of 32 per cent, whose existence is a defeat for the Stalinists. In Poland, since they cannot accomplish “unanimous” elections as in Russia, it is necessary to admit the opposition even if reduced by GPU arithmetic.
Now the GPU is contriving documents in order to accuse the whole Polish opposition of “Nazism” which is supposed to be headed by the Nazis of Gdansk (Danzig), and also by General Anders and the London government. A series of trumped-up lawsuits will prepare the way to declare the opposition and the peasant party of Mikolajczyk “Nazi” and to eliminate it from the elections, already postponed more than two years. The anti-Semitic pogroms, tolerated by the government and organized by its agents, also serve this purpose.
In reality, the opposition in Poland is composed of. all political colors from the traditional right and “Sanacja” of Pilsudski, through the Peasant Party, down to the peasant and proletarian left. The strikes in Silesia and Pomerania, the cynical resolutions of the “unions” criticizing the workers’ strikes, the resistance of the peasants against the requisitioning of grain, by the government, constitute the major proof of our affirmation. It may be added that the reactionary circles, ex-bourgeois and agrarian, try to find employment in the new privileged caste and to reconcile themselves to the Stalinist bureaucracy (Prince Radziwill as chief of protocol in the “Communist” government of Warsaw and tens of thousands of other reactionaries).
The Trotskyist and socialist proletarian opposition which, cruelly persecuted, fights underground, the democratic opposition of the peasants, the elementary and organized opposition of the resistance, deserve the full support of the international proletariat in its fight for the socialist revolution of Poland, which at the same time will be national liberation for the Polish people.
 

