Santen: The Chinese Communist Leadership (April 1960)



S. Santen  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Sal Santen
The Chinese Communist Leadership
(It Feels the Need for a Revolutionary Orientation
But Remains a Prisoner of Its Bureaucratic Conceptions)
(April 1960)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 9, Spring 1960, pp. 39–44.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Much attention was given in the world press to an article published on April 1st by Red Flag, the theoretical journal of the Chinese CP, and entitled: On Imperialism as the Source of War in Modern Times and also on the Way for All Peoples to Struggle for Peace.”It was written for the forthcoming 90th anniversary of Lenin’s death. The main passage, republished by the bourgeois press, read as follows:
Lenin taught us that in the era of imperialism, the imperialist system is the source of war. Imperialist war is a continuation of its policy of aggression and enslavement. (Emphasis of the Peking Review translation) In times of peace, the imperialists always pursue a whole set of policies for the continuous extension of the rule of monopoly capital. The exploitation and oppression of their peoples at home, their domination and plunder of the colonies and semi-colonies and the rivalry among monopoly capital groups in various countries do in fact breed new wars. To the imperialists, peace is no more than an interval between wars. Taking advantage of the interval, they work energetically to expand their arms and prepare for the next war. (...)
(...) Of late certain representative figures in US ruling circles seem to be paying greater lip service to peace than hitherto and playing more peace games. They hope to create the illusion among people that Eisenhower and his kind are capable of “laying down the butcher’s knife and turning into buddhas.” They want people to believe that US imperialism will offer the gift of peace to the world.
Will Eisenhower and his like really lay down their butcher’s knives? Does US imperialism actually desire world peace? Facts are most eloquent. Numerous events have demonstrated that juggling with peace, Eisenhower and those like him are actively preparing for war. (...)
(...) US imperialism being what it is will certainly not abandon its policy of war. The peace which US imperialism seeks is nothing but peace with US global domination. (Emphasis of the Peking Review translation) Neither Eisenhower today, nor Dulles yesterday, made any effort to hide the meaning of their “peace with justice.” In their eyes, the socialist countries are “captive nations,” all revolutions are “means of evil” and “peace with justice” is a peace in which socialism is eliminated, revolutions in all countries are “strictly verboten” and the peoples of the world submissively knuckle under to the oppression and exploitation of US monopoly capital.
For some time, more precisely since the Chino-Indian border disputes and since Khrushchev’s trip to America, such statements – though in a less concrete form – could frequently be found in the Chinese press, and in official speeches. They stood in sharp distinction to the honey-sweet official Russian statements on the possibilities of “peaceful coexistence.” Revolutionary Marxists can only welcome this distinction, favorable to the Chinese Communist leadership. But their doing so does not mean that the last word has been said.
Though much less cynical and conservative than the Russian bureaucracy, the Chinese leadership is nevertheless a bureaucratic one. It is true, by its origins and experience since the victory of the Chinese revolution, it has no illusions about the character of the imperialist enemy. By its ties with the colonial revolution, it welcomes every defeat of imperialism, and – what is essential – it does not fear the revolutionary mobilization of the masses in the way the Soviet bureaucracy does. But fundamentally its policy is also a bureaucratic one, though more sensitive to the revolutionary changes in the world.
Whilst stressing Lenin’s teachings on imperialism, it does so much more through opportunism than for reasons of principle. It does so much more in order to bring pressure upon the Soviet bureaucracy (which did not hesitate to “forget” the interests of its Chinese ally while looking for a compromise with imperialism), than to work up a revolutionary communist policy in the fight against imperialism.
It is absolutely necessary to be aware of this.
Insofar as the Chinese Communist leadership criticizes imperialism as such, it has a revolutionary position. At the same time, however, it is incapable of drawing clear, valid Marxist revolutionary conclusions from it. It welcomes defeats of imperialism, of course, and that is a good thing. It supports, also materially, the colonial revolutions, and this can only be welcomed, though it should be said that its aid, e g to the Algerian revolution, is absolutely insufficient. But on the ideological field, it continues to create confusion by its uncritical support of the colonial national bourgeoisies, and by doing so, it reveals all the conservative – and even anti-revolutionary – traits of a bureaucracy.
This contradictory, and empirical attitude is also reflected in the article in the Red Flag quoted above. Though it begins by stating, and correctly so, that the “peace” of imperialism is a “peace in which socialism is eliminated, revolutions in all countries are ‘strictly verboten’ and the peoples of the world submissively knuckle under to the oppression and exploitation of US monopoly capital,” it immediately afterwards jumps over to the position (”discovered” and defended by Stalin shortly before his death) that the present epoch is characterized by “inter-imperialist contradictions.”
In order to justify such a position, it throws overboard every time the revolutionary conclusions it had (spontaneously) reached. The same thing occurs when it speaks about the character of the imperialist war preparations:
To realize its ambition for world hegemony, US imperialism is on the one hand actively preparing for “total war,” that is world war, while on the other is energetically engaged in preparing for “limited wars,” that is, “local wars.” (...)
(...) The US imperialists consider the strategy of carrying on local wars on the basis of active preparation for world war most advantageous to them. They are aware that lagging far behind the Soviet Union in military science and technology, they will suffer extremely serious consequences if they venture to start a world war.
If we disregard the exaggerations, which of course have a political foundation, this is correct. But immediately afterwards, the Red Flag drops its own conclusions, and states:
Nevertheless, they are neither willing nor able to abandon their policy of war. That is why in the hope of step by step realizing their imperialist objectives they have adopted the strategy [emphasis by me, S.] of “limited wars” (i.e., “local wars”) short of world war.
If this were true, it would mean that imperialism had abandoned its strategy of “eliminating socialism,” as this “purpose” could be reached (if it ever could be reached) only by an “overall war, that is a world war.” Thus it could try to maintain itself for some time by intervening in this or that revolution, by “local wars” only, but such a strategy, as is clear, would be one only of defending the “status quo,” of accepting the existence of a series of workers’ states as an accomplished fact. It would be a strategy of defeat for the imperialist enemy, as it would start from the invincibility of the workers’ states. It would mean an imperialist retreat before the forces of world revolution, and therefore would be of world historical importance. It would open a new epoch, in which the final defeat of imperialism would be a short-term perspective, as imperialism would not be capable of maintaining itself very long with the sole weapon of “local wars” against the rising forces of world revolution. Militarily stated, imperialism would have decided to fight against its downfall by means of guerilla-warfare. Unfortunately, the combined forces of world revolution are not yet strong enough to provide grounds for such conclusions. The Red Flag, however, does not hesitate to draw them:
The US policy of “local wars” is a kind of conclusion drawn from historical experience in pursuance of its policy of aggressive wars. US control over the Western Hemisphere was effected by resorting to this tactic of “local wars.” The era of’ imperialism has a history replete with “local wars,” besides (!) the two world wars. The Second World War began (!) with a series of local wars. From the end of World War II until today, there have been an uninterrupted series of local wars started by the imperialists: wars of imperialist intervention against the revolutions of other countries, wars of imperialist suppression of the national liberation movements and wars of imperialist aggression against the socialist countries.
Here we see a clear contradiction with the beginning of the Red Flag article, in which it was said that “To the imperialists, peace is no more than an interval between wars.” The era of imperialism being “a history full of local wars,” even “besides the two world wars,” i e, even in “peace” time, it should be a duty for revolutionary Marxists to draw some more general conclusions from the “local wars” which have characterized and are still characterizing the period after World War Two. They were and are, as is correctly stated in the Red Flag article, “wars of imperialist intervention against the revolutions of other countries, wars of imperialist suppression of the national liberation movements and wars of imperialist aggression against the socialist countries.”
For Marxists, who have the courage to think things through to the end, the conclusion is not so complicated. The “local wars” after the Second World War have a common denominator: they are directed against the rising revolutionary forces in the world in all their forms, that is to say: they are counter-revolutionary in essence. They form part of a world strategy of imperialism, led by the strongest and most conscious imperialist power, the USA, which – inevitably – will lead to a final showdown between imperialism and the forces of socialism. To conclude, as does the Red Flag, that the imperialists “have adopted the strategy of limited wars.” is, au fond, a “theoretical” capitulation before the combined forces of imperialism, that is: an effort to escape from the most burning problem with which humanity is faced in the present epoch.
In order to justify its overhasty conclusions, the Red Flag of course is obliged to minimize the strength of the imperialist enemy. Faithful to its contradictory conception, it walks again on “two legs”: one revolutionary and the other bureaucratic. On the one hand, it speaks of “the inevitability of revolutions in the imperialist countries” as “an objective law of history.” But on the other hand, it plays the card of “inter-imperialist contradictions,” and says:
According to the Leninist theory, the contradictions between the imperialist countries are irreconcilable and antagonistic in nature and constitute one of the root causes of modern wars.
It prefers to forget that the world has changed a little bit since Lenin’s death; that, the relationship of forces in the world having definitively changed in favor of the forces of world revolution and to the disadvantage of imperialism, the fundamental contradictions on a world scale in the present epoch relate to revolution and counter-revolution, and no longer to inter-imperialist rivalries, however important they may be. What are now irreconcilable and antagonistic in nature are the contradictions between the workers’ states, the colonial revolution, and the working-class movement on the one hand, and on the other hand, imperialism. There is, in spite of their rivalries, a holy alliance among the forces of imperialism, from Franco to Eisenhower, from Adenauer to de Gaulle, in order to face the rising forces of world revolution.
Prisoner of its own confusion, the Red Flag develops a kind of schema which should prove the predominance of the inter-imperialist contradictions over the contradictions between revolution and counter-revolution.
It therefore states:
The resurgent imperialist powers of West Germany and Japan are two sources of serious war danger. The inevitable (emphasis by me, S.) outcome of the US fostering West Germany and Japan will be, as the Chinese saying has it, to lift a rock only to smash its own toes.
The argument is not very convincing, as a child in politics knows that the arming of West Germany and Japan by American imperialism forms part of the over-all war preparations a-gainst the workers’ states, the USSR, and China in particular. For the Red Flag, this is not a problem:
According to the wishful thinking of the United States, a rearmed West Germany will serve as a mainstay in an anti-Soviet war in the West and a rearmed Japan in a war against the Soviet Union and China in the East. But did not the United States, Britain and France, prior to World War, also plan to use Germany and Japan to wage war against the Soviet Union? History, however, followed a course quite independent of their will.
Wishful thinking, we fear, is this time on the side of the Red Flag. It simply projects the present situation from the one existing before World War II. As it is not possible, however, to convince anybody with such reasoning, it suddenly adds:
In this respect, the situation today differs from that before the Second World War only (emphasis by me, S.) in that the socialist camp headed by the Soviet Union has grown incomparably strong. Whoever dares launch a war against the socialist countries will only be courting his own destruction.
So there is no reason to worry. “It is in the nature of imperialism to bully the weak and fear the strong,” is the consolation of the Red Flag, and it continues:
Raw materials and markets are vital to the imperialist powers and they will fight for them by every means available. World War I was a war among the imperialist powers and World War II began in the first place among them. Though West Germany and Japan owe what they are today to US help and support, they will not always bow to US dictates. Who can guarantee that West Germany will not unleash a new war of aggression in Western Europe and Japan in Southeast Asia? And who can guarantee that there will be no repetition of Pearl Harbour or that a new world war will not break out among the imperialist powers?
Really, sense becomes nonsense here. And this is written to commemorate Lenin, who knew the class enemy better than anybody else, who never minimized or underestimated its “will to survive,” its counter-revolutionary capabilities, who always orientated toward what was fundamental, who untiringly analyzed the changes in the relationship of forces between revolution and counter-revolution, and who relegated those who stuck to outdated formulas (correct in a certain concrete former situation, nonsense and therefore anti-revolutionary in the new one) to the “museum of antiquities.”
And as the question “Who can guarantee that a new world war will not break out among the imperialist powers?” is only meant to stress that this variant is unrealistic, the Red Flag is looking for another “guarantee.” It quotes Mao Tse-Tung in order to assure that “the real, direct contradictions in the post-war world are not contradictions between the Soviet Union and the United States.” [Emphasis added.] But then, again “walking on two legs,” Mao Tse-Tung contradicts himself, and adds:
The propaganda about an anti-Soviet war consists of two aspects. On the one hand, US imperialism is really preparing a war against the Soviet Union (emphasis by me, S.); the current talk about an anti-Soviet war and other anti-Soviet propaganda is the political preparation for an anti-Soviet war. On the other hand, this propaganda is a smokescreen put up by the US reactionaries to cover up the many real contradictions US imperialism is now facing. These are the contradictions between the US reactionaries and the American people and those between US imperialism and capitalist countries and colonial and semi-colonial countries. At present the US slogan of waging an anti-Soviet war actually means the oppression of the American people and the expansion of its aggressive forces in the capitalist world.
In reality, the article in the Red Flag is full of such contradictions. One sentence is in opposition to the next, from the beginning to the end. It does not want openly to attack Khrushchev’s policy of “peaceful coexistence”; it repeats – as is clear from the above quotations – the really Stalinist “conception” of inter-imperialist wars in the present epoch; but at the same time it wants to warn against too many illusions about it. It brings to mind Lenin’s words that “we are surrounded by people, classes, and governments who openly express the greatest hatred for us,” and it adds:
Today, US imperialism still surrounds us with a network of military bases and guided missiles; we must still maintain the keenest vigilance with regard to the danger of war which it creates.
It preaches “peaceful coexistence,” or, better said: it wants to “force imperialism to accept peaceful coexistence,” but with quite another conception than Khrushchev’s:
... peace for which the people of the whole world thirst cannot be won if we beg it of imperialism instead of rallying all peoples to a struggle to defend world peace and oppose imperialist wars so as to tie the hands of the imperialist war-makers.
It disregards the need for an independent proletarian leadership in the colonial countries where the revolution is a living reality, but at the same time it flirts with the idea of a proletarian revolution in the imperialist countries, where it says:
According to the Leninist theory, the contradictions between the monopoly capitalist class and the broad masses of the people are irreconcilable and antagonistic in nature and constitute one of the root causes of modern wars. (...)
(...) He also said, “Only the proletarian, socialist revolution can bring mankind out of the blind alley created by imperialism and imperialist wars. Whatever the difficulties of the revolution and its possible temporary setbacks, or whatever waves of counter-revolution may arise, the final victory of the proletariat is inevitable.” Lenin further pointed out, “Civil wars are also wars. Whoever recognizes the class struggle cannot fail to recognize civil wars, which in every class society are the natural, and under certain conditions, inevitable continuation development and intensification of the class struggle. All the great revolutions prove this. To repudiate civil war, or to forget about it, would mean sinking into extreme opportunism and renouncing the socialist revolution.” Has there been any relaxation today in the contradictions between the monopoly capitalist class and the broad masses of the people in the imperialist countries? Has the imperialist system been transformed into “people’s capitalism” and even reached the point “nearest to the communist ideal of ‘prosperity for all’” so that the above mentioned principles of Lenin no longer hold good as claimed by the imperialists?
No doubt, the Red Flag’s article is – compared with the opportunism and revisionism of Khrushchev, who in the theoretical and political field is in reality a liquidator of the communist movement in the world – a great step forward. Only sectarians could neglect this positive side of the Chinese attitude towards imperialism. It reveals at the same time that there are great contradictions between the Chinese Communist and Russian bureaucratic leaderships, and that China is orientating towards a more revolutionary policy on a world scale. This can only be welcomed by every revolutionary Marxist.
But it would be light-minded and irresponsible to be satisfied with noting this. For the colonial peoples, and for the working class in the West, the policy of the Chinese Communist leadership continues to contain many dangers.
This becomes clear, even when the Red Flag “forgets” its speculations about “inter-imperialist rivalries,” and, at the end of its article, implicitly starts from the conception that a war would be a world class war, directed against the combined forces of revolution, whilst stating:
We have full confidence in being able to shatter the war plans of imperialism. But should we be afraid if the war maniacs, defying the will of the people of the world, unleash a war? Comrade Mao Tse-Tung has given a Marxist-Leninist reply to this question in his work On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People. He said: “We stand resolutely for peace and oppose war. But if the imperialists insist on unleashing another war, we should not be afraid of it. Our attitude on this question is the same as our attitude towards all disturbances: firstly, we are against it; secondly, we are not afraid of it. The First World War was followed by the birth of the Soviet Union with a population of 200 million. The Second World War was followed by the emergence of the socialist camp with a combined population of 900 million. If the imperialists should insist on launching a third world war, it is certain that several hundred million more will turn to socialism; then there will not be much room left in the world for the imperialists, while is quite likely that the whole structure of imperialism will utterly collapse.
If they are taken as such, every revolutionary could only applaud these words, insofar as their meaning is a revolutionary one. But at the same time they have an anti-revolutionary aspect, are contradictory, like the whole policy of the Chinese Communist Party. They correspond to similar, though less courageous, routine statements from the Soviet bureaucracy, which have the tendency to “threaten” the imperialists with the consequences of a war, in order to make them accept “peaceful coexistence.” Here the proletarian revolution (or better said: the threat of the proletarian revolution) is used only to serve the interests of the bureaucracy. Fundamentally, such a policy is in full agreement with the policy of Stalinism, which permanently subordinated everything to the interests of a privileged bureaucratic caste.
For the world working class, the necessity of overthrowing imperialism, in order to establish its own proletarian rule and a planned socialist economy all over the world, cannot be “postponed” to the catastrophic event of a new world war. If it is true, and it is true, that imperialism is preparing such a war, the world communist movement has more than ever the duty to fight such preparations effectively by the means of proletarian revolution: by disarming imperialism, by breaking it before it can drag along a great part of humanity with it in its downfall.
Never before in history have the exploited masses had to face such a dangerous, criminal, rotten enemy as imperialism. While it is true that the strength of the world revolutionary camp is constantly increasing, thanks to the heroism of the colonial peoples and the rapid economic development of the workers’ states, imperialism is nevertheless still a very real force on this globe, which we cannot yet exchange for another. “The historical experience of mankind shows that the ruling class will not give up state power of its own accord,” the Red Flag teaches in its article. Even though it refuses to drawn the necessary lessons from this, for the world working class and the fighting colonial peoples it should be a warning.
Only a world revolutionary strategy, aiming at the concrete downfall of imperialism in our epoch, by combining the strength of the workers’ states, the colonial revolution and the proletarian movement in the West, could open the perspectives of the transition of humanity to socialism without the calamity of a Third World War, or, if imperialism, in despair and in a last effort to react, should launch such a war, its immediate transformation into international civil war on the highest level.
History has still to give its final answer to the question whether the coming showdown between the combined forces of revolution and those of imperialism will take the form of an overall nuclear war, or whether imperialism, definitively weakened by the rising forces of revolution, would have to retreat to the defensive. There cannot be the slightest doubt, however, that imperialism is preparing for the first variant. It would have launched such a war already (and it set the time-limit of 1953 for it, as it revealed later on), if it had not been surprised by the rapidly increasing forces of revolution on the one hand, and the “generosity” of the Soviet bureaucracy in making concessions on the other hand.
Commemorating Lenin, the Red Flag should not have forgotten that Vladimir Ilyitch, drawing a perspective for the fight against the class enemy, always started from the worst variant as regards the strength and the intentions of the enemy. This is the only way to prepare victory.
“Know the enemy and know yourself, and you will win any battle,” is a Chinese saying, as we learn from the Red Flag. Alas, the Chinese Communist leadership still has many illusions about the “inter-imperialist rivalries” amongst the enemy; that is to say, it does not know the enemy well enough.
In spite of that, the saying is a good one. It strengthens our conviction that the irresistible fusion of the Fourth International with the rising revolutionary forces in the world will make the battle victorious. The rapidity of this process will be decisive for the question, whether imperialism will be compelled to change its perspective of nuclear war for the coming showdown into one of merely defensive fights. Contrary to the Red Flag, however, we do not want to lose our time, and to confuse the vanguard, by similar speculations. We know the enemy, and we face the problems by starting from its worst intentions – which, moreover, correspond with its present strategy and counter-revolutionary activity all over the world. If our “pessimism” should be rejected by the further course of history, so much the better! This would depend, however, upon the rapid conscious combination of the forces of the workers’ states, the colonial revolution, and the proletarian movements in the West.
No movement other than the Fourth International can provide the bases for it, and change it into an invincible force.
April 1960
 

S.: Anton Pannekoek Has Died (Spring 1960)



S. Santen  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Sal S.
Holland
Anton Pannekoek Has Died
(Spring 1960)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 9, Spring 1960, p. 68.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

In Wageningen, on April 28, Anton Pannekoek died at the age of 87 years. Though almost forgotten by the younger generations, for many years he had been an internationally known Marxist theoretician, especially before the First World War.
In 1902 he entered the Dutch Social-Democratic Workers Party (SDAP), and soon (together with Wijnkoop, Gorter, Henriette Roland Hoist, Frank van der Goes et al.) belonged to its Marxist left wing.
In 1906 he was appointed as a teacher at the Central Party School (Zentrale Parteischule) of the SPD, the German social-democratic party, and later on at the Arbeiter Hochschule (Workers University) of the same party in Bremen. In those years, as a teacher of the working class cadres, he worked under the leadership of Rosa Luxemburg.
He contributed to the German Marxist theoretical magazine Die Neue Zeit, and polemicized with Karl Kautsky about the question of the State, a discussion quoted by Lenin in State and Revolution in a way which was favorable to Anton Pannekoek. In this book, Lenin wrote about him:
“Pannekoek acted against Kautsky as a representative of that ‘left radical’ tendency which counted in its ranks Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Radek and others, and which, as a representative of revolutionary tactics, was united in the conviction that Kautsky was going over to the ‘Zentrum’ and that he was unprincipledly wavering between, Marxism and opportunism. The correctness of this opinion was completely confirmed by the war, when the tendency of the ‘Zentrum’ (which by mistake was called Marxist) of ‘Kautskyanism,’ exposed itself in its full horrible misery.” (Translated from the German edition)
During the First World War, Anton Pannekoek remained an internationalist. In 1919 he joined the Communist International. He participated in the left-wing tendency, developed by Gorter, which was criticized by Lenin and Trotsky at the Second World Congress of the Communist International, and by Lenin in his book on Left Wing Communism. In 1922 Pannekoek left the Third International, and, in reality, gave up his activity as a militant communist, whilst dedicating himself completely to his scientific work as an astronomer, in which field he also distinguished himself internationally.
He still wrote some ultra-left books. Under the name of Horner he attacked Lenin as a philosopher. In this book he tried to deny the working class character of the Soviet Union.
When Sneevliet, in 1936 – during the infamous Moscow Trials – asked Pannekoek to come out in defence of Leon D. Trotsky, Pannekoek refused to do so with the argument “that the revolutionary honour of Trotsky could not be smeared by the Trials.” It was then the well known communist mathematician Mannoury who, in Holland, was at the head of those revolutionary intellectuals who fought against the Stalinist slanders against Leon Trotsky and the Bolshevik Old Guard.
Anton Pannekoek was a typical representative of the Dutch Marxist school, about which Karl Kautsky, still being a revolutionary Marxist, once jokingly said to Henriette Roland Hoist, that he had set his hope in the Russian and Dutch Marxists. Having lost its intimate ties with German Marxism, however, in 1914, after the collapse of German social-democracy, the Dutch Marxist school began to develop a series of peculiarities, in which dogmatism began to predominate and which finally led to its disintegration.
Henriette Roland Hoist, who once belonged to those Marxist intellectuals, tried to explain their fate in poetical words by the contradiction between the broad horizons of their flat country and the narrowness of its frontiers. As long as the problems of Revolution belonged to the domain of theory, the school, represented by Pannekoek, was able to understand. It had no profound roots, however, in the world of catastrophes and revolutions, which began with the First World War, and which had only feeble echoes in a country like Holland. At that moment, Kautsky’s words appeared to be prophetic as regards Russian Marxism (though Kautsky had become a renegade then), and a joke as regards the Dutch Marxists.
But even in a joke, there is an element of truth. Before and during the First World War, the Dutch school made a valuable contribution to international Marxism: before the war by its fight against revisionism, during the war by its internationalism and by its solidarity with the Russian Revolution.
The degeneration of Marxist theory and practice under Stalin, delivered the final blow to the Dutch Marxist school. It was the Russian “school,” led by Leon D. Trotsky, which profoundly understood the ups and downs of Revolution, and which laid the basis for the victorious revival of revolutionary Marxism on a world scale, as it is embodied now in the programme and practice of the Fourth International.
This fact does not diminish the duty of the Fourth International to pay a last tribute to the memory of Anton Pannekoek, who dedicated the most fruitful part of his life to the defence of revolutionary Marxism.
 

Santen: Dutch Trotskyists Greet Socialist Workers Party (28 December 1945)



S. Santen  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Sal Santen
Dutch Trotskyists Greet Socialist Workers Party
(28 December 1945)

From The Militant, Vol. X No. 9, 2 March 1946, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Amsterdam, December 28, 1945
Socialist Workers Party,
New York
Dear Friends:
The Congress of the Revolutionary Communist Party, section of the Fourth International in Holland, founded on the 23rd of December 1945, is sending its fraternal greetings to your party.
We learned of your activity in connection with the strike of the General Motors workers, which struggle weakens the heart of world imperialism.
We know that the General Motors have many imperialist interests in Indonesia and that therefore the strike means an immediate support to the Indonesian masses in their heroic fight for freedom against the Dutch imperialists.
We welcome the common fight of the American and Dutch workers against imperialism. We welcome the common activity with the oppressed colonial people.
We send you our warm greetings.
For the Revolutionary Communist Party of Holland,
S. Santen


Santen: How Washington Prepared for "General War on Communism" (Winter 1959/60)



S. Santen  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Sal Santen
Review Article
How Washington Prepared for
“General War on Communism”
(Winter 1959/60)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 8, Winter 1959–60, pp. 52–57.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Arms and the State
by Harvey C. Mansfield and Walter Millis
New York
“‘Disengagement’ may be a meaningful term in the Middle East; perhaps, by a narrow definition of its meaning, in Europe but hardly for the Soviet Union and the United States,” says Mr. Stein in his introduction to Arms and the State, published by the 20th Century Fund, New York, 1958.
It is not necessary to have read the book to have few illusions about “disengagement” in the Middle East, and Europe too. But one thing is certain: there is not one single person in the leading American administrative and military circles who has any “tendency” to disengagement. Their main preoccupation is, how to halt the revolutionary tide in the world, and to drive it back by all means. Arms and the State, based on research in government files, Congressional hearings, military writings, presidential memoirs etc., gives, willingly or not, clear proof of this.
The first part of the book, on the pre-war decade, written by Harvey C. Mansfield, faithfully follows the official pattern of pre-war American foreign policy. Only when Mansfield, though rarely, tries to look “behind” it, his chapters get some interest. Thus we learn that in the USA until the autumn of 1942 “no firm strategical plan existed.” It is of importance to note this, not only for having an idea of the empiricism of the ruling American circles both administrative and military, but also in order to get a clear idea of the enormous changes which have taken place since then.
This empiricism did not only complicate military planning to the utmost. It was characteristic for all fields of activity:
In this course the service chiefs were only emulating their chief, the President. For Roosevelt too, though he was ready enough to proclaim bold production goals in big round numbers, had little patience to follow through the details and problems of their achievement. He is recorded as once telling Marshall that “planners were always conservative and saw all the difficulties, and that more could usually be done than they were willing to admit.” [1] Military strategists, in turn, called supply problems logistics and relegated them to others to solve. Top strategists, in uniform or not, regarded production and supply as a lower order of activity except when shortfalls or mistakes directly jeopardized specific operations (p. 88).
What an enormous difference with the conception of Leon Trotsky, who, when leading the Red Army, said in a speech to the Third World Congress of the Communist International:
Let me state quite candidly that I have had a great deal more to do with the Red Army’s statistics than with its sword [...] I have had a great deal more to do with counting up the numbers of boots, trousers, and with your permission drawers, than with wielding the sword. Generally speaking I believe that there is no contradiction whatever between swords and statistics, and that statistics relating to military equipment play a very big role in war. Napoleon used to say: “Dieu est toujours avec les gros bataillons” – “God is always on the side of the heaviest battalions.” And statistics as you know, also takes in the strength of battalions. (The First Five Years of the Comintern, p. 227).
It is not necessary, however, to go back to Trotsky for making a comparison between the empiricism of the imperialist rulers and the enormous advances of planning in the workers states. Even under the catastrophic leadership of Stalin, in the first years of the war, Russian policy, based on a plan, seemed a miracle to the Americans:
Only the Russians seemed to know consistently and specifically what they wanted. The United States needed to transform its attitudes and traditions about war and foreign affairs to correspond to its new role (p. 92).
This, in reality, is the meaning of the book. To show how the US leading circles are wrestling in order to “correspond to its new role”; empirically once more, but nevertheless arriving at a plan, as it moves at the head of a world coalition, directed against the workers states.
During the second imperialist war, such preoccupations only existed in an embryonic form. The main direct enemies, in that period, for American imperialism were Germany and Japan. The United States’ alliance with the USSR, after Hitlers’ attack on Russia in 1941, completely flowed from the “necessity” to beat these imperialist rivals:
Thereafter (June 1941), and almost to the end, Roosevelt and the Joint Chiefs continued to regard the Russian fighting contribution as essential to the defeat of Germany, and of Japan later also; they continued to be apprehensive until after the Russian victory at Stalingrad in the winter of 1942–43 that Russia might be forced to a separate peace; and they continued accordingly their firm support of Russian lend-lease.
 
The American Leaders
It would be a mistake to underestimate the capacity of the American ruling classes to produce leaders fit “for the new role.” Marshall was such a man, no doubt by far superior to Eisenhower, who is a compromiser much more than a coordinator:
Roosevelt’s regard for Marshall was perhaps best expressed in Cairo, at the time Eisenhower was selected for the supreme command in Europe against the known preference of Churchill and Stalin and the strong recommendations of Stimson and Hopkins, very simply in the President’s words as Marshall recalled them: “I feel I could not sleep at night with you out of the country” (p. 111). (Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, p. 803.)
Eisenhower’s capacities when “out of the country” in Europe – proved to be of quite another, inferior character. Unscrupulous compromiser as he is, whilst starting from the interests of American imperialism (his task today is to find a “compromise” between the military and civil interests), he was not hindered by some “democratic conception” when looking for allies. It was he who put Darlan in charge of French civil affairs, and later gave the following explanation:
I believe in a theater commander doing these things without referring them back to his home Government and then waiting for approval. If a General makes a mistake, he can be repudiated and kicked out and disgraced. But a Government cannot repudiate and kick out and disgrace itself not, at any rate, in wartime [2] (p. 120).
At any rate, his conception did not differ much from Roosevelt’s, who at the end of the war
thought a military government was needed in France; he expected a civil war there when troops were withdrawn, and wanted no provisional government in office and making reprisals until conditions permitted free and orderly elections (p. 123).
It would be easy to give more examples of the completely counter-revolutionary, reactionary conception of the “democratic” American ruling circles in that period. Compared to the present role of American imperialism, that of “super-Wrangel no. 1,” to use Trotsky’s words about Hitler, there is a qualitative change. How this change took place is the subject of Part II of the book, written by Walter Millis, which gives a rather vivid (though far from complete) picture of the efforts of the American state machinery “to correlate its attitudes about war and foreign affairs to its new role.”
Military Conquer the State
A great deal of part II is dedicated to the increasing (even dominating) role of military men in American administration and policy.
Neither civil nor military policy could exist and prosper in isolation. They were now deeply interlinked, not only in theory but in human fact, by a host of already existing joint boards, committees, policy-forming groups, in which professional soldiers, civilians temporarily in uniform and civilians still in their gray-flannel suits combined to make policy decisions both great and small (p. 142).
Such was the situation in 1945. At that moment, the book relates, there were “three major and urgent issues’”:

The administration of the occupied territories, in which “commanding generals were final sources of civil authority”;
 
The atomic bomb, the “future management of which” demanded that “political and military considerations must be closely integrated,” and
 
The reorganization of the military establishment in the following sense:

We should adopt the organizational structure best suited to fostering coordination between the military and the rest of the government. Our military policy, for example, should be completely consistent with our foreign policy (Truman, Memoirs, Vol. 2, pp. 48–49, Arms and the State, p. 154).
 
The Atomic Bomb
In 1945, already, the atomic bomb played an enormous role in American foreign policy. Its use against Japan was much more a threat against Russia than a means to make Japan capitulate. Stalin may have welcomed its criminal “usefulness” in the cases of Nagasaki and Hiroshima; the American politicians had quite other preoccupations And so, no doubt, had the Russian. On September 11, 1945 (a month after the dropping of the bomb), Stimson wrote to Truman:
In many quarters it [the atomic weapon] has been interpreted as a substantial offset to the growth of Russian influence on the continent. We can be certain that the Soviet Government has sensed this tendency and the temptation will be strong for the Soviet political and military leaders to acquire this weapon in the shortest possible time [...] The result will be a secret armament race of a rather desperate character. There is evidence that such activity may have already commenced. (On Active Service, p. 643, Arms and the State, p. 157).
And not without reason, Stimson pronounced the expectation that the relations with Russia “may be perhaps irretrievably embittered by the way in which we approach the solution of the bomb with Russia.”
The way the “approach” was made is too well known to everybody. Stimson resigned completely, as his warnings did not fit with the tendency of American imperialism to prepare for an “approach” of quite another character.
The implications of the “bomb” were several. It accentuated the influence of the military on the American state apparatus to the extreme, while undermining democratic bourgeois traditions. The House “was less suspicious of the professional military services than of their appointed civilian superiors”:
A similar attitude was reflected in the unbounded confidence which the congressmen were coming to place in the professional police of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. One could trust the professional soldiers and policemen; one could not trust the civilian administration to have sufficient regard either for the national security or the preservation of a free enterprise economy (p. 168).
 
The National Security Act and the Cold War
In 1947 the National Security Act was introduced. By this “the post-war reorganization of the American military, diplomatic and political system was substantially complete”.
It put the capstone, so to speak, on the new governmental structure deriving from the experiences of the Second World War. Subsequent developments were to flow, not from the experiences of the war but from the harsh lessons of the post-war period to which it led (p. 178).
In spite of its weaknesses, which would appear later on, “as it could not transfer the real world into one of order and precision,” it armed American imperialism for the cold war.
Among the many problems which worried the American rulers so intensely, the revolutionary development of China was most burning. What to do against it? Dean Acheson had reported in 1945, already, that
while the policy of refusing in any way to cooperate with the Chinese Communists was “diplomatically correct,” it was also practically “dangerous.” He felt that “if this situation continues [...] the probable outbreak of disastrous civil conflict will be accelerated and chaos in China will be inevitable (p. 190).
Ambassador Patrick J. Hurley, in his turn, sharply opposed a policy of “cooperation with the Chinese Communist,” and for this he based himself upon ... Stalin:
Hurley returned to Chungking by way of Moscow; there he received from Stalin himself what Hurley thought were assurances that Russia, wanting only a stable government in China, was uninterested in the Chinese Communists and would firmly support Chiang Kai-Shek. This seems to have convinced the Ambassador that there was no need to make concessions to Mao Tse-Tung in order to avert “disastrous civil conflict” (p. 191).
Happily, both Hurley and Stalin appear to have been mistaken, as “nearly everyone seems to have been mistaken in this crisis, at once so vast and so vaguely apprehended for what it really was.”
Moreover, the situation was “complicated” by the desire of the soldiers to go home. A proposal on November 20, 1945, of the secretaries of State, War and Navy, “to get the Japanese out of Manchuria and establish the authority of the Nationalist government over the whole country” was “obscured” as: “They were under heavy pressure to ‘bring the boys home’” (p. 192).
Under those conditions Byrnes finally suggested “the wise course would be to try to force the Chinese government and the Chinese Communist to get together on a compromise basis.” And he added that it might even be well “to tell Russia what we intend to do and to try to line them up with this policy” (p. 194, The Forrestal Diaries, p. 113).
Wedemeyer the soldier, however was of the opinion that they “either have to support the Generalissimo in full-scale warfare, with many more American troops than anyone dreamed of committing, or in effect surrender the colossal population of China to Communist conquest.” According to Millis, “our total policymaking machinery – military, diplomatic, administrative and legislative – was simply incapable of facing and clearly resolving such a dilemma.” And, whilst referring to the concrete “communist conquest of China,” he formulates: “It was just such failures in basic policy-formulation which it was hoped that the National Security Act would correct.”
 
The Crises of 1948
The complete disdain of American government and military leaders for “planning,” still so evident in the course of the Second World War, had changed rapidly. It was no longer possible to face the problems of the world in a purely empirical way. America had to give “leadership” to the “threatened free world.” In accordance with this mission, people also changed:
The top administrators of American civil and military policy in these years were all friends; they shared a common apprehension of the Soviet Union and a common conviction that the answers were to be found primarily in foresight, planning and cooperation (p. 202).
The necessity of it became clearer from day to day. Before even the Policy Planning Staff (set up by Marshall in 1947, and a forerunner of the National Security Council Staff) could meet, on April 29, 1947, “the Secretary of State demanded from Kennan a policy adequate to meet the impending crises of Greece and Turkey, of a collapsing Europe and a collapsed China”:
The next day the Secretary called Kennan in and said he wanted the policy within ten days or two weeks. One result was the “jelling” of what was later known as the Marshall Plan (p. 202).
The extreme rapidity with which the American imperialist governors learned to react (a “policy within ten days or two weeks”) in order to face the problems, gave clear proof of their decided intention to resist to the utmost any tendency to “capitulation.” “But in spite of the new machinery of the National Security Act, there was no easy way in which to reconnect the two,” military demand and civilian economy.
In order to “grapple with the underlying issues confided to them by the Security Act,” a Conference of the Joint Chiefs was planned:
The conference was to meet at the isolated Key West naval base on March 11, 1948; before it could do so, however, there intervened a series of startling and ominous events which were to lend to its deliberations an unexpected urgency. Our efforts to defeat Communist rebellion in Greece were going badly. In early February the Communists in South Korea had precipitated a wave of strikes, riots and sabotage which, though not widely noticed in the United States, was menacing for the future. On February 24, 1948, democratic Czecho-Slovakia was captured by her internal Communist conspiracy in a coup which did profoundly shock the United States and the whole non-Communist world. And on March 5 there arrived a top-secret telegram from General Lucius D. Clay, commanding in Berlin:

Within the last few weeks, I have felt a subtle change in Soviet attitude which I cannot define but which now gives me a feeling that it (war) may come with dramatic suddenness (The Forrestal Diaries, p. 387, Millis, p. 210).

Faced with this situation, the Joint Chiefs agreed, amongst others, “that the President should ask for a supplemental military appropriation to bring the armed forces as a whole to a state more nearly commensurate with the ominous “realities of the world” (Forrestal, p. 393, Millis p. 212).
How many times since then will they have repeated such “requests”?
Everything was moving then. In the midst of the Key West conference “a telegram was handed in announcing that Ernest Bevin, the British Foreign Minister, was proposing the expansion of the Brussels Pact (which was signed on Friday) into a larger structure of Atlantic Security.” And indeed, one year later, the NATO pact was signed.
The Key West conference appeared to be a turning point:
On Monday afternoon Forrestal found the President prepared to make a strong statement favoring some measure of rearmament and a revival of the draft. The Secretary had gone to Key West mainly with the idea of beating the Joint Chiefs’ heads together on the technical issues of service functions; he returned to find that the Key West decisions were expected to provide the basis for an immediate strategic plan to meet the suddenly urgent immediate issues (p. 213).
And on March 16, after studying the Clay telegram, the Central Intelligence Agency predicted “that war was not probable over another sixty days.” On the last day of the same month, however, “there had come the first hint of what was to become the Berlin blockade.” The very same day a meeting took place with Forrestal, the Service Secretaries and Chiefs of Staff, in which “Several possible courses of action were considered, starting with an idea that the President might send a message direct to Stalin threatening war” (p. 221).
With such perspectives, the Berlin crisis was faced. For the first time, American imperialism knew how to react promptly to what it considered to be the “Russian threat”:
While mastering the blockade the United States achieved at least three fundamental decisions. The first was to found the military security of the United States upon a military defense of Europe. [...] The second strategic decision was that Nationalist China could not be saved. [...]
[...] The third basic strategic decision arrived at by the latter months of 1948 was never clearly stated and many of its aspects are still obscure. But it amounted to committing American defense and foreign policy ultimately to the atomic bomb [...].
The Formation of NATO
On the formation of the NATO, in 1949, the book gives only a little information. As is clear from the above, it was a creation of American imperialism, and “in the event of war” there should be a “Supreme Allied Commander-in-Chief (West)” who should be an American (p. 237).
It started from the conception, however, that “the defense of the West had to be unitary.” By shaping the NATO, American imperialism had succeeded in unifying the imperialist world, and to dictate to it her policy of “containment” in her own terms. By doing so, quantity changed into quality. And though still much had to be done to forge the NATO into the force it was expected to become, its realisation was of fundamental significance for the aggressive policy of the world imperialist bloc since then, under the leadership of the United States.
Much earlier than the Americans had expected, the Soviet Union “had the bomb.” To the men in government “the shock was extreme.” “They knew that at a stroke the whole military-political situation had been transformed”:
There was to ensue one of the truly great debates of our times over military and foreign policy, perhaps more significant to history than the great debates over the League of Nations, over the approach to the Second World War or over the United Nations. But in two ways it was extraordinary: it was almost wholly secret, hidden in the upper recesses of government; while its decisions, insofar as they were arrived at, were administrative rather than political in character. The Congress, the press and the public – the great organs of modern democratic government – were only peripheral parties to an argument upon which the whole future of American and Western society might well turn [...].
[....] To thoughtful men, whether in uniform or out of it, the announcement of September 23, 1949, presented a crisis – intellectual, moral and technical – far transcending the usual crises of international affairs [...] (pp. 245–6).
Whilst referring to the hearings In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (spring 1954), Walter Millis calls it a “tragic record of the actual processes of policy formation in the modern age”:
it records with precision the manner in which some of the more basic decisions of our time are arrived at: at the same time making clear the extent to which all these responsible officers had to operate in secret, to make their decisions in secret, to arrive at judgments on which they knew the nation’s if not civilization’s future might depend without the political officer’s normal support in public argument and expression (p. 247).
The conclusion of all those secret debates and decisions in the “bulwark of democracy” was the H-bomb. “The Russians had knocked our strategic position into a cocked hat; we had lost our “lead” in atomic energy, and the best way to regain it was at once to produce the thermonuclear weapon.” In 1952 the terrible weapon was ready, indeed.
“The first Soviet thermonuclear explosion took place in August 1953; the first “droppable” American bomb was fired in the following March ...
“Thus in the fall of 1949 and the winter of 1950 the nation had faced a major transformation in the world scene and its administrators had secretly made or prepared drastic changes in military and foreign policies.”
One of the main consequences of it, for America itself, was a further undermining of the democratic institutions:
The image arose of a vast and lethal fog of Communist conspiracy, infiltration, espionage and betrayal, at work everywhere in the national community and especially in the Democratic Administration. That this was seriously to distort the more normal processes of policy formation in the military and diplomatic fields can scarcely be doubted. Tightened “security” measures were to divorce the public even further from participation in major policy issues, of which they might now be kept in almost total ignorance (p. 258).
The American rulers themselves had prepared the field for the sinister McCarthy ...
 
The Korean War
“The Korean War was to bring the most dramatic, the most complex and most illuminating issue of civil-military relationships since the end of the Second World War.”
The great changes in the American civilian/military apparatus began to pay. Washington was prepared for prompt intervention but, as would become clear during the Korean War, not yet on a global scale.
According to Millis, who follows here the very doubtful official version, “the attack of June 24, 1950, upon South Korea came as a virtually complete surprise.” He adds to it, however:
The possibility, of course, had been long foreseen. Only a day or two before, John Foster Dulles (then a special representative of Dean Acheson’s State Department) had been inspecting the South Korean defenses along the 38th Parallel (p. 260).
In Blair House (as Truman revealed in his Memoirs later on), there was “complete acceptance” of the fact that “Whatever had to be done to meet this aggression had to be done” (p. 262).
If both military intelligence and political foresight may seem to have been deficient, the crisis when it did break was handled with courage, skill and effectiveness. Truman maneuvered promptly and adroitly, both to throw in military force and to secure UN authorization for doing so. State and Defense functioned smoothly and cooperatively to bring forth agreed recommendations; Congress raised no objections; public opinion seemed overwhelmingly behind the decisions taken, and Acheson was later to think it probable that he might have got a war resolution by acclamation, and perhaps regretted that he had not risked the attempt (p. 265).
Whatever may have been the disillusion for American imperialism in the course of the Korean War, at the outbreak of it it was decided to go to the end. Hesitations, then, come from the side of its allies, before all Great Britain, who feared that an extension of the “conflict” would spread the civil war to the rest of Asia.
Our UN allies were already nervous over the idea that the Korean police action might be expanded into a general crusade against communism in the Far East that would precipitate the third war (p. 271).
The American government, then, tried to maneuver its allies in such a way, that, whilst taking into consideration their argument, the Korean war would become a direct threat against the Chinese Revolution:
If there was no indication or threat of entry of Soviet or Chinese Communist elements in force, the National Security Council recommended that General MacArthur was to extend his operations north of the parallel and to make plans for the occupation of North Korea. However, no ground operations were to take place north of the 38th parallel in the event of Soviet or Chinese Communist entry (Truman, Memoirs, cited by Millis).
The gentlemen preferred to neglect the fact that “the entry of Chinese Communist elements in force” might be provoked, by the extension of the operations North of the parallel. Not without reason, Millis comments:
If Washington was to commit our troops to the “occupation of North Korea” then it should have been prepared to accept the possible consequences, already foreseen; if the risks were too great, then the commitment should not have been authorized (p. 274).
In reality, Washington accepted the consequences. If it began to waver, later on, it was owing to the dynamic force of the heroic Chinese soldiers, to the moral breakdown of the American army in Korea, and to the pressure of the Allies.
Placed before those facts, Washington had to change its plans.
MacArthur’s later complaints of his inability to secure clear policy directives from Washington were not without substance (p. 274).
At any rate, Washington could not be unaware of what was at stake:
Both in Washington and Lake Success there was much division of opinion. Our UN allies were already concerned lest we convert the war in Korea into a general war on communism. The general whom we had appointed as UN commander had rather plainly indicated his leading toward such a course (p. 276).
Then a meeting took place between Truman and MacArthur at Wake Island, in which the latter (no doubt against his own conviction) denied the possibility of Chinese entry, whilst Truman (all too glad) accepted this statement in order to leave a free hand to MacArthur, who moreover stated his “firm belief that all resistance would end, in both North and South Korea, by Thanksgiving. This, he said, would enable him to withdraw the Eighth Army to Japan by Christmas” (Truman, Memoirs, Millis, p. 279).
 
The Chinese Reply
The Chinese army did not wait long with its reply. Even before MacArthur was aware of it, “they had passed the Yalu many days before and were actually massing in the midst of his own forces. The “trap” had not been avoided; “the real trap had not yet even been detected” (p. 287).
And then it became crystal clear that American imperialism once again had by far underestimated the enormous force of the Chinese Revolution. It had to drop its ambition “to convert the war in Korea into a general war on communism,” and, for the same reason, it had to drop MacArthur. It became clear to Washington, that for “a general war on communism,” it had to prepare better:
Korea could be, and apparently was being, held with the available bits and pieces of the World War II military machine. But to hold the free world itself it seemed suddenly urgent to convert the new NATO alliance into an effective instrument of defense; to raise and re-equip American military forces for its support and, even more, to raise the American military production potential) to a point at which we would be reasonably prepared to face the possibility of a third general war (p. 280).
MacArthur was sent into the wood, only in order to prepare better for what he had propagated. He was replaced by Ridgway, who was
in these hours touring the front lines of the 8th Army. It is not surprising that he was shocked by the state of morale which he encountered. It was an army of beaten, apprehensive men who had lost not only their aggressiveness but their alertness. They were ‘not patrolling as they should’; they knew nothing about the enemy before them; they did not know the terrain; they were not preparing rear lines of defense against the attack which everyone expected to come, and they did not know what they were fighting for or why they should be expected to continue (p. 306).
This was the greatest victory of the Chinese Revolution. It had succeeded in breaking the morale of the troops of the combined imperialist powers. Revolution was victorious over counter-revolution.
 
The Global Problem
In the last part, dealing with The Global Problem and The New Look, the book loses much of its interest. Such important problems as the State intervention in industry in favor of armament, and the radical changes in budget, are treated too superficially for having much interest.
As for German rearmament, it might be interesting to quote:
German rearmament, in short, was the condition on which the military command would permit the essentially civilian and diplomatic NATO policy to go forward (p. 338).
But such dominating facts as the Russian lead in ‘’missiles” is only mentioned with a few words, as are Indo-China, Formosa, Suez, because “the facts of these episodes and isuues are still hidden in the top-secret papers.”
For this reason, it is not worth while to follow the book to the end. It would still be possible, to find here and there some interesting details, but there is no line in it.
So we return to the middle of the book, in which Walter Millis says on page 260:
The events of late 1949 and early 1950 were a case history in the reaction of a modern democracy to a revolutionary, but long-range, shift in the international power balance. Korea was a case history in its reaction to an immediate military crisis. The value of the book, though written from the point of the view of the enemy, lies in the fact that it gives an interesting look into those years, in which the “revolutionary, but long-range shift in the international power balance” took place in such a breath taking tempo in favor of world revolution, and to the disadvantage of world imperialism.
It was then, that American imperialism set 1953 as its “target date” for its counter-attack against the revolutionary forces in the world:
In the panic atmosphere of late 1950 the Joint Chiefs had formulated their huge expansion plans on the estimate that by 1953 the Soviet Union would be reaching the peak of its military capability, and that this should consequently be taken as our own target date (p. 396) (Our emphasis).
It will always remain to the honor of the IVth International, that, at the outbreak of the Korean War, it understood immediately the profoundly revolutionary significance of the great changes in the world since 1948. Against the hue and cry of many revolutionaries who were frightened in that period by the complexity of the situation, it concluded that American imperialism would not be prepared to leave the scene of history in favor of revolution, without a life-and-death fight, that it had taken the lead of a world imperialist coalition with the conscious intention to prepare from that moment on for war against the combined forces of world revolution, the Workers States, the Colonial Revolution and the working class movement. It did not hesitate to say that war became possible from 1953, as American imperialism would be ready then for launching it (and indeed, as we see from the above, 1953 was their “target date”).
For the Fourth International, this correct analysis of the real situation in the world, did not flow from pessimism. On the contrary, it understood that the war preparations by American imperialism were a consequence of the enormously increased strength of world revolution, and not a consequence of its defeats, as had been the case before World Wars One and Two. For this reason it predicted, that such war preparations (counter-revolutionary in essence) would give rise to new revolutionary shocks in the world, and that a war, if it would become a reality, owing to its character (being in a distorted form and in final analysis the showdown between world revolutionary and counter-revolutionary forces) would and should be transformed from the start into the world civil war against imperialism.
Arms and the State, based on a wealth of material and written by partisans of the American imperialist policy, confirms this analysis even in details.
From the book we understand the enormous force, the will to survive, of the American, ruling classes. Their flexibility has reached a remarkable level, and the way they knew promptly how to react to the enormous changes in the world, every time they reproduced themselves, is unique in the history of imperialism. And indeed, they succeeded in “transforming their attitudes and traditions about war and foreign affairs to correspond to their new role.” There cannot be the slightest doubt about it.
In spite of this, the rising revolutionary forces in the world have given proof of being stronger than the capability of the enemy to halt and defeat them, although American imperialism has not hesitated – since 1953, the “target date” – to bring humanity to the brink of war. In his introduction, Harold Stein concludes:
But Truman and Eisenhower, and all of us alive today, also live with the new problems of that terrifying new world we never made, or at least never meant to make.
And indeed, the time is over when the imperialists “made this world” according to their will. What is “terrifying” now for them, the rise of world revolutionary forces, will be the world of tomorrow. Neither “arms,” nor “the state” will be able to prevent it from becoming a reality.

Footnotes
1. Cline, Washington Command Post, p. 259.
2. Ibidem, pp. 648–655.
 

anten: On the Problems of the Colonial Revolution (Spring 1959)




S. Santen  |  Trotskyist Writers  |  ETOL Home Page

 
Sal Santen
On the Problems of the Colonial Revolution
(Spring 1959)

From Fourth International (Amsterdam), No. 6, Spring 1959, pp. 46–48.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

As Approached by China ...
It cannot be doubted that the sympathy and solidarity of the Chinese Communists, leaders included, with the struggle of the colonial masses in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, is sincere and profound. The struggles of the Cuban and Congolese gave rise to nationwide demonstrations in China. Recently a mass rally was held in Peking to demonstrate China’s solidarity with the cause of the Cameroons, etc. Support was given to the people of Oman. There is sincere concern about the fate of Vietnamese and Korean prisoners of war in the hands of the enemy.
Especially since the victory in Cuba of Fidel Castro over the brutal dictatorship of Batista, the Chinese Communists show a lively interest in the fight of the Latin American masses against American imperialism. On February 21 the People’s Daily devoted an article to the Latin American liberation struggle.
It should be said immediately: there is a gulf between China’s practical solidarity with the struggle of the colonial masses and the theoretical approach to the problems of the colonial revolution by the Chinese CP leadership. It is as if their own experience of bitter defeats owing to the policy of class collaboration in 1925–27 has not taught the Chinese Communist leaders at all, in spite of the example of the victory of 1949, possible thanks only to the war to the end against Chiang Kai-Shek.
After analyzing the hatred of the Latin American masses towards American imperialism, the article comes to the conclusion that the formation of a national united front is characteristic of the present anti-United States struggle in Latin America. This front, according to the People’s Daily, is based on the alliance of the national bourgeoisie with the workers, peasants, and petty-bourgeoisie. It says:
Though the national bourgeoisie of Latin America is dependent on United States monopoly capital, so the alliance between them is transient, while the contradictions between them are permanent. In recent years, anti-imperialist, especially anti-United States imperialist, sentiments have grown among the national bourgeoisie, because they have suffered heavy blows from United States imperialism and been influenced by the mounting anti-United States struggle of the mass of the people. Although the national bourgeoisie is fearful of the growing political activity of the workers and peasants, in view of its sharp contradictions with United States imperialism, it is compelled to co-operate with the people. On this basis a national united front is gradually being formed in Latin America. [Our italics.] It is a matter of fact that the national bourgeoisies in Latin America are striving for independence from imperialism. It is a normal tendency, to be observed in the colonial and dependent countries everywhere in the world. To draw from it the conclusion, however that the national bourgeoisie “is compelled to cooperate with the people,” is – to put it mildly – a bit euphemistic. The truth is that the national bourgeoisies have tried, and to a certain extent continue to try, to use the anti-imperialist struggles of the masses as a means to obtain concessions from imperialism, but only in their own national bourgeois interest. At the very moment the struggle of the masses goes beyond the class interests of the national bourgeoisie, i e, begins to become a danger for the national bourgeoisie itself, the latter does not hesitate a single moment to call on imperialism for aid against the struggling masses.
The Latin American masses have a brief but very rich experience in this field. In Argentina, the “cooperation” of Peron, and later on of Frondizi, with the people, ended at the very moment when the masses, through their struggle, began to endanger the bourgeois regime. In Bolivia the MNR, brought to power by the revolutionary struggle of the workers and poor peasants, has become an agency of imperialism in order to prevent the formation of a workers’ and peasants’ government by the masses themselves. In Latin America there are already numerous examples of the same character.
While the Latin American workers and poor peasants have every reason to be in complete solidarity with the Chinese revolution, and to welcome its uninterruped development in China itself, they should be aware at the same time that the policy advocated for them by the Chinese leaders is a mortally dangerous one. The task of the Latin American masses, in order to prepare victory, is to liberate themselves from the national bourgeois leaderships, to find the way to independent class action, as the only means to follow the Chinese example: to take power and to break the imperialist domination.
Though the Chinese approach to the Latin American revolution is Stalinist in essence, it can be said in favor of the Chinese Communist Party that finally – contrary to 1925–27 – it followed in China another, independent path which ensured the victory of the Chinese revolution. Its lack of understanding of the revolutionary problems of Latin America demonstrates its pragmatism and empiricism. It would be false, however, to conclude from it that the Chinese CP attitude flows from the desire to prevent the Latin American masses from taking power, in order to maintain “peaceful coexistence.” It simply repeats the Stalinist wisdoms, without taking any notice of the disastrous consequences such a policy would have for the Latin American masses.
 
... And Indonesia
The attitude of the PKI (the Indonesian Communist Party) toward the problems of the Indonesian revolution is also Stalinist, Menshevik, to the core. Compared to the Chinese approach to the Latin American revolution, however, it is much more dangerous. China is far away from Latin America. The Latin American workers’ vanguard is not waiting for an article in the People’s Daily, in spite of their solidarity with China, in order to work out an adequate policy.
The policy of the PKI, however, has its direct influence upon the struggle of the Indonesian masses themselves. The leadership of the PKI is a cynical one, which received its “education” entirely in the school of Stalinism, in Moscow itself. Aidit, general secretary of the PKI, is an adept of Stalin. He knows his way in the Moscow hierarchy better than in his own party. If the Indonesian Communist rank and file, is inspired by the Chinese revolution, and this cannot be doubted, the PKI leadership is completely faithful to the Soviet bureaucracy.
In the interest of “peaceful coexistence,” the PKI leadership has at any cost prevented the masses from taking power. Its cooperation with the national bourgeoisie does not even have the appearance of being in the interest of the national revolution. When the workers last year occupied the Dutch factories and enterprises, the PKI ordered them to return them to the Indonesian army, headed by Nasution, an anti-communist.
Thanks to the aid of the PKI leadership, the Indonesian Djuanda government succeeded in “restoring order.” Having obtained this unexpected success, the Indonesian national bourgeoisie is doing everything to concentrate state power in its hands, at the cost of the revolutionary masses.
Under those circumstances, Sukarno’s “principles” about “guided democracy” are a real weapon in the hands of the Indonesian bourgeoisie. They weaken the role of the Indonesian mass movement in political life and strengthen Sukarno’s “independent” position as “arbiter.” While in the past Sukarno’s Bonapartist position was steadily undermined by the strength and combativity of the mass movement on the one hand, the weakness of the national bourgeoisie on the other hand, “guided democracy” intends to lay the foundations for “stable” Bonapartism in Indonesia. It guarantees even the political position of the army as a “functional group” within the state.
A genuine communist party, with a passion for preparing the masses for taking power, would, of course, launch a life-and-death struggle against “guided democracy.” Even from the formal democratic point of view it would have had to warn the masses about the consequences of it, as being directed against themselves.
Not so the PKI. On February 24th it issued a statement saying that it would accept restoration of the 1945 Constitution “only on condition that it were done within the scope of, and to carry out, guided democracy and the concepts of President Sukarno 100%.” It had supported Sukarno’s concepts and the proposal for guided democracy from the very beginning. Guided democracy was the way to carry out fully the President’s concepts. In implementing guided democracy, a democratic and constitutional approach should be provided for Sukarno, so that he could give competent leadership in legislative and executive affairs. The return to the 1945 Constitution meant opening such a way for the President, it pointed out. So far the PKI. It should be stressed that the 1945 Constitution authorizes the President to govern by decrees!
The submission of the Indonesian mass movement to the interests of the national bourgeoisie could not be posed in a clearer way. There is no reason to be surprised about it. If one starts from the need to “cooperate” with the national bourgeoisie, the ruling force in the country, the way to submission is only a gradual one.
 
The Future of the Colonial Revolution
It is not by chance that we have made this comparison between the Chinese and the Indonesian approach to the problems of the colonial revolution. We repeat: no doubt the Chinese Communist leadership started from other intentions than the PKI leadership. The Chinese CP leadership has no genuine interest in preventing the Latin American masses from taking power, whereas the PKI leadership consciously restrains the Indonesian masses from taking power.
But in politics, as we learned from Marx, good intentions are not enough. Decisive are the effects of the policy one advocates.
And as such there is no difference between the Chinese and the Indonesian approach.
For revolutionary Marxists the conclusion is clear. With the policy of Stalinism it is impossible to secure new, decisive, socialist victories of the colonial revolution. Therefore an independent class policy is needed, which succeeds in uniting the broad masses against both imperialism and the national bourgeoisies.
The preparation of such a policy cannot be left to chance. If the Chinese Communists, after all their experience of defeat and victory, have not succeeded in mastering a clear understanding of the colonial revolution, how could one expect such an understanding from the masses themselves without the conscious political intervention of the revolutionary Marxist vanguard?
The future of the colonial revolution, it cannot be stressed enough, depends more than ever upon its impregnation by revolutionary Marxism, i.e., the Fourth International.
 

