


The great wit of the bourgeoisie, George Bernard Shaw, has discovered a new love. Before the war It was the Fabian Society, the pinkest of all pink organizations. During the war he served God and Empire. Recently his love was the Soviet Union, whose hotels at last had hot water, and whose trains at last ran. And now it is Herr Hitler.
“Describing Hitler as ‘a very able man’ Mr. Shaw said he had the genius to realize ‘that Germany had been kicked long enough.’ (New York Times)
We cannot blame Mr. Shaw. He always was just one thing – a bourgeois, a very clever and, at times, a caustically critical one, but none the less a bourgeois. And Mr. Shaw is perfectly right. Adolph is a great man – for the bourgeoisie. For the workers Hitler is hell incarnate.
The danger lies not in Mr. Shaw being a bourgeois, but in the willingness of so-called proletarian leaders to take him for something else. And the danger becomes disaster when the Stalinist leaders of the Comintern rely upon Mr. Shaw and his fellows as the “friends” and defenders of the Soviet Union. Shaw and his friends are only petty bourgeois or bourgeois masqueraders, and when they get tired or scared of the red get-up, they’ll change it for black, brown or blue. Henri Barbusse, Romain Rolland, Lord Marley, and all the rest will very probably disappear long before the battle which decides whether the Horst Wessel song shall be sung in Moscow’s streets by Hitler’s brown shirts – or whether the Internationale shall be heard in Berlin.
Mr. Shaw has shown these people the road. It is useless for Communists to blame them for taking it; they are what they are. But all workers must watch with suspicion those leaders of the Soviet Union, the whole Stalinist bureaucracy, who prefer such friends and defenders to the revolutionary proletariat.
 







We give here a brief account of the brutal measures employed by the Stalinist bureaucrats and G.P.U. agents against the Left Opposition at Verchne-Uralsk where 130 Bolshevik-Leninists are held at an isolation camp. This savage treatment of the best revolutionists and Communists is meted out to the thousands of Left Oppositionists who are exiled and imprisoned in all parts of the Soviet Union.
The disappearance of Christian Rakovsky from Barnaoul, and whole present location is not known to this day, except to Stalin and his jailers, is arousing the indignation of revolutionists throughout the world. It is not known whether Rakovsky is alive or dead. This situation applies to others of the young and old Bolsheviks being persecuted by the Stalinist bureaucracy.
We demand a cessation of the persecution of the Left Opposition. The militant workers must insist upon a knowledge of Christian Rakovsky’s whereabouts. Stalin and his henchmen will not be permitted to ignore or forget their brutal actions, which include imprisonment, exile and murder of revolutionary Communists. Time will yet give a reckoning. – Ed.





MOSCOW. – At the isolation camp of Verchne-Uralsk, where 130 “Trotskyists” are kept, the repression was so severe that the prisoners answered by a hunger strike. This lasted eighteen days, after which the administration resorted to forcible feeding. The result was resistance, the use of brute force, shooting, with one comrade wounded, so far as we know. The treatment to which the prisoners are subjected is sufficiently described by the fact that thirty comrades are sick with scurvy.
 

 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.9)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

WHAT REALLY DID EXIST?


After having crushed the Left Opposition in 1927-1928,
Stalin, who had until then denied the possibility of industrialization,
of collectivization, and of the planned economy in general, made a left
turn. The new Stalinist economic policy, extremely contradictory,
chaotic and carried out with purely bureaucratic methods, was formed
from scraps taken from the platform of the Left Opposition. With all
the more bitterness Stalin directed the repression against the bearers
of this platform. The Stalinist left turn (plus the strengthening of
repression) brought disorder in 1929 into the ranks of the Left
Opposition. The recently begun industrialization and collectivization
opened up new possibilities and new perspectives. Under these
conditions, many Oppositionists were inclined to he lenient toward the
regime, which had become increasingly bureaucratic. They were swept
away by a wave of capitulations. Among them were Radek, Preobrazhensky,
I.N. Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Ter-Vaganian, Dreitzer, and others.
The following years (1930-1932) were the years of uncontrolled
bureaucratic management of the economy by the the Stalinist leaders who
rapidly led the country into a very serious economic and political
crisis. This crisis took particularly sharp forms in 1932. The
administrative abolition of classes in the countryside and the forced
“complete” collectivization had radically disrupted agriculture. In the
Soviet economy the disproportions had taken on extraordinary
dimensions: between industry and agriculture, and within industry; a
catastrophic level of quality, an absence of consumer products,
inflation, the complete disruption of transportation. The material
situation of the masses worsened continuously, malnutrition turned into
actual starvation. Millions of new workers lacked housing and vegetated
in barracks, often without light, in the cold, in filth. Across the
country there spread an epidemic of spotted fever such as had not been
seen since the Civil War. A general fatigue and discontent began to
come to light. The workers had recourse more and more frequently to
strikes, in Ivanovo-Voznesensk there were large upheavals of workers.
The kolkhozniks defended their harvest and their goods against the
non-collectivized peasants with arms in hand. In the Caucasus and the
Kuban a small civil war raged. The demoralization which was growing
ever stronger in the party, the discontent and the distrust of the
leadership also filtered into the apparatus. One could hear everywhere,
among the old Bolsheviks, the workers, the young Komsomols, that Stalin
was leading the country to ruin.
This was the situation which surrounded the former leaders of the
Left Opposition who had split from it. After having capitulated at a
different time, they had all sincerely tried, at least at first, to
adapt themselves to the Stalinist apparatus, hoping to take part in the
struggle for industrialization, the struggle against the kulak. But the
sharp economic and political crisis moved them away from the Stalinist
apparatus. Half involuntarily, certain oppositionist feelings were born
in them, the need to speak among themselves, to criticize the Stalinist
policies. Thus in 1932, one could observe a certain, though rather
weak, awakening of the groups which at one time had capitulated before
Stalin; the group of Zinoviev and Kamenev. the group of old left
Stalinists—Lominadze-Shatskin-Sten (those who were called the
“leftists”); of Smirnov and his friends, and also of some rightists,
Riutin, Slepkov, and others. But this “awakening” must not be
exaggerated. For the majority, it had a purely domestic character,
never going further than “heart-to-heart” talks and dreams about how
good it would be to have other politics and another leadership. Most
likely, the men from the different circles sought out a personal coming
together, ties with each other. The most audacious perhaps said that it
would be good to form a “bloc.” But probably it was not even taken that
far. Hence Stalin now (four years later!) constructs a “bloc” and even
a “Unified Center.”

Of course the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists didn’t enter into my kind
or a bloc with a single of one these groups. [41] All these
groups had at one time or another capitulated to Stalin and for this
alone they were utterly opposed to the Bolshevik-Leninists, who
considered and continue to consider capitulation as one of the greatest
crimes against communism and the interests of the working class. On
this question, the Left Opposition took a particularly intransigent
attitude. In the eyes of the Bolshevik-Leninists, these groups and men
did not and could not have any political or moral authority.
The Left Opposition attached a primarily symptomatic importance to
the awakening of these groups of “party liberals.” as they were called
amongst themselves. Of course, this could serve as a point of departure
for Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov and others to return to the old banner
of the Bolshevik- Leninists—it could, but it was nothing
of the sort.
Stalin, the GPU and the Central Control Commission did not remain
ignorant of this state of mind among the old Oppositionists. This state
of mind, be it said in passing, had at that time seized the majority of
the party. At the beginning of October 1932, Zinoviev and Kamenev
were expelled from the party, in a common list with prominent
rightists, Uglanov (former secretary of the Central Committee and the
Moscow Committee of the party), Riutin (member of the Central Committee
and leader of the Moscow organization), Slepkov, Maretsky (young
rightist theoreticians, students of Bukharin), and others. [42] Riutin had
in fact written a long document critical of the Stalinist policies and
the Stalinist regime, including, it seems, a very rude portrayal of
Stalin personally (“evil genius of the party.” etc.). Zinoviev and
Kamenev were accused of the following: “Knowing that
counterrevolutionary documents were widespread, they had preferred,
rather than denounce them, to discuss this document and thus to show
themselves to be direct accomplices of an anti-party
counterrevolutionary group.” [43] (Pravda, 1932). Just for
failing to make this “denunciation,” there was no other accusation —
Zinoviev and Kamenev were expelled from the party and exiled from
Moscow. The announcement of their expulsions mentioned not a word about
any kind of political activity by Zinoviev and Kamenev—there was none.
Such was the first version, in any case a plausible one,
of the “activity” of Zinoviev and Kamenev in 1932. The second
version (in 1934) already spoke of a “Moscow Center,” of having
“excited terrorist tendencies,” etc. The third version (the
trial m August 1936) contains the Unified Center, terrorism, and
Kirov’s assassination! The further the facts go into the past, the more
shamelessly Stalin falsifies them!
Soon the news arrived from Moscow about the arrest of a number of
well-known former Oppositionists, old Bolsheviks: I.N. Smirnov,
Preobrazhensky, Ufimtsev, Mrachkovsky, Ter-Vaganian, and others. [44]
We have written above that the exile of Zinoviev, Kamenev and others
might have become the starting point for their return to the
Bolshevik-Leninists, but that it was nothing of the sort. Already by
the spring of 1933 Zinoviev and Kamenev had capitulated once again,
and in a much more humiliating manner than before, by glorifying
Stalin, etc. They were returned to Moscow. Here is how Trotsky then
evaluated the new capitulation in the press: “Acknowledge Stalin’s
genius ... and Zinoviev and Kamenev ‘acknowledged’ it, that is, they
have finally reached the bottom ...” “Like Gogol’s hero, Stalin is
collecting dead souls ...” (May 23, 1933, Bulletin of the
Opposition, No.35.)
How far away these words are from a “bloc” or common “Unified
Center”! In the eyes of a politically honest man this one quotation
annihilates all the Stalinist slanders concerning the bloc of Trotsky
and Zinoviev, which lay at the basis of this trial.
The new capitulation of Zinoviev and Kamenev was closely linked to
the improvement of the USSR’s domestic situation. In 1933 the crisis
was softening, the Oppositionist feelings were lessening. The
capitulationist groups which had almost come to life once again
returned to passivity. In 1934 these tendencies became decisively
stronger.
At the trial, we are presented with a very different picture. As
long as a sharp crisis and a general discontent reigned (1932-1933),
the terrorists did not show any particular activity. But precisely at
the moment when (in 1934) the country was “coming out of its
difficulties, the triumph of the policy of the Central Committee of the
All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik) provoked a new outburst of
animosity and hatred against the leadership of the party ...”
(Kamenev’s testimony).
This whole story is a very stupid fabrication. It was necessary to
help lay the foundation for the charge of having assassinated Kirov (in
1934.)
After granting amnesty to Zinoviev, Kamenev and others, Stalin did
not give them any confidence. They were not entrusted with work of even
the slightest importance. They were kept far away from politics. Since
that time, that is, since the spring of 1933, Zinoviev, Kamenev and all
the others who had capitulated, passed completely into political
non-existence. Morally, they were broken. They no longer lived, they
vegetated. The revolver fired by Nikolaev upset this situation.
Zinoviev, Kamenev and others were brutally “recalled” by Stalin to
political life, “not for their own sake, but for the sake of Stalin,”
as victims of the Bonapartist bosses. Old Marxists, who had tied their
whole lives to the party of the working class and the movement of
masses, were accused of having participated in “terrorism.”

Footnotes
[41]
If the “bloc” between the Left Opposition and various groups which
capitulated to Stalin existed, how can it be explained that nothing
about this significant fact appeared in the press, especially in the
Stalinist press. The Left Opposition was always an intransigent
opponent of behind-the-scenes combinations and agreements. For it, the
question of a bloc could only consist of an open political act in full
view of the masses, based on its political platform. The history of the
13-year struggle of the Left Opposition is proof of that.
No doubt the politically intransigent attitude toward capitulation
did not exclude individual personal meetings or exchanges of
information—but nothing more. (L.S.)
[42]
The very expulsion of Zinoviev and Kamenev together with the rightists
was a typical Stalinist, i.e., Thermidorian amalgam. (L.S.)
[43]
This means Riutin and his friends. (L.S.)
[44]

Here is how the Moscow correspondent of the Bulletin,
a Bolshevik-Leninist, described these events: “The numerous arrests
among those who had left the opposition (in Moscow alone around 150
people were arrested and exiled), were explained as a prophylactic
measure. Although many of those who had left were passive, they were
not trusted. Stalin considers it necessary to get rid of someone before
he is able to think.” (Bulletin of the Opposition,
No.35, July 1933) (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.6)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE ACCUSED WHO WERE NOT AT THE TRIAL


Besides the sixteen who were shot, mention is made in the case of a large number of people accused of being terrorists or of taking part in terrorist activity. None of them, for reasons unknown and in complete contradiction with the rules of justice, was called to trial either as a defendant or as a witness. (We are not speaking of Safonova or Yakovlev who acted as Vyshinsky’s right-hand men at the trial.) The indictment states that the cases of 1) Gaven, 2) Gertik, 3) Karev, 4) Konstant, 5) Matorin, 6) P. Olberg, 7) Radin, 8) Safonova, 9) Faivilovich, 10) Schmidt, 11) Esterman, 12) Kuzmichev, – “have been set aside.” Why? For purely arbitrary reasons. Gaven, for example, whom we will later discuss more fully, is mentioned several times as a courier of terrorist instructions from Trotsky to Smirnov, – and is absent from the trial. Gertik, Faivilovich, Karev, and Radin “organized” Kirov’s assassination; Schmidt, Esterman, Kuzmichev “organized” Voroshilov’s assassination, etc. But regarding these twelve persons, at least the indictment mentions that their cases have been set aside. There are other people of whom nothing is said. Here is the list: [32]
1. Anishev, sentenced to six years in prison in the first Zinoviev trial;
 2. Arkus, old party member, a leading finance worker;
 3. Bogdan, old party member, former secretary of Zinoviev (committed suicide);
 4. Bukharin, member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, former member of the Politburo, former leader of the Comintern, editor of Izvestia;
 5. Dreitzer, sister of the one who was shot;
 6. Eismont, old party member, already arrested in 1932;
 7. Fedotov;
 8. Friedland, young Soviet theoretician;
 9. Friedman;
 10. Furtyshev, old party member;
 11. Gaevsky, old communist, hero of the Civil War;
 12. Grunstein, old Bolshevik, former political convict, occupied an important position in military affairs;
 13. Hertzberg, old party member, sentenced in the first Zinoviev trial;
 14. Kuklin, one of the oldest worker-Bolsheviks, one of the leaders of the Leningrad party organization, former member of the Central Committee, sentenced to 10 years in prison in the first Zinoviev trial;
 15. Kunt;
 16. Lipshitz P.;
 17. Lominadze, former secretary of the Communist Youth International, one of the leaders of the youth movement, former member of the Central Committee (committed suicide);
 18. Medvedev, old Bolshevik, leader of the former Workers Opposition;
 19. Mukhin;
 20. Okudzhava, one of the oldest Bolsheviks, leader of the Party in the Caucasus;
 21. Piatokov, old Bolshevik, member of the Central Committee, Deputy People’s Commissar of Heavy Industry;
 22. Putna, great military figure, until most recently military attache in London;
 23. Radek, former member of the Central Committee, famous journalist;
 24. Riutin, former member of the Central Committee and leader of the Moscow party organization;
 25. Rykov, member of the Central Committee, former Chairman of the Soviet of People’s Commissars, only recently removed as People’s Commissar of Post and Telegraph;
 26. Serebriakov, one of the oldest worker-Bolsheviks, former secretary of the Central Committee;
 27. Sharov, old worker-Bolshevik, Zinovievist, sentenced to eight years in prison in the first Zinoviev trial;
 28. Shatskin, one of the leaders of the Lominadze group, old member of the party, former leader of the Communist Youth International;
 29. Shliapnikov, old Bolshevik, former member of the Central Committee, leader of the former Workers Opposition;
 30. Shtykgold, old party member, former secretary of Skliansky, Trotksy’s deputy during the Civil War;
 31. Slepkov, young theoretician from the right-wing of the “Bukharin school,” journalist;
 32. Smilga, I.I., former member of the Central Committee, one of the leaders of the October insurrection, occupied leading positions in military and economic affairs;
 33. Sokolnikov, old Bolshevik, a former military leader, former People’s Commissar of Finance, former member of the Central Committee ;
 34. Sten, one of the leaders of Lominadze group (“leftists”), old party member, former member of the Central Control Commission;
 35. Tomsky, former leader of the trade unions, former member of the Central Committee and the Politburo (committed suicide);
 36. Uglanov, former secretary of the Central Committee and the Moscow Committee; one of the leaders of the Right Opposition;
 37. Yakovlev;
 38. Yatsek, old party member;
 39. Yelin;
 40. Yudin;
 41. Zaidel.
All these men are accused of either active terrorist activity, – the overwhelming majority, – or of having shown sympathy for terrorism and maintaining connections with the terrorists!
One must add to this list[33] those who were sentenced at the same time as Zinoviev, in January 1935, and who are not on the preceding lists: 1) Sakhov, 2) Gorshenin, 3) Tsarkov, 4) Fedorov, 5) Hessen, 6) Tarasov, 7) Perimov, 8) Bashkirov, 9) Bravo, (the majority of these are old Bolsheviks). One must also count the 78 old Bolshevik-Zinovievists (Zalutsky, Vardin and others) interned in a concentration camp in connection with the first Zinoviev trial. One must also add the principal accused of this trial, Trotsky, and also Sedov. We thus obtain a list of 142 people. Each of them is accused of the blackest of crimes. With but a few exceptions, this list is composed of the most famous representatives of Bolshevism.
If anyone were to compose a list of the 20-25 most prominent representatives of Bolshevism, those who played the greatest role in the history of the party and the revolution, we could easily recommend that he take as a base this list plus the old Bolsheviks executed following the Moscow trial. This list would contain six former members of the Politburo and leaders of the party: Bukharin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, Tomsky and Trotsky. In Lenin’s Politburo there were five from this list, plus Lenin and Stalin. Of the members of Lenin’s Politburo only Stalin remains today. The others have either been shot or accused of terrorism (Tomsky committed suicide).
In Lenin’s Testament, six men are mentioned: Trotsky, Stalin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bukharin, and Piatakov, these last two as “the most outstanding of the youth.” Two of the revolutionaries mentioned by Lenin in his Testament were shot by Stalin; Trotsky is, as it were, sentenced to death in absentia; Piatakov is in prison on the charge of terrorism. Bukharin has been pardoned – but for how long, we don’t know. Once again, Stalin alone remains. Among those shot and those who were mentioned in the trial as having participated in terrorism, there are 19 former members of the Central Committee: Bukharin, Evdokimov, Fedorov, Kamenev, Kuklin, Lominadze, Piatakov, Radek, Riutin, Rykov, Serebriakov, Shliapnikov, Smilga, Smirnov, Sokolnikov, Tomsky, Trotsky, Uglanov, Zinoviev (Bukharin and Rykov are still members of the Central Committee!), and three former members of the Central Control Commission: Bakaev, Gaven, Sten. The whole flower of the Bolshevik Party, all the leaders of the October Revolution, prove to be “mad dogs,” “bandits,” and “agents of the Gestapo.” If we add to the 142 whom we counted above, the 16 shot, then the 102 shot in connection with Kirov’s assassination, the so-called White Guards, the 14 shot in the Nikolaev affair, the 12 GPU men who were sentenced (there are the real guilty ones!), we obtain a total of 286 people of the greatest diversity and who often had nothing in common. With the exception of Nikolaev, some of his friends and several members of the Leningrad GPU, none had the slightest connection with Kirov’s assassination. They are nonetheless accused by Stalin of having had a hand in this assassination and we don’t know how many more times Stalin will drag out Kirov’s corpse, nor how many people he will accuse of being responsible for this assassination or of having participated in it. And how many men have been shot “in secret,” without anyone knowing anything about it? How many tens of thousands have been deported or interned in a concentration camp?

* * *


We have already said that the composition of the accused was arbitrary, not only because we are dealing with an amalgam, but also because Stalin could not break all the intended defendants. The list of the accused has certainly changed more than once and was not in its final form until the very day the prosecutor signed the indictment. The fact that Stalin chose the sixteen defendants from a much more extensive list, flows not only from our general considerations, but can also be demonstrated almost mathematically.
The dossier of each defendant carries a number (these numbers are indicated in parentheses in the quotes from the depositions). If we arrange the defendants in alphabetical order, we obtain the following table[34].



Bakaev
  1


Berman-Yurin
  4


David, Fritz
  8


Dreitzer
10


Zinoviev
12


Kamenev
15


Mrachkovsky
18


Olberg, V.
21


Pikel
25


Reingold
27


Smirnov, I.N.
29




The numbers of the dossiers of these eleven defendants are strictly in alphabetical order (Russian). Since Holtzman’s testimony is not quoted at all during the trial, the number of his dossier remains unknown to us. The other defendants have the following numbers [35]:



Lurie, M.
32


Lurie, N.
33


Evdokimov
36


Ter-Vaganian
38




Using these tables we see that a whole series of numbers is missing, i.e. along with the numbers, the prisoners are missing to whom the given cases correspond. For a total of 19 people (plus dossier No.31, of which we spoke in the note), there are 38 numbers. To whom, therefore, do the other 18 correspond? It seems very likely to us that with a few exceptions, such as Safanova, whom the GPU is perhaps saving for a future trial, these “absent” defendants are those whom Stalin could not succeed in breaking and whom he most likely shot without trial.

Footnotes
[32] We do not include here the persons who, according to the court information, are abroad: Weiz, Slomovitz, etc. (L.S.)
[33] In this list, it would also be possible to include Ruth Fischer and Maslow. (L.S.)
[34] (For this demonstration to retain its value, we have preserved the Russian alphabetical order.) A dossier No.31 also appears in the case, in which Reingold, Pikel, Safonova, and Dreitzer’s depositions were collected. It seems this is a unique case. There is also another group of dossiers carrying numbers: 3–Karev, 14–Matorin, 24–Olberg, P. They are not in alphabetical order, probably because each of them refers especially to one of the defendants: Karev to Bakaev, Matorin to Zinoviev and Kamenev, and Olberg to his brother. This is probably why their numbers follow the numbers of the defendants to whom they are linked. (L.S.)
[35] The fact that Evdotimov and Ter-Vaganian come only at the end seems to be explained by the fact that in the early stages Stalin did not intend to bring them to trial. Le us point out also that Evdokimov’s confessions date only from August 10, that is, a few days before the publication of the indictment and those of Ter-Vaganian only from August 14, that is, the very day the prosecutor signed the indictment. Having obtained these confessions, the prosecutor hurried to draw up the indictment and to sign it. It was also probable that the two Luries were not originally intended to be included in the trial and that they were added only later.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.16)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

BOGDAN’S SUICIDE-ASSASSINATION


Stalin not only shoots Bolsheviks, – he even manages to summon them from the dead. It is not necessary here to remind ourselves about Kirov’s corpse. But, in this case, his is not the only corpse.
An old member of the party, Bogdan, worked for many years as Zinoviev’s secretary. A few years ago Bogdan was expelled from the party. He then could not stand up to Stalin’s persecution and insults and committed suicide. [68] This suicide had a rather powerful impact in the party at that time. There was talk of the blind alley into which Stalin drove those who allowed themselves even once to have their own opinion. But evidently that is exactly why Stalin decided to bring Bogdan’s corpse to trial. He had to “take revenge” on Zinoviev and the others for the fact that they probably had allowed themselves in their own circles to talk about Bogdan as a victim of the Stalinist regime. For this reason it was announced at the trial that: “Bogdan’s suicide amounted to an assassination decided on by the terrorist center ... Bakaev persuaded Bogdan to carry out an attack on Stalin or to commit suicide. Bogdan committed suicide and left behind, as he had been directed, a note describing himself as the victim of a party purge.” (Pikel’s testimony).
Here, lying passes into a kind of senseless delirium. Let us admit that Bogdan really had to try to assassinate Stalin and that this attempt, as they tell us during the trial, did not succeed. But why would it have been necessary to insist that he commit suicide? As a punishment for the failure of his attempt? Were there other “attempts,” then, which did succeed? Not a single one! Why didn’t the others kill themselves? Where and when have there ever been unhappy terrorists who killed themselves on an order received from above? Bogdan even “left a note describing himself as the victim of a party purge.”
Evidently this “victim of Zinoviev” lied before his death ... only to make things unpleasant for Stalin. Around this fact which is “simple” in its tragedy – the suicide of a persecuted member of the party – Stalin weaves a whole web of some kind of pathological and delirious lies. At times it seems that you’re reading The Possessed [69] ...
The history of this case is as follows. Reingold testifies that “the Trotskyist-Zinovievist Center, after it had come to power, planned to annihilate all of its own members who had taken a direct and immediate part in terrorism.” This testimony is the product of Stalin’s “own” creativity! Whoever knows the “beloved leader” even a little bit could not doubt it. These methods, to shoot his own agents who are now dangerous because they know too much, are his methods, the methods of a man stopping at nothing, without scruple in his choice of methods and capable of anything. That’s how he proceeded at the trial of the 14 (Nikolaev and the others), where there were GPU agents among those shot. That’s the way he proceeded during the present trial. Psychologically Stalin betrays himself here. He attributes his own baseness to his victims.
We know how far Zinoviev and Kamenev were from power. But, we are told, they not only dreamed of power, not only divided portfolios among themselves, above all, of course, the portfolio of the GPU, but they even thought of shooting their own supporters who knew too much! What foresight! You might think that Zinoviev and Kamenev had no other worries. What’s more, they even went so far as to divulge their plans in advance, as if to warn their supporters of what awaited them in case they were successful. Undoubtedly, the (Stalinist) GPU had the special task of keeping the terrorists alive who had carried out assassinations, so that they and all their comrades could be shot by the (Zinovievist) GPU, once Zinoviev had taken power!
Even model defendants like Zinoviev and Kamenev didn’t agree to lake this nightmare upon themselves. “It’s out of Jules Verne,” said Zinoviev, “these are tales from the Arabian Nights.” The clown of a prosecutor interrupts him with artificial pathos: “And the assassination of Bogdan, Zinoviev’s secretary, what is that?! A fairy tale?”
Why is Bogdan mentioned here? The “plan” for exterminating their own supporters was to have been carried out by Zinoviev and Kamenev after taking power, by means of the GPU, which was to be headed by Bakaev. Or had Zinoviev and Kamenev already taken power? And had Bakaev already taken over the GPU?
It makes your hair stand on end to read this Stalinist edition of The Possessed. How far the degeneration of the Russian Revolution must have gone, for Stalin to be able to circulate this shameless monstosity ... as Soviet justice.

Footnotes
[68] A few years earlier, under analogous circumstances, L. Trotsky’s secretary, M.S. Glazman, committed suicide. This exceedingly pure and dedicated revolutionary shot himself after his expulsion from the party. (L.S.)
[69] The Possessed: Dostoevsky’s novel about revolutionary terrorist circles in Tsarist Russia.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.18)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE TRAGIC COMPROMISE: FOR A CONFESSION, YOUR LIFE


A decree of the Central Executive Committee on December 1, 1934, established an accelerated military trial procedure for the cases of terrorists, without legal defense, behind closed doors, without the right of appeal and with the immediate execution of the verdict. For the Moscow trial an “exception” to this decree was made. Formally, everything was permitted: lawyers, appeal to the Central Executive Committee, a public hearing. In reality nothing was allowed.
Any lawyer who had the slightest independence would have made the trial impossible. Therefore the defendants gave up their right to lawyers, and this was part of their end of the “compromise” which Stalin had made with them: in exchange for their confessions, they would be granted their lives.
The question of the right of appeal is exceptionally important. Why did Stalin concede this right to the defendants? After all, he had already decided to shoot them. There is only one explanation of this circumstance: by granting the defendants the right of appeal and thus countermanding the special decree of the Central Executive Committee, Stalin offered a “guarantee” in his deal with the defendants: for their confessions, their lives.
As for the trial, a comedy was acted out, with the roles decided in advance. Everything was agreed on beforehand. The defendants met the conditions – but Stalin “violated” them by having the defendants shot.


Yes, instead of defenders, [72] there were – accusers (they were the defendants themselves), instead of an open trial, two hundred chosen GPU agents attended the trial, all with “military bearing,” as correspondents from the British newspapers wrote. The presence of this audience was only Stalin’s final mockery of the defendants.
Although it was carefully selected, this Thermidorian mob not only applauded the speeches of the prosecutor and the verdict, but also laughed quite frequently at the unfortunate defendants ... They regarded with delight the humiliation and annihilation of the former leaders of Bolshevism and the Revolution. They, the Thermidorians, needed this firing squad as much as Stalin did. The traditions and the ideas of the October Revolution torment them like a horrible nightmare, they prevent them from constructing their “happy and joyful life.”
Finally, the judges retire to deliberate. And to “write up” the verdict, which had long ago been prepared in Stalin’s secretariat, it took them seven and one half hours. This was one more petty, vile and final example of Stalinist revenge: to torture and ridicule these men in the last hours of their life. True, the defendants had been given the right to appeal for mercy ... so that it would not be granted to them. On August 24, at night, they were taken directly from the courtroom to be shot.
Not only overall, but even in every feature and in every detail, the trial bears the mark of inhuman ignominy.

Footnotes
[72] How can we not recall the trial of the SRs in 1922? These were real terrorists. They killed Uritsky, Volodarsky and wounded Lenin. And these were terrible and dangerous times for the revolution. The trial was open, lawyers were allowed, including even foreigners (Vandervelde, Kurt Rosenfeld, Theodore Liebknecht). At that time, there was nothing to hide. With full clarity, the trial established that the terrorist acts were not the activity of individuals, as it first appeared, but organized by the party of SRs. All the defendants, mortal enemies of the October Revolution, were nevertheless spared their lives. (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.1)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

WHY DID STALIN NEED THIS TRIAL?

WHY DID STALIN NEED THIS TRIAL?


Yes, Stalin must have very pressing reasons to begin the
proceedings and carry out these assassinations. Reasons of different
types, on different levels, but all closely linked. Stalin and his
henchmen undoubtedly considered this trial not only a very cunning and
clever move, but also the beginning of a new period marking the even
greater reinforcement of the power of the Bonapartist [1] bureaucracy and
the end of the Opposition. When Trotsky was still in the USSR, in other
words in the hands of the Thermidorian clique, Stalin had considered
that a meticulously prepared operation, ending in exile, was the best
means of ridding himself of an irreconcilable Bolshevik. He was wrong.
One does not need to have exceptional insight in order to understand
how he is haunted by this mistake. Today, in the face of this ever
renewing and ever growing opposition, he coldly orders the shooting of
Bolsheviks, former leaders of the Party and the Comintern, and heroes
of the Civil War. But here again he is wrong, as he will soon be forced
to realize. This terrifying crime, carried out in cold blood, will fall
back on the head of its author!
Domestic Political Reasons
Socialism has been constructed, classes have been
abolished—proclaims the official Stalinist doctrine. “Socialism has
been constructed,” but never before has the Soviet Union known such
inequality as now, nearly twenty years after the October revolution:
salaries of 100 rubles and salaries of 810,000 rubles. Some live in
miserable barracks and walk about in worn-out shoes; others drive
luxurious automobiles and live in magnificent apartments. Some struggle
to feed themselves and their families; others have not only cars, but
servants, country houses in the suburbs of Moscow, villas in the
Caucasus, etc. “Classes have been abolished,” but what does the life of
a director of a trust have in common with that of a laborer? The life
of a marshal with that of a kolkhoznik? [2] Certainly, even today some inequality
would still be inevitable, but the whole question is this, that the
inequality becomes sharper every year, taking on more and more
monstrous proportions, and this is made to pass ... for socialism.

In the most diverse areas, the heritage of the October revolution is
being liquidated. Revolutionary internationalism gives way to the cult
of the fatherland in the strictest sense. And the fatherland means,
above all, the authorities. Ranks, decorations and titles have been
reintroduced. The officer caste headed by the marshals has been
reestablished. The old communist workers are pushed into the
background; the working class is divided into different layers; the
bureaucracy bases itself on the “non-party Bolshevik,” the
Stakhanovist, that is, the workers’ aristocracy, on the foreman and,
above all, on the specialist and the administrator. The old
petit-bourgeois family is being reestablished and idealized in the most
middle-class way; despite the general protestations, abortions are
prohibited, which, given the difficult material conditions and the
primitive state of culture and hygiene, means the enslavement of women,
that is, the return to pre-October times. The decree of the October
revolution concerning new schools has been annulled. School has been
reformed on the model of tsarist Russia: uniforms have been
reintroduced for the students, not only to shackle their independence,
but also to facilitate their surveillance outside of school. Students
are evaluated according to their marks for behavior, and these favor
the docile, servile student, not the lively and independent schoolboy.
The fundamental virtue of youth today is the “respect for one’s
elders,” along with the “respect for the uniform.” A whole institute of
inspectors has been created to look after the behavior and morality of
the youth.
The Association of Old Bolsheviks and that of the former political
prisoners has been dissolved. They were too strong a reminder of the
“cursed” revolutionary past.
In the economic domain there is a sharp turn to the right:
reestablishment of the market, money accounting [3] and piece work. After the
administrative abolition of classes, the Stalinist leadership has
turned to placing its bet on the well-to-do; it is according to this
policy that the differentiation among the kolkhozes as well as inside
the kolkhozes takes place.
“Socialism has been constructed.” But there are many prostitutes in
the country and prostitution is growing. Most often the prostitute is a
poorly paid worker or servant or a former kolkhoz worker driven from
her village by hunger. The problem of abandoned children is far from
being eliminated.
“Socialism has been constructed”—that is, the state should
disappear and, in any case, force should play a smaller and smaller
role. What is happening is just the opposite. Never before has
repression been so severe and so universal in character, and the repression,
directed in the past against the class enemies of the proletariat, is
now directed against the proletariat itself, since it is
against it that the new ruling social layer, the bureaucracy, defends
its material privileges. By legal and illegal means, the bureaucracy
appropriates an enormous portion of the national income. It has
something to defend! The Soviet bureaucracy, which is getting fatter
and more prosperous, furiously defends its privileges, its “easy and
happy” life, against the masses who are deprived of any rights.
But at the same time, the material situation of the masses improves,
even if extremely slowly and much less rapidly than the inequality
increases. This gives them great confidence in themselves, leading not
to a strengthening, but to a weakening of the political positions of
the bureaucracy. The worker who a few years ago was entirely
preoccupied with earning his daily bread, often working 14 and even 16
hours a day, in two shifts, struggled only to satisfy his hunger and to
feed his family. The improvement of the economic situation has given
him room to breathe and has increased his needs. First he wants to
dress better, to have an overcoat, to go to the cinema. But that is
only the beginning. The worker then feels the need to read, to attain
culture; he begins to think about, or even strives to participate
consciously in the process of production, to defend his interests and
soon—what a crime!—he wants to take an active part in politics.
This, of course, Stalin cannot permit. This is what he mortally fears.
The discontent of the worker, his strivings towards an active
political life, his “oppositionist” protests against social inequality,
the whole complex of brutal contradictions which tear apart the Soviet
state;—this is what Stalin wishes to overcome by police
repression! And to give the repression a still more merciless
character, he needs “terrorism.” By confusing the masses, by
frightening them, Stalin makes his bloody repression easier. Here is
what awaits you, says Stalin, pointing to the corpses of Zinoviev and
Kamenev, if you permit yourselves to doubt my infallibility, if you do
not agree to become mute slaves of the bureaucracy.

If in the past each dissatisfaction, each protest, was labelled
“Trotskyism,” Stalin has, by the Moscow murders, identified
“Trotskyism” with “terrorism.” Whoever is discontented or simply
shows a critical attitude is a “Trotskyist.” Today this means a
“terrorist.” He is not threatened with the concentration camp or
prison, but with an immediate firing squad.
Stalin is finally taking the road of the universal physical
extermination of all the actively dissatisfied and, above all, the Left
Oppositionists. As leaders of the struggle against the bureaucracy and
the only proletarian revolutionaries having roots in the masses, the Bolshevik-Leninists
are the greatest danger to Stalin. In the concentration camps and
in solitary confinement, they will be declared “terrorists,” that is,
sentenced to be shot. Throughout the USSR now, there are without a
doubt “trials” and executions for which the Moscow trial served as a
signal. A terrible and frightening reality ...

With the Moscow murders, Stalin lashes out against even his own
apparatus, especially against the thin layer of it which is still made
up of Old Bolsheviks, for in this part of the apparatus there exists
widespread, though concealed, discontent. Having become the blind
executor of the orders from the Stalinist summit, the former
revolutionary loses all perspective; his rights are reduced to the
right to be in ecstasy before the “father of the people.” He, better
than most, knows Borgia-Stalin, the perfidious usurper, the
cold-blooded assassin, the gravedigger of the revolution. And to keep a
firm grip on his own apparatus, at least that part which is still tied
by something to the October revolution, there is no longer anything
left for Stalin to do but to terrorize it still more.

By means of the Moscow murders, Stalin also wants to politically
annihilate the Left Opposition and Trotsky personally. The trial
is directed above all against Trotsky, who is the principal
defendant, although he is not seated on the defendants’ bench. It
is he whom Stalin tries to cover with filth and blood. The resources of
journalistic slander and calumny have been exhausted. With the bodies
of those who were shot, Stalin wishes to add new weight to the most
poisonous, rotten and vile slanders. If he had not shot Zinoviev,
Kamenev and the others, the trial would have been exposed as a pitiful
comedy, and not as a terrible tragedy. Only after being backed up by
the assassinations did the slanders of the Moscow trials take on a new
force that made them able to shake world public opinion.
By his executions, Stalin shows and wants to show, that the
Bonapartist bureaucracy will stop at nothing in its struggle to keep
the power it has usurped and maintain its privileges. The working class
must remember it well.
But these assassinations show also how precarious the situation
of the bureaucracy is. It is not due to an excess of strength that
one goes to such bloody lengths. To consolidate its position, the
bureaucracy—Stalin—must lead the country, already completely
terrorized, to new and yet unknown forms of monstrous injustice and
fierce repression. But this is a dead end. A way out—insofar as it
depends upon the bureaucracy—can only be found along the road to a
new, even deeper reaction. By the attempt to annihilate Trotsky
politically and by the assassinations of old Bolsheviks. Stalin wants
to make the road to reaction much more secure for himself.
The danger of war only intensifies the Bonapartist character of
Stalinism. In case of imminent war, Stalin is counting not on the
initiative and the courage of the working class in struggle for the
communist ideal, but on the privileged caste of officers. on the
submission of “inferiors.” stripped of every right and driven by fear,
to the all-powerful “superiors.”
The execution of the old Bolsheviks—what a prelude to the “most
democratic constitution in the world!” Let those who have illusions
know—as Stalin would say—that the democracy of the constitution
consists in giving the electors and the congresses the right to vote
for him. And whoever does not vote for Stalin, that is, for the
bureaucracy and its privileges, is a Trotskyist, therefore a terrorist
whom we will have shot in 24 hours. The Stalinist constitution is a
deceitful cover for the plebiscitary regime. [4]
Perhaps there was one more reason which pushed Stalin to the murder
of the old Bolsheviks. It is the bureaucracy’s fear of terrorism, not
organized terrorism, as it was represented at the Moscow trial, —
nothing of the sort exists in the USSR—but of the isolated terrorists
who come From the desperate youth deprived of perspectives. The
terrorist tendencies are hardly strong in the USSR. In any case, during
the ten years of bureaucratic rule, one political
assassination has been carried out by one of these desperate young
communists against the Stalinist bosses, the assassination of Kirov. It
is much more likely that the bureaucracy artificially blows up this
danger, with the aim of justifying and facilitating its repression
against heretics and malcontents.
This is how it is inside the country, but outside?
Reasons of Foreign Policy
Stalin not only bloodily breaks with Bolshevism, with
all its traditions and its past, he is also trying to drag Bolshevism
and the October revolution through the mud. And he is doing it in
the interests of world and domestic reaction. The corpses of
Zinoviev and Kamenev must show to the world bourgeoisie that Stalin has
broken with the revolution, and must testify to his loyalty and ability
to lead a nation-state. The corpses of the old Bolsheviks must prove to
the world bourgeoisie that Stalin has in reality radically changed his
politics, that the men who entered history as the leaders of
revolutionary Bolshevism, the enemies of the bourgeoisie,—are his
enemies also. Trotsky, whose name is inseparably linked with that of
Lenin as the leader of the October revolution, Trotsky, the founder and
leader of the Red Army; Zinoviev and Kamenev, the closest disciples of
Lenin, one, president of the Comintern, the other, Lenin’s deputy and
member of the Politburo; Smirnov, one of the oldest Bolsheviks,
conqueror of Kolchak—today they are being shot and the bourgeoisie of
the world must see in this the symbol of a new period. This is the end
of the revolution, says Stalin. The world bourgeoisie can and must
reckon with Stalin as a serious ally, as the head of a nation-state. [5]
Such is the fundamental goal of the trials in the area of foreign
policy. But this is not all, it is far from all. The German fascists
who cry that the struggle against communism is their historic mission
find themselves most recently in a manifestly difficult position.
Stalin has abandoned long ago the course toward world revolution. He
carries out a national policy which is “reasonable,” the Thermidorian
measures follow one after another. It becomes more and more difficult
for the fascists and other enemies of communism to represent Stalin,
with his “nationalist” IIIrd International, as the source of
revolutionary danger and upheavals. Thus they assert with such great
insistence the slander that the IVth International is nothing but a
branch of the IIIrd, on the basis of a division of labor. Some assist
the Thermidorian policies of Stalin in the USSR, others (the IVth
International) stir up the fires of revolution in the West; presenting
themselves as the enemies of Stalin, they are in fact only his allies. [6]
This gives Stalin an additional argument for carrying out his
assassinations and for actually condemning Trotsky to death. Here is
the proof that Stalin has nothing in common either with the revolution
or with the revolutionary IVth International.
Instead of the international revolution—the League of Nations, the
bloc with the bourgeoisie in the framework of the so-called People’s
Front, and in France there is the perspective of the French front, that
is, the Holy Alliance. [7] No help whatsoever to the Spanish
revolutionaries. Long live the Poland of Pilsudski! [8] Without
hesitation Stalin would make a pact even with Hitler at the expense of
the German and international working class. It only depends on Hitler!
All these international policies of Stalinism move and will move the
working class further and further away from the parties which for some
reason still call themselves communist. In the European working class
and in particular among the communist workers, the distrust and
discontentedness toward the Stalinist policies are increasing. That in
itself would not trouble Stalin very much if he did not fear that the
revolutionary workers would find the way to the IVth International;
Stalin understands very well how this orientation would constitute a
great danger for his policies in the USSR itself. (In this respect, let
us say, parenthetically, he is more astute than the narrow-minded
critics who consider us “sectarians” without perspectives.) This is why
Stalin tries to discredit the IVth International, to annihilate Trotsky
politically by accusing him of terrorism and connections with the
Gestapo and rendering these accusations “convincing” by the execution
of old Bolsheviks ... with blood and filth, Stalin wants to close off
to the advanced workers the road to the ranks of the IVth
International. This is yet another one of the aims of the Moscow trials.
“Sweet Revenge”
Apart from the political reasons for this affair, there
is a purely personal reason. Stalin’s insatiable thirst for revenge. It
enters as a factor in all Stalinist affairs. It played no small part in
the creation of the latest amalgam.
In one of the last letters which he wrote before his internment in
Norway, L.D. Trotsky tells of the following episode:

In 1924 Stalin, Dzerzhinsky [9] and Kamenev were sitting on a summer night
around a bottle of wine (I don’t know if it was the first) and chatting
about various trifles when they came, during the conversation, to ask
themselves what each of them likes most in life. I don’t remember what
Dzerzhinsky or Kamenev (from whom I got this story) said. But Stalin
said: What is best in life is to choose one’s victim, prepare the blow
well, take revenge without pity, and then go to bed.

In the same letter, Trotsky reports, according to Krupskaya, [10] a
declaration of Lenin’s about Stalin which was never published:

In the autumn of 1926 Krupskaya told me in the presence of Zinoviev and
Kamenev: “Volodya (this is a nickname for Vladimir, i.e. Lenin) used to
say of Stalin: "He lacks the most elementary honesty,’” And
she repeated: “Do you understand? The simplest human honesty!” I have
never published these words before because I did not want any harm to
come to Krupskaya. But now that she helplessly swims with the official
current and raises not the slightest voice of protest against the
infamous crimes of the ruling clique, I consider myself to have the
right to make these words of Lenin public.

(Trotsky did not know at that time of the miserable and odious article,
as painful as it is to say, by Krupskaya on the trials.)
Let us recall again some of Lenin’s other declarations about Stalin.
In March of 1923 Lenin was preparing the struggle against Stalin at the
12th Party Congress; through his secretary Fotieva, he told Trotsky —
Do not enter into deals with Stalin, because “Stalin will make a rotten
compromise and betray you.”
It is a “compromise” of this type that Stalin had made before the
trial with Zinoviev, Kamenev and the others; in exchange for their
confessions—their lives. And he betrayed them! And how horribly
he betrayed them!

Even earlier Lenin had said of Stalin: “This cook will only prepare
spicy dishes.” Lenin, although correctly exposing Stalin’s tendencies,
could not by any stretch of the imagination guess how far this
modern-day Cesare Borgia [11] would go.
Rudeness and disloyalty, perfidy and the absence of scruples, these
are the most characteristic traits of Stalin. These personal traits of
the “leader” have become the traits of the Bonapartist ruling clique.
And it is this man whom Pravda declares to be as “pure and
clear as a crystal!” There are no limits to human baseness!
Stalin, who, in the circles of the apparatus, has the reputation of
being experienced at “measuring out doses,” is beginning to lose his
self-control. He thereby accelerates the disintegration of his own
absolutism.
The rise of the workers’ movement in the West and from there to the
USSR will put an end to the corrupt regime of the Bonapartist clique.

Footnotes
[1]
Bonapartist, Thermidorian: To help clarify the nature of the
Stalinist reaction in the USSR, Trotsky developed the analogy to the
French Revolution. On “Ninth Thermidor” (July 27, 1794), the
revolutionary dictatorship of the Jacobins, led by Robespierre, was
overthrown and replaced by the Directory, which represented the
conservative wing of the bourgeoisie. On “Eighteenth Brumaire”
(November 9, 1799), the Directory was overthrown by Napoleon Bonaparte,
who established a military dictatorship, still resting on bourgeois
property relations. Napoleon did not restore feudalism in France.
Thermidorian is used hem to describe political reaction without a
change in the fundamental class base of the regime. Bonapartism
designates a one-man dictatorial rule in times of extreme crisis of the
ruling class.
[2]
Kolkhoznik:—worker on a collective farm.
[3]
Money accounting: “In a communist society, the state and money
will disappear. Their gradual dying away ought consequently to begin
under socialism.” (Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed).
In the Soviet Union, a workers state in transition between capitalism
and socialism money had by no mans lost its historical role as a
measure of value, means of exchange and medium of payment. Attempts to
“abolish” money and establish “direct socialist distribution” were
exemplified by the introduction of the food-card. By the 1930s, facing
a crisis in the monetary system which included dangerously high
inflation, Stalin re-introduced monetary accounting, wage scales and
even piece-work to try to raise the productivity of labor. The Left
Opposition had long since called for a stable unit of currency, even at
the price of “a bold cutting down of capital investments” (1932).
[4]
Plebiscitary regime: a form of rule where the vote is taken
for or against a candidate or proposal without the voters having an
alternative choice.
[5]
O. Bauer is horrified about the impression the Moscow executions make
on sincere, liberal and socialist friends of the USSR. For Stalin, this
is a stage already passed through. He now has little use for these
friends. In case of war, he seeks much more “solid” friends and allies
among the bourgeoisie of France, England, America and other countries. (L.S.)
[6]
With this goal, for example, the German fascists recently spread rumors
about a pint conference of the IIIrd and IVth Internationals in Brede,
about Stalin financing the IVth International, and other nonsense. (L.S.)
[7]
This sentence was omitted in the revised French edition.
[8]
Pilsudski (1867-1935): Polish politician and general. A
one-time socialist and leader of the Polish Socialist party. Fought to
free Poland from Tsarist Russia. Imprisoned in Siberia from 1887-1892.
Led Polish troops in World War I. Fought against the Bolsheviks.
Launched invasion of the Ukraine in May 1920, which was answered by the
Red Army’s advance on Warsaw in August 1920. Emerged as a spokesman for
the petit-bourgeoisie in opposition to the bourgeois National
Democrats. On May 12, 1926, Marshal Pilsudski seized power in Poland.
When the Polish Communist Party approved of the coup, Trotsky launched
a campaign against what he felt was support for a fascist regime.
Pilsudski remained in power at the head of a military dictatorship
until his death in l935.
[9]
Felix Dzerzhinsky (1877-1926): Polish revolutionist. Freed
from tsarist prison by Bolsheviks in February 1917. Central Committee
member in August 1917; member of the Military Revolutionary Committee.
Organizer and Chairman of the Cheka in December 1917. Commissar for
Internal Affairs in 1921. Active on many fronts in the Civil War. Sided
with Stalin in February 1921 on the Georgian question. Commissar for
Transport 1921, President of the Supreme Economic Council 1923,
candidate member of the Politburo 1924. Opposed the Russian Opposition.
Died of a heart attack on July 20, 1926.
[10]
Nadezhda Konstantinova Krupskaya (l869-l939): Lenin’s wife, a
leading Old Bolshevik and expert in education. After Lenin’s death in
1924, became alarmed at the rising bureaucracy headed by Stalin; joined
briefly with the Left Opposition in 1926. Fearing a split in the party,
withdrew from the Opposition. Became increasingly isolated, and by the
purge trials of 1936-1938 was a virtual prisoner of the GPU. Died in
February 1939.
[11]
Cesare Borgia: infamous and unscrupulous Italian politician of
the 15th century.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.14)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

TROTSKY’S “CONTACT” WITH THE DEFENDANTS


The trial considered that it established the following
contacts of Trotsky with the defendants:
1. With Smirnov and Holtzman, through Sedov. With
Holtzman directly, in Copenhagen;
2. With Dreitzer, through Sedov and through direct written contact;
3. With Berman-Yurin and Fritz David;
4. With Olberg, through Sedov;

5. With M. Lurie, through Ruth Fischer-Maslow.
To help the reader orient himself on this question, we
provide a diagram of these contacts, p. 93. The diagram is drawn, of
course, on the basis of the facts given at the trial, and not according
to reality.

Smirnov and Holtzman

On August 5, 1936, that is, a few days before the
beginning of the trial, I.N. Smirnov was broken. Having resisted until
then—Vyshinsky tells us that Smirnov’s interrogation consists of
“only these words: I deny this, I still deny it, I deny,”—even
Smirnov took the path of false confessions. Describing his meeting with
Sedov in Berlin, he says: “In the course of our conversation, L. Sedov,
while analyzing the situation in the Soviet Union, stated his personal
opinion that under present conditions only the violent elimination of
the leaders of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and the
Soviet government could bring about a change in the general situation
in the country.” But this false testimony was not enough for Stalin. He
demanded more “precise” formulations. Another week passes, a week of
terrible moral suffering, and on August 13, the day before the
prosecutor signed the indictment, Smirnov finally yielded: “I confess
that I knew after the conversation with Sedov in 1931 in Berlin, that
the directives for terror as the only means capable of changing the
situation in the Soviet Union, were his personal directives. [60]
In all this, obviously there is not one word of truth. The only
truth is that in July 1931, Sedov met I.N. Smirnov [61] completely
by chance, in a large department store in Berlin, the “KDV.” I.N.
Smirnov had known Sedov intimately for many years. After a second of
confusion, I.N. Smirnov agreed to meet with him and have a talk. The
meeting took place. During the conversation, it turned out that I.N.
Smirnov had already been in Berlin for a long time, but he had made no
attempt to establish any ties with the Opposition and would not have
made any attempt, if not for this chance encounter in the department
store KDV. This fact is indirectly confirmed even by the court
transcripts, according to which I.N. Smirnov arrived in Berlin in May
1931. But the meeting of Sedov and Smirnov didn’t take place until
July. (If Smirnov, as the prosecution wishes us to believe, had come to
Berlin with the specific aim of contacting Trotsky, one cannot
understand why, having arrived in May, he would have waited, that is,
lost, two months).
First the two speakers exchanged information. During the
conversation, I.N. Smirnov, without speaking directly on the question
of his break with the Opposition, insisted that between L. Trotsky and
himself, there was the following disagreement: He, Smirnov, did not
share Trotsky’s point of view about the necessity of conducting
political work in the USSR. With this, Smirnov wanted in some way to
explain and justify his break with the Opposition. Smirnov thought that
the present conditions in the USSR did not allow any oppositional work
to be carried out and that, in any case, it was necessary to wait until
these conditions changed. A characteristic trait: in speaking of the
Opposition, Smirnov said you, not we, your
point of view, your comrades, etc. Without there having been
any suggestion by Sedov, Smirnov categorically declared that he did not
want and would not enter into any relationship with the
Bolshevik-Leninists in the USSR. This is not the place to polemicize
with Smirnov’s point of view, but how far all this is from “terrorism”
and the “representative” [62] of Trotsky in the USSR! On the political
questions, the speakers established that their points of view were
rather close, although I.N. Smirnov did not express it categorically,
touching in general on the political questions from the point of view
of passive contemplation. At the end of the conversation, it was only
understood that if the possibility came up, I.N. Smirnov would send
information on the economic and political situation in the USSR, with
the help of which one could here, abroad, be oriented more correctly on
Russian questions. But I.N. Smirnov would not make any promises in this
respect either. Is it worth the trouble to deny that there were
conversations and “terrorist instructions”? Let us only note in passing
the absurdity of the fact that Sedov could have “personally”
given “instructions” to I.N. Smirnov, an old Bolshevik, one of the
pioneers and leaders of the party, and one who was old enough to have
been Sedov’s father. But perhaps Sedov was transmitting “instructions”
in Trotsky’s name? Smirnov himself denied it, categorically, in
front of the court.
Thus the meeting had an accidental, semi-personal character and in
any case stood outside any organizational relations whatsoever. The
principal interest of this meeting was that it made possible direct
personal contact with a man who had recently left the USSR. In
perceiving Soviet reality, such personal encounters were more precious
than dozens of the best articles.
For more than a year, there was no news of any kind from I.N.
Smirnov. It seemed that this chance meeting would have no results, not
even in the sense of receiving some scraps of news from him.
And suddenly, in the fall of 1932, a Soviet employee arriving in
Berlin from the USSR looked up Sedov. This was Holtzman. He said that
I.N. Smirnov, who was a close friend, had learned of his trip abroad on
official matters and had asked him to visit Sedov in Berlin.
Holtzman himself was never an active Oppositionist, although he had
sympathy for the Opposition. He was a fairly typical representative of
that layer of old Bolsheviks who were called “liberals” in the milieu
of the Opposition. Honest men, they half-way sympathized with the
Opposition, but were incapable of fighting the Stalinist apparatus;
they had gotten used to not expressing their thoughts openly, adapting
to the apparatus, grumbling in their narrow circle and were not averse
to offering this or that service to an individual Oppositionist,
especially one in exile. Holtzman did not come in the name of the
organization of the Left Opposition, with which he, like Smirnov, had
no connection, nor in the name of any other group, because none such
existed (nor, even less, in the name a “center”!) But he came on behalf
of Smirnov personally, whom Holtzman cited. Smirnov asked him to tell
Sedov what was happening in the Soviet Union and give him a short
letter, concerning the economic situation in the USSR. This letter
was printed in the form of an article in the Bulletin
(No.31, Nov. 1932) under the title The Economic Situation in the
Soviet Union. This article contained considerable statistical
material and facts and had a purely informational character.
This was the only document brought by Holtzman. As far as the rest
is concerned, he limited himself to verbal information on the political
situation in the USSR, on the state of people’s spirits, etc. On the
basis of this information, the editorial staff of the Bulletin

composed some “correspondence” from Moscow, which appeared in the same
issue (No.31).
From the entire character of this meeting, it is absolutely clear
that Holtzman received neither “instructions” nor a letter, and did not
ask for any either. If he did carry some sort of material into the
USSR, it could only have been the Bulletin.
His aim was to gain a close knowledge of Trotsky’s point of view,
his assessment of the Russian question, in particular, so as to able to
inform Smirnov.
Holtzman quickly returned straight to the USSR. He did not go to
Copenhagen and did not see Trotsky. (On this point, see the chapter Copenhagen).
But since this meeting between Holtzman and Sedov provided nothing
for the purposes of the GPU, they forced Holtzman to testify about his
imaginary trip to Copenhagen, in order to give more weight to all the
charges of the indictment, by directly linking Holtzman with Trotsky.
We’ve already seen how pitifully this attempt failed.
These two facts, i.e., that meetings of Smirnov and Holtzman with
Sedov actually took place, are the only drops of truth in the Moscow
trial’s sea of lies. The only ones! All the rest are lies, lies
from beginning to end.
But what does the fact of the meetings of Smirnov and Holtzman with
Sedov prove? It proves that there were meetings and nothing more.


On January 1, 1933, I.N. Smirnov was arrested. It was
also then, perhaps a bit before, that Holtzman was arrested. Smirnov
was sentenced by the GPU to ten years in an isolator for “ties with the
Opposition abroad.” Without a doubt, Stalin and the GPU knew at that
time, i.e. at the beginning of 1933, all the circumstances of I.N.
Smirnov’s meeting with Sedov because I.N. Smirnov had nothing to hide.
Smirnov was arrested alone. None of his close friends (Safonova,
Mrachkovsky, et al.) were arrested; some among them were only deported.
This alone shows that the GPU—as a result of the investigation of
Smirnov’s case—considered it established that his ties “abroad”
were of a purely personal nature, that there was no “center” or
group organized around Smirnov. Otherwise the arrests would have been
much more extensive and it would not have been Smirnov alone who was
sentenced to imprisonment in an isolator.
On the other hand, if the “contact” with Smirnov had been of an
organizational nature, then after Smirnov’s arrest someone else would
have automatically had to renew this contact. But, from the court
evidence itself it obviously follows that the “contact” existed only
with Smirnov and that after his arrest, it ceased.
This did not stop Stalin, three and a half years after Smirnov’s
arrest, from turning this ill-fated meeting, which had already cost
Smirnov a sentence of ten years in isolation, into a new case about a
terrorist center and terror, and—from shooting Smirnov.


The charges mention Holtzman’s name all of one time and
that only in passing. He, they say, had received instructions from
Trotsky during a private meeting. Throughout the trial, Holtzman is
referred to as the one who received terrorist instructions.
During the trial, it is not once said that Holtzman passed
these instructions on to Smirnov, the only defendant with
whom Holtzman was personally linked. Holtzman himself denied
categorically having transmitted “instructions.” The one at the trial
who figures as the transmitter of Trotsky’s instructions about
terrorism is not Holtzman, but Y. Gaven, who
supposedly personally received terrorist instructions from Trotsky, and
passed them on to I.N. Smirnov. The charges speak of Gaven as the only
person who had passed on terrorist instructions from Trotsky to the
“Unified Center,” and it is Gaven alone who is cited in the testimony
of Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Safonova, and others. He is also the one that
the prosecutor Vyshinsky mentions five or six times in his indictment
speech. There is not a single word of testimony at the trial concerning
the fact that Holtzman passed on terrorist instructions from Trotsky.
Meanwhile the Gaven case is for some reason “set aside,” and he is not
summoned before the court, even as a witness. Holtzman, however, was
shot for the “instructions” which he supposedly received, but which he
passed on to no one. This is the version upheld during the whole trial.
But in the verdict, everything comes out just the opposite;
the name of Gaven is not even mentioned; Holtzman is cited as having
passed on Trotsky’s instructions about terror to the Unified Center.
This confusion was inevitable, because it flows from the
whole nature of the trial,—a crude and insolent police machination.
Is it necessary to say that Trotsky did not transmit through I.
Gaven, any more than through anyone else, any kind of terrorist
instructions and did not meet with Gaven abroad, any more than he met
with a single man of the defendants?
The Missing Document
(Trotsky’s “Letter” to Dreitzer)
As is well known, the prosecution did not have at its
disposal during the trial a single shred of material evidence, a single
actual document or letter. In order to fill in this gap, a “letter”
from Trotsky to Dreitzer and Mrachkovsky was indeed cited from memory
and in quotes. The original, of course, was absent.
This story begins with Dreitzer’s trip to Berlin (in the autumn of
1931) when he “met twice in a cafe on Leipzigerstrasse with Sedov
[Trotsky’s son]. Sedov told him that Trotsky’s directives would be sent
later.”
This is the purest fabrication. Not only did Sedov never meet
Dreitzer in Berlin, but he has never met him and they are not
personally acquainted. (For those who know Berlin, we note
parenthetically, that a cafe on Leipzigerstrasse is a place very poorly
suited for a conspiratorial rendezvous ... )
The three lines quoted above are all that Dreitzer says about his
rendezvous in Berlin. There were no “instructions.” Nor were there any
conversations about terror. Why then, one should ask, was it necessary
for the GPU to “send” Dreitzer to a rendezvous in Berlin? We will now
find this out. Jumping ahead three years, Dreitzer testifies further
that “in October 1934, Dreitzer’s sister brought him a film magazine
from Warsaw, given to her for Dreitzer by an agent [?] of Sedov.
Dreitzer easily discovers within this magazine—since he had agreed
with Sedov in Berlin on the means of contact (Here’s the solution! Now
we understand why the GPU invented the rendezvous in Berlin)—a
handwritten letter from Trotsky in chemical ink which contained the
order to proceed without delay in the preparation and execution of
terrorist acts against Stalin and Voroshilov ... Dreitzer immediately
sent this letter to Mrachkovsky, who ... after learning its contents,
burned the letter out of conspiratorial considerations.”
It is not without interest to note, first of all, that this highly
important testimony of Dreitzer’s was made only after many weeks and
perhaps even months of interrogation (in the volume containing his
testimony it is recorded on pages 102 and 103). It required 100 pages,
of forced confessions, for him to “remember” this very important fact.
The letter had been brought from Warsaw. Neither Trotsky or Sedov
had ever been in Warsaw. By what means did the unknown sister of
Dreitzer (why wasn’t she summoned as a witness?) receive this highly
conspiratorial handwritten letter from Trotsky, through whom, through
whom, under what circumstances? Quite reasonably, no one tells us a
word about all that. If one admits, ad absurdum, that Trotsky
had actually been capable of writing a letter containing the directive
to kill Stalin, it is still impossible to imagine that Trotsky had been
so careless as to entrust such a letter to Dreitzer’s sister
who was a complete stranger to him, and what’s more, to write it in
his own handwriting, as if for the express purpose of giving the
GPU death-dealing evidence against him. The letter wasn’t written in
Code. [63]
This form of activity is worthy of a student terrorist, but not of an
old revolutionary with experience in conspiratorial matters. If the GPU
were unable to obtain the letter, it is only because it was never
written.
Dreitzer further testifies that after he received the letter in
Moscow, he familiarized himself with its contents. The letter
was written in chemical ink, in such a way that it had to be developed

in order to be read. After having developed and read the letter,
Dreitzer sent it to Mrachkovsky in Kazakhstan, How would it be
necessary to act in such a case? You would have to rewrite the letter
in chemical ink, not to mention that it would be necessary to write it
in code. And what does Dreitzer do?
Mrachkovsky states “that in December 1934, when he was in
Kazakhstan, he received from Dreitzer a letter from Trotsky written in
chemical ink ... Mrachkovsky stresses that he knows Trotsky’s handwriting
very well and that he did not have the slightest doubt that the letter
was actually written by Trotsky.” These details are of
enormous interest. It turns out that Dreitzer did not recopy Trotsky’s
letter, but sent Mrachkovsky—the original, which he had developed.
Dreitzer sends a foreign magazine to Mrachkovsky in Kazakhstan. In
its margins, quite openly, as if it were written in ordinary ink, a
letter is written in Trotsky’s hand, and what a letter! It calls for
the assassination of Stalin and Voroshilov!
We are sure that never, anywhere in the entire history of
revolutionary struggle, was there even an instance of sending a
developed chemical letter (and what a letter!) absolutely openly for
thousands of miles. This case would be without precedent in the history
of illegal correspondence. Would be, we say,—because it didn’t
happen. But “there was” something even more fantastic. Mrachkovsky, it
turns out, received Trotsky’s original letter (“written in chemical
ink”) undeveloped. Thus, in transit, a miraculous
transformation of the developed letter sent by Dreitzer took place:
when Mrachkovsky received it was no longer developed. Nothing
like this has ever happened not only in revolutionary practice, but in
nature in general.
No, what incompetents, these GPU people! The Stalinist
bureaucrat-investigator doesn’t even know how to lie properly!
But we still have to say a few words about the content and style of
this crudely constructed falsification.
During the trial, two versions of this letter were given: one
according to Dreitzer’s “recollections,” the other according to
Mrachkovsky’s. The two versions, apparently similar, differ on one very
essential point. Mrachkovsky says that Trotsky gave instructions that
“in case of war, one should hold a defeatist position.” With Dreitzer,
“it’s necessary in case of war to make good use of all the defeats ...”
The Left Opposition has always irreconcilably taken the position of
unconditional defense of the USSR. In Mrachkovsky’s version, Trotsky
makes a 180 degree turn on this highly important question, by taking a
position which is exactly the opposite of that which the Left
Opposition and Trotsky have defended for many years, as well as in
their latest works. This point of the letter alone could not have
failed to strike those to whom it was written, and it could not have
failed to embed itself in their memory forever, because it meant a
break with all the past. Meanwhile, in this extremely important
question the testimonies of Mrachkovsky and Dreitzer contradict each
other.
In the same way, it is impossible not to notice that Trotsky’s
“letter”—in which he proposes to assassinate Stalin and Voroshilov,
take a defeatist position and organize illegal cells within the army, —
takes all of eight or nine lines! You would think that such an
extravagant “platform” would have at least required some explanation.
And one more thing: if Mrachkovsky or Dreitzer had actually

received such a letter, they would have undoubtedly taken it for a
crude provocation.
This incompetent and ignorant forgery is significantly inferior as
far as “quality” goes, to other “police” productions such as the
celebrated “Zinoviev letter,” not to mention “the bordereau in the
Dreyfus affair.” [64]


Let's draw up a short balance sheet:
1. Berman-Yurin and Fritz David were not linked to any
other defendants. They could be included in the trial only by means of
a tenuous thread, tying them to Trotsky and Sedov. We have already
shown that this “thread” was a product of the GPU. Let’s break it.
Berman-Yurin and Fritz David hang in mid-air. It becomes clear that
they were included in the trial as the basis of an amalgam.
2. Olberg, outside of Sedov, is not linked to any of the
defendants. We have already shown what kind of a person this Olberg
was, what kind of character belonged to this “contact,” which stopped
in 1932. Let’s break this thread as well. Olberg also hangs in mid-air.
He also was included in the trial for the sake of the amalgam.[65]
3. M. Lurie is included in the trial through Ruth
Fischer-Maslow who supposedly transmitted to him terrorist instructions
from Trotsky at the beginning of 1933 in Berlin. But Trotsky at this
time had no connection [66] with Ruth Fischer and Maslow,
because they held different political positions. (This contact was not
established until 1934.) Of course, the proposition that Ruth Fischer
and Maslow, in their own name, gave “instructions” to Zinoviev is the
purest absurdity. The thread which ties the anti-Trotskyist scribbler,
M. Lurie, to Trotsky breaks in two places. [67] (They break easily,
these rotten threads!)
4. Dreitzer. Everything necessary about this connection
has been said in this chapter. Let’s break this thread as well.
5. There remains the triangle of Sedov-Smirnov-Holtzman.
We have drawn it, in contrast to the other lines, with a solid line,
because the fact of the meetings itself is true. This is
the only truth in the whole trial. These meetings took place in
1931 and 1932. Since then there has been no other contact whatsoever;
from the beginning of 1933, both Smirnov and Holtzman were in prison.
(The thread which directly links Trotsky with Holtzman was “broken” in
the preceding chapter.)
As far as these two meetings are concerned, one participant
(Smirnov) categorically denied having received terrorist instructions
from Trotsky; “it was the personal opinion of Sedov,” he says; the
other (Holtzman) did not transmit terrorist instructions and was so
hopelessly discredited by the story of his “trip” to Copenhagen.
However, they were to prove Trotsky’s participation in terrorist
activity, especially in Kirov’s assassination. And the verdict says
that “L. Trotsky, from abroad, hastened by every means possible
the preparation for Kirov’s assassination.” (Although this wasn’t
mentioned once at the trial itself.)
In order to explain why it was necessary to assassinate Kirov, who
played no independent role, they tell us that it was the revenge of the
Zinovievists for the fact that Kirov had crushed them in Leningrad. But
what then does Trotsky have to do with it? When Kirov crushed the
Zinovievists in Leningrad, they were just as hostile to the Left
Opposition as were the Stalinists.
On the role of Trotsky in Kirov’s assasination, Zinoviev testified
in a much more eloquent manner: “In my opinion, Bakaev is
right when he says that the true and principal culprits of the odious
assassination of Kirov were, in the first place, myself—Zinoviev,
Trotsky and Kamenev.”
For four years Zinoviev led terrorist activity of unprecendented
scope. And Zinoviev, one of the principal defendants, speaks of the
role of the principal defendant, Trotsky, in a very uncertain way (“in my opinion”,
with reference to a third person.
No comment.
On the basis of irrefutable facts, we have shown that there was
neither terrorism nor a “center”; we have also shown how much these
contacts of Trotsky with the defendants are worth. Of the Stalinist
“schema,” there remains only a blank space. In order to fill it with a
“schema” which corresponds to reality, it would be enough to draw two
rectangles: one large Stalin, the other smaller—Yagoda. The Moscow
trial is their creation from start to finish.

Footnotes
[60]
In this example, the investigative technique is once again revealed:
the accused are constantly pushed, one degree at a time, toward false
confessions. (L.S.)
[61]
In describing Smirnov’s meeting with Sedov, as with a number of other
questions where Sedov is mentioned, we are using his testimony. (L.S.)
[62]
At the trial, Smirnov was always called Trotsky’s “representative” in
the USSR. Such personal “representation”—a “junior leader” represents
not the organization, but the “senior leader”—was, of course,
completely alien to the Opposition and, on the other hand, is a highly
typical invention for the bureaucracy, in the farm and image of their
“leader” and his personal representatives—his minions. But, in
general, how could Smirnov have “represented” the Opposition? He, who
had publicly broken from it in the USSR in the presence of thousands of
Bolshevik-Leninists true to the cause? Until 1934, the Left Opposition
in the USSR was headed by Rakovsky whose moral authority during that
period could not have been compared with I.N. Smirnov’s authority. (L.S.)
[63]
Holtzman had already said that a code existed for correspondence with
Trotsky. (L.S.)
[64]
“Zinoviev letter”: published by the Tory Daily Mail
during the 1924 election campaign after the fall of the first Labour
Government. It purported to be from Zinoviev, then President of the
Communist International, to the British party containing instructions
about the military section of the British CP. In fact it was a crude
forgery, concocted by White Russian emigres in Paris and conveyed
through agents connected with the Conservative Central Office. Its aim
was to weaken Labour’s electoral chances, and this it did, not by
diminishing the Labour vote, but by scaring pro-liberal middle class
voters into supporting the Tories. This allowed Baldwin to become Prime
Minister again in 1925. (Trotsky’s Writings on Britain,
Vol. 2)
[65]
The Dreyfus Affair: Alfred Dreyfus was a Jewish captain on the
French General Staff who was sentenced to life imprisonment on Devil’s
Island in 1895 on a false charge of espionage. The War Office,
monarchists and the Church conducted a viciously anti-Semitic campaign
which split the nation into warring camp. The Republicans finally
triumphed and Dreyfus was exonerated in 1906. The crudity of the
frameup has long since served to make the Dreyfus Affair a paradigm of
political falsification.
[66]
This fact can be established on the basis of documents and the
testimony of numerous witnesses. (L.S.)
[67]
As far as M. Lurie’s “ties” with Zinoviev are concerned, it is
interesting to note that M. Lurie, who brought such important terrorist
instructions for Zinoviev to Moscow in March 1933, met with him only in
August 1934! (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.12)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE ATTEMPTS WHICH DID NOT TAKE PLACE


Besides general conversations about terror, the
transmission of “instructions”, all sorts of “terrorist” conceptions,
etc., a few concrete attacks are nevertheless mentioned. Let us take
them one by one.

1.The Berman-Yurin—Fritz David Team
The Attack on Stalin

Having arrived in Moscow in March 1933, [49] Berman-Yurin
and Fritz David decided to organize an attempt on Stalin at the XIIIth
Plenum of the Comintern in December 1933. According to Berman-Yurin
“the plan fell through,” because Fritz David had not been able to get a
pass for Berman-Yurin “who was supposed to fire at Stalin.” Fritz David
gives another version: “These projects failed because Stalin did not
attend the XIIIth Plenum.” This is a bit like the story of the borrowed
pot. First, he says, I returned the pot to him intact, second, it was
already cracked, third, I didn’t borrow anything from him at all. The
third part seems to be missing here, but in fact it is here too. There
was no pass, there was no Stalin and ... there was no attempt to
organize an attack.


But Fritz David and Berman-Yurin were not depressed by this failure.
In fact, “they had already elaborated two concrete (!) plans for
attacks on Stalin.” There remained the second plan: to carry out an
attack on Stalin at the VIIth Congress of the Comintern.
Without a doubt, this plan was brilliant; furthermore it
corresponded to Trotsky’s “directives,” which were not simply to kill
Stalin, but to do it without fail to the accompaniment of music and
ovations, “before an international forum,” according to the statement
made by Berman-Yurin. But from our Point of view, this plan still
contained a serious drawback. The last previous Congress of the
Comintern (the VIth) was held in 1928. From 1928 to 1933, more than
five years had already passed, and there was absolutely no mention of a
new congress. Violating the statutes of the Comintern, Stalin pushed it
back from year to year, with the intention, if possible, of never
convening it again. In the propaganda of the Left Opposition abroad
during those years, the question of the failure to convene the Congress
of the Comintern played a great role. Here is what Trotsky wrote, for
example, in December 1934 (one can find dozens of similar quotations):
“The ruling Stalinist group, basically, has long since waved good-bye
to the Comintern. One of the most obvious proofs of this is Stalin’s
refusal to convene an International Congress.” (Bulletin of the
Opposition, No. 41)
Berman-Yurin and Fritz David were sent by Trotsky, by the same
Trotsky who thought that the Congress would not be convened, and at the
same time, as Berman-Yurin testifies, who proposed to the latter “to
organize an attack at the Congress.” And so, instead of acting, our
“terrorists” wait ... for the Congress. They wait one year, they wait
two years, and finally two and a half years later, their patience is
rewarded. After a break of seven years, from 1928 to 1935, the VIIth
Congress is at last convened. One may retort: perhaps they waited a
long time, but on the other hand they had prepared the attack well and
“elaborated a concrete plan.” Let the court record speak: “At the
Congress of the Comintern, only Fritz David was able to get in, since
they could not obtain a pass for Berman-Yurin. Fritz David, according
to his own words, was not able to carry out his terrorist act because
it was impossible for him to get close to Stalin ... He, Fritz David,
sat in the loge, there were too many people in the loge and shooting
was out of the question.”
Obviously Fritz David had thought that he would be seated at the
Praesidium and “there would not be many people” ... at the Congress.
Thus the story ends. But how, one asks, did the GPU learn of all
that? Or did these “terrorists” go to the GPU on their own and tell
them about their failures? And if they had not made that mistake, they
would very probably not only be alive and well today, they would have
prepared, no less successfully, a new attack on Stalin, scheduled to
take place, let us say, at the VIIIth Congress of the Comintern (1940?
1945?).
And this is the only “concrete” attempt at an attack on
Stalin! Furthermore it seems that the court itself did not take this
GPU story very seriously, since it does not even mention it in its
verdict.
2. The Terrorist Olberg Attacks Stalin


Just like Berman-Yurin and Fritz David, Olberg “received
instructions” from Trotsky concerning terrorist activity. Trotsky had
never laid eyes on Olberg any more than he had Berman-Yurin and Fritz
David (although in contrast to the other two, he had heard of him, it
is true, only in a negative vein (see page 33).
Olberg made three trips to the USSR. After receiving “terrorist
instructions” in 1932, he left at the end of March (!) 1933 for the
Soviet Union and stayed there until July 1933; he “hid,” for some
reason, for a month and a half in Moscow, then he left for Stalinbad,
where he settled down as a history teacher. Stalinbad, which is some
distance from Moscow, and therefore also from all the top leaders, some
4000 km. at least, was evidently chosen by Olberg as the most favorable
location for his terrorist activity. But soon Olberg had to return to
Prague, because “his military papers were not in order.” Olberg went to
the USSR for the second time in March 1935, but he only spent several
days there, since he had a tourist visa. In July 1935, Olberg went to
the USSR for the third time. Olberg had made his last two trips with
the famous passport from the Republic of Honduras (the only material
proof officially mentioned in the case). “After spending a short time
in Minsk, [Olberg] left for Corky, linked up with Yelin and Fedotov,
and obtained work at the Gorky Pedagogical Institute where he remained
until the day of his arrest.”
In reading this unbelievable story, one might think there was no GPU
in the USSR! Vyshinsky shows great curiosity toward Olberg’s Honduras
passport: weren’t his parents in Honduras, or perhaps his grandmother?
One wonders why the GPU had not shown the same interest at the time of
Olberg’s trips! Whoever has any understanding of the conditions under
which visas are given for the USSR and the strict manner in which the
GPU watches even the “respectable” foreigners who arrive, will see how
unbelievable this story is. A man arrives (and not for the first time)
with an exotic and unreliable passport from the Republic of Honduras,
does not speak a word of the American languages, but speaks ...
Russian. It is hard to imagine a more suspicious foreigner.
Nevertheless, Olberg not only enters the USSR unhindered, leaves and
enters the USSR again, but he even obtains an official teaching
position at a State Pedagogical Institute! Let us state as
categorically as possible: Olberg was able to receive a visa for
the USSR, to go there and obtain work only with the assistance of the
Soviet authorities, the GPU included.
But let us return to the “terrorist” activity of Olberg. Three years
— from 1932 to 1935—went by without our hearing a word of this
activity. But having arrived in Gorky in July 1935, “Olberg learned
from Fedotov that terrorist combat groups had been organized before his
arrival. Olberg simply had to elaborate the actual plan of the attack.”
Let us note that neither Yelin nor Fedotov (who is none other than
the director of the pedagogical Institute where Olberg taught!) was
called to trial, neither as accused nor as a witness. Let us also note
that if terrorist “combat groups” organized by Fedotov had really
existed in Gorky, then it is simply incomprehensible why Fedotov needed
Olberg. A young man, with neither kith nor kin, having no notion of
terrorist activity or of conspiratorial activity in general, must lead
— “elaborate a plan!”—a terrorist organization already started by
much more experienced people. But what exactly did this notorious plan
consist of? “The terrorist act was to be carried out on May 1, 1936, in
Moscow”; this is all that we learn from the court records.  By whom? Where?
How? Not a word about any of that. “What prevented this plan from being
carried out?” asks Vyshinsky. “The arrest,” answers Olberg.
Such is the story of this “attack.” This, furthermore, does not
prevent a venal scribbler from Pravda, (L. Rovinsky,
August 22) from informing us that “Olberg’s terrorist and spy activity
was coming to a head ...” Not only was he “organizing terrorist
espionage groups,” but he was even “teaching the terrorists
marksmanship and bomb throwing.” In the court transcripts there was
never any question of marksmanship or throwing bombs. We doubt very
much that the student of political science, V. Olberg, had ever seen a
bomb, except for the “bomb” which Stalin prepared for him.
3. The Attack by Lurie No.1 and Lurie No.2 on Voroshilov in
particular and on Others “in General”


N. Lurie confirms that he had engaged in Trotskyist
activity since 1927, that is, for about nine years. Unfortunately, no
one knew anything about it. No Trotskyist from any country, either in
1927, or later, ever met N. Lurie. In all our attempts get information
about N. Lurie, we received the same answer from everyone: unknown.
Unfortunately, the GPU is not among our correspondents. It could
certainly give interesting information and tell us, in particular,
when, in 1927 or any other year, N. Lurie’s “activity” began.
N. Lurie describes the beginning of this terrorist activity in the
following way: “In the early part of 1932 Moishe Lurie told me that it
was time [!] to leave for the USSR and to carry out terrorist work
there.”
This free and easy tone is admirable in itself! We have played
billiards long enough, “It is time” to eat dinner ..., that is, to take
up “terrorism.” In Moscow, Lurie met with a certain Konstant and a
certain Lipshitz, whom he calls “German Trotskyists,” but who, once
again, are strangers to any true Trotskyist. (Let it be said in
passing, that neither Konstant, nor Lipshitz are brought to trial or
summoned as witnesses. That is the custom at this “model” trial!)
Lurie told Konstant about the “terrorist directives.” In the same
carefree tone, Konstant answers Lurie “that this is nothing new to
him.” (He undoubtedly knew about “this” since childhood.)
In August 1932, the N. Lurie group receives from a certain Franz
Weiss (a fascist secret agent, according to the court transcript) the
assignment to carry out an attack on Voroshilov. At the time of the
preliminary investigation, N. Lurie declared that the preparation of
this attack (in Moscow) had lasted “from the fall of 1932 to the
end of 1933.” But at the interrogation the same Lurie indicated
that already in July 1933 he left for Cheliabinsk. If N.
Lurie moved in July 1933 to Cheliabinsk, one wonders how he
could have been preparing an attack in Moscow until the end of 1933.
Probably in order to “liquidate this hitch,” at the trial, N. Lurie
gives a new version: “We were occupied with it [with the preparation of
the attack against Voroshilov] from September 1932 until the
spring of 1933.”
Until the spring or until the end of 1933?! The court
naturally passes over this contradiction in silence.
But what did the actual preparation of the attack consist of? The
troika—N. Lurie, Konstant, Lipshitz—which, for reasons unknown, is
represented at the trial only by Lurie, watched when Voroshilov would
leave, but the car “went too fast. It is hopeless to fire at a swiftly
moving car,” (the testimony of N. Lurie). Having convinced themselves
that the car was travelling too fast, these unfortunate terrorists
ceased any further surveillance of Voroshilov’s departures. When the
trial chairman asks them what they did next, N. Lurie replies that they
directed their attention toward the acquisition of explosives in order
to accomplish the terrorist act by means of a bomb. The court makes no
attempt to bring to light whether they procured any explosives, where,
how, whether a bomb was made, etc. With this, the case is closed. In
July 1933, N. Lurie leaves for Cheliabinsk to work as a physician. But
even in faraway “Cheliabinsk Lurie didn’t halt his terrorist activity.”
He waits, don’t you see, for some leader, Kaganovich or Ordzhonikidze,
to come to Cheliabinsk. But neither Kaganovich nor Ordzhonikidze, as if
on purpose, comes to Cheliabinsk; in any case, N. Lurie does not meet
any of them there and does not commit, of course, any attack.[50]
This does not prevent Moishe Lurie from pointing out “how he
organized [!] the attack on Comrade Ordzhonikidze ... To this end, M.
Lurie proposed that N. Lurie, who was leaving for the tractor factory
in Cheliabinsk, use the eventual arrival of Ordzhonikidze at the
factory for the realization of the terrorist act!”
N. Lurie remains two and a half years in Cheliabinsk fruitlessly
awaiting Ordzhonikidze or Kaganovich. But as the proverb says, if the
mountain will not come to Mohammed, Mohammed must go to the mountain.
N. Lurie leaves for Leningrad. Passing through
Moscow, Moishe Lurie orders him in January 1936 to “shoot Zhdanov
during the May 1st demonstration in Leningrad.” (Why it was necessary
to assassinate Zhdonov, is impossible to figure out.) During the May
1st demonstration, N. Lurie marches in the column of demonstrators, but
does not try to shoot. When the trial chairman asks him why, he
answers: “We passed too far away.” And this rubbish is served up at the
trial as attacks!
4. One More Attack on Voroshilov


During the trial, there is mentioned the preparation of
one more terrorist act against Voroshilov, which supposedly was to be
carried out by two important soldiers, both famous heroes of the Civil
War: D. Schmidt and Kuzmichev. Obviously, no proof is introduced.
Neither Schmidt, nor Kuzmichev, nor any other soldier accused of
terrorist activity—Putna, Esterman, Gaevsky—was brought to trial.
Three defendants do mention the “terrorist” activity of
Schmidt-Kuzmichev. Reingold testifies that “he learned from Mrachkovsky
and Dreitzer that in the summer of 1933 there was organized
... a Trotskyist military group consisting of Schmidt, commander of one
of the Red Army brigades, Kuzmichev, staff commander of one of the
military units, and a number [!] of others.” Mrachkovsky testifies that
things took place a year later. “In the middle of 1934,
Dreitzer reported to me that he was simultaneously preparing
Voroshilov’s assassination, for which Schmidt Dmitrii would have to be
prepared ...” Dreitzer himself testified during the prosecutor’s
cross-examination that, “I enlisted the services of Esterman and
Gaevsky for the terrorist act, and added Schmidt and Kuzmichev in
1935. The latter ones took up the task of killing Voroshilov.”
Thus all three testimonies (and there is no other testimony about
this matter) radically contradict one another: 1933, 1931, 1936—they
therefore have to be discarded as crude lies.[51]


During the trial, other attempted attacks are also
mentioned; but these last have not even a shadow of proof. Thus, for
example, Zinoviev testifies that “he knew about two attempts on
Stalin’s life in which Reingold, Dreitzer and Pikel took part.” Neither
Dreitzer nor Reingold mentions these “attempts.” Pikel testifies “that
in the autumn of 1933 Bogdan had made a new [?] attempt at an attack on
Stalin’s life.” He also testifies “about the preparation of a terrorist
act against Stalin in 1934”; while his participation “was limited to
having put Bakaev in touch with Radin” (the latter is also not brought
to trial). Bakaev also makes it known that “in October 1934, under the
leadership of Kamenev, Evdokimov and himself (Bakaev), an attack
against Stalin was prepared in Moscow ... This attack did not succeed.”
And that is all.
The court accepts all these declarations indifferently, does not at
all try to clarify the circumstances, the character, the time, the
place, etc. of these “attacks.” The absence of any facts about these
attacks does not permit us to examine them in greater detail.
Let us note in conclusion that the verdict says: “the
Trotskyist-Zinovievist Unified Center prepared a series of terrorist
groups and a series of terrorist acts against Comrades Stalin,
Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Kirov, Ordzhonikidze, Zhdanov Kossior,
Postyshev and others.” [52]
We have tried above to assiduously select and systematically examine
all the facts about the attacks which are scattered
throughout the court transcripts. If one considers N. Lurie’s trip to
Cheliabinsk an “attack on Ordzhonikidze and Kaganovich” and his trip to
Leningrad an “attack on Zhdanov,” then there still remain nonetheless
“Postyshev, Kossior and others ...” In the whole trial not one word is
said about attacks against them. This does not prevent the court from
placing the following paragraph in the verdict: “The court
investigation has also established that the Trotskyist-Zinovievist
terrorist center ... prepared terrorist acts against comrades Kossior
and Postyshev, through a Ukrainian terrorist group which acted under
the leadership of the Trotskyist Mukhin.”
The Ukrainian terrorist group and the very name of its leader Mukhin
are mentioned at the trial for the first time in the verdict!
The story of Mukhin and his group was obviously improvised at the last
moment so that Postyshev and Kossior would not be offended.


Let us draw up the balance sheet on the basis of the
trial evidence itself. There was not a single attack, there was not
even a single attempt at an attach. The prosecutor Vyshinsky
nonetheless considers that “the guilt is so clearly established that he
can free himself from the obligation to analyze the materials gathered
by the court investigation.” He even adds: “What is essential in this
trial, is that they (the accused) transformed their
counter-revolutionary thoughts into counter-revolutionary deeds, their
counter-revolutionary theory into terrorist practice: not only do they
talk of shooting, but they shoot; they shoot and they kill!”
So they shoot?! At the trial it was not, in any case, mentioned that
any of the defendants had fired a shot. There were “instructions,”
“conversations,” “preparations,” “attempts,” “people were picked out,”
now the terrorist activity was “speeded up,” now it was “halted,” —
there was all that in words, but not a shot was fired. Not one
attack, not one real attempt at an attack was established in court.
Sometimes it turned out, as if on purpose, that it was too far to
shoot, or that the terrorist marched by too far away, or that the car
was moving too fast, or that the terrorist happened to be in Stalinblad
or Cheliabinsk, while Stalin, as if by chance, was in Moscow.
Nonetheless, these “terrorists” were placed in exceptionally
favorable conditions. The usual difficulties of terrorists—belonging
to different social layers ... or lacking information about the
targets, or being unable to penetrate into their milieu—here all this
was completely absent.
After breaking from the Opposition, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov,
Mrachkovsky, Bakaev and others moved in the circles of the apparatus.
They were well received at the Kremlin, in all the institutions, some
even in Stalin’s secretariat. Mrachkovsky, for example, was given a
personal reception by Stalin; [53] it would not have taken much for him to
discharge his revolver into Stalin. The terrorist opportunities of the
majority of those shot, famous Bolsheviks, were almost unlimited. In
addition, they were helped from abroad by Trotsky, and in the USSR, by
dozens, if not hundreds, of people; they got support from an
organization as powerful as the Gestapo! And the results? Zero! Zero!
If there were no assassinations, it is only because none of the
people who were shot or mentioned in the case had prepared any
assassinations, none of them had had the idea of searching along
the road of terror for a way out from the Stalinist dead end.
Without Kirov’s assassination, Stalin would never have decided to
start circulating all these wild lies about “terror.” This is why he
artificially combined reality—Kirov’s assassination by Nikolaev, an
assassination with which none of the defendants in the trial had any
connection—with all the other inventions, This artificial concoction
is the content of the central police combination of the Moscow trial.
The reality of Kirov’s assassination was to give the appearance
of reality to other attacks—which did not take place.

Footnotes
[49]
It is highly characteristic that all the terrorists “sent” by Trotsky,
i.e., Berman-Yurin, Fritz David, Moishe Lurie and others, all left for
the USSR in March, 1933. Is this not explained by the fact that they
were in reality “sent” to the USSR, not by Trotsky, but by Hitler, who
had just taken power in Germany with the help of Stalin and all his
Berman-Yurins? While the German revolutionary workers were dispatched
to concentration camps, the Stalinist functionaries, including
Berman-Yurin, Fritz David and all the others, left for Moscow. (L.S.)
[50]
Nevertheless the verdict says that “N. Lurie tried (?) to carry out an
attack on the life of Cdes. Kaganovich and Ordkzonikidze.” The same
Nathan Lurie is accused in the verdict of preparing an attack on Stalin
as well. In the court transcripts regarding the attack of N. Lurie on
Stalin there is not one word! (L.S.)
[51]
The presiding judge makes no attempt in the course of the trial to
clear up the contradictions, to bring to trial the people mentioned in
this case, etc. But he suddenly shows a great interest in the exact
type of revolver N. Lurie had: a Browning? what kind! medium caliber?
What pathetic play-acting! (L.S.)
[52]
We will lay aside one, completely anecdotal incident. “The terrorist”
Yakovlev, who, along with Safonova were the sole witnesses at the trial
(why witnesses and not defendants is inexplicabe), testified that
Kamenev ordered him to organize a terrorist group ... at the Academy of
Sciences. (L.S.)
[53]
Safonova testified about this reception, saying that “Mrachkovsky told
us (Safonova and I.N. Smirnov) about the conversation with Stalin ...
and said that the only answer was to kill Stalin.” If all of this is
not made up from beginning to end (I.N. Smirnov flatly denied the
Safonova story), then probably this is what happened: upon returning
from the reception with Stalin, Mrachkovsky was greatly disappointed —
there is nothing surprising about that—and sharply attacked Stalin.
Hence Safonova, freely moving back the date, “laid the basis” for the
terror charges. Of course, this is only a hypothesis. (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.11)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

LENIN, THE FIRST TERRORIST
 (“Remove Stalin”)


During the trial as during the investigation, the official and unofficial accusers (i.e., the accused) used with particular insistence the expression: “Stalin must be removed.” During the investigation this formula was used as amorphous pig-iron, from which one might make a club, but from which one might also make nothing at all. Does it mean to “remove” him legally, on the basis of party statutes and at the party congress, whose business it is to reelect or to replace the General Secretary, – or in some other manner, “illegally”? This question is carefully left in the shadows at the beginning of the inquiry. There it will become apparent. As long as the accused have not been broken for good, all that is torn from them is the confession of having the intention to “remove” Stalin, to remove, i.e., to replace. Then as if by chance, they are ordered to confess that they are for “extreme methods.” The rest is clear: the two declarations are combined and when the accused is definitively broken, the investigating judge lays down his hand. The extreme methods become “terror;” to “remove” becomes synonymous with to kill. And what at first sight was amorphous pig-iron has sharpened to become a deadly weapon. In the court, the formula “to remove Stalin” appears with its new meaning: to remove means “to kill.” [45]
But why have Stalin and his accomplices become so obsessed with this expression? Where did they first come up with it? In his statement, Vyshinsky gives us some explanation of this: “In March 1932, in a fit of counterrevolutionary anger, Trotsky published an open letter with the call to ‘remove Stalin’ (this letter was discovered in the secret lining of a suitcase belonging to Holtzman and added to the dossier as material evidence.)” Olberg also mentions this, testifying that: “Sedov spoke to me for the first time about my trip to the USSR following Trotsky’s appeal which was written after he had been deprived of his Soviet citizenship. Trotsky, in this appeal, put forward the idea that it was necessary to assassinate Stalin. This thought is expressed in the following words: ‘It is necessary to remove Stalin.’ After having shown me the typewritten text of this appeal, Sedov said to me: ‘Well, you see now that it cannot be said more clearly. This is a diplomatic formulation.’”
We thus learn that we are dealing with an open letter which Trotsky wrote in March 1932, on the occasion of the revocation of his Soviet citizenship. Vyshinsky doesn’t find it necessary to quote such an important document, although the letter was “added to the dossier as material evidence.”
Why? We shall soon find out. Trotsky’s “call” for the assassination of Stalin is nothing other than the open letter of Trotsky to the Praesidium of the Central Executive Committee, that is, to Kalinin, Petrovsky, and others, published at one time in the Bulletin of the Opposition [46] and in all the other publications of the Left Opposition. It is to Kalinin and Petrovsky that Trotsky transmits – through the press! – the instruction to assassinate Stalin.
What a sensation! And why is Kalinin not among the defendants? Or hasn’t his turn come yet?
Here is the extract from this “open letter” which interests us:

 Stalin has led us to an impasse. There is no way out except the liquidation of Stalinism. One must have confidence in the working class, one must give the proletarian vanguard the possibility by means of free criticism, to reexamine from top to bottom the whole Soviet system, to pitilessly purify it of all the accumulated rubbish. One must, finally, carry out the last urgent advice of Lenin: remove Stalin. (Bulletin of the Opposition, No.29, March 1932)

 Now we understand why Vyshinsky does not quote the document [47] which was so important for laying the foundations of “terror”! If Vyshinsky had quoted the whole sentence, the sensation would have been even greater. Not only does Trotsky call for removing – “assassinating” – Stalin, but what’s more he quotes Lenin!
It thus turns out that the one who laid the foundations of terrorism and who was the first terrorist, was Lenin, and not Trotsky.
The “last urgent advice of Lenin,” is his famous Testament. Let us recall what Lenin wrote in it:
Comrade Stalin, having become General Secretary, has concentrated in his hands an immense power and I am not convinced that he always knows how to use it with sufficient caution.
Stalin is too rude and this fault, entirely tolerable in our midst and in relations between us communists becomes intolerable in the position of General Secretary. This is why I propose to the comrades that they reflect on ways of removing Stalin from this post and naming in his place a man who, in all respects, will distinguish himself from Cde. Stalin in only one way, that is, one who would be more patient, more loyal, more polite and more attentive toward his comrades, less capricious, etc. This circumstance may seem an insignificant trifle, but I think that from the point of view of preventing a split, and from the point of view of what I have written above about the mutual relations between Stalin and Trotsky, it is not a trifle, or else it is trifle which can acquire decisive importance. January 4, 1923 [48]

 To remove Stalin – or more crudely put: kick him out – from the post of General Secretary, that is what Lenin proposed in his Testament. Here are the sources of “terrorism,” which Vyshinsky so wisely doesn’t mention!
Since its formation, the Left Opposition has demanded the fulfillment of Lenin’s Testament in hundreds of articles, documents, tracts, in its platform, in the articles of the Bulletin of the Opposition and, finally, in Trotsky’s Open Letter to the Central Executive Committee (on the occasion of one of Stalin’s more minor and preparatory amalgams – depriving Trotsky of his Soviet citizenship). And this letter was written four and a half years ago. Why didn’t Stalin dare to attribute terrorist intentions to Trotsky then? Because Stalin needed time to prepare the ground for his poisonous slanders.
Remove (kick out!) Stalin meant, according to Lenin’s thinking, to take away the immense power that he had concentrated in his hands since becoming head of the apparatus. That meant depriving him of the possibility of abusing this power.
When Lenin was writing his Testament, he was far from being able to imagine just how far Stalin’s abuse of power would go. Yes, if Lenin were alive, he would not only be in prison (“Lenin was only saved from prison by his death,” said Krupskaya in 1926), but he would have been declared the first and foremost terrorist!
Such is Stalin’s belated revenge – thirteen years later – for Lenin’s Testament, Stalin’s revenge against Lenin. It took the gravedigger of the revolution, Stalin, thirteen years to crush Bolshevism and to turn the greatest of all revolutions into the corrupt Bonapartist regime which now rules in the USSR.

Footnotes
[45] This emerges especially clearly in Ter-Vaganian’s testimony. (L.S.)
[46] Although the “Letter” was published, Sedov is supposed to have shown Olberg a “typewritten” copy. Olberg needed this story to give the thing a mysterious and conspiratorial character. What pathetic nourishes! (L.S.)
[47] It seems that only Kerensky swallowed this bait: “One document – he says – in any case exists – and of no small significance. Vyshinsky uttered (0!) one sentence which no one (no one, with the exception, it goes without saying, of Kerensky) noticed.” Then follows the above mentioned quotation from Vyshinky’s speech. (L.S.)
[48] The September 1936 issue of The Bolshevik, organ of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, reports Lenin’s Testament in the following words: “Stalin, whom the dying Lenin put at the head of the party!” (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



edov: Red Book (Chap.3)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE ASSASSINATION OF KIROV


All the latest Stalinist amalgams have been constructed
over Kirov’s corpse. To see clearly into the Moscow trials, one must
first of all recall the history of this assassination and the
circumstances connected with it.
On December 1, 1934 in Leningrad, the terrorist Nikolaev
assassinated Kirov.
For more than two weeks, nothing was known of the assassin
personally, or of the nature of the assassination.
On the 6th, 12th, and 18th of December the Soviet newspapers printed
the news of the execution of terrorist White Guards (104 people in
all), the majority of whom had come to the USSR illegally from Poland,
Latvia, Finland and Romania. They created the impression that these
people were shot in connection with the Nikolaev affair, that is, that
Nikolaev had been connected with White Guards.
On December 17, sixteen days after the assassination, in resolutions
of party organizations on the assassination of Kirov, came the first
mention that Nikolaev had at one time been a member of the “Zinovievist
anti-party group.” (Furthermore, the entire Leningrad party
organization had joined this group in 1926.)
The mention of Nikolaev as a “Zinovievist” revealed Stalin’s
intentions at one stroke: to attempt to implicate the Left Opposition
and Trotsky in the assassination of Kirov, by means of the old
Zinovievist group which, although it had broken with the Opposition in
January 1928, was easier, from the policeman’ s point of view, to draw
into the case.
On December 22, Tass [16] announced that in connection with the
assassination of Kirov, fourteen old Zinovievists had been arrested
(Kotolynov, Shatsky, Mandelstam and others), the majority of whom were
supposedly part of a so-called “Leningrad Center.” This center, whose
existence was Far from proven, was characterized by the news as
“closed”; it said nothing of Zinoviev, Kamenev, or of any other known
Zinovievist.
On December 23, new information was published indicating that a week
before (on December 16), Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov, Bakaev, etc, had
already been arrested in connection with the Nikolaev affair; for seven
of them, including Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Evdokimov, “given the absence
of sufficient evidence,” judicial prosecution would not be undertaken;
they would be handed over to the GPU for administrative punishment.
On December 27 the newspapers published the formal indictment for
the case of Nikolaev, Kotolynov and others, in which there was not a
word mentioned about the Zinoviev group and its participation in
Kirov’s assassination. [17]
On December 28 and 29 the trial of the fourteen (Nikolaev, Kotolynov
and others) took place, and, as we know, they were condemned to death
and shot.
At the trial of the fourteen, the overwhelming majority of the
defendants, in spite of a four-week investigation, did not admit their
participation in Kirov’s assassination. Besides Nikolaev, only Zvezdov
and Antonov admitted it fully and Yuzkin partially, that is, four out
of the fourteen.
If, as it is turns out according to the new version at the Moscow
trial, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bakaev and the others were not only connected
with the Leningrad Center, which is supposed to have committed the
murder of Kirov, but also immediately and practically directed the
assassination, how can one explain that an investigation conducted for
an entire month established absolutely no evidence in this respect? Why
would the defendants who gave full depositions have decided to conceal
at all costs precisely the role of Zinoviev, Kamenev and the others?
Why would the participation of these men have been concealed as well by
the GPU agent [18]

who was located in Nikolaev’s entourage?
The only explanation for it is that Zinoviev, Kamenev, and the
others had nothing to do with Kirov’s assassination. It is precisely
for that reason that, as long as they had not yet been completely
broken, they could not be accused of Kirov’s assassination.
On January 16, 1935 the Soviet newspapers published the formal
indictment in the case of the so-called Moscow Center, with Zinoviev,
Kamenev, Evdokimov and the others at its head.
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov and the others, whom the press had only
a few weeks earlier declared as having no part in Kirov’s
assassination, were now being brought to trial in connection with this
murder. The case took a new turn. On January 15 and 16 the court
pronounced judgment on the fate of Zinoviev, Kamenev, et al., 19
defendants in all. They were accused of striving for the “restoration
of capitalism” and of counter-revolutionary activity in general. Not a
single concrete fact, no proof, was introduced by the prosecution.
During the trial, it was only stated that by their “malevolent
criticism,” by “spreading rumors,” Zinoviev, Kamenev, et al, had
encouraged terrorist moods, and that consequently they bore the
political and moral responsibility for the Kirov murder. At the same
time, the court considered it established that none of the accused had
anything to do with the assassination itself, although there had been
no doubt on this subject in the mind of any man who was the least bit
informed and politically experienced. If Zinoviev, Kamenev and the
others had had the slightest hand in Kirov’s assassination how could
one explain, once again, that the new investigation (from December 16,
1934 to January 15, 1935) had also not uncovered a single thread
leading to Kirov’s murder? And in the Zinoviev-Kamenev affair dozens of
people were implicated who were already demoralized for the most part
and who accused themselves and others of non-existent crimes. Yet none
of them, either by word or by allusion, be it ever so “unintentional,”
gave into the hands of the GPU the thread leading to the participation
of Zinoviev, Kamenev and others in Kirov’s assassination!
Stalin had to content himself in 1935 with the admission by Zinoviev
and the others of “political and moral responsibility” for Kirov’s
murder, and even this admission was wrenched from them under the threat
of the firing squad. But by the insolent and deliberately ambiguous
formulation of the verdict,—“the investigation has not established
the facts” of the participation of Zinoviev and the others in Kirov’s
assassination,—Stalin retained the possibility of “developing” the
case in the future, depending on how the situation worked out.
All the accused avoided the firing squad at that time. They were
sentenced to long prison terms. Even then it was totally clear that the
arrest and conviction of Zinoviev and Kamenev were provoked not by
their activity (it was nonexistent), but by Stalin’s plans: striking at
this group meant striking at all the oppositionist moods in the
country, in particular inside the bureaucracy itself, where Zinoviev
and Kamenev still showed certain authority, and above all—striking
out at “Trotskyism.”
No sooner had the trial of Zinoviev and Kamenev come to its end,
than a new case, the third case in connection with Kirov’s
assassination, had begun. On January 23, 1935, twelve leaders of the
Leningrad GPU appeared before the military Tribunal under the following
indictment: “While having information at their disposal on an attempt
being prepared against Kirov ... they had demonstrated an attitude
which was not only careless, but also criminally negligent ... by not
taking the necessary measures.”
We thus learned, with complete surprise, that the GPU had “information
at their disposal” about the attempt being prepared against Kirov,
and that the heads of the Leningrad GPU “had not taken measures
to bring to light and stop the activity of Kirov’s assassin in
Leningrad, L. Nikolaev, even though they had all the necessary
opportunities to do so.”
In what way could the GPU have known and had “every necessary
opportunity?” In only one way: amongst the Leningrad terrorists,
the GPU had an agent provocateur (perhaps even more than one),
directly associated with Nikolaev.
The trial of the members of the Leningrad GPU and the very
formulation of the verdict demonstrate irrefutably that Kirov’s
assassination did not happen without the GPU having had a hand in it.
The verdict states literally that “they were informed (sic!) of the
attempt being prepared against Kirov ... and they acted with criminal
negligence.” Trotsky had already explained in his pamphlet devoted to
Kirov’s murder that “negligence” had nothing to do with it and that:
“When the preparation of the terrorist attack, of which the GPU knew,
had already begun, the task of Medved (chief of the GPU in Leningrad)
and his collaborators was not at all to arrest the conspirators—that
would have been too simple—it was necessary to find the appropriate
consul, to put him in touch with Nikolaev ... and establish a link
between the Zinoviev-Kamenev group and the Leningrad terrorists. It was
not an easy job. It demanded time and Nikolaev refused to wait.
Medved was an instrument in the hands of Stalin-Yagoda, nothing
more. Stalin consequently bears not only the political but also
the direct responsibility for Kirov’s assassination. Certainly
Stalin and the GPU did not want this assassination, they were counting
on arresting the terrorists at the last moment, but while preparing the
amalgam (between the consul and Trotsky) they “played with Kirov’s
head.” This game was interrupted by Nikolaev’s premature pistol shot.
Left unfinished, the combination made between the consul and Trotsky
collapsed pitifully. Even the trial against Zinoviev and Kamenev had to
be built upon accusations “in general” without any possibility of
linking them with Kirov’s assassination. Now, about a year and a half
later, without the least new fact, a new case the fourth!—has come to
fruition in the backstage area of the GPU around Kirov’s body:
Zinoviev, Kamenev and others, it turns out, organized and carried out
Kirov’s assassination.


The fact that the terrorist activity of Zinoviev and the
others could not be established earlier is explained, according to the
GPU, by the exclusive secrecy of the conspirators.
Is this true? The Moscow trial gives a completely contradictory
picture. In theory, there is an extraordinary conspiracy, which goes so
far as to plan the murders of those who carried out the terrorist acts
after the seizure of power, in order to erase every trace; in practice,
there is incessant chatter about terror, endless meetings, trips,
communications.
Let us demonstrate this with the facts. In order to prepare Kirov’s
murder, Bakaev goes to Leningrad and joins Kotolynov, Levin,
Rumiantsev, Mandelstam, and Miasnikov. [19] (These are all people
who were executed in the Nikolaev affair.) Bakaev meets five people!
But that is not enough for him.
It turns out that he has not gone to Leningrad alone, but with some
“Trotskyist-terrorist” (whose name is not cited and whose identity the
court does not even attempt to establish.) As if Bakaev were visibly
trying to fail, he asks to “assemble the men.” “A little later, in
Levin’s apartment were gathered, in addition to himself and Mandelstam,
Sositsky, Vladimir Rumiantsev, Kotolynov and Miasnikov” (at this
meeting the only one missing is Medved!). [20] Evidently thinking that
everything had not yet been done to make sure that the affair would be
discovered, Bakaev also asks that he be introduced to Nikolaev
personally. He meets with Nikolaev and discusses Kirov’s assassination
with him and not with him alone, but in the presence of the same
“anonymous” Trotskyist, as if he were trying hard to have a witness.
Still another interesting detail. At the time of his journey to
Leningrad, Levin meets Bakaev at the station. He complains to him:
“Well, Grigori Evseievich (Zinoviev) does not trust Gertik or Kuklin or
even Evdokimov.” Thus we learn—it was also mentioned in the
indictment—that Gertik, Kuklin and Evdokimov were also connected with
the Leningrad terrorists. And this is called “secrecy”!
Zinoviev not only personally sends Bakaev, Gertik, Kuklin and
Evdokimov (and later, as we will see, Kamenev himself) to Leningrad to
make contact with the terrorists, but further considers it necessary to
talk about it right and left. Thus, for example, Reingold, who,
according to the court evidence, took no direct part in the terrorist
act against Kirov, declares: “I learned from Zinoviev himself that
Kirov’s assassination in Leningrad was prepared under his own direction
...” It seems that Zinoviev is very worried that his personal role in
the assassination of Kirov will remain unnoticed and insufficiently
appreciated. The same Reingold indicates that Faivilovich also kept in
touch with the Leningrad terrorists.
Bakaev indicates that Kirov’s murder was also entrusted to Karev,
while Evdokimov proposed to put Karev in touch with Levin and Anishev.
Of course, that seemed insufficient to Zinoviev and he proposed to “put
Bakaev, in Leningrad, in touch with Rumiantsev as well.” Thus Karev is
linked to Levin, Anishev and Rumiantsev. In addition, Bakaev, during a
“conversation,” informs Karev of the existence of Kotolynov’s terrorist
group. The affair does not stop there. It turns out that in June 1934,
Kamenev went personally to Leningrad; “where he ordered the active
Zinovievist, Yakovlev, to prepare, parallel to the Nikolaev-Kotolynov
group, an attempt on Kirov”; in addition Kamenev tells Yakovlev that
other groups are preparing terrorist acts as well: in Moscow against
Stalin; in Leningrad, the Rumiantsev-Kotolynov group against Kirov.
In search of new listeners, Zinoviev relates his terrorist
intentions to—everyone! everyone!—Matorin and Pikel, while Pikel
puts Bakaev in contact with another “terrorist,” Radin.
After an absence of almost two years, Mrachkovsky returns to Moscow
in the summer of 1934. Kamenev tells him immediately that “in Leningrad
Bakaev is organizing ... a terrorist act against Kirov.”
Evdokimov finally testifies that “in the summer of 1934, in
Kamenev’s apartment in Moscow a meeting took place which was attended
by Kamenev, Zinoviev, Evdokimov, Sokolnikov, Ter-Vaganian, Reingold and
Bakaev. It was decided at this meeting to speed up the assassination of
Kirov.”
Thus it turns out that dozens of terrorists—the number just of
those mentioned above adds up to 24—chatted for many months about
terror, travelled to terrorist meetings, had terrorist conferences,
etc., etc. They talked in every direction about it; all their friends
and acquaintances knew they were preparing Kirov’s murder; the only
ones not to know ... were the GPU. And when the GPU, finally made some
arrests after Kirov’s assassination, it was not able to extract any
information from them. After nearly two months of investigation of the
Kirov case, with the presence, we repeat, among the terrorists of an
agent (or agents) of the GPU and three trials, the GPU, in spite of
everything, still has no suspicion of the “terrorist activity” of
Zinoviev, Kamenev and others. It seems that the affair is taking place
on the moon and not in the USSR, which is completely ensnared in the
nets of the omnipotent GPU.


All this uproar and all this improbable “terrorist”
turmoil is raised around Kirov. Why then Kirov? Let us admit for an
instant that Zinoviev and Kamenev were really terrorists. Why would
they have needed to assassinate Kirov? Zinoviev and Kamenev were too
intelligent not to understand that the assassination of Kirov,
absolutely a third-rate figure, immediately replaced by another
Kirov-Zhdanov, could not “bring them close to power.” However, in the
words of the verdict, they were hoping for one thing only—to obtain
power by terrorist means!


Let us also note the following: Zinoviev, says
Vyshinsky, hurried up Kirov’s assassination and the “desire to out-do
the terrorist-Trotskyists was not the least of his motives,” and at
another point: “Zinoviev declared that for them it was a ’question of
honor’ to accomplish their criminal desire (Kirov’s assassination)
faster than the Trotskyists.”
Bakaev, for his part, declared before the court: “Zinoviev said that
the Trotskyists, following Trotsky’s orders, had undertaken the
organization of Stalin’s assassination and that we (that is, the
Zinovievists) must take the initiative for Stalin’s assassination into
our own hands.”
If Zinoviev had wanted thus to cover up[21] his participation and that
of his friends in the terrorist acts, he ought to have been very
pleased that the “Trotskyists” were taking upon themselves all the
risks and that by doing so, the Zinovievists, all the while keeping out
of danger, would be able, afterwards, to reap the fruits of victory.
Here there is something clearly absurd: either Zinoviev wants to
cover up his participation in the terrorist acts, or he gives these
acts the character of a political demonstration (it is we, the
Zinovievists, and not the Trotskyists, who ...). But not both at the
same time!


There is no doubt that if one tenth of that which the
defendants were accused of were true, they would have been tried and
shot at least two years ago.
Kirov’s assassination was the act of a few desperate Komsomols
from Leningrad, without any connection whatsoever with any central
terrorist organization (none existed). Neither Zinoviev, nor Kamenev,
nor any other of the old Bolsheviks had anything to do with Kirov’s
assassination.

Footnotes
[16]
TASS: the news agency of the Soviet Union.
[17]
An attempt was made to drag L.D. Trotsky into the case immediately with
the help of the anonymous consul. For details, see page 27. (L.S.)
[18]
See page 17.
[19]
The testimony of Evdokimov and Bakaev. (L.S.)
[20]
Medved: the head of the Leningrad GPU.
[21] Reingold for example, testified, and the court considered the fact
established, that Zinoview had told him: "The principal practical task
is to organize the terrorist work in a sufficiently conspiratorial
way, so that we do not compromise ourselves at any point." (L.S.)


Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.5)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE DEFENDANTS AND THEIR CONDUCT BEFORE THE COURT
(The Accused and Their Accusers)


The defendants are sharply divided into two groups. The basic nucleus of the first group consists of old Bolsheviks, known world-wide, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov, and others. The second group are young unknowns, among whom are also some direct agents of the GPU; they were necessary at the trial to demonstrate that Trotsky had taken part in terrorist activity, to establish a link between Zinoviev and Trotsky, and to establish a link with the Gestapo. If after having fulfilled the tasks assigned to them by the GPU they were nonetheless shot, it is because Stalin could not leave any such well-informed witnesses alive.
The artificial combination of these two groups at the trial is a typical amalgam.
The very conduct of the two groups at the trial is as different as their composition. The old men sit there absolutely broken, crushed, answer in a faint voice, even cry. Zinoviev is thin, stooped, grey, his cheeks hollow. Mrachkovsky spits blood, loses consciousness, they carry him away. They all look like people who have been run into the ground and completely exhausted. But the young rogues conduct themselves in an easy and carefree manner, they are fresh-faced, almost cheerful. They feel as though they are at a party. With unconcealed pleasure they tell about their ties with the Gestapo and all their other fables. [25]
The Accused of the First Group
1. Zinoviev, G.E. (born in 1883), a Bolshevik since the formation of the Bolshevik fraction in 1903, for many years Lenin’ s closest collaborator in emigration. Member of the Central Committee and the Politburo, chairman of the Petersburg Soviet after the October Revolution. One of the founders of the Communist International, its permanent chairman for many years. He left the Opposition in January 1928.
2. Kamenev, L.B. (born in 1883), like Zinoviev, a member of the party since 1901, Bolshevik since the formation of the fraction at the Second Congress, Lenin’s long-time collaborator during his years of exile, former member of the Central Committee and the Politburo. Chairman of the Moscow Soviet and Chairman of the Soviet of Labor and Defense, Deputy Chairman of the Soviet of People’s Commissars. Left the Opposition in January 1928.
3. Evdokimov, G.E. (born in 1884), one of the oldest worker-Bolsheviks, leader of the Leningrad Soviet and of the Leningrad party organization, former member of the Central Committee and the Organization Bureau of the Central Committee. A Zinovievist, he left the Opposition in January 1928.
4. Bakaev, I.P. (born in 1887), one of the oldest worker-Bolsheviks, former member of the Central Control Commission, prominent participant in the Civil War; at one time headed the Leningrad Cheka. [26] A Zinovievist, he left the Opposition in January 1928.
5. Smirnov, I.N. (born in 1880), a member of the party since 1899, one of the oldest Bolsheviks, several times endured prison and exile under tsarism. Took an active part in the October Revolution; leader of the Vth Army which crushed Kolchak. Directed all the activities of the Soviets and the party in Siberia after the victory. Member of the Central Committee and People’s Commissar of the Post and Telegraph. A Left Oppositionist since 1923, he split from the Opposition in 1929.
6. Mrachkovsky, S.V. (born in 1883), a Urals worker from a revolutionary family (he was born in prison), old Bolshevik, one of the heroes of the Civil War. After the victory, fulfilled responsible military tasks, commanded the Volga military region and others. A Left Oppositionist since 1923, he split from the Opposition in 1929.
7. Ter-Vaganian, V.A. (born in 1893), an old Bolshevik and Marxist writer, founder of the journal Under the Banner of Marxism. Author of a series of works, in particular on Plekhanov, Lenin and others. A Left Oppositionist since 1923, he split from the Opposition in 1929.
8. Holtzman, E.S. (born in 1882), an old Bolshevik, economist. He was never an active Oppositionist, but sympathized with the Opposition in 1926-27.
9. Pikel, R.V. (born in 1896), a member of the party since the beginning of the revolution, managed Zinoviev’s affairs; a writer. A Zinovievist, he split from the Opposition in January 1928.
10. Dreitzer, E.A. (born in 1894), a member of the party since 1917, an active participant in the Civil War. A Left Oppositionist since 1923, he split from the Opposition in 1929.
11. Reingold, I.I. (born in 1897), a member of the party since 1917, a well-known economist, and at one time Deputy People’s Commissar of Finance and member of the College of that Commissary. Never was an active Oppositionist. A Zinovievist, he split from the Opposition in January 1928.
The Second Group
1. Berman-Yurin, K.B. [27] (born in 1901), never belonged to the Left Opposition, and never had any connection with it; worked in the Stalinist apparatus during his stay in Germany as well as after leaving for Russia. The name of Berman-Yurin is completely unknown in the West. Only one piece of information which appeared in the newspaper of the German Stalinists, Die Deutsche Volkszeitung (September 6, 1936), indicating that Berman-Yurin also went by the name of Stauer, made it possible to establish that Berman-Yurin-Stauer really did exist.
2. Fritz David, I.I. [27] (born in 1897), never belonged to the Left Opposition and never had anything in common with it; worked in the Stalinist apparatus, particularly in the trade unions; former theoretician for the German Communist Party on questions of the trade union movement and editor of the central organ of the Red Trade Unions (R.G.O.), in which he several times attacks Trotskyism. Worked with Rote Fahne and the Moscow Izvestia and Pravda until recently.
3. Lurie, M.I. (Emel) [27] (born in 1897), a member of the German Communist Party and functionary of this party. Belonged to the Zinovievist Opposition, but capitulated in the period of the XVth Congress of the Russian Communist Party (in January 1928) and was not expelled from the party. Since then, he had not only broken with the Opposition and become a defender of the “general line,” but he even “specialized” in articles against Trotskyism, mostly in the tradition of the Black Hundreds. [28]
Overcoming our disgust, let us quote from Emel’s (Lurie’s) slander appearing in No.96 of Imprecor in December, 1932: “This social command (of the bourgeoisie to slander the Soviet Union) is now carried out by Leon Trotsky ... In Pilsudski’s Poland Trotsky enjoys the special sympathy of the political police.” Any comment would be superfluous. The central organ of the German Left Opposition, Die Permanente Revolution, (No.32, 34) published at that time two notes on the anti-Trotskyist works of this individual.
In the writings of Fritz David one can also, of course, find as many such pearls as one lilies. And these people figure at the trial as “Trotskyists”! The Central Committee of the German Communist Party has just expelled these three “Trotskyists,” Fritz David, Moishe Lurie, and Berman-Yurin, a month and a half after their execution (Die Deutsche Volkszeitung, 11 October 1936).
4. Lurie, N.L. (born in 1901), known absolutely to no one; no evidence about him or any trace of him has been found at this time.
The four individuals mentioned above were not only personally unknown to Trotsky, Sedov and their closest friends, but Trotsky and Sedov only learned their names through news articles about the Moscow trials.
5. Olberg, V.P. (born in 1907), attempts in 1930 to join the German Left Opposition in Berlin (called at the time the “Minority of the Leninbund”). However, he meets with refusal because he does not inspire confidence. (He remained in the German Communist Party, collaborated on Stalinist publications, etc.). Olberg then turns to the “Wedding Opposition” (the Landau group), where he is accepted. Because of the unification of the two groups, Olberg succeeds in penetrating the German organization of the Left Opposition. During this period he offers his services as Leon Trotsky’s secretary. Some of Trotsky’s friends from Berlin, the Pfemferts (a well-known left-wing publisher in Germany and editor of the journal Die Aktion) made the acquaintance of Olberg at this time. Here is what Pfemfert writes about him in a letter dated April 1, 1930 to Trotsky: “Olberg made a very unfavorable impression on me. He does not inspire confidence.” In this same letter, Pfemfert relates what a disagreeable and suspicious impression was made on him by the exaggerated interest which Olberg showed toward the Russian Opposition, Trotsky, his life, etc. Of course, there was no longer any question of a journey by Olberg to meet Trotsky.
In April-May 1931, at the same time as the Landau group, Olberg is removed from the ranks of the German Left Opposition. In February 1932, he makes a declaration asking for his readmission into the organization.This request is denied. Let us quote one of the statements which we have on Olberg, the author of which is E. Bauer, now a member of the S.A.P., [29] who left the Trotskyist organization, but was at that time the secretary of the German Opposition. Here is what Bauer writes: “Olberg’s declaration (of February 1932) requesting his return to the organization was rejected in a letter written by me personally. Since then, none of us has heard anything about Olberg.”
Sedov, in a personal capacity, met from time to time with Olberg in the second half of 1931 and at the beginning of 1932. The object of these meetings was, above all, the technical services which Olberg rendered: Olberg collected books, clippings from newspapers, etc. The character of these meetings was not political in the true sense of the word, and even less organizational, Olberg not being a member of the organization and Sedov himself standing outside the organizational work of the German Opposition.
Since 1932 we repeat, no one, neither Sedov, nor any German Trotskyist, had any relationship with Olberg. Since 1932 that is for more than four years, they had completely lost sight of Olberg, until the time of the trial. This statement is not unsubstantiated. There are dozens of people who have emigrated who were in the German Left Opposition or who were in close touch with it, including those who were politically hostile to it. Without any doubt they would all support our statement; some have already done so, in particular the German emigration in Prague, where Olberg lived these last years, without getting in contact with any of the German Trotskyists, of whom there is no small number in Prague.
And this man claims to have been Trotsky’s “emissary” in Germany, that Trotsky had “absolute confidence” in him, that money was given to him by the Opposition for procuring a passport, etc.!


A few words must still be said about the absolutely different roles which were played during the investigation by these two groups of defendants: the old Bolsheviks and the young unknowns.
First of all, the testimony of the majority of the old Bolsheviks is limited to a few pages. In fact, the testimonies quoted are those of Evdokimov, from pages 6 to 10, of Zinoviev from pages 16 to 38, of Kamenev from page 10 to 34, of Ter-Vaganian from pages 11 to 32, etc., while the dates of the depositions are from the end of July, the beginning of August, right up to August 14.
It’s a different story with the “young ones.” Olberg, for example, began his testimony not later than January (by February 21 he had already managed to reach pages 77-78). On May 9 the investigation of Olberg was already finished. [30] His testimony forms a volume of 262 pages, while only on this last page does Olberg finally remember the ties between the Trotskyists and the Gestapo, – on the last day of the interrogation, on the last page! [31]
Thus the investigation of the Olberg case was finished nearly three months before the old men, Kamenev, Ter-Vaganian, Evdokimov, Smirnov, and others had made their first “confessions.” By July 21, M. Lurie had already reached pages 243-244; furthermore it is once again in the last pages alone that there is a reference to his link with the Gestapo, and only on page 252 that is, obviously at the very end of the investigation, that he testified that Zinoviev supposedly knew about these connections. On the same day as M. Lurie, July 21, N. Lurie testified about the Gestapo on page 142.
It must be noted that even the testimony of Dreitzer and especially of Reingold, who conducted himself at the trial as an agent of the GPU, accusing everyone of everything, also made up a large volume, On pages 102-103, Dreitzer “remembered” that Trotsky sent him a letter written in his own hand and, on page 195, that he prepared terrorist acts together with Schmidt and others.
Reingold’s testimony is quoted more often that any others. His statements serve as the basic material of the prosecution, in particular, for convicting the other defendants.


Among the defendants at the Moscow trial, there was not one true Bolshevik-Leninist. The Left Opposition had broken with the Zinovievists in January 1928, when they capitulated before the Stalinist bureaucracy. Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Ter-Vaganian and Dreitzer had split from the Opposition two years later, at the end of 1929.
From January 1928 on, Trotsky had maintained no relations whatsoever with the Zinovievists, neither personally nor through any intermediary; he had never written to them, and had not received a single letter from them. And that is understandable. The path of the Left Opposition, standing for an implacable struggle against Stalinism, and the paths of groups capitulating before Stalinism parted sharply.


In 1922-23 Zinoviev and Kamenev, together with Stalin, formed what was known as the “troika,” in whose hands lay all the actual power at the time of Lenin’s illness and especially after his death. With the aid of the party apparatus, the troika prepared and led the fight against Trotsky and “Trotskyism.” But soon the troika itself broke up. Zinoviev and Kamenev, with their international training, their experience in exile, and partly under the influence of the Leningrad workers, entered into opposition against Stalin and his national policy of building socialism in one country, the turn to the kulaks, etc. In this struggle Zinoviev and Kamenev based themselves on the apparatus of the party organization in Leningrad which, obviously, was not capable of controlling the all-union apparatus which Stalin automatically brought in battle against Zinoviev and Kamenev. Despite their past struggle against “Trotskyism,” Zinoviev and Kamenev soon stood, in 1926, on the platform of the Left Opposition, recognizing it correctness. The passage into the camp of the Left Opposition by the “inventors” of Trotskyism – as an ideological tendency hostile to Leninism – struck an irreparable blow against this legend of Trotskyism. But the Zinovievist Opposition, which had its origin inside the apparatus, leaned heavily toward diplomacy, combinations, tactical maneuvers, compromises with the apparatus, capitulation, etc. By January 1928, at the XVth Congress of the All-Union Communist Party, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their friends had already capitulated before the Stalinist fraction, capitulated not just from the lack of political courage, but also from the sincere conviction that it was impossible to lead the struggle to a split.
Later, Zinoviev, Kamenev and their friends capitulated twice more. With each new capitulation, they made still greater concessions to Stalin and, falling lower and lower, they became his prisoners. Stalin squeezed them more and more in a vise. If at first they acknowledged “only” the anti-party character of their activity, they were soon forced to admit their “counterrevolutionary” nature, to praise Stalin to the skies and later (under the threat of the revolver) to take upon themselves the “political and moral responsibility” for Kirov’s assassination. Admitting everything Stalin demanded of them, making the most monstrous accusations against themselves, against their comrades, and against the party, they became playthings in the hands of the Stalinist Bonapartist bosses.
Although not to the same degree, but in a similar fashion, Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, and others followed the same road. By capitulating before Stalin, they also showed in 1929 that they were no longer revolutionary fighters, but spent men, who had a great past, but no future. Capitulation had intrinsically broken them for all time.
The conduct of the accused during the trial was only the tragic conclusion, the last stage of their political prostration and fall during the previous years.


Everything which we have just explained is forgotten in the West (not in the USSR; there it is unfortunately too well understood), when they ask how men like Zinoviev, Kamenev and especially Smirnov or Mrachkovsky, old revolutionary fighters, could have fallen so low. They imagine the Zinoviev of the Smirnov of the heroic years of the Russian revolution. But since then nearly twenty years have gone by, more than half of them under the corrupt Thermidorian regime of Stalin. No, on the defendants’ bench sat only the shadows of the Smirnov of the Civil War or the Zinoviev of the first years of the Comintern. On the defendants’ bench sat broken, crushed, finished men. Before killing them physically, Stalin had broken and destroyed them morally.
Capitulation is an inclined plane: no one has yet succeeded in coming to rest on it. Once on it, you can’t help but slide to the very bottom. Rakovsky, who resisted longer than the other old men, – capitulating only in 1934 – today has gone so far as to call for the execution of Zinoviev, Kamenev, and Trotsky! Such behavior, precisely on the part of Rakovsky, has been met with particular bewilderment in the West: an honest man, of great moral purity and suddenly ... How can it be explained? As if Rakovsky could escape from under the heavy bureaucratic millstone, which turns former fighters into nothing but human dust! One should sooner ask oneself how Rakovsky, who was at the head of the Opposition until 1934, could have been ignorant of the terrorism, if it had really existed? Having remained in the Opposition until 1934, Rakovsky, as proof of the existence of the “terror” refers to ... Zinoviev, Kamenev, and others with whom the Opposition had broken in 1928, Stalinist absolutism allows no half-way capitulations; all or nothing, there is no middle ground.
The Stalinist “art” of breaking revolutionary characters consists of going cautiously, steadily, pushing these people degree by degree, always lower and lower ... And what incentive could they have had to struggle? They had not only renounced their own ideas, but helped Stalin to drag them in the mud. If the international workers movement had not been in such a state of collapse, these men would have undoubtedly acted differently. Isolated from the revolutionary movement, and even from the world in general, they saw only the rise and strengthening of fascism, and in the USSR, the hopelessness of Stalinism. The miserable behavior of the defendants is first of all an expression of the profound despair of people who had lost all perspective.
And how could the Soviet people of today, even the best ones, not become demoralized? Have revolutionaries ever been forged in empty space? No, for that there must be collective work, mutual relations, links with the masses, a theoretical self-education, etc. Only in such conditions was it possible for the revolutionary and Bolshevik type to be formed. But that is the distant past. In the last ten years in the USSR, and not only there, the reverse process has taken place. The absence of social life, of free thought, and collective activity welded by a discipline which is conscious rather then servile – all this cannot but destroy the old and prevent the education of the young.
This is why to compare the conduct of the defendants in Moscow to that of certain courageous militants in the face of fascist executioners is to commit the sin of superficiality. These militants were not broken by ten years of Stalinist domination; they were not isolated as were the Moscow victims of Stalin – they felt the support of the world proletariat behind them. The distinction was also much sharper: fascism – communism. At the Moscow trial, however, although they stood before a Thermidorian court of Stalinist usurpers, Zinoviev and Kamenev nevertheless stood before a court which with its phraseology appealed – what monstrous gall! – to the October revolution and socialism. It goes without saying, that along with frightful moral tortures, the inquisitors of the GPU also used this phraseology and, in particular, the danger of war; this could not fail to help in breaking these unfortunate defendants.
The comparison with the behavior of the leaders of the great French Revolution is also superficial. These men were in the full flower of their strength, events were taking place with kaleidoscopic speed, no one could count on receiving mercy and, above all, everything was happening in the period of the powerful upsurge of a revolution, the likes of which had never been seen before in history. The great Russian revolution also experienced a similar period (1917-1922), but it is precisely in those years that the Smirnov’s and the Mrachkovsky’s heroically fought and died on the front lines of the Civil War. If one searches for historical comparisons with the conduct of the Jacobins, one should not take them from 1789-1794, but about ten years later, during the period of the Empire, when many of them had become prefects and other dignitaries under Napoleon.
But they say, how can it be explained that all eleven (not counting the five young ones) could have behaved this way before the court? We must not forget that these eleven were not defendants chosen at random, but rather had been chosen during a long and terrible investigation among the 50 or more other prisoner-candidates whom Stalin could not succeed in breaking. It is precisely those who were broken who were placed on trial. What became of the others is not known; the worst may be feared. Some of them, we have no doubt, were shot during the investigation itself; those who would not succumb to Stalin’s blackmailing were shot; they were shot “for the edification” of the rest. Besides the torture of the interrogation, – from morning until night, for weeks on end, the same question is asked of the accused who remains standing – besides the torment over the fate of their families and other tortures taken from the arsenal of the blackest and most terrible Inquisition, the gunning down of a certain number of accused was one of the most decisive “arguments” of the Stalinist investigation. Smirnov or Evdokimov would be told: today so and so was shot (for example, Kuklin or Gertik), tomorrow so and so will be shot, because they did not give the required depositions, and then it will be your turn. (This, of course, is only a hypothesis).
With a revolver at their temple, Zinoviev and Kamenev say to themselves: if we do not sign these infamies which Stalin wishes to extort from us, he will shoot us secretly, without a trial. But if we sign, we have, in spite of everything, some chance of salvation. Perhaps Stalin is not deceiving us when he promises to give us our lives in exchange for our confessions. The preceding series of trials – the majority of which were also built on false confessions – where the accused got off with light or fictitious sentences, strengthened their hopes. The defendants furthermore were thinking not only of saving their lives, but also saw in staying alive the only possibility of later unmasking, in a new situation, the Stalinist amalgam, thereby rehabilitating themselves, if only partially. They committed a tragic error and this error was not accidental; it flowed from all their previous conduct, as we have taken pains to demonstrate.
But even among these defendants, there was to be found a last remnant of strength, a last drop of personal dignity. Broken as they were, none of the old Bolsheviks took upon themselves – they simply were physically unable to take upon themselves – the charge of being “connected with the Gestapo.”
We think – and this map seem paradoxical to one who judges things superficially – that the internal moral strength of Zinoviev and Kamenev far surpassed the average level, even though it proved insufficient under absolutely exceptional conditions. Hundreds and thousands of Communist, socialist and other leaders, who adapt to the Soviet bureaucracy or to capitalism, would have been incapable of bearing even a hundredth part of the continuous and frightful pressure to which Zinoviev, Kamenev and the others were subjected.
One more point. The speeches of the defendants were in no way distinguishable from the speeches of the prosecutor, in no way distinguishable from the thousands of bloodthirsty articles which fill the press. By the speeches in which they accuse themselves, without facts or proofs, by their literal repetition of what the prosecutor dictated to them, by their great eagerness to blacken themselves, the defendants said, as it were, to the whole world: don’t believe us; can’t you see that it is all a lie, a lie from beginning to end?


Yes, the generation of old Bolsheviks, with only a few exceptions, exhausted itself in the end. They had to carry too much on their shoulders, – three revolutions, the underground, prison, civil war. Their strength failed them, their nerves gave out.
But nevertheless, there still are unbreakable revolutionaries in the USSR, several thousand Bolshevik-Leninists. As for them, Stalin will not be able to draw them into his trials, even though he can exterminate them one after another, exterminate them, but not break them. These revolutionary fighters have not taken and will not take the fatal road of capitulation, because they believe in the justness of their cause. They prefer to die in the cellars of the GPU, unknown, without support and without sympathy. They are the ones who assure the revolutionary continuity and save the revolutionary honor of the Soviet workers’ movement!

Footnotes
[25] We have gleaned this information from the reports of English journalists who were at the trial. (L.S.)
[26] Cheka: the Extraordinary Commission for Struggle Against Counterrevolution, Sabotage, and Speculation. The Soviet secret police 1918-1922.
[27] These three German-Russian Stalinists (Berman-Yurin. M. Lurie, Fritz David) belonged, we are told, inside the German Communist Party, to Neumann’s clique, closely tied in the past to the GPU, one of the most repugnant cliques which ever existed in the Comintern. According to the information available abroad, Moscow liquidated the Neumann group with the aid of the GPU. (The use of the GPU as an instrument of internal struggle in the sections of the Comintern has been a common phenomenon for a long time, which has brought the Comintern apparatus to the limits of demoralization.) It is not excluded, consequently, that the calling to trial of Stalin’s former agents – F. David, Berman-Yurin, and M. Lurie – was done as part of the liquidation of the Neumann group. (L.S.)
[28] Black Hundreds: In Tsarist Russia, members of extreme monarchist group who carried out pogroms against workers, revolutionaries, national minorities, etc. They murdered thousands with the cooperation of the Tsarist authorities.
[29] SAP: Socialist Workers Party, A centrist party in Germany organized in October 1931 when a number of its leaders were expelled from the Reichstag. Agreed to work with the Left Opposition in 1933 but became opposed to the Fourth International and broke with Trotskyism.
[30] About the sources of this money – as well as the entire story about Olberg’s Honduras passport – we have extremely interesting information which we feel can be made public only after thorough verification. (L.S.)
[31] With absolute certainty this flows From the fact that on July 31, i.e., more than two and one-half months after his testimony on May 9, Olberg was interrogated for the second time by the prosecutor about the Gestapo. (L.S.)

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 14.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.15)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE SAME OLD SONG TO A NEW TUNE
 (The Gestapo)


Is it possible to believe for even one minute in the reliability of the information ... that Trotsky, the former Chairman of the Soviet of Workers Deputies in Petersburg in 1905, a revolutionary who has given decades of unselfish service to the revolution – that this man had ties to a plan subsidized by the “German government”? This is indeed an obvious, unheard of, and unscrupulous slander against a revolutionary.

Lenin, Pravda
 April 16,1917

 There is a type of slander which you do not refute, that you step over so as not to soil your boots. Such is the slander about “ties with the Gestapo.” But even this was not invented by Stalin. Stalin slavishly repeats the old slander of the English, Russian, and other imperialists about the “German spies Lenin and Trotsky,” only modernizing it with the word Gestapo.
When in 1917 the Russian bourgeoisie and its agents Miliukov, Kerensky and others tried to slander and defame the Bolshevik Party, the party toward which all the hopes of the Russian working class and wide layers of the peasantry were directed, they proclaimed that its leaders, Lenin and Trotsky, were “agents of the German general staff.” If Stalin himself was not at this time included among those leaders slandered (Lenin, Trotsky, Zinoviev), it is only because in that heroic epoch, he was too little known and was only a third-rate figure. The contemptible and pathetic Kerensky at least remains true to himself when he writes today that there is nothing surprising in the fact that Trotsky and Zinoviev had had connections with the Gestapo, because, you see, Lenin, Trotsky and others were already, in 1917, linked to General Ludendorff!
Kerensky ties the thread of his own past slander against Lenin, Trotsky and Zinoviev to today’s slander hurled by Stalin against Trotsky and Zinoviev. (If Lenin were not dead, he would be, naturally, the first and principal Gestapo agent.) How instructive is this handshake of two slanderers, – Kerensky and Stalin, – across an entire epoch: 1917-1936!
In the quote which we used as an epigraph for this chapter, Lenin says in Pravda of 1917 that “It is an obvious, unheard of, and unscrupulous slander against a revolutionary.” Today these words are more timely than ever. But since then an entire revolution has passed!
When Pravda wrote these lines with indignation, Trotsky was not yet the leader of the October Revolution along with Lenin, when, according to Stalin himself: “all the work of the practical organization of the insurrection was carried out under the direct leadership of Trotsky, Chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. One can say with certainty, that for the rapid passage of the garrison to the side of the Soviet and the able organization of the work of the Military-Revolutionary Committee, the party is above all indebted to Cde. Trotsky,” (Article by Stalin in Pravda, Nov. 6, 1918). Trotsky had not yet been, along with Lenin and Zinoviev, the founder and leader of the Communist International. Trotsky had not yet become the leader of the Red Army and the organizer of the victories of the Civil War.
And could there be a better proof of Lenin’s confidence in Trotsky, and Trotsky alone, than the well-known “carte blanche” which Lenin gave him? In 1919, at the height of the Civil War, Lenin sent the following document to L. Trotsky:
Comrades!

Knowing the strict character of Cde. Trotsky’s orders, I am so convinced, absolutely convinced, of the correctness, the expediency and the necessity for the good of the cause of the order given by Cde. Trotsky, that I fully support this order.

V. Ulianov-Lenin
Lenin wrote these lines at the bottom of a blank piece of paper which carried the heading of the Chairman of the Soviet of People’s Commissars (in July, 1919) so that Trotsky could write above Lenin’s signature any of his own decisions, which would have beforehand Lenin’s signature beneath it!

* * *


One of the reactionary French newspapers, the clerical Echo de Paris, now announces that even the French Trotskyists are agents of the Reich. L’Humanité seized on this discovery. Oh, once the Echo de Paris says so, there’s no doubt about it. Of course, the French Trotskyists struggle against the French front which is joined by L’Humanité and Echo de Paris. The French Trotskyists do not demand the suspension of the class struggle, they do not fraternize with the French bourgeoisie and are certainly not inclined to forgive them all their “sins” in compensation for the France-Soviet military alliance. They are also not inclined to cooperate with the transformation of the French workers into an instrument of imperialism and militarism. There is no doubt, they are agents of the Gestapo!
The Polish Bolshevik-Leninists are agents of the secret police, proclaims Pravda. Of course! You cannot force them, like Thorez and Duclos to cry: “Long live the Poland of Pilsudski!” They are preparing a new Poland in the underground and in the prisons, which will not be the Poland of Pilsudski. Of course, – they are agents of the secret police!

 This “argument” is not new; Lenin and Liebknecht, Trotsky and Rosa Luxemburg experienced it themselves. Marx also went through it: The French Bonapartist press accused him of being an agent of Bismarck. Well, it’s not such a bad tradition!
Read the German fascist newspapers, see with what furious hatred they speak of Trotsky. These are the ones who advise handing Trotsky over to Stalin! The German fascists can not forgive Trotsky, not only for his revolutionary role in general but for his revolutionary politics in Germany. They know that it’s Trotsky who spread the idea of the United Front in Germany, the only policy which could have defeated fascism, at a time when Stalin only aided fascism by proclaiming that Social Democracy and fascism were “twins” and that Social Democracy was left fascism. Without Stalin, there would have been no Hitler, no Gestapo! It is Stalin who helped Hitler to sit on the back of the German working class. And in this much deeper, historic sense, Stalin is an agent of the Gestapo, and all the pitiful police machinations will not enable him to remove From himself this terrible responsibility. Yes, if today there is fascism and the Gestapo in Germany, they “owe it first and foremost to Stalin.”

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.19)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

AFTER THE TRIAL


The Moscow trial is not ended, it continues in new
forms. The business of “terror” is conducted at full speed. Dozens,
hundreds of people arrested in connection with the trial of the old
Bolsheviks fill the prisons of the USSR. The repressive machine works
for the time being without failure.
People are arrested because they had a Trotskyist relative, because
ten years ago they expressed some Oppositionist thought. Arrests take
place in Moscow, the Ukraine, in Turkestan, everywhere. Writers,
economists, journalists and military men are arrested; no one is
spared. Bukharin, the editor of Izvestia, mints in the
newspaper which he edits resolutions demanding his head! The ink on the
new Stalinist Constitution was not yet dry, when one of its principal
editors—Radek—was handed over for punishment to another of its
editors—Vyshinsky. After elaborating the “most democratic
constitution in the world,” its authors send one another to the
guillotine. The same day that Radek clamored in the columns of Izvestia
for the shooting of the defendants and recalled his services as an
informer (in the Blumkin affair) in order to appease Stalin, his name
was mentioned at the trial and he was declared a “terrorist.” You only
had to turn the page of the newspaper!
Piatakov is imprisoned by the GPU for being guilty of the same
crimes for which, the day before his arrest, he “demanded” a merciless
punishment for the other defendants. Ordzhonikidze’s deputy is found
guilty of terrorism, that is, he had planned ... to assassinate his
immediate superior. Sokolnikov and Serebriakov, Uglanov and Putna are
in prison. Having already broken from any opposition many years ago,
they had become docile functionaries of Stalin. This did not help! Even
them people an in some respect dangerous for Stalin. Or, rather, then
is some ether terrible danger which threatens him and he hopes to ward
it off by striking at these men, and getting rid of them. Linked by
their past to the revolution, of which Stalin is the gravedigger, they
must disturb him by their very existence. And if Stalin, after several
years of preparation and hesitation, has now decided on bloody
repression, this shows that along the road of the liquidation of the
revolution he is preparing something new, something which cannot be
compared with what he has already done. His blow against the former
revolutionaries, his blow struck against the Left, leaves no doubt but
that his path is heading to the right, sharply to the right.
In the Moscow trial, those dragged to trial are the most notable
representatives of Bolshevism, as we have already shown. Remember that
19 members of the Central Committee alone and eight members of the
Politburo were mentioned! True, Rykov and Bukharin have been
“rehabilitated” [73]
after a three-week investigation. But how were they rehabilitated? “The
investigation has not established the judicial grounds which make
Bukharin and Rykov legally responsible.” How well we know this wretched
formula! It repeats word for word the first “rehabilitation” of
Zinoviev. In using this truly Stalinist formula, the “father of the
people” keeps his hands free for future infamies. “Grounds” can always
be found. It will only take a short time before we learn that the
Unified Center was nothing in comparison to the “Bukharin-Rykov
Center,” the existence of which was hidden by those who were shot. We
will also learn that Bukharin personally went to Leningrad to organize
Kirov’s assassination, etc., etc. The fact that the names of Bukharin
and Rykov were mentioned at the trial is a “warning” from Stalin: you
are in my hands, I only have to say the word and you’re finished. In
the language of the penal code, this “method” is called extortion (in
its most odious form: life or death).
The death of Tomsky, [74] whose suicide made a very strong
impression on the country, had a definite effect on the temporary
easing of Rykov and Bukharin’s fate. This suicide forced the usurper
who had gone too far to reduce the pressure. Accused of taking part in
terror, Tomsky understood that there was no way out of the Stalinist
trap. As a revolutionary and a Bolshevik, Tomsky preferred a voluntary
death rather than suffer the Stalinist ignominies, rather than spit on
himself, rather than drag through the mud all that he had fought for
for decades. Doesn’t this fact alone, the suicide of one of the heads
of the party, show what a hopeless quagmire Stalin has driven the
revolution into?
Stalin took revenge on Tomsky in the Stalinist way. After having
half-condemned and half-rehabilitated Rykov and Bukharin, he has not
said a word about Tomsky. But how indeed could Stalin have
rehabilitated his memory? That would have meant admitting the calumny
over the still-fresh grave of one of the leaders of the party and the
most capable Bolshevik to come out of the Russian working class.


It is not difficult to imagine the nightmarish
atmosphere which reigns in the USSR today. No one is sure of tomorrow,
least of all the old Bolsheviks. Yesterday’s experienced and
responsible leaders are without any reason declared terrorists tomorrow
and thrown into the teeth of the repressive machine. The old Bolsheviks
among those who distinguished themselves in some way in the past can
only anxiously ask themselves: who’s next in line? [75]
Only the “non-party Bolsheviks” and certain “leading figures” feel
at ease. These upstart bureaucrats have neither prison nor the fight
for revolution in their past, in fact they have no past at all.
And that is why their future is so much more secure.
Just as the bureaucracy as a whole has freed itself of any
dependence on the workers, so inside the bureaucracy the GPU takes on
an increasingly autonomous character. Independent, not only of the
masses, but also nearly independent of the bureaucracy itself, the
GPU is Stalin’s personal instrument. Of course, it protects the
positions of the bureaucracy as a privileged social layer, but its
first task is to safeguard the personal position of Stalin and his
absolutism, to defend him against the bureaucracy itself, if
circumstances demand it. The Bonapartist nature of Stalinism shows
itself most clearly through the role of the GPU. In order to guarantee
his monopoly on power, Stalin relentlessly strengthened the role of the
GPU—the major instrument of this power. Since it has achieved unheard
of power, when it is called on to fight against the dangers which
threaten Stalin, the GPU itself begins to be a danger to him. It is not
without concern that Stalin must consider the GPU. It depends only
upon the “leader” but the “leader” depends no less on it. And if the
GPU wanted another leader? It is from this point of view, it seems,
that one must consider the removal of Yagoda. He had been head of the
GPU for too long. He had assumed too much power and gathered too many
threads into his hands. Even if Yagoda did not threaten Stalin yet,
it was reasonable, nevertheless, to remove him as a preventive measure.
Less to worry about. Yezhov, the new head of the GPU, is that much
better suited because he’s a new man, “inexperienced.” (In the past,
Yagoda also showed sympathy for the right.) The Moscow trial was,
moreover, a good pretext for removing Yagoda. The truly “saboteur’s”
handling of this case required a scapegoat, and not just from among the
lower ranks. To shake up the talentless investigative agents, mired in
routine, Stalin removed Yagoda, thus giving the others a lesson.
Neither rank nor “General Commissar of Security” nor the large star on
his collar could save him from a transfer to the Post Office. What then
can the other Yagodas, at lower levels hope for? Shooting some, shaking
up others, Stalin only reinforces the state of general uncertainty,
anxiety and discontent.
We are certainly headed toward a new trial (or trials)! Its outlines
can begin to be discerned even now. The slanderous accusation of
“terrorism” must be supplemented by the accusation of a “military plot”
and of “espionage.” A number of symptoms tell of how the new trial will
be built around these accusations. It is enough to read the lead
article in Pravda on October 8. It leaves no doubt as to
Stalin’s plans for the near future.
The “Trotskyists” are spies and saboteurs; this is what is repeated
dozens of times. Along these lines, public opinion is now being
prepared. What is more, Pravda openly informs its readers about the
course of the new investigation of the Stalinist Inquisition, when it
says that the “frank confessions of a number of the most
prominent (?) Trotskyists (?) show” that they “carried out the work of
spies and saboteurs in the Soviet Union not only out of fear, but out
of conscience.”
Here again we have before us the “frank confessions” which are so
well known and so discredited.
(Stalin will find it that much easier to repeat with the new
defendants that which he was able to do with the 16 already shot, since
they were arrested before or during the trial. Cut off from the outside
world, they know nothing of the end of Zinoviev, Kamenev and others.)
The arrests of the military men, Putna, Schmidt, Kuzmichev, and
others also reveal the nature of the new case. They are to help Stalin
accuse the Left Opposition of a “military plot,” and by their
execution, he will have the possibility of calling the military caste
“to order.”
It is also possible that Stalin will place the new trial on the
widest possible foundation. Moscow’s lead article says, for example,
that the “counterrevolutionary sabotage of the Trotskyists in our
industry, in the factories and the mines, on the railroads, in
construction, in agriculture is now proven and already admitted by
a whole series of the most prominent Trotskyists.”
There can be doubt. We are on the eve of a new trial. Our duty is to
warn Western public opinion. No illusions concerning the Borgia of
Moscow, armed with modern technology!
Stalin needs Trotsky’s head, that’s his main goal. To
achieve it, he will begin the most extreme, even more ignominious
trials. If any one was still able to entertain any illusions on this
subject, the Moscow trial must have dispelled them completely. Stalin
hates Trotsky as the living representative of the ideas and traditions
of the October Revolution, toward which is turned all that has remained
revolutionary in the Soviet Union. To get Trotsky’s head, Stalin
conducts the most abominable intrigues in Norway and prepares further
intrigues through the League of Nations. With his trials he prepares
the ground for demanding Trotsky’s extradition. It is not in vain that
the Soviet government showed such a great interest, in connection with
the assassination of the King of Yugoslavia, toward the problem of
international police collaboration against terrorists. At that time, it
might have seemed rather surprising. Today, after the Moscow
“terrorist” trial, Stalin’s interest in the struggle against terrorists
on an “international scale” takes on much sharper meaning.[76]


The methods of Stalin and the GPU are carried over more
and more into the international arena. Trotsky is imprisoned. The
Spanish Trotskyists are accused of “attempts” against the leaders of
the Popular Front (although every Spanish worker-militiaman knows that
the Bolshevik-Leninists fight with them in the same ranks at the
front). The Polish Trotskyists are agents of the secret police. The
German Trotskyists are Gestapo agents. Such is Stalin’s only
method of fighting.
It is not at all a question of Trotskyists, it is a question of
Stalin’s methods which threaten to poison the entire moral atmosphere
of the world workers movement. Today these methods are used
predominantly in the fight against “Trotskyism,” tomorrow

they will be directed against other currents in the working class. We
have already seen how the leaders of the Second International were
accused of being accomplices of the Gestapo agents because of their
telegram during the Moscow trial. Stalin wants to reduce the political
disagreements of the workers movement to the formula: GPU or Gestapo.
Whoever is not with the GPU is a Gestapo agent. Regardless of party
affiliation the world workers movement must repulse this attack in the
sharpest and most decisive manner. The workers movement cannot tolerate
in its midst the methods of political gangsterism. The danger
is all the more serious since Stalin has placed a powerful government
apparatus at the service of this political gangsterism.
The Moscow slanders and the Moscow assassinations affect not only
the interests of the Soviet Union, but deal an irreparable blow not
only to all the gains of the October Revolution, but also to the world
workers’ movement. Woe to him, who doesn’t know how to protect himself
from the fatal venom of Stalinism. It is his moral self-preservation
which is at stake.
It is a lie and a slander to pretend that Lenin and Trotsky, the
Bolsheviks during the epoch of the upsurge of the Russian Revolution,
used the same methods. This is a slander against the October
Revolution, the greatest proletarian revolution in history. Could it
have been by means of filth and slanders that the Russian working class
conquered in 1917? That it won the Civil War? Political morality is not
an abstraction. It depends entirely on politics itself. The poisoned
weapon of slander was organically alien to the revolutionary politics
of the insurgent masses of 1917. This weapon is taken from the arsenal
of reaction. But it is only with the help of this weapon—lies,
slander, and the assassination of revolutionaries—that Stalinism,
which has usurped power from the Soviet proletariat, is able to hold on.


The Moscow trial has once again shown just how much the
bureaucracy has exhausted its progressive role as defender of the
conquests of the October Revolution. It has become an obstacle to
the further development of the USSR, because the interests of this
development in social, cultural and political relations have come into
irreconcilable contradiction with the caste interests of the
bureaucracy. In order to open the way for the development of the
USSR toward socialism, the bureaucracy mast he liquidated.
More than ten years ago, Stalin said: “these cadres (of the
bureaucracy) can never be removed except by civil war.” Thus he openly
placed the bureaucracy above the working class, above the party. For
ten years, nevertheless, the Bolshevik-Leninists defended the political
line of reforming the Soviet state. But by its politics and by its
methods, the bureaucracy has finally taken from the Soviet proletariat
the possibility of reforming the state by legal means.
The International Conference of the IVth International in July 1936
— before the trial—said in its theses: “If the return of the USSR to
capitalism requires a social counterrevolution, then the
advance toward socialism inevitably requires a political revolution.”
The Moscow trial has confirmed with new force the correctness of
this perspective.
The Soviet proletariat can advance to socialism only through the
rebirth and expansion of Soviet democracy, through the legalization of
Soviet parties, above all, the party of revolutionary Bolshevism. But
the rebirth of Soviet democracy is only possible with the overthrow of
the bureaucracy. And only the forces of the revolutionary working
masses can overthrow the bureaucracy!

Footnotes
[73]
Reingold, Kamenev and Zinoviev testified that these men knew about the
terrorist activity and had found a “common language” with them. The
“rehabilitation” of Bukharin and Rykov indirectly gives an unequivocal
evaluation of the defendants’ confessions. (L.S.)
[74]
M.P. Tomsky (born in 1880), a lithographer, joined the revolutionary
movement in 1904; in 1905 was a deputy of the Revel Soviet; was
arrested for the first time in 1906, deported and escaped from exile. A
delegate to the London Congress (1907); arrested once again toward the
end of 1907, Tomsky remained in prison with only a short break until
April 1909. After a few months of illegal party work, in December 1909,
Tomsky was again arrested and, after spending two years in jail before
being brought to trial, was sentenced to five years imprisonment. In
1916, after almost seven years imprisonment, Tomsky left prison for
eternal exile in Siberia. After the October Revolution, Tomsky was for
many years an authoritative leader of the Soviet trade unions; a member
of the Central Committee and the Politburo.
[75]
This atmosphere could not help but affect even the top bosses. A
characteristic fact: on the lists compiled by Stalin of leaders whom
the terrorists supposedly intended to kill, them appeared not only
leaders of the first rank, but even the Zhdanovs, Kossiors, and
Postyshevs. But Molotov was not listed. In affairs of this
type, Stalin does nothing by accident. Isn’t he preparing the ground
for a future “reevaluation” of Molotov? If the terrorists did not want
to “murder” Molotov, doesn’t this man that they “were counting on” him?
And from here, it is only one step to the indictment of Molotov himself
in terror. But, of course, this lies well ahead in the distant future.
[76]
It is highly possible that one of the candidates for the new
Berman-Yurins or Olbergs of the impending trial will be A. Senin, whom
we mentioned in the chapter on Copenhagen. True, Senin had
already broken with the Opposition by 1932, and broken in a
particularly loathsome way by directing many insinuations in the press
against the Left Opposition. True, Senin then went to the USSR and told
the GPU everything he could about the life of the international left,
and, since that time—four years—has been with the Stalinists. But
did similar circumstances hinder the bringing to trial of Lurie or
Olberg or even Fritz David or Berman-Yurin, who never were in the
Opposition? Another possible candidate is a certain Mill-Obin-Okun. He
became a member of the administrative secretariat of the Left
Opposition, but because he was completely unfit, he was dismissed. Soon
after this, Mill joined the Stalinists and went to the USSR. At that
time, a note appeared in the Bulletin, No.31,
November 1932, exposing Mill’s behavior.

Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.10)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

MARXISM AND INDIVIDUAL TERROR


Individual terror sets as its task the murder of isolated individuals in order to provoke a political movement and even a political revolution. In pre-revolutionary Russia, the question of individual terror had importance not only as a general principle, but also had enormous political significance, since there existed in Russia the petit-bourgeois party of the Socialist Revolutionaries (epigones of the heroic Narodnaya Volya), who followed the tactic of individual terror with regard to tsarist ministers and governors. The Russian Marxists, including Trotsky during his earliest years, took part in the fight against the adventuristic tactic of individual terror and its iilusions, which counted not upon the movement of the masses of workers, but on the terrorists’ bomb to open the road to revolution. To individual terror, Marxism counterposes the proletarian revolution.
From his youth, Trotsky adhered resolutely and forever to Marxism. If one were to publish everything which Trotsky wrote, it would make dozens of thick volumes. One would not be able to find in them a single line which betrayed an equivocal attitude toward individual terror. How strange it is to have to even speak of it today!
Here is how Trotsky formulated the position of Marxism toward individual terror in an article appearing in the Austrian newspaper Der Kampf, in 1911:

 Whether or not a terrorist attack, even if “successful,” provokes disturbance in the ruling circles depends on the concrete political circumstances. In any case, this disturbance can only be short-lived; the capitalist state does not rest on ministers and cannot be destroyed together with them. The classes which it serves will always find new men; the mechanism remains intact and continues its work.
But the disturbance which the terrorist attack brings to the ranks of the working masses themselves is much more profound. If it suffices to arm oneself with a revolver to arrive at the goal, why then the efforts of the class struggle? If one can intimidate high-ranking people with the thunder of an explosion, why then a party?

 The Marxist Trotsky has given his whole conscious life, forty years! – to the workers movement. The last twenty years of Trotsky’s revolutionary activity have been spent before the eyes of the whole world. In this activity his worst enemies could not find an instance of “double-entry bookeeping,” or compromises with Marxism. For forty years, Trotsky has always taken the direct path to the final goal. To now take the path of individual terror, to renounce Marxism, would signify for Trotsky not only renouncing himself, but also reducing to nothing the fruits of forty years of revolutionary activity. That would signify political suicide.
Rejecting individual terror with regard to the bourgeois police state, because only the proletariat itself can overthrow this state, the Bolshevik-Leninist-Marxists still more strongly reject individual terror in the country of Soviets, where the greatest social revolution in history was accomplished. Individual terror in the USSR, completely independently of the intentions of the terrorists themselves, can only serve the cause of Bonapartist counterrevolution and could only facilitate the victory of fascism in the USSR.
In contrast to the bureaucrats and terrorists, the Left Opposition has always thought that the problem does not rest with Stalin personally, but in those social changes which have occurred in the USSR and as a result of which the victory of Stalin was guaranteed. Stalin’s absolutism is not at all accidental, it is result of historical development. It is not Stalin personally who holds unlimited power, but the bureaucracy as a social layer, through Stalin. This limitless power was given to the bureaucracy by the reaction which followed the heroic period of the Russian revolution. The strength of the bureaucracy and, derived from it, the strength of Stalin, “the party’s most eminent mediocrity,” does not at all lie in the “genius” of Stalin, but in that relation of class forces, a very unfavorable relationship for the proletariat, as it developed inside and outside the USSR in the recent period.
The removal of Stalin (from his position as General Secretary) as an individual question, was proposed by Lenin at the beginning of 1923, and this could have made sense at that time, because it could have facilitated the struggle against the bureaucracy which had not yet been able to strengthen itself. Today, and even long ago, the question of Stalin, as an independent question, does not exist. It is impossible to change by assassination the relationship of social forces and to stop the objective path of development. The personal removal of Stalin would today signify nothing but his replacement by one of the Kaganoviches whom the Soviet press would overnight turn into the genius of geniuses.
The Soviet bureaucracy is the greatest danger to the USSR. But it can be removed only by an active uprising of the working class. This uprising is only possible as the result of the rebirth of the workers movement in the West, which, reaching the USSR, would undermine and sweep away the Stalinist absolutism. There can be no other road for revolutionary Marxists. And it is not with the aid of some police machinations that Stalin will discredit Marxism and Marxists! For nearly a hundred years the worldwide police have been working toward this, from Bismarck and Napoleon III, but each time they have only burned their fingers. The police falsifications and machinations of Stalin hardly surpass the other examples of this same work; but he has carried them out – and in what a manner! – by “confessions” torn from the accused by the infinitely refined methods of the Inquisition.
To discredit Marxism, Stalin puts onto the stage the same Reingoid, who declares that “Zinoviev based (sic) the necessity of using terrorism on this, that although (?) terror was incompatible with Marxism, at the present time it is necessary to cast this (!!) aside.” What a beautiful accumulation of words! Zinoviev, don’t you see, based this on the fact, that although this is incompatible with Marxism, this has to be “cast aside.” What complete idiocy!
Toward Marxism, as toward theory in general, Stalin shows fear, and at the same time, a sort of contempt. A limited empiricist, “a practical person,” Stalin has always been a stranger to the theory of Marxism. For him, Marxism, more exactly the arguments “from Marxism,” are first of all a cover, a smokescreen. The “practical” arguments, those of day-today life and, in particular, the arguments of political gangsterism, are obviously closer to him. There, he is in his element.


If we approach the question of individual terror in the USSR, not from a theoretical, but a purely “empirical” point of view, from the point of view of so-called common sense, then it suffices to draw the following conclusion: the assassinated Kirov is immediately replaced by another Kirov-Zhdanov (Stalin has as many as he needs in reserve.) Meanwhile hundreds of people are shot, thousands, and very probably tens of thousands, are deported. The vise is tightened by several turns.
If Kirov’s assassination helped anyone, it is certainly the Stalinist bureaucracy. Under the cover of the struggle against “terrorists,” it has stifled the last manifestations of critical thought in the USSR. It has placed a heavy tombstone on all the living.
In fact, it is Stalin himself who pushed isolated groups of youth who are politically backwards and desperate onto the road of terrorism. By reducing liberty to the right to be a docile subject, by stifling all social life in the USSR, by giving no one the possibility of expressing his opinion in the framework of proletarian democracy, Stalin necessarily pushes isolated and desperate men onto the road of terrorism. The personification of the regime – the party does not exist, the working class does not exist, only Stalin and the local Kaganovich exist – this also cannot fail to feed terrorist tendencies. To the extent that these really exist in the USSR, Stalin – and he alone carries the full political responsibility. It is his regime which gives birth to them and not the Left Opposition.
It is also in this direction that the monstrous and bestial repression acts, in particular the latest Moscow shootings (and across the entire USSR there are undoubtedly shootings of which we know nothing!) At the time of Nikolaev’s revolver shot we, the communist-internationalists, had already condemned individual terror in the most pitiless and most decisive fashion. Today we maintain this point of view more firmly than ever. If Stalin, by his policy, his regime and the extermination of the Opposition, can create a terrorist state of mind, then revolutionary duty imperiously demands that the Bolshevik-Leninists repeat once again with all their energy: the path or individual terror is not our path, it can only be the path to the destruction of the revolution. It can facilitate the victory of the Bonapartist counterrevolution and only that.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.8)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

WHEN EXACTLY WAS THE “UNIFIED CENTER” CREATED AND WHEN DID IT FUNCTION?


Here is what the indictment says: “At the end of 1932 the
unification of the Trotskyist and Zinovievist groups took place and
they organized a unified center ...”
Organized at the end of 1932, this center, according to the
indictment, carried on terrorist activity for almost four years: “from
1932 to 1936.” It is the end of 1932 which is considered the
moment—and that is repeated dozens of times during the trial—when
the Zinovievists on the one hand, and the so-called “Trotskyists”
(Smirnov and others), on the other hand, supposedly obeyed Trotsky’s
instructions and created the Unified Center, “which gave itself the
task of executing a series of terrorist acts.”
What happened next? Here is what a number of the defendants and
Bakaev in particular, say: “In the autumn of 1932, Zinoviev and Kamenev
had been expelled from the party ... it was decided to temporarily
suspend the terrorist activity. In the autumn of 1934 it was taken up
again.” Reingold also says: “In our terrorist activity ... between the
autumn of 1932 and the summer of 1933 there was a break, beginning with
the autumn of 1932.” The inconsistencies concern only the time when
this activity was resumed. It thus turns out that the center which was
formed at the end of 1932 had already ceased its activity for
a while ... before its formation, in the autumn of 1932. [36]
In reality, to demonstrate that the center (if it had ever existed)
could not do otherwise than cease its activity in the autumn of 1932,
we do not need this testimony. The fact is that in the autumn of 1932
(in October) Zinoviev and Kamenev were exiled from Moscow, and in the
winter(on January 1, 1933) Smirnov was arrested. Mrachkovsky was also
outside Moscow; he was, according to the information available at that
time, deported, as were Ter-Vaganian and a number of other former
Oppositionists. We can see that from the autumn of 1932 and until at
least the summer of 1933 (the return of Zinoviev and Kamenev from
exile), the center could not in fact exist.
This does not stop Dreitzer from stating that in the spring
of 1933 he received “instructions from the Trotskyist-Zinovievist
center to hasten the terrorist acts against the leadership of the
Communist party in the USSR.” According to Dreitzer, consequently, it
turns out that, just in the period in which the center “had ceased its
activity,” it demanded that he “hasten” the preparation of the
terrorist acts.
In this jumble of absurdities, it is difficult to understand
anything at all! The center is organized and dissolved all at once,
ceases its activity and at the same time “hastens” it.
There is no less confusion tied to the question of exactly when the
center finally “resumed” its mysterious activity. Bakaev, who answers
this question the most precisely, says: “In the autumn of 1934,” that
is, two years later. This date is not chosen accidentally. It must be a
preparation for the “confession” of Kirov’s assassination. If we
believe Bakaev’s testimony, the only period in which the center existed
and involved itself in terrorist activity was the second half, and, in
particular, the autumn of 1934, that is, a period of only a few months.
If we accept the version of the other defendants (Pikel, Reingold,
Zinoviev, Kamenev), the center existed and acted from the summer or
autumn of 1933 to the end of 1934, that is, one year and a half at
the very most. Meanwhile, the indictment and the verdict say that
the center existed from 1932 to 1936. In order to demonstrate that this
statement is not unfounded, Vyshinsky asks Zinoviev the following
question: “For how long did it (the center) function?” Zinoviev
answers: “In fact, until 1936.” [37] This testimony of
Zinoviev’s is at least strange, since he himself, like Evdokimov,
Bakaev, and Kamenev had been in prison since December 1934. (Since the
end of 1934, none of the members of the center had been in Moscow.)
Obviously, from the end of 1934 to 1936 they engaged in terrorist
activity ... in prison. Another member of the center, Mrachkovsky,
during the four years of his “terrorist activity” was in Moscow only
twice, in 1932 and in 1934, and even these were only short visits. How
he was able, under these conditions, to work actively in the center is
incomprehensible.
Besides this, one of the members of the center, I.N. Smirnov,
never left prison after January 1, 1933, that is, for more than three
and one half years. One wonders what role I.N. Smirnov could have
played in the activity of the center since he was arrested in the
period when this center had just been organized, and how, in
particular, he could have taken an active part in Kirov’s assassination
when he was in prison, without interruption, for the two years which
preceded the assassination. But the verdict says in black and white —
and Smirnov was shot in accordance with this verdict—that he is
accused of “having organized and carried out on December 1, 1934 ...
the assassination of S.M. Kirov.” Is this not a “model trial”?
Vyshinsky, it is true, also has a reply to that. Regarding the
terrorist directives which Dreitzer was supposed to have received (in
1934), that is, when Smirnov had already been in prison for a long
time, the prosecutor Vyshinsky says: “I am deeply (!) convinced (!!)
that you knew about it (the terrorist directive) even while you were
being held in the political isolator.” The material proofs are replaced
by false “confessions” and mind-reading.


During the trial, several meetings are mentioned: in Zinoviev and
Kamenev’s country house in Ilinskoe, in Zinoviev’s apartment, in
Kamenev’s apartment and in Mrachkovsky’s railroad car. The first three
were made up exclusively of Zinovievists; the last one, in
Mrachkovsky’s railroad car, was, on the contrary, made up of former
Trotskyists (which the exception of Evdokimov). Furthermore, the very
fact of the last meeting is formally denied by I.N. Smirnov. These
meetings, if they really took place, were not and could not have been
sessions of the “Unified” Center, since they were only meetings of a single
group. The court furthermore does not attempt to present these meetings
as assemblies of the Unified Center.
With the object of crushing Smirnov, Vyshinsky asks Zinoviev: “And
did you personally hear from Smirnov a series of propositions
(concerning terror)?” Zinoviev: “I personally held talks with him on
two or three occasions.”
This dialogue, by the way, exposes the fictitious character of the
center. It turns out that during the entire terrorist activity, the two
most outstanding members of the center “held talks” only “on two or
three occasions.” And the common work of the center? The joint
participation in its sessions? Of this—not a word!
Thus, during the trial, there is no evidence of any kind which
would permit one to say that the “Unified Center” ever met, even once,
or even once carried out any decision at all.
And as for I.N. Smirnov, who had started making “confessions” during
the preliminary investigation, when it came to the trial he made an
attempt to stop; [38]
on the question of the Center, the following dialogue took place with
the prosecutor:
Vyshinsky: When did you leave the center?
Smirnov: I did not have to leave it, there was nothing that
I might have left.
Vyshinsky: Did the center exist?
Smirnov: But what center ...? [39]
The trial record is also forced to say that Smirnov confirmed these
words by referring to the fact that “the center did not meet.” With
this testimony, Smirnov struck the last blow to the legend of the
“Unified Center.”
Is it worthwhile to dwell on the fact that neither the court, nor
the prosecutor tries to look into all these contradictions? Rightly
fearing that by “deepening” the investigation they would be threatened
with even more disagreeable contradictions, they quite reasonably
prefer not to dwell on them.
The attentive reader of the trial records who has little experience
with Stalinist amalgams cannot help but say to himself: “What a bizarre
center! It is impossible to establish its exact composition, the moment
of its creation, or the period of its activity; it did not meet a
single time. What it did in general is unknown!” Certainly, this center
would be very bizarre, if ... if it had ever existed. [40]

Footnotes
[36]

In the verdict an attempt was made to correct the situation by saying
that the center arose not at the end of 1932, but in the autumn of
1932. That changes nothing in the case. It turns out that the center
was organized and at the same time ceased its activity. It was
undoubtedly organized with the special object .... ceasing its
activity. (L.S.)
[37]
Citing in his indictment speech the words of Zinoviev, “until 1936,”
Vyshinsky changes 1936 to 1934, fearing, evidently, that otherwise the
lie would be too crude to get away with. (L.S.)
[38]
This explains why Smirnov’s depositions in court contradict in some
measure the depositions at the time of the investigation. Not having
the courage to openly break with the “confessions” extorted by the GPU
and to tell the whole truth, Smirnov tried nonetheless to put up
resistance during the trial. Justice demands that we note that Smirnov
conducted himself somewhat better than the other defendants. (L.S.)
[39]

This is the official translation from the International
Correspondence (special number for the trial). Smirnov’s reply
corresponds, rather, in English, to the exclamation, Come on!
(L.S.)
[40]
Besides the Unified Center there also appears in the trial a certain
terrorist Center of Moscow (not to be confused with the Zinovievist
Moscow Center of 1934!) The official composition of this center is:
Dreitzer, Reingold and Pikel. It would be easy to show that everything
we have said on the question of the Unified Center could more or less
apply to this “center.” Its composition varies according to different
testimony. This “center” was organized by Mrachkovsky before his
departure from Moscow in 1932. Returning to Moscow nearly two years
later, Mrachliovsky hears a report from the director of this center,
Dreitzer, according to whom ... the Moscow center has been organized
and so on, all in the same spirit. (L.S.)

Read next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Foreword)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

FOREWORD TO THE FRENCH EDITION


This Red Book is only a first contribution to the analysis of the Moscow trial.
Except for the first chapter, which is of a general political character, and the second, which recalls previous facts, both of which are likely to be of less immediate interest to the reader, this work, based on the official record, is dedicated to the analysis of the trial itself. It has already appeared in Russian, as an editorial article in the Bulletin of the Opposition: the author has revised it for the French edition.
The inquiry is in its first few stages. New information and new evidence will not be lone in coming. Certain documents have not been given space in these pages because we do not consider it possible to render them public before they have been rigorously verified, as well as the circumstances connected with them.
The author of these lines keeps himself apart from active politics. He has never addressed himself to public opinion. He is only doing so today because compelling reasons have constrained him.
In Moscow, men have been trampled in the mud, shot for crimes they never committed and assassinated.
Leon Trotsky – the author’s father – has been slandered ignominiously, slandered as very few have been in history. All his revolutionary honor and all his work of forty years have been implicated.
And the slanders have already born fruit; Leon Trotsky is interned and condemned to silence so that, once accused, he may not become the accuser.
The author of these lines is also one of the accused in the Moscow trial. He has the right to defend himself. But it is above all a two-fold duty which is required of him. The duty of the only accused still at liberty to establish the truth; the duty to defend Trotsky’s honor.
The real trial, that of the Moscow executioners, has only just begun. Our only weapon is the truth. We are pursuing our task to the end, without weakening, whatever the difficulties that must be overcome. The truth will emerge.
Not a stone will remain standing of the monstrous Stalinist plot. The dreadful responsibility will come down on the Moscow Thermidorians.
Stalin’s crime will appear as it is, one of the greatest of modern history.



October 28, 1936


L. Sedov




Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.17)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE PROSECUTOR VYSHINSKY


The prosecutor who served against Zinoviev, Kamenev and the other old Bolsheviks was the Menshevik Vyshinsky. To be sure, he had been much less a Menshevik than a small-time provincial lawyer who accommodated himself marvelously to tsarism. Carried away like many other petit-bourgeois by the 1905 revolution, Vyshinsky became a Menshevik, but already in 1907, he broke from the workers movement and returned to the life of a philistine. There is a gaping hole in his official biography between 1907 and 1920. After the February revolution Vyshinsky “became active” and, as a right Menshevik, (in the Zamoskvoretsky region of Moscow) he spoke as a frenzied enemy of Bolshevism and the October Revolution. After the victory, Vyshinsky decided to sneak into the ranks of Bolshevism. But first he prudently waited for the results of the Civil War. He joined the Communist Party in 1920, when the Soviet power had secured its victories, when it stood firmly, and when Vyshinsky therefore no longer risked anything. Having joined the party, the future prosecutor became, of course, a vehement opponent of all opposition and a faithful Stalinist. Just as he adapted to tsarism in the past, he now adapts to Stalinism.

 And Stalin entrusts this man with the prosecution of old Bolsheviks! A former Menshevik, enemy of Bolshevism and the October Revolution, who demands the heads of the leaders of Bolshevism and the October Revolution. Isn’t that symbolic? Doesn’t this one fact say more than all the speeches and resolutions? Certainly, Vyshinsky felt at ease in his role of the Thermidorian avenger against Bolshevism.
Vyshinsky is no exception; there are thousands of Vyshinskys, faithful Stalinists,the buttress of the regime. The former minister of the White government under the auspices of Kolchak – Maisky, is now the Soviet ambassador to London; the former minister of Petliura, [70] Rafes, is one of the leaders of the Comintern.
In 1917, in the newspaper Dni, the venal journalist Zaslavksy slandered Lenin and Trotsky with particular hatred, calling them German spies. Lenin wrote about him repeatedly in the following way: “Zaslavsky and other scum,” “mercenary pen,” “blackmailer,” “slanderer.” These references are found dozens of times in Lenin’s writings of 1917.
And who today writes articles in Pravda which slander Trotsky as a Gestapo agent? The very same Zaslavsky!
Isn’t this symbolic, once again?
But let us return to Vyshinsky. In his speech, he is imprudent enough to venture into historical research. In order to expose Kamenev, Vyshinsky tells how, while editing a book by Machiavelli, “Kamenev ... wrote in a short introduction to this book ... ‘Master of political aphorism and brilliant dialectician,...’” and Vyshinsky adds: “This Machiavelli is, according to Kamenev, a dialectician! This arch-scoundrel is, it seems, a dialectician!”
Let us quote some estimations of Machiavelli by men whose works are not yet banned in the USSR, but whose revolutionary heirs have been shot there. We are talking about Marx and Engels. Marx called Machiavelli’s history of Florence a “masterpiece” (in a letter to Engels). For his part, Engels wrote: “Machiavelli was a statesman, historian, poet and at the same time, the first military writer in modern times worthy of mention,” (1880). In an article in the Kölnische Zeitung (No 179), Marx mentions Machiavelli alongside Spinoza, Rousseau and Hegel, as the one who discovered the laws of the state, drawing a parallel between this discovery and the discoveries of Copernicus. There are still other enthusiastic appreciations by Marx of Machiavelli; his name is often found in his correspondence.
It seems then that Marx and Engels did not consider Machiavelli to be an “arch-scoundrel.” But even “arch-scoundrel” fails to satisfy Vyshinsky. As a criminal, Machiavelli is a “puppy or a country bumpkin compared to them (Zinoviev and Kamenev).” What! And this imbecile of a prosecutor asks the court not to consider Kamenev’s preface to Machiavelli’s book “as one of the items of material evidence” (although Vyshinsky certainly did not have very many of these.)
Kamenev’s evaluation of Machiavelli “has,” in Vyshinsky’s words, “a certain importance for defining the moral and, if you will, ideological level, of the defendant Kamenev.”
“The moral and, if you will, ideological level.” But whose? By this example, Vyshinsky completely unveils his own “ideological level,” as far as this expression can generally be applied to such an individual.
Vyshinsky’s entire speech is kept strictly at this level. Let us just consider his slander that Trotsky holds a defeatist viewpoint with respect to the USSR. The prosecutor refers to the testimony of the arch-suspicious Berman-Yurin and Fritz David. He does not manage, though, to extract more than a few sentences from this testimony, according to which Trotsky demands the “disintegration of the armed forces.” Evidently feeling, himself, that all this was too false, crude and stupid, Vyshinsky adds: “Perhaps all this is invented? Fantastic fabrications? Perhaps all this is fantasy, pure invention, the irresponsible babbling of defendants who are trying to say as much as possible about others in order to lighten their own sentence?”
Having raised this extremely risky question, Vyshinsky presents the final proof by referring to ... the Theses of Clemenceau. We don’t know if Clemenceau [71] ever wrote theses. This Marxist foible was surely not part of the Tiger’s character. Vyshinsky evidently has in mind, and here he once again reveals his “ideological level,” the so-called “thesis” on Clemenceau. But let us listen to Vyshinsky himself. These mysterious theses of Clemenceau, in his words, speak “of the necessity, in case of war, of waiting until the enemy is within 80 km. of Moscow to take up arms against the Soviet government in order to overthrow it.”
In fact, in one of his speeches to the Political Bureau (apparently in 1927) Trotsky said that the danger of war or war itself would by no means wipe out the differences between the Opposition and the Stalinists, and that the Stalinist leadership, incompetent in peacetime, would reveal its inability to a far greater degree in case of war. Trotsky summed up his thoughts in another speech with the following words: “For the Socialist fatherland? Yes! For the Stalinist course? No!” Trotsky introduced the example of Clemenceau, who, when the Germans approached Paris during the war, by no means drew the conclusion to support the sluggish radical government, but on the contrary, considered that the very possibility of victory depended on the creation of a strong government. Clemenceau overthrew the government of radicals and took power. As even Vyshinsky probably knows, Clemenceau did this not by means of an armed insurrection or battles on the barricades. He overthrew the government within the framework of Parliament. With this analogy, Trotsky wanted to say that for the Soviet Union to win the war, it would be necessary to liquidate the Stalinist course and to remove the Stalinist leadership. Of course, in a strictly constitutional and statutory manner. If Trotsky had been speaking of an armed insurrection, it would have been useless for him to introduce the example of Clemenceau.
After referring so imprudently to the Theses of Clemenceau, Vyshinsky concludes: “Precisely for this reason one is forced to acknowledge that the testimony of Berman-Yurin and Fritz David in this case corresponds to reality.” Precisely for this reason one is forced to acknowledge, we say, that the testimony of Berman-Yurin and Fritz David does not, even in this case, correspond to reality.
As for the attitude of the Bolshevik-Leninists toward the defense of the USSR, whoever reads the Bulletin has no need of further explanations on our part. It is enough to look through the Bulletin to find instructions in almost every issue that the defense of the USSR is the unconditional duty, in spite of the bureaucracy and its ignominies, of every worker, not only a Bolshevik-Leninist. We again point out that the Left Opposition has always ruthlessly broken with those who allow any compromise on this question.

Footnotes
[70] Petliura: A Ukrainian bourgeois nationalist who led counter-revolutionary armies against the Bolsheviks to establish a separate Ukrainian nation. Welcomed the German armies in 1918, appealed to Paris for further foreign aid, tried to ally with Denikin and other White generals, and finally made a pact with the Polish bourgeoisie. By 1920 was defeated with the establishment of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
[71] Georges Clemenceau (1841-1929): Chief inspirer of Versailles, was in his youth a radical, called himself a socialist and was even for a time a member of the French Socialist Party. Later he became the beloved leader of the French big bourgeoisie, its “Tiger.” In the days of the Versailles Conference and during the era of the first World Congress of the Comintern, Clemenceau headed the French cabinet (First Five Years of the Communist international, Vol.1).

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.4)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

TWO TRIALS
(January 1935-August 1936)


The Moscow trial actually was, and in any case had to
be, a revision of the first trial of January 15-16, 1935, in
which Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov, Bakaev and others were sentenced to
long years of imprisonment. The verdict of the January 1935 trials said
that “the inquiry had not been able to establish the facts which would
provide the basis for directly charging the members of the ‘Moscow
Center’ with having given their assent to the organization of the
terrorist act directed against Comrade Kirov or of having given any
instructions on this subject.”
These “facts” were supposedly now established. Hence the new trial.
Such is the official version. The “case” of Zinoviev and the others is
being reconsidered.
One might have thought that the trial would have to proceed from the
evidence of the first trial, from its entire “structure,” enlarging and
completing what had “not been established” in the past, openly
correcting, without forgetting to explain the reasons, the “error” of
the first trial.
Nothing of the sort! The trial does not even attempt to establish
the continuity—it would have been wasted effort!—between the first
and second trials, proceeding from the evidence of the first trial,
etc. It simply casts it aside as useless rubbish, thus exposing the
first trial as a machination of the police, which was necessary then,
but not now. It is extremely instructive to compare the trials. It
unmasks the whole lie of the Stalinist judicial “constructions.”
The “Moscow Center” and the “Unified Center”
At the first trial, the entire indictment hinged on the
so-called “Moscow Center” (Zinovievists) whose members were, according
to the prosecution: Sharov, Kuklin, Gertik, Fedorov, Gorshenin,
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov and Bakaev, that is, exclusively
Zinovievists. Not one word was mentioned in the case about
“Trotskyists,” not only the real ones, but even those who capitulated,
such as Smirnov and Mrachkovsky (pseudo-Trotskyists).
At the present trial the Moscow Center has been almost completely
forgotten and the prosecution is constructed exclusively upon the
activity of the so-called “Unified Center” (of an altogether different
composition). At the first trial, this Unified Center was never
mentioned at all, for the simple reason that ... the GPU had not yet
succeeded in inventing it.
Neither the court, nor the prosecutor makes any attempt to clarify
what were the political and organizational relationships between the
so-called Moscow [22]
Center and the Unified Center. However this question ought to have been
of great interest to the prosecution, all the more so since the first
center was joined by a number of people who were not in the second and
a few, such as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bakaev and Evdokimov, belonged to
both centers.
According to the prosecutor’s explanation, Zinoviev, Kamenev and
others—19 defendants in all—(to whom the 14 shot in the Nikolaev
case must be added) simply hid the existence of the Unified Center in
December 1934, and January 1935, while acknowledging everything else
that was demanded of them. Inconceivable! Zinoviev, Kamenev and the
others had spared neither themselves nor those near them, but for some
reason concealed the role of the “Trotskyists,” in particular, for whom
they had never harbored any especially tender feelings and the
implication of whom at that time might have really eased the fate of
Zinoviev and Kamenev, because the main blow of the GPU was obviously
aimed at Trotskyism.
The Nineteen and the Four
At the first trial of Zinoviev and others, 19 people
were sentenced. Here is the list: 1. Zinoviev, ten years in prison as
the “principal organizer and leader of the Moscow Center”; 2. Gertik,
A.N.; 3. Kuklin, A.S.; and 4. Sakhov, B.N.—as “the most active
participants,” ten years each in prison; 5. Sharov, Y.V.; 6. Evdokimov,
G.E.; 7. Bakaev, I.P.; 8. Gorshenin, I.S. and 9. Tsarkov, A.N.—eight
years in prison. 10. Fedorov, G.V.; 11. Herzberg, A.V.; 12. Hessen,
S.M.; 13. Tarasov, I.I.; 14. Perimov, A.V.; 15. Anishev, A.I. and 16.
Faivilovich, L.Y.—six years each. 17. Kamenev, L.B.; 18. Bashkirov,
A.S. and 19. Brave, B.L.—(as “less active participants”) to five
years each in prison.
In connection with this case, 49 people were condemned to internment
in a concentration camp for four to five years, including Zalutsky,
Vardin, and others, and 29 people were sentenced to exile for two to
five years. In total, 97 people, former leaders of the former Zinoviev
Opposition.
Of the 19 convicted in the first trial, one finds in the
present trial, chosen with the utmost arbitrariness, only four.
Why were the 15 others not called, even if only as witnesses? What has
become of these 15 men? Why were only four implicated and why precisely

these four? Let us recall once more: the verdict cites, among
the most “active,” next to Zinoviev, Gertik, Kuklin, and Sakhov,
(10 years in an isolator [23]), whereas Evdokimov and Bakaev had been
placed in the category of people who were less active and Kamenev in
the category of the least active (“only” five years in an isolator).
It now turns out that Kamenev, along with Zinoviev, Bakaev and
Evdokimov, was one of the principal leaders. On the other hand, Gertik,
Kuklin and several others, although mentioned several times in the
present trial as leading terrorists, are not on the defendants’ bench!
Many among the “19” are not even mentioned in the new case. One must
suppose that as far as they were concerned, what took place in 1935 was
a judicial error. It was necessary either to implicate them or to
rehabilitate them, in any case to call them as witnesses.
At first 19 old Bolsheviks are sentenced to long prison terms for
taking part, although “it is not established,” in Kirov’s
assassination, then four of them, at Stalin’s choice, are implicated in
a new trial and shot. The fate of the others remains unknown. And there
was, in spite of everything, a juridical scoundrel (the English lawyer
Pritt) who had the effrontery to characterize the “procedure” of this
trial as an “example for the whole world!”
The four Zinovievists arbitrarily included in the trial Zinoviev,
Kamenev, Evdokimov and Bakaev—were obviously not chosen in the
interests of justice, but for political and police reasons. Stalin
needed Zinoviev and Kamenev to give this trial its full political
significance. Bakaev and Evdokimov were, most likely, those whom it was
possible to break and without whom the implication of Zinoviev and
Kamenev by themselves would have been difficult. The fact that Kuklin
and Gertik, above all, were not included in this trial can only be
explained, so it seems, by the fact that it was impossible to
break them. For this reason they suited Stalin very poorly, even
as witnesses, in this “exemplary” trial. It also cannot be excluded
that certain of them constitute a Stalinist reserve in case of new
trials.
The Price of the Confessions
At the Moscow trial, no document, no material proof, (Olberg’s
Honduras passport cannot be taken seriously) was introduced, no witness
who was not directly implicated in the case was called. The last trial,
just like the first one in 1935, was constructed exclusively on
the confessions (full of lies) of the accused themselves, who were
at the same time the (false) witnesses of the prosecution. Four of
them, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov and Bakaev had already made
depositions at the first trial. Let us compare them:







January 1935
August 1936


Kamenev acknowledged that he “did not fight actively
or energetically enough against the demoralization which was the
consequence of the struggle against the party and upon which ground a
band of brigands (Nikolaev and others) could spring up and carry out
their crime.”
“Acknowledged ... that he did not break all ties with Zinoviev.”
(What a fearsome crime!)
Vyshinsky: “You therefore confirm that there existed
in your company such a monstrous plan (the taking of power by terror)?”
Kamenev: “Yes, this monstrous plan existed.”
Vyshinsky: “Was the assassination of Kirov your direct
work?”
Kamenev: “Yes.”


Bakaev declares that “here among the Zinovievists
there was only malevolent and hostile criticism of the most important
measures taken by the party.” (Not one word about the attempts terror,
the “Unified Center:” etc!)
Vyshinsky: “You were ordered to organize the
assassination of Comrade Stalin?”
Bakaev: “Yes.”
Vyshinsky: “You took part in Kirov’s assassination?”
Bakaev: “Yes.”


Zinoviev (under the threat of the gun) says that
“... the party is absolutely correct when it speaks of the political
responsibility of the old ‘Zinovievist’ anti-party group for the
assassination which has just been accomplished.”
Vyshinsky: “This center was composed of you.
Kamenev, et al.?”
Zinoviev (Again under the threat of the gun): “Yes.”
Vyshinsky: “That means all of you organized Kirov’s
murder?”
Zinoviev: “Yes.”
Vyshinsky: “That means all of you killed Comrade Kirov?”
Zinoviev: “Yes.”


Evdokimov: “We must bear the responsibility (for
Kirov’s murder), because it is the venom with which we poisoned those
around us during a 10-year period which made possible the realization
of this crime.”
Vyshinsky: “Do you acknowledge that it was with your
collaboration that Kirov’s assassination was prepared?”
Evdokimov: “Yes. I admit it.”





After having heaped upon themselves the slander that
they bore political responsibility for Kirov’s assassination in 1935,
Zinoviev and the others began to yield to Stalin’s demands and in 1936
piled on the still more monstrous slander of having assassinated Kirov
and prepared other attempts. These men lied both in 1935 and in 1936.
But their lie of 1935—the self-acknowledgement of the “political
responsibility” for Kirov’s assassination—is nothing in comparison
with the frightful lie of 1936, the character of which is so tortured
and forced! This “yes, yes” repeated at each question by the
prosecutor, doesn’t that alone reveal that all these confessions are a
lie? Vyshinsky himself qualifies the testimony of the accused as
“deceit, lies, ... concealment,” unworthy of “the slightest confidence.”
We ask: Of what value is the testimony of accused men who “have lied
previously as they are lying now!” ... (Prosecutor Vyshinsky)? And of
what value is this trial based exclusively on this testimony,
that is, on “deceit, lies ... concealment”?
The “Restoration of Capitalism” or the “Thirst for Personal Power”?
In connection with the first trial, Zinoviev and Kamenev
had been accused of supporting the return to capitalism, “capitalist
restoration.” It is with this refrain that the Soviet newspapers of
that period (the beginning of 1935) persecuted Zinoviev and Kamenev.
If one could not—then—establish the nature of the activity of
Zinoviev and Kamenev (terror), at least their purpose had been clearly
established: the re-establishment of capitalism.
At the second trial, the “restoration of capitalism” was completely
forgotten. A new version was given: “... It is irrefutably established
that the only motive for the organization of the Trotskyist-Zinovievist
block was the attempt to seize power at any cost,” (The Indictment).
The prosecutor repeated it dozens of times: “For power, power at any
price, the thirst for personal power, that is the entire ideology of
this gang.”
The sentence is passed, the accused are condemned and shot for using
terror while striving for personal power. And suddenly, several weeks
after this trial, Stalin gives the order to return to the first
version, evidently considering it more “propitious.” Pravda
(September 12) publishes a thunderous article according to which the
defendants “... attempted to hide the true purpose of their struggle.
They gave the version that they had no program. In tact, their program
did exist. It was the program of the destruction of socialism and the
reestablishment of capitalism.” And now the entire “critical review”
takes this direction. One of the most important questions—the motive
of the accused—is revised by a number of newspaper articles,
completely ignoring all that was said before the court.
When Stalin needs to prove that the defendants are people without
principles, he declares that they have no program and that there is
only the “thirst for power.” When he must prove their
“counterrevolutionary character,” he announces without embarrassment
that they were not seeking power for its own sake, but the
reestablishment of capitalism. What unceremonious behavior a decade of
uncontrolled power has taught these people!
The End of the Legend of the Consul
By implicating the Zinoviev group in Kirov’s
assassination in 1935, Stalin wanted above all to strike a blow at
“Trotskyism” through this group. This was his principal aim. At the
same time, the attempt was to directly associate the name of Trotsky
with the Nikolaev affair.
On-the twentieth day (!) of interrogation (December 20, 1934)
Nikolaev finally indicated that an anonymous consul, whom he
frequently visited, “had said that he could establish a link with
Trotsky if I would deliver a letter from the group to Trotsky.” And
that is all.
As we can see, the initiative for this proposition came from the
anonymous consul; furthermore, the prosecution and the court at
Nikolaev’s trial did not even judge it necessary to make clear if any
letter had been written and transmitted to Trotsky, if Trotsky had
responded, etc. The GPU preferred not to go into these details, rightly
fearing that they would compromise themselves and discredit their
amalgam.
On December 29, 1934, Le Temps announced that
“foreign circles in Moscow ... are lost in conjectures over the
nationality of this diplomat.” On December 30, the telegraph agency
announced that “a conference of the consuls was held, at which it was
decided ... to demand of the Soviet authorities that they publicly name
the suspected consul.”
Stalin was thus forced on January 2, 1935 to name the consul. “The
foreign consul mentioned in the indictment in the case concerning
Kirov’s assassination is the Latvian consul, M. Bissinieks.” And the
next day, January 3, Tass announced that the consul who was mentioned
had been “recalled by his government.”
The consul didn’t feel it necessary to deny anything or to give any
information. He didn’t even feel it necessary to indicate why he had
needed a letter from the terrorist Nikolaev to Trotsky. He no doubt had
serious reasons not only for covering up the amalgam of the GPU, but
even for participating in it.
In Moscow, people quickly understood that the amalgam with the
consul had not been successful and that it was better to be silent
about it. Thus it was with all the more insistence that Moscow ordered
its French lackeys to raise a storm against Trotsky in order,
particularly, to create police difficulties for him in France where he
was then living. (What did not succeed in France at that time, has just
succeeded in Norway.) With still unsurpassed gall, Duclos [24] wrote in L’Humanité

(December 29, 1934): “It is proven (where? when? how?) that
between the assassin Nikolaev and his associates, Trotsky and the
diplomatic representative of an imperialist power (Latvia!) there
existed ties (??) which make it possible to establish Trotsky’s
responsibility for Kirov’s assassination.” “The consul,” continues L’Humanité,
“served as a link between Trotsky and the group of assassins in
Leningrad.”
The consul served—in 1935—as the sole “basis” for
accusing Trotsky of participating in Kirov’s assassination. “Trotsky’s
hands are red with the blood of a proletarian leader (Kirov)!” howled L’Humanité.
The proof? The consul!
At the Moscow trial, however, this consul was purely and simply
forgotten. He, who had been the “link,” who had proved that “a
connection did exist” between Trotsky and Nikolaev, etc.,—and
suddenly not a word, not a single word! The unsuccessful amalgam was
casually tossed onto the garbage heap and ... replaced by another.
Can anyone compromise himself more? Whose confidence can these men
lay claim to when they expose themselves as slanderers and falsifiers?!

Footnotes


[22]
We are sure that the Moscow (Zinovievist) center never existed on the
face of the earth. Bound by long years of mutual effort, people met,
conversed, criticized ... and that’s all. Vyshinsky announced, for
example, that “Kamenev said (in January 1935) that he did not know that
there had been a ‘Moscow Center’ ... He (Kamenev) says that in so far
(?) as this center existed) and this is proven (???), then he answers
for it”! (L.S.)
[23]
Isolator: a special political prison or solitary confinement.
[24]
Jacques Duclos: Born in 1896. After war service in which he
was wounded, he joined the (French) Communist Party after the Tours
Congress and rapidly became a leading figure. Elected deputy in 1926,
he acquired a reputation as an orator and an accomplished
parliamentarian. Too volatile to become party leader, he performed as
second string to Thorez and was unfalteringly faithful to the dictates
of Stalin. Trotsky regarded him as a GPU agent. During the occupation,
he went underground and directed the party’s activities while Thorez
was in Moscow. Has produced lengthy memoirs which deform the history of
the period and excuse Stalinist policies.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.13)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

COPENHAGEN


Copenhagen plays a major role at the trial. It’s there
that Trotsky’s “meetings” with the terrorists are supposed to have
taken place, from there supposedly came Trotsky’s “instructions” for
terror. The Trotskyists would have turned the peaceful capital of
Denmark, if one believes the court transcripts, into a sort of foreign
“terrorist center.” This question therefore requires a detailed
examination.
In the fall of 1932, the Danish Social-Democratic Student
Organization invited Comrade Trotsky to give a lecture in Copenhagen on
the Russian Revolution. Judging it difficult, it seems, to refuse the
students, the Danish government gave L. Trotsky a visa for Denmark, good
for eight days. Having left Istanbul on November 14, 1932, L.
Trotsky (after a circuitous journey through France) arrived in Denmark
on November 23. Trotsky stayed in Copenhagen for eight days;
he left this city on the morning of December 2, in order to return to
Istanbul, once again by way of France.
The formal charges and the verdict say that Trotsky carried out
terrorist activities for about five years (from 1931 to 1936). During
these five years Trotsky spent a total of eight days in
Copenhagen. But, by some strange coincidence all the “terrorists” who
supposedly met with Trotsky (Holtzman, Berman-Yurin, Fritz David) chose
— completely independently of each other!—precisely Copenhagen as the
location for their meeting with Trotsky, during the very same week,
from November 23 to December 2, 1932. No other meeting in any other
city was mentioned during the trial.
Only one week of “terrorist” activity during five years! This fact
alone has to evoke disbelief. The explanation is simple. Copenhagen was
chosen by the GPU investigators for reasons of personal convenience.
The city is close to Berlin, it’s easy to go there, and above all, the
exact dates and circumstances of Trotsky’s stay in Copenhagen were in
all the papers. That gave the GPU investigators the necessary
“material.” Meetings in Istanbul or in the secluded villages of France,
where Trotsky lived during those years, were an exercise which was
really too dangerous for the GPU. The lack of “material” added to the
risk of failure.
Having chosen Copenhagen, the GPU sent not only the “terrorists”
Holtzman, Berman-Yurin, and Fritz David, but also Sedov. Here is
Holtzman’s account of his trip to Copenhagen:


Sedov told me ... that it would be good if you came with me to
Copenhagen [to see Trotsky] ... I agreed, but I told him that it would
be impossible to travel together out of considerations of secrecy. I
arranged with Sedov that I would arrive in Copenhagen in two or three
days; that I would stop at the Hotel Bristol and that we would meet
there. From the station I went straight to the hotel where I met Sedov
in the foyer. [54]

We are greatly won over by this account with all its factual evidence
which so rarely appears at this trial. In particular, it even names the
Hotel Bristol where Holtzman and Sedov supposedly met in the foyer. The
only trouble is that there is no Hotel Bristol in Copenhagen.
Such a hotel did exist but it was closed in 1917 and the building
itself was destroyed. [55]
Perhaps Holtzman or one of his investigators had gone to Copenhagen
before the Revolution and had stayed at the Hotel Bristol. Perhaps the
investigators simply decided that there is no major city in Europe
without a Hotel Bristol. Everything is possible ... But the incompetent
and lazy investigators would have done better to take the trouble to
first make the necessary inquiry. Now there’s some “sabotage” for you!
And after this. what else remains of the testimony, so rich in detail,
given by Holtzman, the most important witness for the prosecution?
Doesn’t this fact alone shed a bright light on the whole trial?
Sedov’s Trip to Copenhagen
But that’s not all. As we have seen, they forced
Holtzman to say that he didn’t go to Copenhagen alone,—that by
agreement with him, Sedov also went to Copenhagen. In describing the
conditions of his conversation with Trotsky, Holtzman gives us
interesting new details: “very frequently Trotsky’s son Sedov would
enter the room and then leave it.” A new act of sabotage! Never in
his life was Sedov in Copenhagen. This sounds unbelievable, but
nevertheless it’s true. In order for Sedov to be able to travel to
Copenhagen from Berlin, his home at that time, he had to obtain a visa
from the Berlin Police Headquarters to leave and re-enter Germany (a
so-called “Sichtvermerk”). The obtaining of such a visa ordinarily
brings with it great difficulties for a Heimatloser

(stateless person).
When it became clear that L.D. Trotsky would go to Copenhagen, Sedov
immediately began efforts—through his lawyer, the late Oscar Cohn —
to obtain permission to leave and return to Germany, hoping after this,
to obtain a visa to Denmark without any difficulty. Since it was
originally supposed that Trotsky’s visa to Denmark would be extended a
few weeks for medical treatment, the delay at the Berlin Police
Headquarters at first did not worry Sedov or his parents. It was quite
unexpected when, after the eight days had gone by, the Danish
government in a very sharp manner ordered Trotsky to leave Danish soil.
By now Sedov had no possibility of meeting with his parents in
Copenhagen. A last attempt was made to see each other, even though it
would only be for the short time which Trotsky had to spend in France
on his way from Copenhagen to Istanbul (Dunkirk—Marseilles via
Paris). N.I. Trotsky sent a detailed telegram to Edouard Herriot, the
French prime minister at that time, asking him to give her son, Sedov,
permission to travel in France for a few days in order to meet with
him·after being separated for several years. This telegram can
undoubtedly be found in the archives of the French Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. Sedov, on his part, with the help of Oscar Cohn, managed
finally to obtain permission from the Berlin Police Headquarters for
the return trip to Germany, without which he could not have received a
French visa. On December 3 [56] , 1932, Sedov received the necessary
permission from the German Police and on the same day the French
consulate in Berlin received a telegram with instructions to give Sedov
a French visa for five days. On the morning of December 4, Sedov left
for Paris and arrived in the evening; at 10 AM on December 6 he met
with Trotsky in Paris, at the Gare du Nord, in a railroad car. His
father was travelling from Dunkirk to Marseilles without stopping in
Paris.
Everything said above on be verified by certain documents: 1) Sedov’s
passport with the corresponding visas and stamps for going both
ways across the Franco-German border; 2) Natalia Trotsky’s
telegram to Herriot, asking him to give a visa to her son, whom
she was unable to see in Copenhagen; 3) a certificate from the
Danish authorities stating that Sedov never asked for and never
received a Danish visa. But, they can say,—perhaps Sedov travelled to
Denmark “illegally”? Let us assume so. But why then, we must ask, was
Sedov—after meeting with his parents illegally in Copenhagen,
travelling a few days later to another meeting with them in France, a
trip which was accompanied by such difficulties and trouble (a telegram
to Herriot, etc.)?
But we have at our disposal irrefutable proof that while
Trotsky was staying in Copenhagen, Sedov remained in Berlin without
interruption:
1. Over the course of these eight days Trotsky or his
wife talked with Sedov on the phone every day, sometimes twice a day,
by calling Sedov’s Berlin apartment from Copenhagen. This can—and
will be established by the central telephone office in Copenhagen.
2. Since Trotsky’s journey from Istanbul to Copenhagen
brought on the burning hatred of world reaction, a number of Trotsky’s
friends and co-thinkers set out hurriedly for Copenhagen. There were
more than 20 people. All of them will swear under oath that L. Sedov
was never in Copenhagen. Let us allow ourselves to take up one of these
statements. Its author is E. Bauer, whom we have already quoted, now in
the leadership of the SAP (Socialist Workers Party of Germany),
formerly a member of the German Left Opposition. In September 1934,
following serious political disagreements, E. Bauer broke with the
organization of the Bolshevik-Leninists; this split was accompanied by
very sharp polemics. Since then, E. Bauer has had no connection, either
political or personal, with the membership of the Trotskyist
organization. “This is why” as he writes in his deposition, “there can
be no question in my case of any partiality toward the Trotskyists.”
Then he writes: “From the first day of Trotsky’ s stay in Copenhagen, I
spoke daily with Sedov in Berlin either directly or by telephone, since
I was preparing to travel to Copenhagen. On the evening of December 1,
1932, I left for Copenhagen. Sedov accompanied me to the station and
... remained in Berlin. On the morning of December 2, we [Bauer and
another person] arrived in Copenhagen ... and two hours later, between
10 and 11 o’clock in the morning, I was leaving Copenhagen by car with
Trotsky and his wife; Sedov was not with us, since his trip had been
impossible for technical reasons.”
We have at our disposal ten similar depositions and we will have
still more. We are ready to submit all this material immediately
to a responsible commission or a tribunal which would undertake an
investigation of this case.
That’s how things stand with the testimony of the chief witness
Holtzman who was, in spite of everything, an old Bolshevik. After this,
is it necessary to dwell on the statements of scoundrels and Stalinist
agents such as Berman-Yurin and Fritz David? Neither Trotsky nor Sedov
— we repeat once more—had ever laid eyes on these people, whether in
Copenhagen or elsewhere; they learned of their existence for the first
time through the reports from the Moscow trial.


We have already noted above that at the time of
Trotsky’s stay in Copenhagen, several dozen friends and comrades were
also there. Fearing possible incidents, these comrades organized a very
serious guard around Trotsky. It was impossible to enter L. Trotsky’s
study without first passing through another room, where there were
always four or five comrades. Access to the small villa occupied by
Trotsky in Copenhagen was only allowed to a few close friends. [57]
Neither Berman-Yurin, nor Fritz David, nor anyone else could have
reached Trotsky unless comrades on guard in the front room knew about
it.


By the preliminary, yet absolutely precise,
investigations carried out by the comrades who were in Copenhagen, it
has been possible to establish that Trotsky received only one
Russian-speaking person in Copenhagen. This is a certain Abraham Senin
(Sobolevich), who was then a Lithuanian citizen and a member of the
Berlin organization of the Opposition. He came to see Cde. Trotsky on
the last day of his stay in Copenhagen (at the same time as E. Bauer)
and spoke no more than one hour with Trotsky, under conditions of
extreme haste before the sudden departure. Senin’s trip to Copenhagen
was made at the insistence of some of Trotsky’s Berlin friends; they
had wanted to make a last effort to save Senin from capitulation to the
Stalinists, to whom he was drawing nearer and nearer. The attempt was
not crowned with success; a few weeks later, Senin, with three or four
friends, went over to the Stalinists. This event was reported in both
the Stalinist and Oppositionist press. By the very character of L.D.
Trotsky’s meeting with the semi-capitulator Senin, it is quite obvious
that Trotsky could not have maintained any confidence in Senin and
could no longer look upon him as a cothinker.


In conclusion, we must once more turn our attention
toward part of the testimony given by Olberg which deals with
Copenhagen. “It was my intention” says Olberg “to go to Copenhagen with
Sedov to see Trotsky. Our trip did not succeed and it was Sedov’s wife,
Suzanne, who left for Copenhagen. Upon her return, she brought a letter
[58]
from Trotsky addressed to Sedov, in which Trotsky agreed to my trip to
the USSR, etc.” This must be noted above all: in affirming that his
trip to Copenhagen with Sedov did not take place. Olberg contradicts
Holtzman. Because if one were to admit that Sedov went to Copenhagen
without Olberg, why then would Trotsky have given a letter for Sedov to
his companion, as Olberg contends?


No one, of course, has to know the name of Sedov’s wife, but Olberg,
who claims to be on intimate terms with Sedov (“we [Sedov and I] met
almost weekly, and sometimes we met twice a week in a cafe ... or I
visited him at his apartment,” testifies Olberg), should have known
that Sedov’s wife is not named Suzanne. Furthermore, Olberg,
as we have just seen, affirms that this same Suzanne “upon her return
[from Copenhagen to Berlin] brought a letter from Trotsky.” Sedov’s
wife really was in Copenhagen, [59] but she left there not for Berlin,
but directly for Paris, where she remained for a rather long time.
This fact can be established with absolute precision on the basis of
the passport belonging to Sedov’s wife. It is completely obvious that
Trotsky could not give Sedov’s wife, who was leaving for Paris,
a letter for Sedov who was in Berlin, But, one might
object once again, perhaps Sedov’s wife nevertheless went “illegally”
to Berlin. “Illegal trips” are not romanticism, they are a sad
necessity for those who do not have papers. But why would a person who
has a good legal passport for travelling in every country, the majority
of which do not even require her to have a visa, travel illegally? This
is simply not serious!


There we have the “foreign terrorist center” of
Copenhagen, the only European city mentioned in the trial. The baseness
of it aside, what poverty of invention! What a pitiful and hopeless
failure!

Footnotes
[54]
It must be noted that Holtzman was a Soviet citizen and as such,
getting a visa for any country, including Demark, was fraught with
nearly insurmountable difficulties, if the request was not backed by
the Soviet Embassy, and it goes without saying that in this case there
can be no talk of the embassy’s support. Thus Holtzman could only go to
Copenhagen illegally. It is strange that the court was not interested
in these circumstances and did not explain what papers Holtzman used to
go to Denmark, where he got these papers, etc. (L.S.)
[55]
For further details, see the Sozial Demokraten of
Copenhagen on September 1, 1936; also Baedeker.
The work of falsification went full speed ahead even
after the trial. In the English language edition of the court
transcripts, which appeared somewhat later than the others, the Hotel
Bristol is not even mentioned! (L.S.)
[56]
Trotsky left Copenhagen, as we already said, on December 2. (L.S.)
[57]
We take this opportunity to correct an imprecision which slipped into
the Russian edition of this work. It was said in this passage that some
journalists had visited Trotsky in this villa. This was incorrect and
was immediately rectified by comrades present in Copenhagen. In
reality, no journalist any more than anyone else, outside of the
immediate friends who stood guard, was able to enter the villa. (L.S.)
[58]

The contents of the “letter” by Trotsky about Olberg, with whom the
reader is already sufficiently familiar are very amusing. In order to
puff himself up, it seems, Olberg declares that in this letter Trotsky
was in “full agreement” with Olberg’s candidacy for the trip to the
USSR. Trotsky considered Olberg “an absolutely (!!) appropriate (??)
man in whom one could have complete confidence (!!)” The whole letter
is nothing but a dithyramb to Olberg! (L.S.)
[59]
The GPU could have obtained information about this in its own manner,
for example, by way of the above-mentioned Senin, who later was to play
a somewhat suspicious role. (L.S.) See also note 73.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.7)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

DID A “UNIFIED CENTER” EXIST?


The axis of the trial and at the same time the basis of
the indictment, was the so-called “Unified Center.” This
center not only made the decision to take the road of terror, but
organized and directed the attacks. The question of the “Center” has,
consequently, decisive importance for the analysis of the trial. We are
forced to examine it in greater detail.
We have already tried to show the arbitrary way in which Stalin
included four Zinovievists in the trial, designating them as members of
the Center. But no matter what the cost, he had to get at Trotsky,
without whom the whole trial would have been worthless. The collapse of
the consul affair forced him to look for other ways. Stalin understood
that the Zinovievists, who had broken with the Left Opposition in
January 1928, by capitulating to the bureaucratic apparatus, had not
had any ties with the Left Opposition since then and could hardly be of
use to him in attaining his goal. He needed to “unite” them, those who
had earlier taken upon themselves the political responsibility for
Kirov’s assassination—with the Trotskyists. It was precisely this
“unification” that the “Unified Center” was to serve. After the
unsuccessful attempts to indict the true Trotskyists,—Stalin’s
blackmailing could only have run up against a sharp refusal on their
part—Stalin stopped at former Left Oppositionists,—Smirnov,
Mrachkovsky and Ter-Vaganian. These men had openly broken with the Left
Opposition in 1929, that is, seven years ago! And in the absence of any
authentic Trotskyists (among the defendants, let us once again recall,
there was not one true Trotskyist), Stalin was forced to content
himself with pseudo-Trotskyists, all the more so since one of them,
I.N. Smirnov, had by chance met with Trotsky’s son in Berlin. This at
least gave him the formal pretext of speaking of a “connection” abroad.
Thus the idea of creating the “Unified Center” was born in Stalin’s
police mind. The rest was a case of police technique.
The Composition of the Center
The indictment and the verdict give the Unified Center
the following composition: Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov, Bakaev,—from
the Zinovievists, and Smirnov, Ter-Vaganian, Mrachkovsky—from the
Trotskyists.
But even on the question of the composition of the center, the
defendants contradict each other. Besides, we are not talking about a
large committee, the composition of which would be constantly changing,
where it would be difficult to remember everybody, but essentially
about a narrow, strictly conspiratorial collegium, involved in
terrorist activity. The composition of such a conspiratorial center
ought, in any case, to have been exactly defined. This is, in fact,
what the indictment tries to do as it enumerates the seven members
cited above. The defendant Reingold, one of the principal witnesses of
the prosecution, gives a different composition of the center. “I was,”
he says, “in an organizational and also personal relationship with a
series of members of the Trotskyist-Zinovievist center: Zinoviev,
Kamenev, Sokolnikov, and others.” And further on Reingold
repeats: “the members of the Trotskyist-Zinovievist center were
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bakaev, Evdokimov, Smirnov, Mrachkovsky,
Ter-Vaganian, and Sokolnikov.”
The fact that Sokolnikov was a member of the center is also
confirmed by Kamenev, who specifies, in response to a question by the
prosecutor, that Sokolnikov was even a “member of the center whose
participation was strictly secret,” in order that he might, in case of
disaster, continue the terrorist activity. One, therefore, wonders why
the prosecutor did not immediately summon Sokolnikov before the court.
It is very simple: to summon Sokolnikov at that very moment would have
meant to destroy the entirely false, and therefore “fragile” edifice of
the trial.
Sokolnikov would first have to be prepared in the torture chambers
of the GPU, and that, even if successful, takes time. The fact that
Reingold mentioned Sokolnikov, on Stalin’s orders, was necessary in
order to make it easier to execute him without even a trial.
While confirming the testimony about Sokolnikov, Kamenev, for his
part, gives a new version of the center (of the “plot,” as he calls it)
which “was composed of the following people: from the Zinovievists,
myself (Kamenev), Zinoviev, Evdokimov, Bakaev, and Kuklin,” Besides
Sokolnikov, Kuklin also is apparently a member of the center.
As in Sokolnikov’s case, the prosecutor doesn’t consider it necessary
to bring Kuklin to trial. Meanwhile, Kuklin, one of the oldest
worker-Bolsheviks and leading Zinovievists, who was sentenced in
January 1935 to 10 years in prison, is mentioned many times over during
the trial as one of the leaders of the terrorist activity!
According to Smirnov’s testimony, the Lominadze group had
also joined the bloc (Smirnov says nothing about the Center and later,
as we will see, he even denies its existence). Let us note that no
member of this group was brought to trial. Although he did “confirm
Smirnov’s testimony,” Ter-Vaganian does not mention the Lominadze group
in his account. Mrachkovsky, on the contrary, not only mentions the
Lominadze-Shatskin group as members of the bloc, but says in addition
that Lominadze personally was a member of the center. Bakaev
names not only Kuklin, but also Sharov, another old
Bolshevik-Zinovievist, sentenced during the first trial in 1935. Karev

is repeatedly mentioned as a leading participant at a terrorist
conference (of the Center?) But he also is not on the defendants’
bench, since his case has, for some reason, been “set aside.”
Better still, Kamenev testifies that, in case of discovery, besides
Sokolnikov, Serebriakov and Radek were also designated as
substitutes, “who,” according to Kamenev, “could perform the role with
success.” Let us recall that Serebriakov split from the Opposition in
1928, and Radek left in 1928, and how he left! Since 1929 Radek has
appeared several times in the press as one of the most hateful and
vicious adversaries of Trotskyism. But even this didn’t help him!
During the trial, Safonova is also brought from prison to
serve as a “witness,” and her interrogation produces a particularly
painful and loathesome impression. Hoping to save herself (and in
reality Stalin is at best saving her for a new trial, in order to shoot
her afterwards, as he shot all the Berman-Yurins), Safonova denounces
I.N. Smirnov in a veritable frenzy. And this Safonova, according to the
records of the trial, “was herself a member of the Trotskyist center
... and took an active part in the work of the center.” Why then is she
summoned only as a witness?
The center also supposedly conducted negotiations about “joint
activity” (i.e., about terror) with Shatskin, Sten (“leftists”),
Rykov, Bukharin, Tomsky, (“rightists”), Shliapnikov and Medvedev
(former “Workers Opposition”). Of course, not one of them is
summoned before the court, even as a witness.
Falsification is not such an easy thing. No matter how deeply you
submerge them, lies and contradictions stubbornly reappear at the
surface. These contradictions in the composition of the center are
undoubtedly explained by the fact that during the investigation, the
composition was changed more than once.
Some of the “candidates” who had been designated in the early stages
couldn’t be broken,—it was necessary therefore to rebuild along the
way, including new victims in the “center,” and once again bringing the
dates and the testimony into agreement.
In addition, the whole case was prepared with such haste that all
the defendants could not learn their roles ...

Read next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005



 Sedov: Red Book (Chap.2)



The Red Book
On the Moscow Trials

THE STALINIST AMALGAMS WERE FORESEEN


The naked declaration that the Opposition is a
“counter-revolutionary party” is insufficient; no one will take it
seriously ... There is only one thing left for Stalin, to try to draw a
line of blood between the official party and the Opposition. He must at
all costs link the Opposition to attempted assassinations, to the
preparation of armed insurrection, etc.
(Trotsky, March 4, 1929, Bulletin of the Opposition.,
No. 1-2)

The Moscow murders were for many liberal democrats and socialists —
Otto Bauer is a striking example of this—a bolt from the blue. Not
understanding the meaning of the profound social changes which are
occurring in the USSR, the bitter struggle between the bureaucracy,
defending its material caste privileges, and the working class,
deprived of its rights and beginning to raise a voice of protest, these
enemies of the Russian Revolution in its herioc epoch now idealize the
Thermidorian bureaucratic regime and Stalinist “socialism” and announce
the gradual return of the USSR to democracy, since they see in the
Stalinist plebiscite constitution the beginning of a new “democratic”
era. On the heads of these naive Manilov [12] dreamers, Stalin has
dumped a pail of cold water. With his murders he has introduced not
only an amendment to “the most democratic” of constitutions, but also
to the conceptions of all these gentlemen.
Without any pretense of passing for prophets, we, the
Bolshevik-Leninists can say that we not only never had the slightest
illusion about the Bonapartist regime of Stalin, that we not only
foresaw such events, but dozens of times warned the proletariat in the
West that Stalin would take the road of the bloody repression of
Bolshevism, the road of bloody amalgams. He has no other way.
Stalin is not defending progressive ideas, but the caste privileges
of a new social layer, the Soviet bureaucracy, which has long been a
brake on the socialist development of the USSR. It is impossible to
defend these privileges by the methods of proletarian democracy; one
can defend them only by means of falsifications, slanders and bloody
repression.
Stalin has been headed along this road, without deviating for
several years now, since 1924, if not earlier. The Moscow trial is the
most grandiose amalgam of Stalin, but it is far from the first (or
the last).
At first Stalin proceeded cautiously, with small doses, gradually
accustoming the consciousness of the party to more poisonous and vile
amalgams like those of the last trial.
Already by 1926, at the height of the struggle inside the party, the
GPU [13]
had sent their agent to some young, unknown Oppositionist. The
“liaison” between the Oppositionist and the GPU agent aided Stalin in
accusing the Opposition of “connections with one of Wrangel’s officers”
because it appears that in the past the GPU agent had been an officer
in Wrangel’s army! That this “officer of Wrangel” was an agent of the
GPU, the Stalinist machinery was obliged to recognize officially,
forced into a corner as they were by the leaders of the Opposition who
at the time were still members of the Central Committee. But in the
meantime, Stalin had opened up a furious campaign of slanders against
the Opposition for its connections with “Wrangel’s officer.” This
campaign was conducted in the press, in party cells, in meetings; it
stunned the masses who were not familiar with the hidden aspects of the
case.
In 1928, an attempt was made to create an amalgam centering around G.V.
Butov, Trotsky’s secretary in the War Commissariat. By using
violence, Stalin wanted to fabricate a “plot” around Butov which would
link him to the Whites and so on. In prison Butov was cruelly tortured,
not only mentally, but also physically. He fought desperately, went on
a hunger strike, fasted 40-50 days and as a result of this hunger
strike, died in prison in September 1928. Only Butov’s firmness
prevented Stalin from fabricating an amalgam at that time.
In January 1929, at the time of Trotsky’s exile, Stalin declared
that Trotsky’s activity “in the recent past” was directed “toward the
preparation of armed struggle against the Soviet government.” By the
words “the recent past” Stalin wished to show that the Left Opposition
had taken an abrupt turn, passing from the policy of reform to that of
armed insurrection. Stalin needed this slanderous fabrication in order
to justify Trotsky’s exile.
In the summer of 1929, Trotsky met in Istanbul with J. Blumkin.
In 1918 Blumkin had assassinated the German ambassador, Count Mirbach,
and had taken part in the armed insurrection of the Left Social
Revolutionaries against the Soviet government. But at that time he had
not been executed and for many years he had faithfully served the
Soviet regime. He was shot in 1929 for having met with Trotsky in
Istanbul. Before shooting Blumkin, the GPU had tried to build an
amalgam of some kind around the Blumkin “affair.” But nothing came of
it. Shortly after Blumkin’s execution, in the same year of 1929, two
Left Oppositionists were shot in Moscow, Silov and Rabinovich.
They were shot after an unsuccessful attempt to link them with a case
of some type of “conspiracy” or “espionage.”
In 1932 Trotsky was deprived of Soviet citizenship, along with about
a dozen Mensheviks whom Stalin had included on the same list only in
order to create an amalgam: surround Trotsky with Mensheviks. That
should, according to Stalin’s thinking, discredit Trotsky and show his
counter-revolutionary character. But these were only the flowers, the
fruits were yet to come.
Kirov’s assassination, a terrorist act by several Komsomols, [14]
gave Stalin the long awaited and incomparable opportunity to build a
“real” amalgam. This is how the case of Zinoviev, Kamenev and other
famous Bolsheviks developed in 1935. The attempt to bring Trotsky into
this amalgam ended, as we know, in a pitiful fiasco. But it was
precisely this failure which impelled Stalin to prepare a new case.
“Stalin is faced with the necessity of covering up the unsuccessful
amalgams with new ones on a grander scale and ... with more success.”
(Trotsky)
In the pamphlet dedicated to the assassination of Kirov in January
1935, Trotsky insistently warned that one must be ready “for new, even
more monstrous amalgams.”
“What character the next attack will take,” he wrote,
“this question has still not been resolved, perhaps even in the closest
circle of the conspirators (Stalin, Yagoda...) Neither malicious desire
nor material means are lacking for the conspirators. The preparation of
‘public opinion’ will be undertaken along the lines of the ‘terrorist’
dangers which threaten from the camp of the Trotskyists.”
It seems difficult to express oneself more clearly!
Between the first and last trials of Zinoviev, Stalin built still
another amalgam (in mid-1935), no news of which reached the public
press. The central figure of this amalgam was Kamenev;
probably because Stalin needed to correct the error of the preceding
trial, in which Kamenev was given a relatively light sentence (five
years in prison). Kamenev was accused of having taken part in an
attempt on Stalin’s life. The main witness of the prosecution was
Kamenev’s brother, the artist Rosenfeld. There were thirty defendants,
a very suspicious gathering. Kamenev categorically denied any
participation in this affair and later told his comrades in prison at
the Verkhne-Uralsk isolator that most of the defendants were people
whom he had seen for the first time in his life at the trial. Kamenev
was then sentenced to five more years of imprisonment.
It is to this affair that Kamenev alludes in his final speech at the
Moscow trials, when he says: “It is for the third time that I
appear before the court.”
But during the trial itself nothing is said of this case. Nothing is
said of it because any previous amalgam only constrains Stalin in the
preparation of new ones. And Stalin is still far from having said his
last word.
In May 1936 Trotsky wrote: “It is now 1936. The methods of
Stalin are the same. The political dangers facing him have grown. The
techniques of Stalin and Yagoda  have been enriched by the experience of
several failures. This is why we must have no illusions. The spiciest
dishes are yet to come!”
These lines were written at a time when the preparation of the trial
was already well underway. The Moscow trial has fully confirmed
Trotsky’s prediction. We repeat: the spiciest dishes are yet to
come.

Footnotes
[12]
Manilov: sycophantic character in Gogol’s Dead Souls.
[13]
GPU: the State Political Administration, i.e., the Soviet
secret police.
[14] Komsomol: communist youth.

Next chapter | Sedov Internet Archive
Last updated on: 13.2.2005





The Fifteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U. (December 1927) placed the Opposition outside of the ranks of the Party and sanctioned the state repressive measures taken against it. In the course of 1928 thousands of Oppositionists were arrested and sent into exile. Despite all that, the curve of development of the Opposition for the entire year of 1928 was vigorously on the ascendant. At the beginning of 1929 the G.P.U. ferociously ransacked the Opposition organizations all over the U.S.S.R. Simultaneously the repression not only increased in quantity but also achieved a new quality: the creation of Solitaries; depriving the deported of their work, transferring them to unhealthy places, reducing their maintenance by half; the expulsion of comrade Trotsky; general provocation and so on. In the economic and political domain, the year 1929 was characterized by the accentuation of the Left zig-zag of Centrism, necessitated by the kulak grain strikes in 1928.
 
The Crisis in the Opposition
The combined influence of these two factors, the ruthless repression and a certain division brought about by the Left turn of Centrism – placed the Opposition before a grave crisis in the summer of 1929. A wave of capitulation passed over the places of deportation. In August 1929 comrade Rakovsky and others made their well known declaration. This declaration was an attempt to realize a united front with the Party. It established certain modifications of the official course, and based on these, expressed anew the desire to defend and to struggle for its ideas within the frame work of the Party, underlining at the same time that the only serious guarantee for the turn was a change of regime in the Party. Rakovsky’s declaration – as was evident – was rejected. This served as an additional test of the Party regime by showing the Opposition elements who were seriously doubtful all the superficiality and the insincerity of Centrism’s Leftward turn. The August declaration of Rakovsky brought into circulation extensive theses and submitted the policy of Centrism to a profound and compact criticism. The response of the apparatus to the declaration of Rakovsky forced the Opposition to declare again and precisely that it will not only continue, but enlarge and intensify its factional work.
In the same period comrades Rakovsky and Trotsky again put forth the question of the Party as the central problem of the revolution. Certain capitulators have deluded themselves (and deluded others) with pseudodialectic arguments, in the sense that the correction of the economic line will of itself entail an improvement of the regime in the Party. “It is an absurdity”, comrade Trotsky wrote to the Russian comrades, “to believe that the Five Year Plan can modify automatically the regime of the Party. On the contrary, the change of regime in the Party is not only the premise of ultimate successes, but also a certain guarantee against the dangers which grow more rapidly than the successes.” And on several later occasions: “The Party regime constitutes a mortal danger precisely towards economy.” Ravoksky and other Russian Opposition comrades wrote in the same vein.
However, the Left course of Centrism began, toward 1930, to transform itself into an ultra-Left policy which expressed itself in the “industrialization course”, and “complete collectivization.” The Left Opposition did not allow itself to be carried away by the Stalinist “dizziness.” On the question of our attitude towards the new ultra-Left course, it reenforced its cohesion, while holding to its previous strategy of collectivization and industrialization. The Russian Opposition launched the tactical slogan: Slow down! Retreat! This slogan was unanimously approved by the Russian Left Opposition. Later on, the new course was replaced by a still newer one, in which the elements of adventurist leaps were joined with those of panicky retreat. It is in such a situation that the Sixteenth Congress met, and brought about a new aggravation of the Party regime. “The preparation of Bonapartism, insofar as it concerns the Party, has been accomplished. In the Party the plebiscitary regime has been definitely installed,” comrade Trotsky wrote to the U.S.S.R.
For the Opposition, the preparation of the Congress expressed itself in a mad reenforcement of reprisals. [1] The Opposition presented to the Congress a declaration “of the 7”: Rakovsky, Muralov, Kossior, Kasparova, Grunstein. Zinzadze, Aussem. All these comrades are Opposition leaders and among the oldest members of the Party. Some time before this declaration to the C.C., to the C.C.C. and to all the members of the Party, a long principle declaration called The April declaration of the 4: Rakovsky, Kossior, Kasparova, and Muralov. Around this declaration a vast polemic developed in the deportation camps and in secret (in the U.S.S.R.)
 
The Ideological Life of the Opposition
It must be said that from the day of its birth, the Opposition in deportation began to live an intense ideological life. Not only are timely economic, political, tactical and strategical questions profoundly studied and heatedly discussed, but even the most abstract problems of philosophy. The Solitaries have become revolutionary universities. Numerous serious Marxist works have been produced by the pens of deported Oppositionists. The ideological level of the Russian Opposition cadres may be considered, without any exaggeration, as exceptional. In ridding themselves of the capitulatory ballast, in gaining cohesion under the fire of repression, it is the firmest and most valiant revolutionists who have remained in the deportation.
During this current year, the exchange of ideas has been rendered very difficult by an almost complete postal blockade. That is why the study of questions often does not emerge from the limits of the isolated centers of the deportation.
Certain differences – though not of principle – have been provoked by the following theses in Rakovsky’s April declaration: “Before the Party is posed the question of supplying the country with food stuffs and with agricultural raw materials by reinforcing the construction of the Soviet farms, at the same time maintaining the rhythm of industrial development.” Some of the comrades found a contradiction to the slogan of “retreat” in these theses. Their argument can be summed up in this: “It is our duty to subject the bureaucratic rhythms to a merciless criticism and not to maintain them. The period of ultra-Left adventurism in the Centrist policy of industrialization is not yet at an end.”
On the other hand, the comrades who supported the theses of comrade Rakovsky countered with the following argument:
“The period in which the articles and letters of Trotsky and Rakovsky (which called for beating a retreat and not for maintaining the rhythms) belong, is distinct from the period of the declaration ... In the present period, after the collapse of the ‘complete collectivization’, it is collectivization itself which is in danger. Not only is the ‘five-year plan in four years’ threatened but the realization of the ‘five-year plan altogether, and to support the slogan of a relaxation of the rhythm in such a situation is profoundly wrong.”
The Editors of the Bulletin of the Russian Opposition have not had the opportunity to express themselves fundamentally on this question, since it had not yet received the April Declaration at that time. They simply stressed that “it is of course understood that we are for the ‘maximum rhythms’ provided they are economically and politically possible,” and that it is not this question – despite all its seriousness – which is of decisive importance at present but rather that of the “methods of economic direction and of the life of the Party with whose aid the rhythms have been elaborated, realized and checked.”
 
The Social Nature of the State
Another question which has provoked a broad discussion is that of the social character and perspectives of the Soviet state, and the question which is bound up with this, namely, of the social essence of the Soviet bureaucracy (or of the degree of the divorce between the bureaucracy and the masses, as some of the comrades pose the question), a phenomenon hitherto unknown in history and which has consequently not been analyzed as yet by Marxist thought. To what degree can the bureaucracy be considered as a class, as an embryo of a class? Can it become a class? Such are the questions which are at the center of the analysis and discussion on the Soviet system. Evidently, it is not a question of a rigid, that is to say, of a metaphysical formula, but of the analysis of perspectives and the orientation of living processes. According to the Moscow correspondent of the Russian Bulletin, this tendency is indicated by comrade Rakovsky “as being the possible line of transformation of the proletarian state into a bureaucratic state with Communist vestiges.”
“The great merit,” writes the same correspondent, “of the documents written by comrade Rakovsky since 1928, is the profound penetration and entirely concrete analysis of his process. The new declaration in question, in enhancing this analysis and extending it to the new supplement of the Soviet bureaucracy – the nascent collective farm bureaucracy – interested in preserving the current state of affairs, not only establishes that bureaucratic atrophy threatens to denature the social content of the Soviet system in the U.S.S.R., but outlines in broad strokes the characteristics of the bureaucratic order which can follow the Soviet order, while remaining in the domain of real phenomena.”
Concerning the bureaucracy, comrade Rakovsky writes:
“Under our very eyes, there has been formed, and is still being formed, a large class of rulers which has its own interior groupings, multiplied by means of premeditated cooptation, direct or indirect bureaucratic promotion, fictitious system of elections). The basic support of this original class is a sort, an original sort, of private property, namely, the possession of State power. The bureaucracy possess the state as private property wrote Marx. (Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Law)”
The colony of deportees at X... formulates the question as follows:
“We are of the opinion that the bureaucracy is not a class and will never become one. We believe that the bureaucracy, the leading stratum of society, will degenerate that it is the germ of a class which will not be bureaucratic at all ... The bureaucracy is the germ of a capitalist class which dominates the state and possesses the means of productive collectively.”
 
The Slogan of a Coalition C.C.
Difference in tactics, and partially in principle, were evoked by another question. In one of his letters in May, Rakovsky issued the slogan of a coalition Central Committee (Left, Center and Right). Unfortunately, the inadequacy of our information does not permit us to a summarize the opinions on this point. A comrade writes:
“I believe that this slogan has a foundation (economy is balked), all the factions must take this fact into account and join in following a single tactical line in spite of the diversity of their strategical lines. This slogan can become popular among the masses. It is another question to know if there are any reasons for being optimistic about its possible realization. The general secretary (Stalin) will not join the coalition, and with Party opinion dispersed, it may not be able to exert enough pressure. However, these considerations are not a decisive argument against the slogan. We must work and fight for its realization. In this way we will point out the concrete road – naturally, an imperfect road, but the situation allows of no better one – for the concrete abolition of the political monopoly of the Centrists.”
Let us quote an extract from the theses of an authorized comrade, now incarcerated in Solitary:
“The present state of the proletarian dictatorship can be characterized above all by the extreme nature of the bureaucratic degeneration of its apparatus and, so to speak, by the bureaucratic envelopment of the proletarian dictatorship.”
The theses say that the economic organs,
“seized by panic before the growing elements of catastrophe, seek to overtake this delay by incessantly exceeding the predetermined projects, above all, by excessive increase of the exploitation of the workers and the lowering of their living level ... As a result of the super-industrialization, the condition of the workers is worsening. The workers are obliged to adapt themselves to a reduction in real wages and the exhaustion of physical efforts.”
The theses define the policy of Centrism in the country in the following manner:
“The political consequences of the peasant policy conducted, can throw back the Sovietization of the country for many years and make us return to the old times of War Communism. The whole policy will be discredited, and the most irremediable discredit will affect in principle, even the policy of collectivization and industrialization, that is all the teachings of Lenin.”
“The principal misfortune,” the theses say finally, “consists in the fact that, while there is a possibility of a reaction, and sometimes even of a decisive influence on the direction of policy by organizing the resistance of the Opposition in the proletarian sector of the Party to the sliding of Centrism to the Right, with the existing regime this resistance cannot take a sufficiently active form to permit making a radical end to this policy of the Right and ultra-Left leaps, and to realize the reformation of the Party leadership.”
 
The Opposition’s Growth
The above-quoted theses touch the decisive problem of the Russian Opposition, consequently, the future of the proletarian dictatorship in the U.S.S.R. All the facts show the sympathy existing in the working class towards our ideas, but the weakness of the Opposition organization prevents the crystallization of these sentiments and their necessary development. “Interest towards us is undubitably growing, we are weak, although we have numerous supporters.” In August, we heard from Kharkov: “One feels that a certain additional push is needed, a new experience, so that what is covered with ashes will flame up again. The work must be organized in a more regular and systematic manner, the Bulletin made to appear more regularly, and we need a well functioning internal organization. On this point, comrades in various sections believe that this push is not far off.”
In one of his last letters to the Russian Oppositionists comrade Trotsky raises the question in the following way:
“Since the mass of the Party is definitely dispensed, then the sole means of heightening the chances for the development of the October revolution and Lenin’s Party by the Reformist road, requires the creation of a well-functioning centralized organization of the Bolshevik-Leninists, armed with sufficient technical means for reacting systematically upon the dispersed public opinion of the Party ... A half-passive policy in the future would mean, not to mention other things, the gradual physical destruction of our best cadres.”
The principal obstacle on this road is obviously the repression and above all provocation. The G.P.U. floods not only our isolated groups of deportees but also the prisons with provocateurs. Provocation is, Stalin’s main weapon against the Opposition. At the same time, as we have said, the ground for the development of the Left Opposition is very favorable. Facts like the election of a worker Oppositionist as chairman of the factory council, the refusal of the workers to elect another in spite of the rabid pressure of the apparatus, and finally his arrest by the G.P.U. (Mechanical Shops, Kharhov), the successful organization of collections among the workers on the Moscow-Kazan railway, upon their own initiative, for aid to the deportees and their families, the steady torrent of new deportees, the almost daily arrests of new Oppositionists, generally still members of the Party – all this proves that the Opposition is not stifled. And in spite of the incessant arrests, the G.P.U. cannot exhaust the reserves of the Opposition, since they are steadily renewed.
 
New Deportations
A special and very characteristic phenomenon is the arrest of capitulators, that is, of former Oppositionists who signed the declaration of Radek or Smirnov. Capitulators imprisoned and deported a second time are not isolated cases, but constitute a large phenomenon of their type. It shows, on one hand, that among the capitulators, after the return to Moscow, there is manifested again “relapses into Trotskyism”, and on the other, the great fear of the apparatus even for the cadavers of the Opposition – the capitulators.
In recent letters (October), the comrades communicate that these phenomena not only do not cease, but on the contrary increase. Capitulators are mentioned who arrived in deportation in September or October, that is, more than a year after their capitulation.

Footnote
1. We will not stop at this question, which has been sufficiently illuminated in the Opposition publications.
 



At the end of January 1930, a new recruitment of workers into the Communist Party of the Soviet Union was proclaimed. The February issues of the Pravda are full of information about the “great upsurge”, about “the mass flocking of workers into the Party” etc. The Central Committee has already given the directives: “To get not less than half the Party membership from workers in industry until the Sixteenth Party Congress” (Pravda, Feb. 11). Translating this into the language of figures it means that in approximately two months the Party has to admit a minimum of about 150,000 new members. [1] Up till now there are already about 200,000 applicants. In a few weeks the number of members and candidates in the Party will exceed 2 million.
 
Collective Admission
All the newspaper statements underline the collective character of submitting applications for admission to the Party. They enter in brigades, shifts, crafts, and even whole factories. Factory crafts, that is several hundred men, with the foremen at the head, and often even with the technicians and engineers, are poured into the Party. The nuclei grow, 100, 200 and more percent. Formally, the procedure for admission is, as always, individual, but in reality the admission is collective. The newspapers and the Party leaders insist that the commissions for recruitment rush with the formalities. The Central Recruiting Commission decided to “simplify the admission into the Party’’ (Pravda, March 4). This is why, in view of the purely formal character of the procedure, the percentage of rejected applicants is extremely insignificant. The lack of the least serious judgement of candidates, in a word, all this really anti-Party method of the campaign is already alarming the less short-sighted Communists.
The pursuit of high percentages (almost always fictitious) result in the fact that a recruiting agent, grabbing by the sleeve one who refuses to join the Party begins to persuade, advise, etc. As a result – a worker correspondent remarks in the Pravda – “political illiterates having insignificant industrial experience go into the Party”. What this policy leads to can be seen from the partial cleansing of the Party. For example, in one of the Donbas districts (Usovca) one third of the members in the industrial nuclei were expelled (Pravda, February 1). The results of the cleansing in Sumara speak still more eloquently that the apparatus has wiped out the boundary line between the Party and the class, taken into the Party a raw mass, which is not only not transformed in the Party melting pot but in view of the terrible condition of the inner-Party regime, is pushed away, either by expulsion, or by falling away. In place of those falling out, new raw material is poured in. The Party entrance and exit gates are wide open.
 
A Premium on Political Illiteracy
Almost the only, at any rate, the decisive criterion for admission into the Party is the question of the productive work and the “model discipline” of the applicant. ‘’The most important proof of fitness for admission into the Party, is the degree of the active participation of the workers in the shock brigades, in socialist competition, and their actually advanced role in industry” – these are the instructions of the C.C. of the C.P.S.U. (Pravda, Feb. 11). Did you participate in socialist competition? How many days were you absent from work? How much did you subscribe for the loan, and did you sell it? In what way do you help collectivization? These, and some more in the same spirit, are the questions that are asked of an applicant. There are no Party and political questions. (Even “classic” Trotskyism is absent.) One may think it is a matter of one’s admission into the cooperative or the trade union, this is the extent to which Party spirit is lacking. But what does the Stalinist apparatus need that for? It looks upon the new additions to the Party only as a “shock” support to the industrial organs. Lacking any kind of political outlook the adventurist leaders consider this – sometimes semi-compulsory (the chairman asks: “Who is against?” naturally, there aren’t any. All vote “for”.) inclusion of crafts and factories into the Party as a means of raising the productivity of labor, as a more successful realization of intensification and higher tempos. They are not concerned as to what becomes of the Party, or whether the Party exists as such.
 
The Gap Between Leaders and Masses
In December 1929 the influx of workers into the Party was still very low. But now, the Pravda states, “there is an unexpected great change”. The Party organizations are caught “unawares”. “At the factory something unexpected and unforeseen occurred: columns of workers sign up for the Party. The nucleus could in no way expect it” (Pravda). The writers and editors do not even notice what a fatal verdict this is for the Party regime, what a terrifying statement on the deterioration of all the Party tissues. If we assume, according to the apparatus – that there really is a mighty rise in the working class, and the apparatus sitting there does not know anything, “does not expect” anything, “does not foresee” anything, then it must be recognized that it is separated from the mass with an impenetrable partition. The fact in itself shows even to the blind, the depth of the abyss the apparatus has dug between itself and the mass.
The Kolomensk factory entered the Party almost in a collective body. Eight thousand workers from this factory already entered the Party. “The Kolomensk workers should be an example to the others” – appeals Pravda. It is therefore interesting to consider this factory in a few words. [2] The Kolomensk factory produces machinery (tractors, locomotives, Diesels etc.), it is something over a hundred kilometres from Moscow. The proletarian staff of the factory was always considered in the Moscow Party organization as a backward one, and it really was. Over 70% of the workers are not only “bound” to the village, but they have their own cabin, cow, garden, etc. The brother, the father of a Kolomensk worker is a peasant, toe works in the factory and helps them – they own their holdings together. The psychology of an average Kolomensk worker is that of a peasant. He often considers his work in the factory as a support for his peasant holding. A Kolomensk worker resembles very little the Leningrad proletarian. It is this factory that became now the vanguard of the workers army, and Leningrad its rearguard. (Up to March 14 the Moscow district had over 90,000 applicants and the Leningrad about 30,000). And it is no accident. An explanation for this fact will be found not in the city, but in the village, and particularly in the “collective” policy. The collective pushed the Kolomensk, Podolsk and Mytishchensk worker into the Party. His peasant status decided. Without penetrating into the complicated problems of collectivization we nevertheless will point out that the element of insurance played no small role. “I will have to enter the collective anyway, then I may as well enter it as a Communist – there will be more privileges.” This way he hopes to get easier credits, inventory, etc. On the other hand – and this is the most important – the non-Party worker in the factory does not see any big difference between himself and the Party worker. Why shouldn’t I get into the Party, perhaps it will be easier – he asks himself. Depriving the Partyite, as well as the non-Party, of all rights, pressing them in the bureaucratic clamps, the usurpationist apparatus has made of both of them speechless executors.
Neither the non-Party nor the Party worker dares to decide, criticize, or deliberate. Opening wide the Party doors wipes out the distinction between the Party and the class. The Party ceases to be the vanguard, it ceases to be a Party. But this is precisely what the apparatus is striving for. Simultaneously with the dissolution of the Party in the class, the apparatus rises above it all the more. Both these processes are parallel, one supplementing the other. On the top the apparatus became a supra-Party institution, it is without control, it is infallible, it commands – the Party below ceases to exist. The further development of this process is the decay, the death of the Party as a Party – we must be frank about this, stating it with all determination.
March 30, 1930

Footnotes
1. During the year 1929, 200,000 workers entered the Party.
2. The figures on the age of those in the factory entering the Party are very interesting. Most of them are 30–40 years old – this holds true for other places. Fifty percent of them have more than ten years of industrial experience. “The change that occurred among the older workers, those working in the factory for the last 20–30–40 years, is particularly gratifying,” Pravda writes. It is doubtful whether this fact is “particularly gratifying”. An old worker who was not shaken by the October, or the civil war – is advanced. The youth, the Comsomols, that is the most advanced and active part of the mass is lagging behind. This symptom is more alarming than “gratifying”.
 



Since the Spring of this year, the Stalinist leadership has again been compelled to pose as a task of the moment the question of the “extermination of the Opposition”. This task arises out of the fact that, in spite of the boastings to the contrary by the members of the apparatus, the Opposition lives, works and will continue to work. It is enough to run through the Soviet papers to be convinced that rarely does a nucleus meeting or Party conference take place without Oppositionists or semi-Oppositionists taking the floor. The apparatus struggle against the Left Opposition is developed exclusively by means of repression. In connection with this Congress, the repression mounted frightfully. The rotten monolithism of the top is guaranteed by the coercion, the arrests, the banishments at the bottom. The Solitaries replace the discussion that should have preceded the Congress. That is how the Congress of the Party was prepared.
The aim of this article is to give the genuine facts, particularly on the “preparations” for the Congress. In January-February there was a strong wave of arrests of Oppositionists, of comrades who sympathized with them, and even of comrades simply suspected of sympathizing with them. According to an approximate reckoning more or less correct, 300 comrades were arrested in Moscow alone. A large number of comrades arrested in the provinces passed through Moscow to the Butirskaia prison, coming mainly from the Ukraine, and especially from the Donbas (the proletarian mining district).
 
Non-Party Workers Arrested
At Butirki, there were a few dozen non-Party worker’s of Moscow, arrested for the sympathy they expressed for the Opposition, who are now deported to Siberia. Among the prisoners, there was also a certain percentage of capitulators, mainly of those who repented under the influence of a momentary weakness, and who subsequently declared, almost openly, that they had made a mistake. Many of them are no longer just deported, but sent to the Solitaries. They now demand from the capitulators not only the complete and absolute disavowal of their convictions but also that they disclose all their connections. For refusal – there is the Solitary (Zabrovskaia, Blumenfeld, and dozens of others).
The lengths to which they will go in arrests and deportations can be seen by the fact that among those arrested there is a big percentage of people arrested by chance, “seized” for reasons of relationship or simply because of saying Hello to an Oppositionist. That is how dozens of people were arrested who have no connection with the Opposition. (It frequently happens that they become real Oppositionists in prison or deportation!) During this period the Moscow comrades have distributed a leaflet and have assumed charge of a whole series of strikes which were provoked by the policy of the bureaucracy (in Serpuchov at Moscow, four factories of Mostriutaga and elsewhere). This has still further irritated the bureaucracy.
A wave of arrests that began at the end of the winter continued to rise up to the month of May. The number of persons arrested in this period is at least 500, without counting more than 100 arrested persons who were transported to the Solitaries. By this time the figure has further increased.
A remark must be made here. The Stalinist repression exercized against the Bolshevik-Leninists is distinguished from that practised against the Memilieviks and S.R.s. While the latter are simply isolated from the social life of the country, to hamper them in their counter-revolutionary action against the proletarian dictatorship for the Oppositionists who fight Centrism which upsets the dictatorship of the proletariat – the Stalinist course is directed toward their moral strangulation and their physical extermination.
Among the Oppositionists arrested in Winter were comrades Silov and Rabinovitch, who had unleashed against them the special hatred of the apparatus: they have been shot. How comrade Blumkin was shot before them – this crime is known to. the whole world.
The repression has been sharpened against all the deportees. A regime of horrors has been established: they have lost the right to work, that is, the right to serve, and by that they have acquired the right to be hungry. The official aid a deportee receives has long ago been reduced to 15 rubles ($7.50 a month) and that means hunger, and cold in winter. Since they have no right to be members of the cooperatives, they can frequently buy nothing, even with these 15 rubles; they live in lodgings without fire, remaining for weeks without warm food, often without light. Especially painful is the situation of the deportees in Narym, one of the most terrible places of deportation in Siberia. The Narym deportees are literally condemned to death by hunger. Moreover at Narym which, by the harshness of living conditions, is similar to a Solitary, they transport the Bolsheviks originally deported elsewhere, in an ever growing number. It is a course deliberately directed towards the physical extermination of the Opposition.
Over and above the material privations, every deportee is exposed to innumerable “little” vexations, the fruit of the absolute arbitrariness and impunity of the local G.P.U. The already tiny aid is kept back (a case is cited where it was withheld for four months and where the only reply to the demand for it was mockery of this sort: “Go to Moscow!” – that is: Capitulate! In a similar situation a comrade reduced to despair asked that he be led to a Solitary, and that is not the only instance); people simply suspected of knowing a deported Oppositionist are arrested, thus sowing terror among the local population in order to cast the Oppositionists into absolute isolation.
Systematic raids are organized, in which not only political works are seized From comrade L.S. Sosnovsky, in prison, his work on the agrarian policy of Centrism was seized; at comrade C.C. Rakovsky, his declaration to the Party was taken, etc.) – but also quotations from the works of Marx and Lenin. This is accompanied by a courier blockade so as to isolate the deportees politically. During the Congress, the G.P.U. did not let a single letter go through in order to prevent the elaboration of a collective declaration of the Opposition. But this did not succeed, and a declaration bearing the signatures of comrades Rakovsky, Moralov,, Kasparova and Kossior. was presented (all the deportees joined with it). In deportation the receipt of a letter is an event! We are not speaking even of political, but of family letters.
All the deportees live under the constant threat of being transferred to a Solitary (and this threat exists for the smallest thing: for instance, a delay of five minutes for the compulsory registration at the G.P.U.). Often they do not even give formal reasons. The real aim is to shatter the revolutionary intransigence of the Oppositionist. At the same time with an open tendency to transfer the points of deportation to the harshest regions of the North, the Solitaries are filled up more and more. Their number is always growing because those that exist are already full. The regime in the prisons and Solitaries is incomparably worse than that of deportation. In the prisons there is rarely any light (the windows are covered with an opaque panel), the damp cells are occupied by two or three times as many prisoners as the rules provide for; place is lacking for sleep, not only on the cots, but even on the floor.
 
In the Solitaries
What the sanitary conditions are is not difficult to judge. In their cells, the Oppositionists, kept separate from each other, are mixed up with counter-revolutionaries and criminals who not only detest our comrades as the representatives of Bolshevism but hate and jeer at them, casting upon them all the hatred they nurture against the Soviet power. The system of the G.P.U. – holding Oppositionists in common cells with criminals – did not even exist in the prisons of czarism. This system is applied only to Oppositionists, The Mensheviks (at Butyrki, for instance) enjoy all the rights of political prisoners; they are kept separate from criminals, their cell doors are open; they have a small library at their disposal.
The cells of the Oppositionists are closed, nowhere is visiting allowed them, they have no rights to anything sent from the outside. And in addition to all this, they are treated coarsely and laughed at. Under such a regime, hunger strikes break out without end, and sometimes last until a mortal end (let us remember the heroic death of comrade Butov). To the hunger strikes, to the minimum demands of the prisoners, the prison direction replies by having them systematically beaten, by soaking them with water in the bitter cold of winter, etc. Beatings are a system known in the prison of Kharkov, in the Verchnye-Uralsk Solitary, in the Leningrad prison, and in a whole number of others. It was through blows that comrade Haenrichsen was killed in the Leningrad prison.
The colony of Oppositionists deported at Tomsk has gathered a great deal of information on the absolutely terrible crimes Stalin has perpetrated against our comrades. It has presented a document of protest to which all the other colonies of deportees have rallied. In this document it is learned that hunger prevails in all the places of deportation for Oppositionists; it is established that for Bolsheviks, the conditions of Stalinist deportation are incomparably worse than those of czarism. Many deportees have become invalids (there are dozens of them) for lack of any medical succor, at Narym and similar places elsewhere. The seriously ill are not even transported to the nearest inhabited regions where a doctor might be found. When it is decided to transport an ill comrade, it is only when he is in a hopeless state. This winter, many comrades had their limbs frozen, and some had to undergo amputations because no medical aid was given them in time.
Babies, right after their birth, have been taken from their mother, and the latter sent into Solitaries (comrade Yanovskaia among others). The same document informs us that a new shooting of Oppositionists took place at Solovski; it is no rare thing for the G.P.U. now to pronounce sentences, not of 3 to 5 years, but of 10 years, in vengeance for the political conduct of a comrade. For instance, without any formal proof, comrade Golodni was condemned to 10 years in Solitary. In all the colonies of deportees, before the 16th Congress, comrades were arrested and sent to the Solitaries. We do not give here the names of the colonies nor the names of the comrades arrested; we will deal only with the most striking facts.
 
A Hunger Strike in Ichim
In May, at Ichim, the whole colony was arrested – 9 comrades – as well as 35 inhabitants of the city who, according to the accusation of the G.P.U., had been propagandized by Oppositionists. All are now in terrible condition, our comrades write us – they are locked up in the Sverdolsk prison. Two of them are seriously ill, they do not receive the political prisoner’s ration, they are locked up in different cells, and have been compelled to declare a hunger strike. How this hunger strike ended, and above all, what was subsequently the fate of the Ichim deportees, we do not know.
The comrades informing us, call this arrest together with 15 non-Oppositionists an “amalgam”, which means an artificial liaison for the purpose of discrediting our comrades by means of people alien to the Opposition. The destruction of the colony and the creation of a Thermidorian amalgam are the work of a provocateur. The provocations practised against the Opposition recently have assumed Homeric proportions.
Not only are the Opposition groups still filled with provocateurs, but these “operate” also in the deportation and in prison. There, their task is to disclose the most intransigent, to provoke decomposition by leading comrades to capitulate, etc. A provocateur showing himself under the mask of a “capitulator” is now a current phenomenon in the deportation.
That is how the colony of deportees at Kaminsk was destroyed. Two comrades, Stolovsky and Densov, were transferred to the Tomsk prison, the others, to the furthest corners of Siberia. This colony was dispersed only because it didn’t produce a single capitulator. In their declaration to the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U., the Kaminsk comrades showed how the cadres of the local Party organizations are recruited. Basing themselves on exact information, they name more than 30 members of the Party now occupying responsible posts who were agents of the White terror during the days of Kolchak and who shot Reds. These elements are leaders of this district to this very day. The Kolchakists are chiefly to be found in great numbers in the G.P.U. This fact throws a striking light on the question: who is carrying out the Stalinist policy which hounds the deported Bolsheviks, which aids in their extermination? Ex-Whites, and not accidentally!
At Rubtsevsk, Siberia, without any accusation being formulated against them, four Oppositionists were arrested: Abramsky, Antokolisky, Veskresensky, Evingelstaedt. From the Rubtsevsk prison, they sent a declaration to the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. on June 4, in which they said: “We can only consider this repressive act excercized against us only as a preparation by unusual means for the 16th Party Congress ...” “The repression will not halt the struggle for the redressment of the Party, just as the damage done will not prevent the Party from returning to the positions of Leninism”. What was subsequently the fate of the Rubtsevsk comrades is not known to us. But there is no doubt that they will be imprisoned in the Solitaries.
A similar destruction took place at Kansk (comrades Kusminsky and Landau), at Alma-Ata (comrades Goldin and others), at Slavgorod, Chimkent, and many other places. Raids have taken place everywhere. The impudent raid upon comrade Rakovsky has been told everywhere and is well known. Upon him, as the leader of the Russian Opposition, the Stalinists are concentrating their hatred. Seriously ill (afflicted with heart trouble and malaria), comrade Rakovsky, far from being sent to a more clement climate (as the doctors ordered) has been transported from Astrakan to Barnaoul. Comrade Rakovsky, who is 57 years old, of which 40 have been devoted to the struggle for Communism, passed a very painful Winter, his sick organism having to undergo cold of 40 to 50 degrees. The isolation in which he is held is more rigorous than for anybody else. The game of Stalin is clear: slowly but surely to finish off Rakovsky.
 
Sosnovsky in Danger
It is in an even more painful situation that another eminent leader of the Opposition, an old Bolshevik, comrade L.S. Sosnovsky is to be found. He is incarcerated in the Tomsk prison, in a regime of isolation more severe than any known in the czarist prisons for those condemned to death. No correspondence is allowed him, no authorized mail, no relation with the other prisoners; he must take his walks in company with a special agent of the G.P.U. The state of health of comrade Sosnovsky is critical. A prolonged imprisonment under such conditions means the end for him. It is under similar conditions than another old Bolshevik, E.D.Eltsin, is to be found (in the Supdalsk Solitary): this comrade is afflicted by spinal meningitis.
That is how the 16th Congress was prepared on the back of the Left Opposition. By using the power of coercion of the apparatus for factional ends, the Stalinist leadership has set this apparatus against the Left proletarian wing of the Party. Fire to the Left! the more terrible this fire will be, the clearer will appear in the eyes of the proletarians the lamentable bankruptcy of Centrist policy.
By hunger, by cold, by the blockade, by outrages, by blows and by shootings, Centrism aims to squeeze out of the weakest ones a capitulation, and the strongest ones it condemns to ruin. Only the working class can thwart this Thermidorian plan. There is its duty, there is its task. By making an end of the Left wing, Stalin will make an end of the October revolution. That must be understood, that must be prevented, that must not be permitted.
* * * * *
We take this occasion to inform the foreign comrades that in reply to the greetings of the international conference in Paris to the deported and imprisoned Russian Oppositionists, there have arrived in the editorial Board of the Bulletin of the Russian Opposition numerous greetings not only from the places of deportation but also from the Solitaries.
 







(The following was the last article written by comrade Leon Sedoff for the issue of the Bulletin of the Opposition which appeared a few days before his tragic death on Feb. 16.)



A series of symptoms, as well as fragmentary reports from the Soviet Union, have already indicated for some time that in the leading stratum a conflict is developing between the military apparatus and the G.P.U. After the military reforms of 1935, which greatly increased the specific gravity of the officers corps and linked it closely to the summits of the bureaucracy, the Army command felt more stable, stronger, and somewhat less dependent. But the decimation of the party apparatus by Stalin in 1936 could not fail to arouse uneasiness among the leaders of the Army. This uneasiness was dictated not by political considerations but by concern for the defense of the country which was being so dangerously sapped by the Stalinist purge.
Tukachevsky, Voroshilov, Gamarnik could not look on indifferently as the G.P.U. upset industry, especially that of armaments, by wholesale arrests, from government Commissars to qualified foremen. The army command could not but offer resistance to this frenzied purge, insofar as it began to affect the vital interest of defense. This resistance, probably quite strong from the beginning, necessarily became stronger as the G.P.U.
began to decimate the Red Army itself. The arrests of generals as important as Schmidt, Kuzmitchov, Putna, Primakov, the heads of the political sections of the Caucasus, the Far East, etc., of their aides, their friends, were certainly regarded by the Army command as discrediting and disorganizing the army itself. The Army chiefs entered into conflict with the G.P.U. and this conflict was doubtless aggravated by various other issues where the interests of the Commissariat of War clashed with those of the G.P.U.
 
Conflict Really with Stalin
Superficially, the struggle went on between the Army tops and G.P.U. Actually, it went on between the Army command and Stalin, although the generals probably did not realize this, at east at the outset. The subsequent course of events can only be explained, it seems to us, by the fact that Stalin held himself aloof in the first stages of the friction, giving an appearance of neutrality and that he even more probably, with his characteristic perfidy, egged the generals on. This attitude of Stalin’s could only pour oil on the fire.
The struggle between the military and the G.P.U., i.e., the interests of the defense of the country as opposed to the arbitrary rule of the G.P.U., undoubtedly contributed to the cohesion of the former, the strengthening of their mutual confidence, and the resumption of their activity. Meanwhile Yagoda and several others among the most odious chiefs of the G.P.U. fell into disgrace. To Tukachevsky, Yakir, Gamarnik, perhaps even to Voroshilov, the victory of Yezhov-Stalin might have seemed like their own victory over Yagoda. But Stalin; having played neutral and set the trap, gave Yezhov the signal for action. The military apparatus was decimated, its leaders and thousands of officers linked to them were shot.
 
“German Orientation”
(I do not stop here to consider the alleged German orientation of Tukachevsky and the others. This accusation, made out of whole cloth, has become a sort of ritual for Stalin when he suppresses his real or fancied enemies. In reality, to the extent that there exists a “German orientation” in the U.S.S.R., it is Stalin himself who embodies it. He is ready to support Hitler at any price in exchange for peace.)
If this explanation of the Tukachevsky affair, which seems to us to be only possible one, does not appear to offer anything essentially new, the most recent events shed new light on the personal role of Voroshilov. During the Tukachevsky affair, Voroshilov might have been supposed to be the accomplice of the Stalinist provocation, remaining for a time in the background and leaving the initiative to Tukachevsky, Gamarnik and the others. The whole past of Voroshilov, a mediocre man, lacking initiative and personally devoted to Stalin, offered support for this impression.
There was a serious fissure in 1929 in the relations between Stalin and Voroshilov, the latter (like Kalinin) displaying strong sympathy for the Right (Bukharin-Rykov). It was only to save his own neck that he joined Stalin against the Right.
 
Got Out in Time
Today there is reason to believe that Voroshilov himself was at the head of the alleged Tukachevsky plot. But as a member of the Political Bureau and closer to the center of political intrigue, and more experienced at the game of double-cross, Voroshilov sensed before the others where Stalin was heading. He had time to make an about-face at the last minute and so to save his life and his post by betraying, his comrades.
This was only a postponement, however. Stalin is suspicious, bitter and vindictive. No one has ever succeeded in regaining his confidence once lost. If Stalin is in no haste to finish with Voroshilov, it is because he understands the disastrous impression it would make in the U.S.S.R. and in. the world generally. It is quite probable that it is this consideration which determined the “grace” accorded to Voroshilov last June during the Tukachevsky affair. Faithful to his methods – slowly and gradually to prepare the mortal blow – Stalin began “encircling” Voroshilov soon after the Tukachevsky affair.
 
The Military Councils
The first step was the establishment of the Military Councils, i.e., of the collective principle in the Army command, a principle so harmful in the military sphere. This reform was dictated only by political considerations. The Military Councils provided Stalin with the means of reinforcing his control over the High Command of the Red Army and at the same time of decentralizing to some extent the over-powerful military apparatus by weakening the position of Voroshilov at its summit.
The same purpose – decentralizing and weakening the war commissariat – was served by a recent innovation: Withdrawal of the naval forces from the war commissariat and. the creation of an independent naval commissariat. The most privileged and qualified of the armed forces of the Soviet Union, the troops of the G.P.U. and the frontier guards, had already long since been removed from the sphere of authority of the war commissariat. Now the naval forces were taken away as well. The arguments advanced at the Supreme Council in favor of this reform seem scarcely convincing to us, especially at a time when all the great powers are snowing the tendency to concentrate in a single center the command of the land, sea and air forces. Moreover, the limited strength and nature of the Soviet fleet deprive it of any independent strategic importance and make of it an auxiliary instrument for the land forces.
 
Decision Not New
As for the decision to increase the naval forces, (adduced as a reason for the change), it is not new. This decision was made- several years ago and has been energetically carried out. In 1935 the reporter of the military department to the Congress of Soviets, Tukachevsky, devoted a good part of his report to the necessity for creating a strong fleet. (Since then an important step forward has been taken, at least in connection with the submarine fleet.) But neither in 1935 nor later did anyone raise the question of forming a special, autonomous department.
It is not by chance that a Moscow observer reported that this decision was a surprise to everyone. One need only, to confirm this, thumb through the Soviet press, especially the organ of the Army. But even if this step was sound in itself, that would mean, we believe, only that in this particular instance objective interests coincided with Stalin’s designs against Voroshilov. The flattering comments in the Red Star (organ of the Red Army) about Voroshilov apropos of the new reform are only a smokescreen to cover Stalin’s flanking movement.
 
Appointment of Mekhlis
The “encirclement” of Voroshilov is shown much more clearly in the appointment of Mekhlis, the probable successor to Voroshilov at the Defense Commissariat. By naming his horse a senator, Caligula wanted to humiliate the Senate. By appointing his lackey Mekhlis to the High Command, Stalin pursued less platonic aims. Former private secretary to Stalin, careerist without talent, specialist in lobby intrigues, executor of the basest designs of his master, Mekhlis’ strength derives solely from Stalin’s support. Mekhlis assistant Defense Commissar! Who would have thought it possible only six months ago? The more “enemies of the people” Stalin executes, the emptier grows the void around him. The reserves of the faithful are today limited to men of the type of Mekhlis.
Having lost last June his entire High Command, Voroshilov has remained suspended in midair. He subsequently submitted without protest to the disorganization of the Red Army, not even moving a finger when his last two assistants, Admiral Orlov and Gen. Alksnis were arrested when their turn came. (Both were “judges” of Tukachevsky. They did not survive their victim for long.) Today he accepts everything. He not only confirms automatically all the orders of his new assistant, but he does not even shrink from being photographed with this chief spy at his side.
In conclusion we mention a bit of interesting and wholly credible information provided by our murdered comrade Reiss – that the entire correspondence of Voroshilov is under the strict surveillance of the G.P.U. Stalin is methodically preparing, the “liquidation” of Voroshilov. It is obviously impossible to fix a time limit for it. Stalin himself does not yet know when it will come. Unforeseen circumstances may slow down or speed up this liquidation or even change the order in which the future victims will fall. We have already seen how Molotov, suspended for a long time by a hair, has succeeded in maintaining his position For how long? However that may be, neither. Voroshilov, nor Molotov, nor Litvinov – nor many others – will escape their fate.
 

