


The formation of COSATU, uniting half a million trade union
members, takes up the workers’ struggle for democracy and socialism
that SACTU was forced to leave off after the 1950’s. The big
difference is that COSATU has ten times the forces.
The fact that the workers have now rejected the name South African
Congress of Trade Unions (SACTU) for their new federation is not a
rejection of the past traditions of SACTU. But it is a rejection of a
link to an exiled “leadership” which has failed to build inside
the country.
The leadership has opposed international workers’ links with the
unions making up COSATU and denigrated the workers’ leadership
emerging in the country.
COSATU now embodies all the best traditions of SACTU. All sections
of the workers to whom SACTU could historically lay claim are now in
COSATU. The use of the word “Congress” in COSATU shows the
workers want to build the ANC as a force for transformation of society.
The exiled “SACTU” leaders have now served their time and can
no longer lay false claim to leadership of the movement in the
country. They should now give unqualified support to COSATU as the
recognised trade union body of South African workers nationally and internationally.
SACTU is now dead: long live COSATU!

Nimrod Sejake was a founder member of SACTU, an ANC treason
trialist, and secretary of Transvaal Iron and Steel Workers’ Union
in the 1950s.
 




Over the past five years many Labour Party and trade union
branches have shown appreciation of the work of the Southern African
Labour Education Project (SALEP).
SALEP produces vitally needed socialist education materials for
the workers and youth movement in South Africa. It also helps to
build links between the growing trade union and youth movement in
South Africa and other workers throughout the world.
But on 27 March this year, Labour’s National Executive Committee
(NEC) resolved to direct that “Regions, CLPs and affiliates have no
contacts with SALEP, do not use its materials or allow it
facilities”. In effect a ban has been introduced.
The NEC said SALEP were outside “mainstream progressive opinion
both within and outside South Africa”, for among other things
linking the end of apartheid with the end of capitalism and for
building links between workers in South Africa and elsewhere.
During the British miners’ strike, striking Staffordshire miner
Roy Jones was invited by the South African NUM to visit South African
miners. The black mineworkers gave a generous donation to the British
miners’ strike and Roy met SA NUM leaders, conference delegates,
stewards and rank and file.
The NEC report claimed that SALEP were not building links at all
levels and that Roy was a “white unrepresentative member” of the
British NUM. The South African NUM on the other hand made him their
first white member.
The NEC also claim that SALEP’s expenditure is diverting
resources from the liberation movement. The claim is nonsense.
The African National Congress (ANC) receives big grants from a
number of governments including a million kroner a year from the
Swedish government, dwarfing SALEP’s Â£5,000 a year spending.
 
New federation
The NEC report echoes the view put forward in the Stalinist SA
Communist Party through the ANC and South African Congress of Trade
Unions (SACTU) in exile.
Instead of taking organisational action against SALEP on the
advice of a body dominated by the SA Communist Party, the Labour
Party should look to the new federation of independent trade unions
being formed this November, which, drawing together up to half a
million black workers, will constitute the most powerful organisation
of black workers in South Africa’s history.
The unions making up this ‘super union’ all advocate direct
links between workers internationally and particularly between
organised workers in the same multinationals.
How can the NEC now justify its statement that “it is the duty
of the international trade union movement to consult and accept the
advice of SACTU” when the organised black workers have their own
directly elected representatives?
SALEP makes no apology for advocating direct links and direct
support for the non-racial trade unions in their struggle against
oppression and the capitalist monopolies. At the same time it
supports the ANC and the United Democratic Front (UDF) whose leaders
are on trial for treason.
Both these organisations endorse the Freedom Charter which calls
for the nationalisation of the monopolies and banks. While the
leadership of the ANC fudges this question and talks of ‘breaking
the monopolies’, SALEP supports the full implementation of the
ANC’s freedom charter as do the hundreds of thousands of activists
in the country.
As a group carrying out socialist education, SALEP is helping to
prepare black workers for the task of leading their unions, community
organisations and the UDF on a programme of national liberation and
socialism. As a FOSATU speaker said at a May Day rally this year:
“Capitalism is our enemy!” (Star, 2 May 1985).
It is these ideas of the mass movement, strengthened and explained
in SALEPs material, which the NEC has condemned in banning SALEP and
the campaigns for direct links.
Delegates should read the letter of protest from left-wing members
of the NEC available from SALEP and oppose the right wings
suppression of socialist education.
Speakers from SALEP should be invited to the GMC, regional
parties, wards and trade unions to hear their reply and report on the
exciting developments in the Labour movement in South Africa, which
dooms apartheid and capitalism to destruction.



 


Nimrod Sejake
(Former organiser of Transvaal steelworkers)



 




Black South African workers’ leader and fighter for socialism
The CWI is sad to announce the death of Nimrod Sejake, a life-long
fighter against apartheid in South Africa, and a committed socialist.
Nimrod died on 27 May 2004, aged 83 years.
During the 1950s, Nimrod was a black workers’ leader in South
Africa under the former apartheid regime, a leading member of the
South African Congress of Trade Unions, and of the ANC in the Soweto Township.
Forced into exile, Nimrod eventually arrived in Ireland in the
1980s. He became a supporter of the ‘Militant’, the forerunner of
the Socialist Party (CWI affiliate), and joined the Marxist Workers’
Tendency of the ANC.
Nimrod was a well-known and loved figure on the left in Ireland.
He regularly travelled across the country, south and north, to speak
at public meetings on the struggle of the black South African working
class. Nimrod also regularly attended international meetings
throughout Europe. At all times, he was an inspiration, particularly
to youth.
Following the removal of the apartheid regime in the 1990s, Nimrod
was eventually allowed to return to South Africa. But for Nimrod the
struggle was not over, once back in South Africa he continued to
campaign for a socialist society.
The following is an obituary article on Nimrod that recently
appeared in the Irish Times newspaper. It indicates the
stature Nimrod has in Ireland, amongst the anti-apartheid movement
and the left.

Tireless activist who spent 30 years in exile

From the Irish Times, 19 June 2004

Nimrod Sejake: Nimrod Sekeramane Sejake, who has died aged
83, was a South African political refugee in Ireland during the
1980s, when he became widely known in trade union and socialist
circles for his campaigning work to raise the profile of the new
South African unions.
Born in August 1920 in Evaton, south of Johannesburg, to Basotho
parents, he attended mission school in Evaton, worked as building
site clerk, trained as a teacher, married, and settled in Jabavu, Soweto.
As the National Party came to power in 1949 and sought to impose
unprecedented racial discrimination under the rubric “apartheid”,
Sejake joined the opposition. Noted for his ability as a union
organiser, he became secretary of the non-racial, though mainly
African, Iron and Steel Workers Union, affiliated to the South
African Congress of Trade Unions (SACTU). His militant,
uncompromising approach is recorded in Organise or Starve, the
history of SACTU.
Sejake joined the African National Congress (ANC) and was active
throughout the 1950s in its increasingly radical Defiance Campaign of
demonstrations, strikes and burning of the hated pass books. He was
active also in the Congress of the People of 1955 when the ANC
proclaimed the Freedom Charter at Kliptown.
Sejake shared a cell with Nelson Mandela, when they were both
arrested with 156 leaders of the ANC, SACTU and the Communist Party
(SACP), accused of treason in the famous treason trial of 1956–61.
The NP government sought the death penalty for treason and, as
oppression intensified, limiting the possibilities for legal
political work, Sejake and others left the country through the then
Basutoland for training in the Soviet Union. The treason trial
accused were acquitted but the die was cast and Umkhonto We Sizwe
(MK), the ANC’s military wing, was founded to begin armed struggle
against the apartheid regime.
Sejake spent a period studying Marxism in the USSR. He had been
influenced by a teacher in Evaton in the 1930s, Johannes Nkosi, a
leading member of the Communist Party. Nkosi had been sent to the
Soviet Union where he fell foul of the Stalinist teachers and died in
suspicious circumstances. Like others of the ANC and similar
liberation movements, Sejake found that only the “communist”
states were prepared to provide arms and training, whatever
criticisms they had of the system were not voiced then.
Sejake returned to Africa as political commissar in the ANC
training camp in Morogoro, Tanzania. He was convinced of the central
role of the organised working class in the liberation of South
Africa, and insisted their priority should be to send trained
activists back to organise militant trade unions to bring down the
regime. Such views led to a clash with the more conservative exiled
leadership which prioritised the armed struggle and appeals to the
United Nations.
Sejake was removed from his post. The President, Julius Nyerere,
ordered his expulsion from Tanzania, a decision probably influenced
by Mr. Sejake’s involvement in a Marxist circle at Dar es Salaam
University which was critical of Nyerere’s “Ujaama”, or African
Socialism. Participants included Zanzibarian A.M. Babu, later jailed
by Nyerere, and Walter Rodney, author of the influential How
Europe Underdeveloped Africa, and assassinated by the CIA in
Guyana in the 1970s.
Exiled to Zambia, Sejake worked with the South African
Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), and travelled to China and Albania,
seeking support for the organisation, before being deported to Egypt,
where he lived in poverty while appealing for political asylum in
Europe. In these difficult times, he was greatly heartened by the
uprising of the South African school students in Soweto, 1976 and by
the rapid growth of the independent trade unions.
In the late 1970s, Sejake was offered asylum in three European
countries and chose Ireland, remembering that his sister worked for
an Irish family as a domestic servant. They treated her well and he
was impressed when they told her Ireland was a country oppressed by
the British Empire!
Living in the Red Cross Hostel in Ballsbridge, Sejake loved
Ireland and never experienced racial abuse. He attended AGMs of the
Irish Anti-Apartheid Movement but was disappointed to find no
recognition of the now hugely significant independent unions. He
found kindred thinkers in the Militant Tendency of the Labour Party
[forerunners of the Socialist Party] which had direct links, through
South African exiles, with these rapidly growing unions. A “retying
of the knot”, he would say, after 25 years in exile.
He devoted himself energetically to solidarity work with the
struggle in South Africa, speaking at meetings the length and breadth
of Ireland and Britain, taking particular pleasure in engaging with
young people. He made speaking tours throughout Europe, the US and
Brazil, and during the 1984/85 anti-apartheid strike at Dunnes
Stores, was regularly found on the picket line.
In 1989 he spoke by phone to his wife and family with whom he had
not been in contact for 30 years. The ANC was legalised, Mandela
walked free, and the exiles returned, although his own return was
delayed for months when he refused to complete the application for
indemnity. He complained, “they are asking me which crimes I wish
to be indemnified for!” Eventually he returned to South Africa in
November 1991.
Reunited with his family, though 71 years of age, Sejake again
threw himself into the struggle and was elected secretary of the
Soweto ANC Veterans League and led delegations from Evaton to
Pretoria to seek compensation for land seized during the 1950s. He
also re-established links with the workers in heavy industry through
the Metal and Allied Workers Union.
Although he voted for the ANC in the 1994 election, he insisted
that the massive vote for the party would not be enough to transform
life for the poor in South Africa. He remained a committed socialist
and marxist, believing that only the overthrow of capitalist economic
relations would end inequality and he was involved in campaigning for
the Congress of South African Trade Unions to build a mass workers party.
Nimrod Sejake: born August 8th, 1920; died May 27th, 2004.
 




Dear comrade,
The Dunnes Stores empire in Ireland is recognised as having
anti-worker and anti-union bosses. On July 19, a worker in the Henry
Street store in Dublin was indefinitely suspended for refusing to
handle South African goods.
The majority of union members – a total of 11 – then began an
official strike. It is the policy of their union, the Irish
Distributive and Administrative trade union, to boycott South African goods.
The strikers are young workers and 10 of them are women.
So far they have been intimidated and harassed by scabs and on at
least two occasions vans have been driven at them. Indeed management
have resorted to bringing in food in trucks used for dumping rubbish!
Public support is very good and business is down 56%. Over IRÂ£80
(R128.00) a day is collected in buckets at the entrances.
The workers are aware of the conditions faced by their class
brothers and sisters in South Africa. They are absolutely determined
that their bosses will be taught not to stock South African goods.
A number of fellow union members in other stores are refusing to
handle the goods and the bosses are afraid to do anything.
The strikers hope that workers in South Africa will learn of their struggle.
They are determined to show their solidarity in the face of their
own vicious bosses.
Messages of support can be sent to: Karen Gearon (shop-steward),
c/o I.D.A.T.U., 9, Cavendish Row, Dublin 1, Ireland.



 


Fraternally,
Nimrod Sejake (Irish Labour Party)
Fergus Cassidy (Irish Labour Youth)



 




IN MILITANT, 14 September, a leading member of the
steelworkers union in South Africa in the ’50s, described how
workers who were denied by law the right to trade unions organised at
the African Lamps factory.
Here he takes up the story after he had been arrested for
“trespass” while negotiating with management. The workers had
downed tools on his arrest.

When it became clear that the workers were not going to end their
strike, the police decided they could not take any action against me.
My arrest was dropped even though I was breaking the Bantu Labour
Settlement of Disputes Act 1953.
The next week, the workers met and we discussed strategy and
tactics for the new offensive. We then received an indictment. I was
accused number one. But we found out a very funny thing; every time
we went to court, the factory stopped because everyone was in the union.
The Rand Daily Mail which covered our court case said that
the iron and steel workers were the first African union to break the
1953 Act, so we felt our tactics were right were convicted
nonetheless and fined £3 each. We had decided the day before to go
to jail rather than pay the fine. We would say we had no money,
because we knew we would have no scabs in our workplace so the
factory could not work.
The employer was forced, not by the law, but by the conditions we
had created to pay our fines himself! We knew he couldn’t raise the
same number of workers with the same skill and expertise overnight.
But the employer thought it was all right to deduct a certain
amount from our pay packet every week until the £3 was paid back to
him. He did that but we appealed to the Supreme Court in Pretoria,
which found against the employer who had to refund every worker their
£3! What is more, wages went up, only by a penny an hour but by the
standard of wages for black workers in South Africa then it was
something to be proud of.
We had beaten the bosses in their own court, the Supreme Court,
after conviction in the magistrates court. But more importantly we
had won with our own weapon, the strike.
We learnt that when workers were properly organised, they were
strong; they could beat the bosses at the factory, they could get an
official out of the clutches of the police so the law was not all
powerful.

Nimrod Sejake will be one of the speakers at Militant’s
20th anniversary rally on 20 October.
 




NIMROD SEJAKE, a black South African union activist for many
years will be speaking at Militant’s 20th anniversary rally at
Wembley on 20 October (see page 13 for details).
In this article he tells of some of his experiences in the
1950s.

I was the secretary of the iron and steel union in the Transvaal,
in Johannesburg. We faced a vicious law, the Bantu Labour Settlement
of Disputes Act which stipulated if Africans went on strike, the
strike was immediately illegal, and their trade union movement not recognised.
There was no law that we could use as a channel for negotiations
with the employers, but we had to face the employers all the time. So
we organised workers to strike, not only to improve the terrible
wages and conditions, but also in particular to disobey this Act.
 
Fight for our rights
We always made it clear to the workers that we should not face the
employers from a position of weakness; the law was not on our side.
To succeed we had to organise say a section 100% first and then
tabulate the demands of the workers, and approach the employer. At
one factory, called African Lamps, where a strike was organised the
employers told me that according to the law I had no right to put
forward the workers demands.
I said ‘OK, I know there is a law to that effect, but the crux
of the matter is that you have entered a contract between management
and the workers you employed but who are now members of a union even
if you do not recognise it. You have to pay the wages for what they
give you in exchange for these wages, which is essentially their
labour power.’
Management felt insulted that I could talk like that to them when
I was an African so I said: ‘If workers feel that you don’t pay
them the wages commensary with their labour power they have the right
to withhold that labour power’. This infuriated the management even more.
They threatened to call in the police because I was ‘illegally’
on the precinct of the factory even though I had gone asking them to
have negotiations. After management had called the police and told
their story the police told me, ‘Nimrod you are under arrest for trespass’.
But our workers were properly organised and the law could not
stand in their way. The police took me to the charge office and the
workers came out on strike.
While I was trying, despite police opposition, to telephone our
lawyer informing her I was arrested, a telephone call arrived from
the factory management, asking the police to bring me back to the
factory because there was a strike!
 
Causing a commotion
‘Look Nimrod’, they told me, ‘you’ve caused a commotion at
the factory!’ For some time I said I would not go back to the
factory unless I was properly charged but the police begged me to go.
At the factory, management begged me to ask the workers to return.
I spoke to the workers but in their own language, saying they
should carry on with the decision they had taken and I would go on
with the mandate to negotiate but that I was still under arrest.
Management expected workers to meekly return to work but one worker
who had been mandated to speak told management they would do nothing
until my arrest had been explained.
Already the white workers had been sent home showing that the
whole factory depended on the power of the black working class. When
they saw the workers were determined to go on striking, the police
suddenly discovered there was nothing they could do, they could not
arrest me for trespass because I was there for a legal purpose even
though the Disputes Act and other laws were on their side! In reality
it as because we had used the power of the working class.

Nimrod Sejake will continue the lessons of the African Lamps
dispute and others in a future issue.
 




Nimrod Sejake is something of a living legend. At 79 years-old,
the former leader of the metal workers’ union in South Africa, is
still fighting for socialism as an active member of the CWI’s South
African section, Socialist Alternative. I met Nimrod at his small
house in White City, Soweto. The same house that the police raided
early one morning in December 1956, to arrest Nimrod for “high
treason”. He was placed in a cell with a young lawyer by the name
of Nelson Mandela!
“155 others were arrested that day” he explained, “Nelson
was the only one I knew, ‘Nimrod, are you here too?’ he said when
they brought me in.” “Even before this time I was active in the
trade union movement. I was a founder member of SACTU (South African
Congress of Trade Unions) in 1955. I organised the workers into the
union, that was my job. The employers asked me ‘who is a member of
your committee?’, I said the whole factory are members, at that
time we called our union the Non-European Iron and Steel workers’
union.” Trade union organisation has never been a picnic, but
Nimrod’s comrades faced severe problems for which special methods
and tactics had to be improvised. “I had my differences with the
ANC leadership, for not following the class struggle. They criticised
me because I advocated breaking the law, which even stated that
‘black workers have no right to strike’. The ANC leadership
didn’t back me up, they said: ‘Nimrod, you must negotiate’,
they didn’t approve of the fact that there were strikes every week
in the Iron and Steel sector – that was my sector.”
The trade unions played a decisive role in the struggle against
apartheid, especially the formation of Cosatu in the 1980s. Today
this is an incontestable fact. But South African marxists, like
Nimrod, argued this many years ago while the ANC leadership placed
their faith in a completely different strategy – a combination of
guerilla warfare organised from camps outside the country, and
international diplomacy.
Nimrod was forced to go into exile in 1962. I first met him in
Liverpool, England in the 1980s when he made a visit during the
famous struggle against the Thatcher government. He spent many years
as a refugee in Ireland.
“I’ve been battling all my adult life”, he told me, “When
I came back to South Africa in 1992 I found that many comrades I knew
had left the country or died. The ANC branches had collapsed.”
Up until the early 1990s the CWI in South Africa supported the ANC
and was known as the Marxist Workers’ Tendency of the ANC. But the
sharp rightward shift of the ANC in the 1990s led them to a total
break and to raise the call for a new workers’ party.
Nimrod is active in his local community Everton, in Soweto,
fighting for the restoration of land which was illegally sold by the
apartheid regime. He launched the Everton Forum for Reconstruction
and Socialism, whose office also serves as a centre for the comrades
of Socialist Alternative.
So, after over six years of ANC government, what does he think of
the way things have turned out?
“It’s a sell out. A straightforward sell out!”, he says
angrily, “The ANC’s Freedom Charter states explicitly that all
the mineral wealth beneath the earth belongs to the people-Nelson did
away with it! It’s been undemocratically thrown into the dustbin
and replaced with naked capitalism, the so called GEAR programme,
privatisation etc. That’s a sell out! We didn’t fight all those
years to retain apartheid.”
There are people whose life has involved far fewer sacrifices, for
whom the betrayals experienced by Nimrod and his comrades would have
produced cynicism. But not him! After a lifetime of struggle he and
his wife live on a pension of 750 kronor a month. He still speaks
enthusiastically of battles to come: “All we have to do is see to
it that we organise the workers – internationally – to see to it
that we bring about a socialist alternative. There’s more and more
talk about the need to create a workers’ party – that’s what’s
going on!”
Within days of talking to Nimrod, major class battles erupted in
the country. Cosatu’s leaders launched a programme of rolling
strikes, threatening a general strike on 10th May. The alliance
between Cosatu and the ANC – they sit together in the government –
is under the most severe strains ever. President Mbeki, under orders
from the stock exchange and international speculators, is attempting
to impose wage restraint, attack employment rights and central
bargaining. Last year saw more strikes than at any time since the ANC
took power in 1994. This year could see a further increase.
“One thing has always been in my mind,” Nimrod had told me,
“we will never become free without the class struggle. I’ve
fought for fifty years with this idea in mind. The ideas of Karl
Marx, our ideas, have stood the test of history. Now it’s time for
a new generation of youth to take up the struggle.”
 




It was from my organising work on the Reef that I came to see the
enormous power of the working class. During those days African trade
unions were not recognised and strikes by African workers were
illegal. But this was no barrier to the workers, if they were
properly organised.
Our motto in the Iron and Steel Union was that we should never go
to an employer with our demands unless we know our power, and that
power was to be found only when the workers were fully organised with
an understanding of how to go about a strike.
Then they can beat the employers in their own field. Even though
there are laws which are barriers, the workers break them, and with
intent. Even if the police are called in they cannot put into effect
their powers because the workers can make their powers ineffective.
Through our union experience we understood that only when you face
the employers from a position of strength can you change society in
South Africa. And if this was done all over the country, with clear
sense of direction, no power can impede the forward march of the
working class.
 
White workers
There is an important thing that we learned in the Iron and Steel
Union. We said to the black workers when they went on strike to talk
with white workers and tell them why we are striking. They should
explain that we are underpaid, discriminated against as a nation and
oppressed as a class. He laws dehumanise us, and make us mere
chattels of society.
Look, we would say to the white workers, you have the law on your
side, you have people you elect to of to the parliament to legislate,
and they legislate against us. You do skilled work, but according to
the law we are not allowed to do it.
Our struggle is not only about wages, but it is a political
question. We want to destroy the laws in this country, to make it fit
for workers of all races. And we are showing today that we can stop
this factory. We said this, for example, in the strikes at African
lamps and at Phoenix Foundry.
“As you can see,” the African workers said to the white
workers, “we stopped management from doing anything. We are the
bosses today. You can see you are being told to go home and not work
precisely because of our power. We can make you redundant” – this
is the word the workers used.
We were aware that the racist regime gets a great deal of support
from white workers. But we wanted to break down this granite wall. We
were saying to the white workers, look, we want to show you we can
penetrate the barriers put before us, we can pull them down and make
the laws ineffective.
As a result, during these strikes, some white workers began to
say: “Look, if you succeed, we are going to succeed as well”.
Many of them voiced the correct view that there is really no
difference between black labour and white labour; we should all be
striking for workers’ rights. White workers say this behind closed
doors because they know the repercussions.
As far as my experiences show, the social support the regime is
enjoying from the white workers can be broken if the African workers
are strongly organised along the correct lines.
 
ISCOR
Often what the state and the employers think is impossible is made
possible by the working class! Let me give the example of huge
concerns like ISCOR. It was said in the 1950s to be impossible to
enter ISCOR, because it was always guarded. These large state
concerns are guarded precisely because if the workers could get a
grip on the, and stop production, the capitalists would be greatly affected.
But that impossibility as again proved by the workers to be a
paper tiger. Through the workers I entered ISCOR in Van der Bijl
Park. I organised the workers there first, not by going to the
factory, but by going to their homes. Through tem the other worker
could be brought into the movement.
Another strategy was making feasts or tea parties in the locations
– where we would meet and discuss. Through that I organised to go
in and distribute leaflets. It is such a huge concern that you would
not know which side of it you entered and which side you came out,
unless you were lead by the people working there.
So I took leaflets in a suitcase from Jo’burg. At the bus stop a
worker was there to guide me. Inside the plant the workers showed me
there we could unpack the bundles of leaflets. Before I knew it,
other workers were placing them in vantage points for workers coming
in on the next shift to find them. Then, when they knew the bus was
about to leave, they led me out to it and I left the place.
Here again the mighty power of the working class demonstrates
itself. Not only is it a power as far as stopping work is concerned,
but because the understanding, the creativity, the grasp of strategy
and tactics of the workers is so powerful, one they are properly
organised there is noting to fear in South Africa. In fact anywhere
in the world that the workers are properly organised with an
understanding of their tasks, they have nothing to fear.
So all these and many other experiences convince me that through
the power of the working class it is possible to bring SA to a
standstill, and overthrow that powerful regime. What we have to do
first is to organise the workers. Then we shall be facing battle from
a position of power, where we can tell the employers there are two
things existing here – you own the means of production, but we own
the labour-power, and if you don’t agree, we fold our hands and
your industry will be paralysed.
I came to see that the power of the working class was so enormous
that even if you compared it with the police, the army, the air
force, the prisons and magistrates court and judges, etc. – that
all the power cannot stand in the way of the struggle of the working
class to overthrow the state. The power lies in the working class, if
it is organised and given a direction, and that direction can only be
found in Marxism.
 
Marxism
Marxism is a scientific theory, based on the experience of the
working class. That is why fro the workers Marxism s easily accepted,
because their lives prove it – their hard lives, cruel oppression,
brutal handling in the factory, in the locations, at home – with
low wages, high rents and high prices.
From this angle the worker understand theory. And when revolution
comes they grasp in a day what would otherwise take years to grasp.
In the Iron and Steel Union we used to say that the very thing that
is called law in South Africa is illegal, that there is no ‘law’
as far as Africans were concerned, because the majority of the people
take no part in making it, but it is made by the capitalists to
oppress the workers.
The only answer to that is for the workers to organise to take
political power into their own hands with the specific aim of ending
capitalism and achieving socialism. That is what Inqaba is saying:
the workers must build the trade unions and transform the ANC. I
support this view to the hilt.
Because, in the 1950s I already found, unfortunately, that this
was not the position taken by the leadership of SACTU, or of the
ANC, or of the South African Communist Party. They did not have
confidence in the power of the working class.
As an example, I will mention a time when I had organised nine
metal factories along the Rand, with the aim that when the workers
came out on strike, they would all come out simultaneously. When they
were all organised and ready I went to the SACTU leadership to make
sure of their support for the action. There would be a lightening
strike spreading along the Rand – and factories where the workers
had experience of strike action like Africa Lamps, Phoenix Foundry
and Benoni Foundry were ready tom come out in support.
In Iron and Steel we saw this as a great step forward for the
trade union movement. But the SACTU leaders told me (and I am quoting
them): “Nimrod, that is too much!”
Or again, there was the time in 1958 when the ANC called off a
tremendous three-day strike on the first day! Called it off! I
remember buying a newspaper and seeing the headline: “Secretary
General of the ANC, Oliver Tambo, calls off strike.” I was furious.
Because, at that time, we were on bail from the treason Trial, and
one of the conditions was that we did not attend meetings or organise
in any way. But, nevertheless, we had risked organising the workers
to make the strike a success.
 
Crisis of Leadership
The leadership of the movement was lagging far behind, out of
touch with developments. That is why I support Inqaba because the
present situation requires a journal like this which puts forward
clearly the manner in which the struggle in South Africa must be
handed. We lacked that in the 1950s.
Inqaba puts forward a theory and a strategy which can guide the
working class movement in the struggle for power something the ANC
leadership has not done – something we can say the South African
Communist Party has failed to do. I say “failed” because
time and time again it has been advised by workers to change its
methods and has failed to do so.
The Communist Party leaders still refuse to put forward that the
task of the working class will be to take power in the revolution
that is coming in South Africa. These leaders have put forward the
position that we must struggle for a bourgeois democracy in South
Africa – and the South African Communist Party has said over and
over again that we must wait until getting that before struggling to
overthrow capitalism.
Workers want democratic rights of course. When in Europe I see I
can stand right next to a policeman and sell a socialist newspaper,
and he doesn’t turn a hair, it amazes me. The workers in Europe
have struggled for and won these rights – although the capitalists
are now trying to whittle them away. And I think: “If the workers
in SA had those rights just for a month, or even 24 hours, what would
they begin to do with them.”
But the point is: it will take a revolution in South Africa – a
revolution made by the power of the working class – to achieve full
democratic rights. And I ask: when the workers in South Africa push
back the state to that point, why should they stop there?
Why should they stop just because their leaders are then
scrambling for positions in the bosses parliament? The workers will
then have the power to take over the factories and mines and so on,
and to take on and destroy the bosses’ state. That is what they
will demand that their leaders carry through.
I came to the conclusion in the 1950s that we were faced with a
crisis of leadership. Subsequently I have discovered that the reasons
for this crisis were explained by the Russian Marxist, Trotsky.
Trotsky had already explained that in Russia the basic problems of
the masses could not be solved unless the working class took power.
It is the same in South Africa – race discrimination even cannot be
ended short of that. It was proved in Russia when the working class
came to power in 1917 under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party,
headed by Lenin and Trotsky.
Later Trotsky also explained how the workers’ democracy which
came into existence in the Soviet Union was crushed by the coming to
power of Stalin and the bureaucracy- how this led to the degeneration
of the workers’ state and the degeneration of the Communist
International, so that Communist Parties no longer stood for the
interests of the working class internationally.
Today it is more clear than ever that the working class can change
society, if it is organised with the correct policy and
leadership. The concept is held by people outside South Africa
and even inside that the regime cannot be conquered. But the working
class is proving today that it can remove it: soften it up first and
then destroy it. This is happening through the workers, not through
the so-called ‘armed struggle’.
 
Armed Struggle
One thing I must make explicitly clear. You can change nothing in
space outside the influence of force. You can’t move anything say,
from this table to that table, unless you use force.
To change society from one state to another, like we want to do in
South Africa; to remove racism and establish democracy, to remove
capitalism and build socialism – we need force. And that force in
my conviction is in the working class.
It is a question of the workers using force and violence in their
proper place. There will come a stage when, to eliminate a
highly-armed regime like the South African regime, the workers will
have to be ready militarily, trained themselves. That is inevitable.
The Russian workers in the October Revolution were not empty-handed –
they organised themselves in an armed workers’ force.
In anticipation of such a situation, the workers must be prepared.
The ruling class must find that they cannot spread their army all
over the country, because the workers are organised everywhere. Then,
when we are physically attacked in any area of the country, we will
be able to hit back and they will find they can no longer control us.
In the 1960s the ANC made me ‘political commissar’ in the
camps in Tanzania. My task was to provide political education for the
workers there. I call them workers because many of them had been
trade unionists and, even though they were militarily trained, they
still had the standpoint of workers, to overthrow the South African
regime and capitalism.
I put the position among these comrades that only the working
class could overthrow the state because who else could do it in
isolation from the workers. Therefore trained people infiltrated into
the country should not start to initiate battles, because they would
only be exposing themselves in front of a powerful regular army which
would just destroy you if it discovered you.
The proper thing to do, I said, when you enter the country is to
organise the workers – and, through them, the masses as a whole –
and to explain that only the organised working class had the power to
defeat the state. And to prepare, only, for when it would be
effective to use arms. The guerilla methods put forward by the ANC
leadership do nothing more than frighten the enemy from time to time.
Later on I have been to China. I have seen the cave in Yenan which
was Mao’s home and command centre in the guerilla war in China. The
situation in our country is quite different. It is a very
industrialised country, where there is no real force of opposition
other than the working class. The method of guerilla war is not the
method of working class struggle.
After a time in Tanzania the ANC leadership told me that I should
no longer teach Marxism. In fact the person who initiated this was
none other than the late Moses Kotane, then the General Secretary of
the South African Communist Party.
It astounded me that when he said we must teach instead the
‘African image’. This is ludicrous. Right back in the Communist
manifesto it was explained that “All hitherto existing history is
the history of class struggle.” Of course national
oppression is central in South Africa, but that does not make the
struggle against it any less a class struggle
Because I would not accept the position of the leadership, it was
decided to get rid of me. I was removed from the camps, and the
Tanzanian government gave me seven days to leave the country! I heard
later that at the Morogoro conference, ANC comrades asked, “Why did
Sejake leave the ANC?”, and the leadership said, “He just left
... just like that” – which is a thing serious comrades do not
believe to this day.
After that I was for a time in the Pan African Congress, because
the youth there were keen to study Marxism. But the same crisis
revealed itself: the nationalist leadership felt threatened by
working class ideas, and I was expelled.
When I look back now to the 1950s I see that the major problem was
that we, the workers, who supported and built the ANC, did not
control it. Even SACTU was under the control of middle class ANC
leaders, rather than the other way around. Everywhere the working
class movement has – must have – two arms: “an
industrial arm and a political arm” as the great Irish Marxist,
James Connolly, once said. Both these arms are necessary. They go
together. The one without the other will not succeed.
The workers, on their own account, have rebuilt a powerful trade
union movement in our country – more powerful than we ever had in
the 1950s. This is a tremendous achievement, even though there is
still a long way to go in organising the unorganised workers.
I have been inspired by the workers organised in the Metal and
Allied Workers Union (MAWU), who have taken forward with courage and
success the work which we began in the 1950s. I regard myself as a
member of MAWU.
These achievements must never be compromised or sacrificed. It is
now vital that they are taken forward in creating a new united trade
union federation, to strengthen our ability to organise and to use
the strike weapon, very intensively, all over the country. Wherever
there is a working concern, a factory, anywhere in the country, there
is the revolution – provided the working class is organised and
knows its power.
At the same time I agree fully with Inqaba when it says that the
trade unions should join and play their part in the United Democratic
Front (UDF), transform the UDF into a mass working class movement,
able to give a lead to all the oppressed – and to white workers
too.
The laws of history work in peculiar ways. In the 1950s, the
workers turned to the ANC as the political organisation which they
felt it was necessary to support and strengthen. Today we see the
response which just the launching of the UDF gained from the
unorganised and many others.
This is because workers saw here a sign of the ANC reborn in the
country, a sign of the return of nation wide organisation around the
Freedom Charter.
It is true that the leadership of the UDF as was the case with the
ANC, in the 1950s (and is still the case today), is in the hands of
the middle class. But the workers must go into the UDF – and later
into the ANC when it returns openly to South Africa – no to bow
down to the leaders’ policies, their hesitations and twists and
turns, but to transform the UDF and transform the ANC.
I appeal particularly to the workers in MAWU, the union to which I
belong, to press this task on their leaders and on the leaders of
FOSATU and all unions. It is only by the workers going into the UDF
at every level, in an organised and united way, that we can get rid
off the influence of the middle class leadership.
We must simply tell them openly that they must accept the
programme of the working class or else it is time they left their
positions. There is no problem in that. If the organised working
class can take on the big bosses and the state, there is no problem
in dealing with individuals who are an obstacle to the movement.
This is in the interests of the majority of the middle class too.
Only the working class can liberate them from their oppression by
racism and capitalism – by overthrowing the state and taking power.
The majority of the middle class will follow a determined lead from the workers.
History will not allow us to postpone this task while we sort out
merely our own ‘trade union affairs’. In fact by transforming the
UDF we will strengthen the whole workers’ movement, the trade unions too.
With the UDF under working class leadership, campaigning for
demands like a minimum wage, it will win the enthusiastic support of
many of the most oppressed whoa re still unorganised. On the other
hand, if the trade union movement remains divided on the question of
the UDF, this can become a barrier to forming the strongest possible
trade union unity in action.
But because from my experience I am confident in the power and the
understanding of the workers, I am sure we are bound to succeed in
building our two arms; the industrial arm and the political arm.
The success will be so tremendous and vibrant that it will shake
the whole of this globe! The South African regime is one of the worst
in the world, and if the African working class understand and apply
Marxist theory correctly they will give some meat to the working
class of the world and gain tremendous support.
I have found that Europe, and the whole of the capitalist West, is
no longer what we thought it was. Conditions are getting worse, in
every country, because of the grip of capitalism. Therefore the
workers are struggling against it.
So workers in South Africa should not look at the West simply as a
place from which imperialism exploits them, without anybody
struggling to put a stop to this. Struggle is going on!
But I have also found the same crisis of leadership of the
workers’ movement. Take Ireland, for example: the Labour Party is
in a coalition government with a capitalist party that has nothing in
common with the workers. It is like the SACP calling for ‘an
alliance of all classes’ – how can workers be in alliance with
their bosses?
Or take the example of Britain, where the Labour Party leadership
has been trying to expel Marxists. It reminds me of the action taken
by the ANC leadership against me. But I find in these countries a
growing enthusiasm for Marxist ideas, especially among the youth and
young workers, but among older workers also. Recently I went to a
Young Workers’ Assembly organised by the British Labour Party Young
Socialists, where I heard many youth and others speaking.
Some were real youngsters, even one ‘small boy’ (I use this
with no disrespect) whose speech made me feel that at his age I had
no idea of struggle. This is because of the change that is taking
place in the working class today. In Soweto, too, four-year-old
children are confronting the police.
It’s the development of a new period in the world. We have
reached the stage of the advent of world revolution. I can see this
is no longer a theory. It is a reality. I can safely say that world
revolution is approaching the doorsteps of the homes where we live
and the sooner we wake up to the occasion the better.
 




A broadcast by the ANC’s Radio Freedom has called on
workers to “intensify their strike actions by sabotaging machinery,
destroying documents, and making sure that commodities coming off
assembly lines are useless ...” (quoted in Anti-Apartheid News,
September 1985)
“By so doing we will force the capitalists to realise that
ours is a country at war, and that their profits are in danger,”
the broadcast said.
NIMROD SEJAKE, a founder member of SACTU, secretary of the
Transvaal Iron and Steel Workers’ Union and an ANC Treason Trialist
in the 1950s, explains why this call by the ANC leadership is wrong
and cannot advance the liberation struggle of the working people.

It is dangerous to the revolution, self-defeating and an act of
desperation for the ANC leadership in exile to exhort the working
class in South Africa to “sabotage industry”. Destruction of
machinery is not the working-class method of combat against the
capitalists who exploit them.
Sabotaging machinery was a method of resistance attempted by
workers against their employers in Europe when the workers’
movement was in its infancy and workers lacked a sense of their
collective power to take strike action. Machine-breaking (e.g. by
the ‘Luddites’ in England) died out well over a century ago
because it was ineffective.
Engels explained that such actions were inevitably isolated and,
“When the momentary end was attained, the whole weight of social
power fell upon the unprotected evil-doers and punished them to its
heart’s content ...” (Collected Works, vol. 4, p. 503)
In Capital (vol. I, ch. XIII) Marx wrote: “Time
and experience were needed before the workers could ... come to
direct their attacks, not against the material instruments of
production (machines), but against the particular social form in
which these instruments are used” – namely capitalist
exploitation itself.
 
Strike action
The classic method of such a struggle, developed by the
working class, is to combine in large numbers and use their power as
the producers of wealth to halt production through strike action.
When workers doing forced labour under fascist regimes in
the past have smashed machinery, this was in a situation where their
organisations had been destroyed and they could not take collective
action. Does anyone still think that is the situation in South Africa
– after more than a decade of successfully rebuilding strong
democratic organisations in the factories and townships, and after
the launch of COSATU uniting half a million workers?
Does “sabotaging machinery” or “making sure that commodities
coming off assembly lines are useless” in any way add to or
“intensify” strike action, as the ANC broadcast claimed?
The answer is no.
The very moment that strike action is effectively mounted there is
an absolute cessation of production. Absolutely nothing is produced
through the assembly lines at that point in time and for so long as
the condition lasts. How can “commodities” be “coming off
assembly lines” when labour is at a standstill?
Sabotaging machinery, rendering commodities “useless” etc.,
would be a sign of the weakness or ineffectiveness of strike
action – of the inability of workers in that place or at that time
to unite and use their collective power. Far from “intensifying”
strike action, sabotage is the method of individuals or isolated
groups who divert attention away from the real task – which is to
organise and mobilise the working class to use its full social power
in mass actions.
Once that mass power is asserted, once labour is withheld by the
workers as in the case of strike action, sabotage of factories only
introduces confusion and division into the ranks of the workers
because it adds nothing to the strength of the action while
threatening the very existence of the workers’ jobs.
If machines are damaged, obviously the employers would be given
the excuse of simply calling in the police to arrest the workers
nearest to the broken machinery. The workers involved would easily be
replaced and production soon continued.
The aim of sabotaging machinery, according to the broadcast, would
be to “force the capitalists to realise ... that their profits are
in danger.” Effective strike action forces the capitalists to
realise precisely that. Mass action is what terrifies them. Why
should industrial sabotage, which has historically proved
ineffective, achieve more than that?
Besides, the point is not to frighten the capitalists but to
prepare the working class to take power and end both apartheid and
capitalism. Sabotage of machinery etc. does not advance but obstructs
that struggle.
The capitalists are rich and own factories because they exploit
the working class. They pay the workers less than the value which the
workers’ labour produces. Their profits are the unpaid labour of
the working class.
When they accumulate capital, investing profits in factories and
machinery, they are accumulating value stolen from the working class.
This they use to sustain their power and exploit the workers
further. The workers’ task is to organise to take power and seize
the means of production.
Unfortunately, over the years, the ANC leadership has failed to
understand the enormous power of the working class and its tasks in
the struggle for national and social liberation in South Africa.
Hence the leadership, backed up by the so-called ‘Communist’
Party, clings with amazing bulldog tenacity to the erroneous
two-stage theory of struggle. They believe it will be possible to
“achieve national liberation first” while postponing a workers’
revolution and socialism to some unknown future period.
 
State power
That is a wrong approach to revolution flowing from ignorance of
the science of Marxism. The nature of our struggle in South Africa is
unequivocally a class struggle – a struggle that must be led by the
working class for the conquest of state power, the elimination
of apartheid, the achievement of democracy and national liberation by
the black majority, and the overthrow of capitalism.
National liberation will only be won by using the method of class struggle.
Since the dissolution of the primeval communistic (early tribal)
society, “the history of all hitherto existing society is the
history of class struggle”. (Marx)
If one advocates the destruction of machinery, that can only
amount to a senseless act of vandalism. It is a blow against the
working class itself, devastating their property, namely, the means
of production: factory plants, machines, etc., which are absolutely
necessary for the production of the means of consumption to sustain
the people – without which any “liberation” would be meaningless.
They are the very foundation on which a healthy, well-planned
socialist economy must be constructed.
The means of production are the workers’ inalienable legitimate
property, which they and they alone have created and must retrieve
intact. They have been stolen by the capitalist ruling class through
exploiting workers. The need therefore arises for a socialist
revolution spearheaded by the working class, in the period ahead to
recover their property.
The speech delivered on the occasion of the launching of COSATU by
its first President, comrade Elijah Barayi, that “COSATU will
nationalise the mines and even take over some of the big businesses,”
has a mighty echo in the ranks of the revolutionary working class of
the world, who are flexing their muscles to retrieve their stolen
property.
Comrade Barayi’s speech is a barometer indicating the unfolding
events of the new era of socialist ideas.
The launching of COSATU is the crossing of the Rubicon. The way
forward now is through a clear direction of Marxism, the building of
direct links on an ever increasing international scale to overthrow
world capitalism and all the evils of apartheid starting with the
immoral pass laws.
Forward to Socialism!
 




On the 18th of September 1955, members of the African National
Congress, the South African Congress of Trade Unions and the South
African Communist Party, met in the Trades Hall, Commissioner Street,
Johannesburg, to discuss the Freedom Charter and the way forward.
On 26th June 1955, we had all gathered at Kliptown to formulate
from aspirations gathered door-to-door all over our country, our
constitution for a Liberated South Africa. We called it the Freedom Charter.
Since 1955, this document has been an inspiration to millions of
oppressed Black people in South Africa and to some whites who
supported us. In the past two years in South Africa, it has been
accepted by trade unions representing a million workers in COSATU,
the Congress of South African Trades Unions, as the minimum programme
of the workers' movement.
Our Freedom Charter is specific. “The banks, all monopoly
industry, mining and mineral wealth shall be transferred to the
ownership of the people as a whole ... the land shall be owned by
those who work it.” For me, and for millions since 1955, this has
always meant a socialist South Africa.
In the Trades Hall during the debate, I argued that the Freedom
Charter could only be implemented by action, that signatures on
petitions were inadequate to force the state to concede freedom.
While I was speaking the South African Police broke up the meeting
and seized my written notes for my speech.
Later when I was on trial with Nelson Mandela, Albert Luthuli and
Oliver Tambo in the Treason Trail, this speech was one of the major
exhibits used by the state to try to hang us.
I have just received this speech from South Africa after 33 years
and reading it again after more than three decades I can see how
relevant it still is. I have been shocked, but not surprised, by the
retreat of the ANC leadership from the Freedom Charter, which
is clearly demonstrated now by the proposed 'guidelines for a
port-apartheid constitution' which have been produced by the ANC.
Our Constitution, our Freedom Charter, for three decades a
beacon for the oppressed masses of downtrodden black people, is being
abandoned by the exiled leadership. It is not surprising because we
had to struggle all through 1955 to get them to accept it in the
first place.
I defended the Freedom Charter than as Secretary of the
Iron and Steel Union and Secretary of the White City, Jabavu branch
of the African National Congress and what I said in the Trades Hall,
Johannesburg is as relevant today as it was 33 years ago.
“One million signatures alone are not enough. Action is
the correct dose. Our one million signatures must be one million
blows, that will shake apartheid a million times to pieces and bring
South Africa and its enslaved people a million years of prosperity
and freedom ...
“It is all very well to say: 'The state shall recognise
the right and the duty of all to work, and to draw unemployment
benefits,' but it is quite a different story to make the state do
these things ...
“It requires hard practical work and sacrifice of the
noblest order. One must be prepared to clash with the state, namely
the police, and if the struggle assumes very large countrywide
dimensions one will clash even with the armed forces. That is the
test we must pass before there can be work and security ...
“The working class understands. The working class is
ready. The necessary conditions have arisen. Time is becoming more
and more opportune.” [Treason Trial Transcript,
Witwatersrand University, pages 7577–8428]
The leadership in exile may be disheartened after many blows. They
have capitulated believing that the Botha regime is too strong. The
workers inside South Africa will not accept it. I am heartened by a
letter from a Johannesburg worker printed in the August 25th South
African Weekly Mail, headed 'ANC neglecting workers' in which
the worker writes:
“(the proposed constitution). In practical terms it
offers workers nothing that they have not won for themselves over the
last twenty years within the framework of apartheid capitalism ... It
is no accident that the document is welcomed by the representatives
of big capital like Zach De Beer.”
P.W. Botha's government tried to claw back the gains this worker
refers to when they tried to force through the Labour Bill, three
months ago.
From the 6th to 8th June, three million workers in a general
strike used their industrial muscle to say No! They have not allowed
Botha to take back their hard won rights and they will not allow the
ANC leadership in exile to abandon our Freedom Charter.
 

