


The miners fought a nine-month struggle to get a little more money to meet the high cost of living. They were vilified. Their leader, John L. Lewis, was vilified.
Labor leaders, hog-tied to the Roosevelt Administration by the no-strike, pledge, trembled at the “bad” example the miners were setting for the whole labor movement. But the rank and file of labor admired the miners, knowing that sooner or later they would all have to do likewise or be the suckers of the war profiteers. The government stepped in, as the saying goes. Secretary of the Interior Ickes became government operator of the mines. The miners returned to work. After much negotiating, the leaders of the United Mine Workers finally entered into an agreement with Government Operator Ickes by which certain very modest gains were clinched for the miners. Among the gains was portal-to-portal pay.
Whereupon the miners were returned to their “rightful” owners – AND THE SAME OLD PROFIT-SQUEEZE BEGINS ANEW! The mine operators now contest the portal-to-portal pay clause in the agreement. A test case is brought by Jewell Ridge Coal Corporation, a Virginia concern. Solidly behind the Jewell company is the Southern Coal Operators Association. They want to continue getting for nothing the many hours of miners’ time consumed in traveling underground.
The other day Judge A.D. Barksdale ruled in the Jewell case. This judge of the Federal District Court, meting out “justice” according to his capitalist lights, naturally decided against the UMW and in favor of the coal barons.
The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, this learned judge declared, was not intended to force mine operators to pay underground employees for the time they consumed traveling in mines to and from their places of work. No, of course not. It was, by inference, intended that this well-earned pay should be pocketed as profits by the mine owners.
The Southern Coal Operators Association is jubilant about this anti-labor decision. Its president, Edward R. Burke, proclaims that the Jewell decision “sweeps away the framework upon which portal-to-portal agreements were made between Secretary Ickes, as government operator of the mines, and John L. Lewis’ UMW.” The United Mine Workers will, of course, appeal the case either to the Circuit Court or immediately to the United States Supreme Court. In a word, a legal fight is on – AFTER THE NINE-MONTH BITTER AND HARROWING STRIKE STRUGGLE FOUGHT BY THE MINERS.
But, under the circumstances, what else could be logically expected? Loudly and clearly, the miners are called upon TO CHANGE THE CIRCUMSTANCES.
Government operation of the mines for the avowed purpose of breaking a strike is of no benefit to the miners. As soon as the mines are returned to private ownership, the exploiters of the miners get busy with new vigor. FOR THE SAKE OF THE MINERS AND OF THE NATION AS A WHOLE, THE MINES HAVE TO BECOME THE PROPERTY OF THE NATION.
But that does not say everything. The question is: Under what kind of government should the mines be nationalized?
There are plenty of government employees today who are exploited, as badly as, if not worse than, employees in private industry. No worker wants to jump from the frying pan into the fire. Furthermore, a government so constituted that capitalist-dominated courts can nonchalantly break the agreements made by it, is not what the workers want. What, then, is the way out?
Something new is needed in these United States – A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT, BASED ON A COMPLETE REORGANIZATION OF SOCIETY.
The interests of the miners and of all the working people must become the paramount concern of government. Nationalization of the mines, the railroads and all industry under a workers’ government will mean that the workers themselves will actually operate industry for human use instead of inhuman profit. The capitalist government gives to the workers with one hand and takes away with the other – thus maintaining the supremacy of the capitalists and their ever-increasing exploitation of labor.
The class-conscious and pioneering spirit of the miners is traditional in this country. The eleventh hour has struck for a real break away from the capitalist merry-go-round. Will the miners arise to this task?
Will they come out with the absolutely necessary demand for nationalization of the mines?
And will they follow the logic of this demand which calls for independent class political action through a national Independent Labor Party – fighting for a workers’ government.
The workers have to vote as they strike – NOT WITH, but AGAINST the capitalists!
 




In some circles Wendell Willkie is regarded as the “New Dealer” of the Republican Party. Not only has “Information Please” taken him to its bosom as a “true liberal.” Certain sections of the labor movement are playing with the idea of accepting him as the very latest edition of “A Friend of Labor in the Capitalist Camp.”
When Mr. Willkie spoke the other night before a conference on the subject, American Plans and Dreams, he was holding forth on his political program in case he is the presidential nominee of the Republican Party in the coming election. What has he to offer?
For the war period Mr. Willkie’s foremost idea is to raise $16,000,000,000 additional annual tax revenue. This is a figure of the boldest proportions, considering that the Treasury asked for a mere $10,500,000,000 – while Congress saw fit to produce only the mite of something over $2,000,000,000.
However, Mr. Willkie is not fazed. We must “tax ourselves now beyond any limit that we have hitherto imagined possible,” he says. We must “actually lower materially the American standard of living,” he says – and the New York Times editor proclaims Mr. Willkie’s arguments are “unassailable.”
 
Workers Have Reached Limit
Immediately after Mr. Willkie’s speech, a few arithmeticians picked up their pencils and calculated that an additional annual tax of $16,000,000,000 would mean EITHER A WITHHOLDING TAX OF FORTY PER CENT OR A UNIVERSAL SALES TAX OF FIFTEEN PER CENT.
Speaking as a member of the privileged class, Mr. Willkie can not know how tight a squeeze the working people of this country are already in. Take-home wages are actually far below the normal subsistence level set by economists. When he talks about “the change of our habits to the use of things that constitute necessitous living,” he is obviously talking like one used to luxuries.
As for the wording class, RIGHT NOW it cannot afford many of the things “that constitute necessitous living.” That is why the organized labor movement has started the fight to bury the Little Steel formula which freezes wages 28.5 per cent below the cost of living. What would happen to the workers’ “way of life” if Mr. Willkie’s tax plan were in effect and the workers were subjected to either a one hundred per cent increase in the withholding tax or to a fifteen per cent sales tax?
Vaguely Willkie included “every group” in his zeal for “major and in some cases dangerous sacrifices.” But did he say a word about limiting salaries to $25,000? Did he mention taxing all war profits made out of this global blood-letting? Neither he nor any other capitalist politician stands for making the capitalist class pay for the war – the only people who can afford to!
As for the workers of this country, they have reached the limits of “major” and “dangerous” sacrifices. From here on, labor must shift the sacrifices onto the shoulders of the wealthy. This point is “unassailable,” to use the word employed by the New York Times regarding Mr. Willkie’s argument.
So much for Mr. Willkie’s wartime plans. What are his “dreams” for the future?
 
A Worker’s Nightmare
First, he visualizes a post-war national income of $120,000,000,000 per annum. Think of that! Today the national income is $165,000,000,000 – and there are some 11,000,000 men and women in the armed forces who are not participating in the productive enterprises of the country.
Mr. Willkie, while giving lip service to expanded production and the rest of that palaver, actually figures on contracting the annual income by $45,000,000,000 at a time when the working force will be increased by those 11,000,000 returning soldiers.
Can this mean anything but a reduced standard of living for the American working people? And isn’t it just this that Mr. Willkie wants to prepare the workers for by stepping on them now?
Secondly, Mr. Willkie estimates a national peacetime budget of government expenditures amounting to $20,000,000,000, This, be it known, is about one-fifth of the present national war budget.
And how does Mr. Willkie allot the $20,000,000,000 national budget? For the interest on the national debt, $6,000,000,000; for a military establishment to police the “peaceful” post-war world, another $7,000,000,000; the remaining $7,000,000,000 is to be used for all other government expenditures, including public provision for returning soldiers and for “better housing, broader education, sounder health” for everyone.
A post-war millennium in which two-thirds of the national budget will go for war purposes!
This is “our standard of living in the future” for which Mr. Willkie tells us “our standard of living must go down.” His figures do not bear out his grandiose words – but only prove that a lower standard of living for the working people is the “dream” of the ruling class for the post-war period.
What has been hailed in many quarters as Mr. Willkie’s political bravery in coming out for reducing still further the standard of living is simply the reflection of his belief that the working people should be made ready now for the retrogression capitalism, has in store for them in the future.
 
Our Answer
Mr. Willkie wound up his speech with the usual hackneyed comparison of civilian “comfort” to soldiers’ discomfort: “There is not much comfort in the foxhole. There’s little comfort waist-deep in the mud of Guadalcanal, it is not comfortable to crash-land a flaming plane. There is small comfort in the cold sea. There is no comfort as a prisoner of the Japs. Why should we be comfortable?”
To which the working class must answer:
“We are not responsible for having sent the youth of the world into foxholes, waist-deep mud, flaming planes. That is the doing of the capitalist system. But if we allowed the standard of living of the working class to be beaten down as the capitalist class wishes to do, we would be responsible to our brothers in the foxholes, mud and flaming planes.
“We figure it will be more ‘comfortable’ for those of them lucky enough to return home, to find a standard of living that will permit them to assume their position in society as self-respecting workers and not as sweat-shop slaves.”
*
Readers of Labor Action understand that in showing up Wendell. Willkie, the “New Dealer” of the Republican Party, we do not do so to add prestige to the ex-New Dealer in the White House. We do so because sections of the labor movement, disillusioned with Roosevelt, are looking hopefully toward Willkie.
This folly of choosing between one or the other side of the same counterfeit coin is suicidal to the labor movement. Capitalist politics is the coin. Its two sides are the Democratic and the Republican Parties – neither is worth a tinker’s damn to the working people.
For American labor to move progressively onward, the organization of an Independent Labor Party is imperative NOW.
 




I.F. Stone is a liberal journalist. He writes for The Nation and for PM. His heart is in the right place, as the saying goes. As a reporter who comes in contact with Washington, its scandals and intrigues, he is not afraid to grind a journalistic axe.
Yet Labor Action shouts from the house tops that such liberals have really nothing to offer when it comes to action in the interest of the working class. Mr. Stone proves this to the hilt in a recent piece he wrote in PM, entitled Some Facts of Life.
He starts out thus: “I think the time has come to open our eyes and look at a few facts of political life not at all pleasant to us assorted liberals and leftists.”
 
A Few Political Facts
Mr. Stone then proceeds to enumerate some of the evidence of the reaction that stalks the country. Senator Pepper of Florida comes out for “white supremacy,” not because he is anti-Negro, according to Mr. Stone, but because he is having a tough time in the Democratic primaries and must pander to prejudice. Lister Hill, “another good New Dealer,” in Mr. Stone’s words, compromises with the reactionary farm bloc in order to make the nomination in Alabama. Barkley of Kentucky is still “too much of a New Dealer” to suit the Democratic Party machine of that state. And in Wisconsin the liberal Willkie didn’t get a single delegate.
“Are these states exceptions?” asks Mr. Stone. “I have yet to talk with anyone from any part of the country who sees a progressive tide anywhere.”
A very dark outlook indeed! But –
 
Facts Mr. Stone Overlooks
The demise of the New Deal, the slinking away of New Dealers to other folds, the growing reactionary and anti-labor trend in the President’s policies, have taught ah outstanding lesson: CAPITALIST POLITICS, NO MATTER IN WHAT ENTICING MASK IT AT FIRST PRESENTS ITSELF, TURNS OUT TO BE NOTHING BUT CAPITALIST POLITICS.
From this lesson the conclusion is inevitable that labor must organize its political power into its own class party and take the lead to rally all truly progressive elements of the population.
“Assorted liberals and leftists” don’t want to see such facts as these. For on the road of independent labor politics lies inevitably the taking of power by the working people, and the end of the capitalist status quo – under Roosevelt. To present-day liberals, President Roosevelt and the demised New Deal are the be-all and end-all of “progress.” To be sure, the President “has made many compromises which we dislike and have quite properly criticized,” admits Mr. Stone. But, “can the President risk a strong affirmative, progressive policy on domestic issues at this time; can he defy prejudice and the political machines more than he already has, if he is to be re-elected?”
 
Anything to Be Re-Elected
Mr. Stone is saying, in extremely plain English, that it is quite in order to give up “a strong prggressive policy” – to court “prejudice and the political machines” – to compromise with reaction – IN ORDER TO WIN AN ELECTION.
This, of course, is not new either in the Democratic or Republican Parties. This is indeed the meat of their diet. What is new is that the “assorted liberals and leftists” now give political horse-trading their blessing – BECAUSE MR. ROOSEVELT IS THE TRADER. Mr. Stone even condones, “more, not less, compromise” which he predicts will be required if the President is to be re-elected and stand in with Congress.
Ah, but there is an out for the President.
“The extent to which labor and the liberals and the left can register the vote and change the temper of public opinion will largely determine the extent to which the President can abandon the policy of retreat.”
So Roosevelt is to be saved from his own policies by the “assorted liberals and leftists” – and by labor.
In the first place, the “assorted liberals, and leftists” who base themselves on the continued existence of the capitalist system and are only too happy when a capitalist politician comes along whom they can dub “progressive,” are not really a dominant force in politics. LABOR, HOWEVER, HAS INDEED THE POWER OF NUMBERS AND OF ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE TO CARRY DETERMINING POLITICAL WEIGHT.
But why should labor waste its power on horse-trading politicians whose “progressiveness” goes with the wind when re-election is in doubt? Mr. Stone would have labor continue to support a once “liberal” capitalist politician, hastily turning his coat. Labor is merely to hope that the President will “abandon the policy of retreat.”
 
Conclusions – And Conclusions
To sum up, Mr. Stone is right in his facts. The forces of reaction have become bolder and the New Dealers are scurrying for cover under its pressured But his political conclusions are incorrect – for labor.
Not seeing “a progressive tide anywhere,” the liberal Mr. Stone is willing to go with the reactionary tide. If Roosevelt can stay in power by compromising with reaction to a greater extent, the “assorted liberals and leftists” must not “push him over a political precipice” by criticizing him too much.
Perhaps Mr. Stone, being a liberal, doesn’t look in the right place for evidence of “a progressive tide.” It is a fact, however, that this very reaction, [before] which Mr. Stone, President Roosevelt, the New Dealers, and the “assorted liberals and leftists” quail, is awakening in labor a new political conviction, namely, THAT IN LABOR ALONE LIES THE LEADERSHIP FOR PROGRESS THROUGH AN INDEPENDENT CLASS PARTY OF ITS OWN.
Though officially through the CIO Political Action Committee, labor is “pledged” to its “friends” among the capitalist politicians, the rank and file has its tongue in its cheek. The recent formation of the Michigan Commonwealth Federation, though a fumbling and uncertain step, was prompted by this trend toward independent labor politics.
The trend is not yet a tide, to be sure. It is not yet dashing upon the political shore and sweeping all obstacles out of its way. But it is there – the most progressive thing in political life today.
But the “assorted liberals and leftists” hold onto Roosevelt for dear life. To them Roosevelt: can do no wrong though he makes “many compromises” which they “dislike and have quite properly criticized” – AND WILL MAKE “MORE, NOT LESS, COMPROMISES” TO GET RE-ELECTED.
 




Just four years ago the first issue of Labor Action came out.
It was dedicated to the interest of the working people.
Today tens of thousands of agricultural and industrial workers who read Labor Action know that it speaks for them.
We hope that tens of thousands more working people will become readers of Labor Action for this same reason, namely, because it never pulls its punches against the enemies of labor; never shuts an eye to the mistakes of labor; never ceases to clarify the economic and political needs of the working people; is untiring in explaining the course of action that will lead to the triumph of the useful and exploited members of society over the useless and exploiting.
As we mark another year of our progress in this task we have set ourselves, we wish to review Labor Action’s performance for the past year.
We Backed the Striking Workers
A year ago the miners’ struggle was the biggest thing in the labor movement. Issue after issue of Labor Action was devoted to supporting this crucial fight and to pointing out that the miners were fighting a battle for the whole of labor. Labor Action cut the ground from under the pay-triots who sought to discredit the miners/by exposing the huge war profits of the capitalists as against the hard existence of the miners plodding along on the edge of actual want.
To the false argument of the capitalist class that the miners were sabotaging the soldiers, we replied that miners and the sons of miners, workers and the sons of workers, form the great majority of the drafted army, and that it is up to the workers at home to protect the labor front from collapse before the onslaughts of the capitalists using the “war emergency” as their excuse.
Every strike of workers against grievances in the plants, to end stalling by the corporations and the government, to get better wages and conditions, to reaffirm their right to strike, has had whole-hearted support in the pages of Labor Action. It has showed that the so-called “wildcat” and “unauthorized” strikes were “wild” only in the sense that the workers have been made wild with resentment against the way they are getting it in the neck. It has shown that the strikes are “unauthorized” only because, labor leaders saw fit to make to the government a no-strike-pledge NOT authorized by the rank and file?
 
Union Problems Discussed in L.A.
In the past year there have been several most important union conventions: that of the CIO, of the AFL, of the UAW, and others: Concerned with the continued development of militant and progressive unionism, the pages of this paper carried many articles both before and after the conventions. Before the conventions, we sought to give such guidance as we are capable of to rank and file delegates who earnestly wished to solve union problems. After the conventions, Labor Action pointed up the hits and the misses, hoping that next time there will be more hits and fewer misses.
We have reason to believe that the campaign; carried on by Labor Action against incentive pay – that fancy name for the return to piecework, sweat-shop labor, pushed mainly by the capitalists and the Stalinists – had its influence on the unions which so definitely rejected it. On other major issues, Labor Action’s voice has been heard. Our insistence today on the restoration of real collective bargaining and the right to strike – as against the no-strike pledge and the WLB run-around – is being accepted as plain common sense by larger and larger numbers of workers.
Furthermore, many progressive unionists now understand that the columns of Labor Action are open to them for reporting situations in their locals, for discussing the problems confronting them and for posing plans for progressive action within their locals. This trend toward becoming the forum of the most class-conscious elements in the unions has been emphasized.
 
We Handled Jim Crow, Anti-Semitism, Fascism
The past year has seen an alarming outbreak of Jim Crow terrorism, commonly known as “race riots.” Labor Action has not called these evidences of the underhand work of KKK and the American fascist gangs, “race riots,” because the implication of the latter is that the Negro was responsible for these instigated outbreaks. Neither does Labor Action – as do so many of the Negro and white liberal papers – caution the Negro to be patient, to be satisfied with a dry bone, to go hat in hand begging for another dry bone on the steps of the White House. Labor Action demands for the Negro every right, every necessity, every luxury that human beings are today entitled to, and furthermore points the way to get these things.
It is significant that in Detroit, at the height of the so-called riots, Negro and white workers continued their tasks side by side on the production line; that in neighborhoods where Negro and white workers live together in peace, they continued, in peace throughout the disturbance. Labor Action has been proved correct in its view that in solidarity between Negro and white worker lies progress for both. Negro progress and labor progress are two sides of the same coin, and the place to cash it in is through the labor unions.
In the past year the emboldening of the fascist forces in this country, manifested both in more open anti-Semitism and in a distinctly fascistic anti-labor development, has also been of paramount concern to Labor Action.
The assorted crack-pots and the more dangerous Charles Coughlins and Gerald Smiths have received their due in these columns. But the interest of the working people require more than just an exposure of the fascists.
Labor Action explains the reasons for fascism itself. It hammers in the point that fascism is only another stage of capitalism; that fascism is the ruthless iron-heel dictatorship resorted to by the ruling class to save itself against a working class whose needs the rulers cannot supply. Fascist suppression, in a word, is the ultimate answer of the capitalists to the demands of the working people.
Therefore, the Jews, the Negroes and the whole of labor are warned by Labor Action against relying on the capitalist government or on any agencies of capitalism for protection against fascist attacks. Protection lies in the organization of neighborhood and union guards – from labor’s own ranks – to combat racial attacks as well as attacks on unions. The interests of the working people require that these truths be stated. Labor Action has been stating them over and over again.
 
We Talk Turkey on the War
The great black cloud overhanging humanity is, of course, the war, how in its fifth year. Labor Action tirelessly teaches that the war is an imperialist war for the division of the earth – just as the last war was, Nothing has changed, except that a more brutal form of capitalism in Germany has given the capitalist democracies a chance to pretend that the war is one against fascism. Labor Action exposes this trickery. As evidence, we held up to view first the machinations between the Allied “democrats” and the French fascists in Algiers; and now, with Badoglio and Mussolini’s tribe in Italy.
Nor does Labor Action – like the soft-as-silk liberals – feel that Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin are just making a mistake – the poor things are so busy waging a war, don’t you know! No, their policy of collaborating with fascists is deliberate; it is what they choose; it is the choice between fascists and the revolutionary masses. Labor Action wants all workers to understand this. The most progressive thing in the world today is the action of the masses – as best shown in Italy – in the direction of throwing out the old powers and establishing workers’ governments. Labor Action wants all workers to know that the United Nations’ statesmen bolster fascism in Italy against the workers.
On the home front, Labor Action draws aside the curtain of hypocrisy behind which the capitalist war profiteers are hiding. The merchants of death who make billions out of war materials and are not too particular about delivering perfect goods – regardless of the toll in unnecessary deaths this means – get front-page “honors” at the hands of Labor Action. The enormous war profits of big business, the unheard-of high salaries of industrialists, the system of dollar-a-year control by big business of government supply agencies and other government functions – all get their due in Labor Action. The connection between high prices, the black market and the capitalist system of private profit are made clear week after week. And Labor Action doesn’t pull any punches.
It doesn’t hem and haw, and say, “Well, these are the bad capitalists – the monopolists, the cartelists,” as do the only-go-so-far liberals. Labor Action tells the workers that this is no exception but the rule; that this is capitalism, which is today monopoly capitalism – without any ifs, ands or buts. Labor Action can do this because it believes that if civilization is to continue, the workers will have to shove capitalism out of their way. But the liberals throw capitalism out of the window, only to let it in the door – while the Stalinists clasp the barbarous profit system to their bosoms.
There are indeed few papers in the country that have handled the war. abroad and at home directly from the viewpoint of the working people, and not allowed war propaganda to becloud the facts.
All Out for Independent Political Action by Labor
The most recent and the greatest task which Labor Action and the Workers Party have undertaken thus far is their campaign for an independent Labor Party, to be based on the unions and to be organized to wage political warfare against capitalist politics. This is indeed the crux of labor’s struggle – for through a class party lies labor’s road to power.
While labor leaders and the despicable Stalinists hold onto Roosevelt’s political coattails, Labor Action sees that the rank and file has learned from first-hand experience about the “friendliness” of this “friend of labor.” A stabilization policy that freezes wages and places into profits a dose of yeast for rising – a labor draft law that will make industrial chattels of workers – these are some of FDR’s “friendly”, offerings to labor.
Liberals and their like make a distinction between the “reactionary Congress” and the President – if the President only had a liberal Congress! But Labor Action knows and presents to its readers a few facts on this score. The President is not only playing political basketball with the reactionaries, he is actually giving them a few baskets by default. The poll-taxers are in the political party of which the President is the leader – and what does he do about it? These and similar facts tell the story,
Labor Action raises the slogan: “On to working class power through an independent class party of labor.” It tells labor to find its political legs – to take its hand out of the misleading hand of the capitalist politicians in the Republican and Democratic Parties.
This, in general review, is a picture of the pages of Labor Action from May Day 1943 to May Day 1944. t has lived up o its dedication – TO SERVE THE CLASS INTERESTS OF LABOR – TO FURTHER THE PROGRESS AND THE FINAL EMANCIPATION FROM CAPITALISM. OF ALL THE WORKING PEOPLE.
We hope that im the year to come tens of thousands more workers will become faithful readers and supporters of the paper, realizing that in it they will find the true facts, the realistic interpretation of facts from the point of view of what is good for the working people, and also guidance to progressive action. But also we hope that more working people will come to realize that Labor Action is a forum where the problems, mistakes and victories of the working people can be discussed freely and fairly – THUS TO LEARN FASTER AND TO STEP FORWARD WITH FIRMER STEPS.
 




Yes, how about THEM? General Marshall, President Roosevelt and the whole kit and kaboodle of capitalist spokesmen who have come out with so much vehemence in attacking labor, have never uttered a syllable of condemnation against, the merchants of death. Who are these merchants of death?
They are the giants of American industry. They are the pay-triots who are raking in “legitimate” war profits that must make even the gods of war hang their heads.
But they have earned the name of merchants of death for two special reasons:

To satisfy their unquenchable thirst for profits they have actually aided and abetted Hitler.
 
To fill their pockets with gold they have actually sold defective war materials to be used by soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen.

For these two special reasons people hiss at American big business the well-deserved epithet: MERCHANTS OF DEATH.
Let us look into the record a bit.
 
Loyalty to Profits First
Back in 1942, when the housewives of the country were stripping their kitchens of aluminum pots and pans to build airplanes, the Department of Justice revealed that the Aluminum Corporation of America was deliberately, wilfully and with a plan entailing greater profits for itself, holding up production of aluminum and magnesium – without which planes cannot be built.
Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold in his testimony against the aluminum trust revealed just how this situation came about.
The Aluminum Corporation of America had a cartel agreement with the Nazi firm of I.G. Farben. By the terms of this agreement, Nazi Germany was permitted to double and triple its aluminum production. The American trust agreed to keep its production in status quo. The “inducement” was that the German trust would not export any of its aluminum or magnesium into the American market – as if the Germans wanted to, since they had plans of their own for the use of aluminum and magnesium!
Out of this arrangement the American aluminum trust reaped bumper profits, but the shortage of these metals in this country meant delay in building the air umbrella for the American armed forces, while the Nazis were enabled to maintain superiority for a long time.
 
No Pals of the Soldiers
Would any soldier, sailor, marine or airman call the Aluminum Corporation of America his pal? Hardly! But Alcoa is one of the powerful American trusts now behind the attempt to steam up the soldier against the worker. And why not? Better steam up the soldier against the worker than let him find but on his own who was really stabbing him in the back.
In giving testimony against Alcoa, Thurman Arnold said:
“throughout my testimony I have tried to emphasize the fact that this case is not unique. I do not think it is an extreme statement to say that in most basic war materials we find similar cartel agreements.”
Long after Pearl Harbor the American-armed forces were being hampered by cartel agreements which allowed the American captains of industry to get enormous profits but at the same time gave Hitler the advantage in building and accumulating war materials.
To cite only two other cases that come readily to mind, there is the Standard Oil trust, whose cartel agreement with I.G. Farbenindustrie prevented for a long time the production of synthetic rubber in this country, and the great General Electric combine, whose agreement with Krupp of Germany regarding tungsten was of the same general nature.
These are the “good friends” of the soldier, who are behind the anti-labor propaganda.
Yes, the pillars of American capitalist society don’t care how they make profits, so long as they are big enough. That is why they were also shipping, on government war orders, defective materials. How many soldiers, sailors, marine and airmen met with sudden death inflicted by “his own side” will; according to the Senate Truman Committee, never be known.
 
Profits Versus Death
There was the case of the Anaconda Wire & Cable Co., a subsidiary of the great Anaconda outfit, which cheated on inspections and shipped defective wire on government orders. The Department of Justice declared this to be one of the most reprehensible cases of defrauding the government and endangering the lives of American soldiers and sailors ever to come to its attention.
The United States Steel trust engaged in similar criminal fraud. The Truman Committee disclosed that the tanker Schenectady, which broke up during its trial on the West Coast, contained defective steel plate made by the Homestead works of the Carnegie-Illinois Steel Co., a subsidiary of U.S. Steel. It was discovered that this top capitalist concern made it a business to sell defective sheet plates. Some 28,000 to 38,000 tons were faked to meet the specifications of war orders going to the United States Navy and Maritime shipyards, and to lend-lease consignments – before the fraud was discovered.
How many seamen lie at the bottom of the world-circling oceans because of the greed of this merchant of death?
Do you know that the United States Cartridge Co., one of the largest manufacturers of small munitions in the world, was delivering thousands of defective cartridges for shipment to the arrned forces?
Do you know that another company was putting government inspection tags on defective shells after taking them from shells that had been okayed – then they would have the okayed shells inspected again to get more tags to put on more defective shells?
How many soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen would be alive now if not for these criminal frauds? But these are by no means all. In January 1943 there were hundreds of cases of such criminal fraud in various stages of prosecution.
Look at a partial list of the merchants of death: Aluminum Company of America, Standard Oil, General Electric, Anaconda Wire & Cable, United States Steel, United States Cartridge, and others.
This is representative American capitalism. Cruelly and relentlessly it functions to make profits. And its spokesmen want to get the soldiers, whose lives weighed as nothing against its profits, to be sore because American workers are getting tired of holding the bag of war burdens at home. The American workers are not only protecting present standards of living but will also be protecting the returned soldiers and sailors in their fight against unemployment after the war.
In many cases these merchants of death would have continued longer with their criminal fraud if it had not been that the workers in the plants would not tolerate stabbing in the back their brothers in the armed forces. This was true in the case of Carnegie-Illinois Steel Co. selling defective steel plates and in the case of the U.S. Cartridge Co. selling duds as good ammunition. In exposing their bosses, the workers, of course, risked losing their jobs.
The merchants of death do not offend the sensitivities of General Marshall and his crowd. But workers striving to make these capitalists relinquish some of their profits so that working people can live decently – ah, that’s a different story!
 




At this season of the year when the air vibrates with prayers, songs and speeches about “peace on earth” and “good will to men,” it is fitting to ask in all seriousness whether the system of capitalist imperialism, which dominates the earth, can bring about that peace and good will so ardently desired by humanity.
If you strip down to rock bottom all the plans of the powers that be, you will find that what they are banking on is an armed “peace” and a “good will” imposed by tanks, battleships and bombers.
 
“Peace” Enforced by Guns
Thus in Mr. Roosevelt’s Christmas Eve speech broadcast throughout the world, he constantly referred to the use of force “to keep international peace.”
The President spoke of the “great military power” of Britain, Russia, China and the United States, and asserted that “the other three great nations who are fighting so magnificently to gain peace are in complete agreement that we must be prepared to keep the peace by force.”
The President’s statements are not, of course, the first indications of a post-war “peace” bristling with tanks, battleships and bombers. When Congress passed the Connally resolution favoring a “general international organization” of all “peace-loving states,” the New York Times lost no time in pressing for a “universal compulsory military service” law to be passed pronto.
The Chicago News added its bit:
“Now those who preach the winning of peace should be listened to with skepticism unless they are for universal military training, and no repetition of Harding Administration folly in tearing down cantonments and condemning military talent to bridge clubs and golfing greens.”
Later, Secretary of the Navy Knox spoke in Chicago about “the backbone of our post-war naval police force, already organized and functioning” with “the British Fleet’s control of the eastern Atlantic, the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, while the United States guards the western Atlantic and the entire Pacific.”
In England similar plans are being made. When asked in the House of Commons whether it was proposed to adopt a system of military training after the war, Mr. Churchill replied, “I hope so.”
British military experts also see that “not only Britain but the United States and probably Russia would need sizable post-war armies to police Europe, the Middle East and Far East.”
 
Mr. Wadsworth’s Suggestions
In this country, Representative Wadsworth has presented the country with a Christmas present in five parts. He hands out five very concrete suggestions to keep up the military power of the United States in the post-war period. He wants:

Compulsory one-year military training of all able-bodied men between 18 and 21.
 
Maintenance of a small but highly trained army which could be increased swiftly by calling up trainees.
 
Preservation of the Fleet, now the greatest sea force in history, and of a second-to-none air force.
 
Retention of a nucleus of munitions factories with plans for quick extension if necessary.
 
Peacetime continuance with the armed service of a big technical and experimental staff to keep abreast of the art of war.

Consider for a moment what a commentary this prospect is on the “progressive” nature of the capitalist system. We “progress” from a partial freedom of no military training in peacetime to universal military training in peacetime. The “progress” from the need for a powerful army, navy and air force only in wartime to the need for them at all times. We “progress” from periodic wars to a state of permanent warfare. That’s capitalist “progress”!
The truth of the above is conceded by a great many people. The prospect of policing the world, of universal military training, of high taxes to maintain a “peacetime” war machine is’ not a happy one. But, they argue, if this will keep the “aggressor” nations down and prevent the outbreak of another holocaust like this one, maybe it’s worth it. The argument goes on to the effect that, if the United States had joined the League of Nations after the last war and if the League of Nations had organized a world police force, maybe the present war would not have taken place.
 
A Lack of Understanding
All of this is very naive and based on lack of understanding of the true nature of capitalist imperialism and of international power politics.
What was it that made the League of Nations fall apart? It became the center of international intrigue. Why? Because winning the war against German imperialism had by no means changed the nature of the capitalist rulers of the Allied powers. For example, no sooner did the British and French powers pledge eternal brotherhood in the League of Nations than each began to connive to weaken the other as a European power. The British naturally turned to those terrible Huns and built them up again – just enough to take some of the wind out of the French sails. But that was all that German imperialism needed for a new try for world power under Hitler.
 
Has Capitalism Changed?
The all-important question today is this: Will a victory over German imperialism under Hitler in any way change the capitalist nature of the victorious nations?
Has the war changed the character of British imperialism? No, not at all. Right in the midst of it, the British rulers are benevolently letting their Indian subjects starve en masse.
Has the war changed the character of American capitalism, which supplied Japan with oil and steel for profitable consideration, while Japan was attacking China? Anybody who reads the daily press knows that it is exactly this kind of “free enterprise” that the American capitalist class wants to make sure of for the post-war period. And they are determined to have this kind of “free enterprise” even if they resort to fascism to have it.
Furthermore, right now the intrigues of power politics are going on; some hidden, some open. The bitter struggle for spheres of influence rages among the United Nations even while the enemy is still unvanquished. Russia wants eastern Europe under the bear’s paws. England wants western Europe under the lion’s claws. The United States wants strategic outposts all over the world under the wings of the eagle.
This is realistic reasoning. The nature of capitalist imperialism cannot be changed.
The yearning of the peoples of the world for lasting peace on earth and good will among men can be fulfilled only through a social system based on human needs. That is international socialism.
World socialism is the goal of humanity. It is the only way to have peace and security.
 




Judging by the contribution made by Mr. Wallace at the conference on post-war problems, just held in New York City under the auspices of the CIO Political Action Committee, there is very little else to recommend Mr. Wallace to labor except his good intentions – if that can be considered a recommendation.
As is to be expected from Mr. Wallace, he lambasted the cartels. This time he added something new, accusing some business men of financing “anti-Semitic movements.” Also, as usual, he did not say how the cartels and fascistic big business can be fought without fighting capitalism as such.
The article on the Chase National Bank on page three of this issue of Labor Action shows how all branches of capitalism are so interlocked it cannot be divided into good and bad.
 
Muffs the Point
When Mr. Wallace finally got around to the problem of unemployment in his speech, he did not look it straight in the face. He said:
“When the European war ends, there will probably be a $40,000,000,000 curtailment in war production. This could conceivably cost the jobs of more than 10,000,000 men, unless plans are made.”
And what about the total war, the global war, including the war with Japan? Will not the end of that bit of business mean more curtailment in war productions – and more unemployed?
A large chunk of the Vice-President’s comments was on the subject of reconversion to peacetime production. He spoke of “suggestions as to how the government may help business finance its reconversion.” However, though he used some fine-sounding words about the common man, he did not mention a word about help to finance the workers in THEIR reconversion.
But reconversion of industry is not the basic problem, though it is something that has to be done. The point is to get jobs for the tens of millions of workers and soldiers for whom there will not be jobs AFTER RECONVERSION!
Generalities Mr. Wallace has a-plenty: We must utilize full productive capacity – unemployment hurts business – consumption capacity is as great as productive capacity if “labor is kept fully employed.”
Certainly, most certainly! But HOW is labor to be kept fully employed when there are no more war orders and when the boys come marching home?
Mr. Wallace asks for a stockpile of blueprints for post-war construction. All optimistic supporters of capitalism are so very optimistic about post-war construction. However, on this subject another speaker at the conference, Alvin H. Hansen, economic adviser to the Federal Reserve Bank, gave some significant facts. He said that while $15,000,000,000 to $20,000,000,000 might help bridge the gap, at the moment only about $700,000,000 in post-war government projects are in the blueprint stage.
The significance of these figures is that the planners are going easy – a bit concerned about how to finance a stupendous construction program when depression hits the land. The trifling amount of post-war construction now provided for indicates that the “free enterprise” boys are pretty influential where the plans are being made. Not willing to surrender their “just rewards” in war profits, they will be even less willing to pay high taxes to finance “socialistic ideas” when there are no more war orders.
The above about summarizes Mr. Wallace’s contribution to the postwar conference of the CIO – only generalities and more generalities, worth a dime a dozen.
 
Hillman or Sloan
Sidney Hillman, who as head of the CIO Political Action Committee, was a leading light at the conference, in his own way did no better than Mr. Wallace.
He was indeed quite angry because Alfred P. Sloan, chairman of the General Motors Company board of directors – an astute business man – is proceeding on the basis of a post-war national income of $100,000,000,000.
“Under such an estimate,” Mr. Hillman declared, “our economy would operate at two-thirds capacity or less. A drop in national income to one hundred billion dollars would add up to unemployment for ten to fifteen million American workers.”
This is quite true.
Mr. Hillman is lots more optimistic about the future than is Mr. Sloan. He believes that even the present national income of $140,000,000,000 “falls far short of providing the American people with purchasing power to satisfy their demand for goods and services, despite the fact that it is the highest national income in United States history.” This is also true.
But the question that must be answered is: How can the national income be increased without breaking down the obstructions of production for profit? Mr. Hillman, who was once a socialist, no longer has any bones of contention with the capitalist system of production. Within the limits of capitalism, Mr. Hillman’s optimism is unwarranted.
What Mr. Hillman and other labor leaders are banking on is that the government will intervene in production, curb the voraciousness of the “free enterprisers,” and plan everything out nicely for the working people.
But what kind of government does Mr. Hillman have in mind to do this job for labor? The CIO leadership opposes a national independent Labor Party aiming at a workers’ government. What the CIO Political Action Committee is working for is a houseful of “friends of labor” from the Democratic and Republican parties. How can responsible labor leaders still rely on this debunked political method?
 
A Sound Program
The CIO intends to bring out a full post-war program on the basis of the conference just held. It is to be honed that it will be more fundamentally sound than the two speeches above considered. Certainly foremost among demands to prevent million-mass unemployment are the following:

A thirty-hour work week with no reduction in wages – to provide jobs for all and a decent standard of living.
 
Government-owned plants not to go to the capitalists to stand idle while workers starve, but to be held by the government and placed under workers’ control.
 
Similarly all private factories closed by the capitalists should be taken over and operated by the workers to produce the needs of the population.
 
Large-scale construction of housing, schools, hospitals, playgrounds, parks, beaches and all public utilities that will add to the well-being and happiness of the people – a program for life as great as the present gigantic program for war!

A glance at these demands makes it clear that any serious approach to the problem of unemployment opposes the interests of the “free enterprisers” and the limitations of production for profit.
For such a program the labor movement must be willing to assume full political responsibility to the working people of the nation. That means coming forth with an independent tabor Party ready to fight for labor’s needs against the capitalists and against their political parties including all the “friends of labor.”
 




Among the demands that the United Steel Workers of America, CIO, are making upon the steel Barons with whom they are now negotiating for a new contract, is one for an annual minimum guaranteed wage. The idea is that for every week during the life of the new contract each employee should get a minimum weekly wage, regardless of, whether he is working that week or whether he has been laid off.
For instance, if a steel worker’s straight time rate is $l.00 an hour, $40 for a forty-hour week, or annual wage of $2,080 for fifty-two weeks, the company would pay this annual wage to the worker whether he is actually employed twenty, forty or fifty-two weeks in the year.
The aim of this demand obviously is that the wages of the workers should not be cut by part or full time layoffs, which never were and cannot be the fault of the workers. A very urgent demand it is – since human life goes on and must have its needs satisfied whether the capitalists keep their plants going at 100 per cent of capacity, at fifty per cent or not at all.
Philip Murray, president of both the CIO and the USW, stated: “This is the first time in the history of the United States or any other country that a labor organization has undertaken to seek the establishment of an annual minimum guaranteed wage through collective bargaining.”
The demand is not confined to the 155,000 steel workers of the USW, which says it intends to ask the War Labor Board to order a clause in the new steel contract in case the steel corporations refuse it. The whole CIO is also behind it, not only as, an, economic demand, but also as a political issue.
President Murray has referred to the annual minimum guaranteed wage as the “major issue for the 1944 elections,” and the CIO Political Action Committee will try “to enlist all possible support” for this demand.
 
A Share in Accumulated Profits
An annual minimum guaranteed wage would, without a doubt, keep the wolf of hunger away from the worker’s door when unemployment begins to stalk the land. In effect, the CIO is asking that the workers share to some extent in the $42,000,000,000 post-war reserves, of big business, in the $19,000,000,000 undistributed profits accumulated since 1939, in the billions of tax refunds the government will make to the industrial overlords. And rightly so! An annual minimum guaranteed wage would mean that the capitalists would have to disgorge a little of their war profits so that workers need not sell apples on street corners.
 
Will the Capitalists Be Willing?
Will the steel barons be willing to pay their workers wages for periods when they are not working? Will other industrialists do this? Will they sit down with labor leaders and through the medium of collective bargaining slice off a bit of their war profits in the interest of preventing privation among their workers?
The idea of a full-time wage hits at the very foundation of the wage system – according to which the workers are given a wage at the end of a work period for creating wealth far greater than the wage they receive. Rather than allow their basic profit structure to be weakened, the capitalists will shirk the responsibility of unemployment and salve their consciences by having the government hand out some WPA Jobs and the dry bone of relief payments.
It will, therefore, be necessary for labor to be ready for an all-out fight.
It will take much more than collective bargaining to get that annual minimum guaranteed wage!
Will the War Labor Board accede to the demand of the USW when the steel corporations refuse it – which they almost certainly will. The public members on the WLB are entirely with the capitalist members in protecting every hair of the profit system. This pro-capitalist body is .not likely to start anything along the lines of an all-time wage for workers.
Is it likely that the CIO Political Action Committee – following its bewhiskered and false political policy of rewarding the Democratic or Republican so-called “friends of labor” – will get capitalist politicians to pass a law for a guaranteed wage?
Of course, Candidates may promise – before the elections – to sponsor such a law in Congress. To get the votes of labor, politicians will support anything by word of mouth – before election. However, to suppose that capitalist politicians will pass a law that really would change the basic concepts of the profit system is to be more childish than any grown-ups have a right to be.
 
CIO Has Something – But ...
In a word, the CIO has definitely got something in its demand for an annual minimum guaranteed wage – but it will be necessary to use labor’s full economic and political might to get it. The idea is reasonable enough that the industries that workers built and where they create the stupendous wealth appropriated by the industrial masters, should pay an all-time wage so that workers’ won’t starve during periods of unemployment.
Such a demand, however, cannot be carried through in the ordinary channels of collective bargaining and the WLB – nor through the politics-as-usual of the Hillman committee.
An annual minimum guaranteed wage is indeed a major issue for the 1944 elections, as Murray says. But it can be a realistic issue only on the platform of an independent Labor Party – acting not with the capitalist parties and capitalist interests, but against them. This point cannot be emphasized too much.
Similarly the whole problem of unemployment is a burning issue for the coming election, and there are practical measures directly applicable to the solution of the unemployment evil. One is a thirty-hour work week to spread the available jobs, with pay commensurate with the productive capacity of the most advanced country on earth.
Another is the opening up of idle plants and factories under the control of the workers themselves for the production of things for consumer use, regardless of capitalist profits. The ultimate goal, of course, is to turn all production away from the profit motive to supplying human needs as the only permanent solution for unemployment.
These are all issues that only an independent Labor Party can honestly and earnestly work for – because the capitalist parties and capitalist interests will not really support any measures that put human welfare above profit-making.
Yes, the CIO has a good idea in its demand for an annual minimum guaranteed wage. It is indeed something new – and necessary. To fight for it and for similar working class aims requires not only militant industrial action by the workers, but also class-conscious political action through an Independent Labor Party free from all capitalist politics.
 




When the miners were fighting alone and desperately for the right of all workers to a wage commensurate with the skyrocketing cost of living, the pay-triots of the National Association of Manufacturers craftily tried to turn public opinion against the miners by accusing them of sabotaging the soldiers at the front.
Following the militant example of the miners, the railroad and steel workers are today out in front struggling to melt the wage freeze. As was to have been expected, the war-profiteering capitalists again set up, the false hue and cry that the workers are betraying the soldiers. And the President now joins the chorus.
The same capitalist propaganda agents who are so arduously and dishonestly trying to hammer a wedge between the workers and the soldiers are now revealing just what they are up to.
This revelation has come about on the question of renegotiation of war contracts – and thereby hangs a most interesting tale.
 
Revelations and “Just Rewards”
In April, 1942, a law was passed for renegotiating war contracts. Under Secretary of War Patterson explained that the renegotiation law was passed for a reason that can be stated in three words: “Exorbitant war profits.”
Since the passage of the law, the government succeeded in taking out of the greedy grasp of big business through renegotiation of war contracts a juicy tidbit amounting to $5,300,000,000.
That $5,300,000,00 looks awfully good to the capitalists. In fact they consider they have been robbed of it. They are positive they have been deprived of some of their “just rewards.”
So they got busy not to let it happen again. Through the “representatives of the people” in Congress, they hoped to commit mayhem on said renegotiation law. Congress obediently introduced so many amendments to the law as to make its operation a pointless joke. If the amendments should be passed, there will be no more such “nonsense” as paying back to the government over five billion dollars of “hard-earned” war profits.
That’s an excellent illustration of capitalist greed – for even without that $5,300,000,000, big business made clear profit to the tune of $8,600,000,000 in 1943!
To save them from their own greed, many spokesmen for the capitalists have started to talk turkey. They are afraid of the consequences of the super-duper war profiteering.
And of whom are the watch-dogs of capitalism afraid?
Of those very same soldiers whom they are trying so hard to turn against labor.
 
Fear Soldier Reaction
Thus Under Secretary of the Navy Forrestal, a Wall Street banker, warns his co-capitalists to go easy because their unrestrained greed may “lead to a reaction and another wave of radicalism and anti-business legislation when the SERVICE MEN come back home and get all the facts about wartime profits.”
In the same vein, David Lawrence, good capitalist journalist, writes in the New York Sun:
“When SERVICE MEN get back home and read the headlines of congressional inquiries into war profits they will wonder what was done back home when they were at war.”
And Arthur Krock, reactionary columnist of the New York Times, also warns the war profiteers that:
“SERVICE MEN returned from the conflict would be conditioned to radical economic plans thus far rejected. And the system of ‘free enterprise,’ to which business men swear devotion every time they come together, would be sorely wounded in its own house.”
So you can see that the “fox hole” propagandists know very well who are the real enemies at home of the soldiers at the front. These hypocrites try to whoop up soldier opinion against the workers – to divert the just wrath of the soldiers from the shameless profit-grubbing of the industrial masters of the land.
What the real interests of the men in arms are is shown, first of all, by the composition of the armed forces.
Of the personnel under arms, twenty-five per cent are actually union men. Another large percentage are unorganized workers. Many are young men from working class families who would have gone out looking for jobs if the war had not swallowed them.
A drafted army necessarily reflects the composition of the population. The overwhelming majority of the people of the United States and every other country work for a living and do not – like the capitalists – live off the labor of others.
The mass of men in arms cannot identify themselves with the exploiters of labor who made huge fortunes out of the blood and horror of World War I – and are repeating the performance on a super-duper scale.
Let us look at what the capitalists are getting out of this war so far.
 
War Profits Up to Now
Profits of companies with war orders are known to have gone up by hundreds and thousands of per cent. One concern hit the jackpot with a 2,420 per cent increase of war profit over peace profits. The salaries of the big moguls of industry have been doubled, tripled and quadrupled.

One executive had his stipend increased over 3,700 per cent!
 
Big business has put under its mattress a post-war reserve of $42,000,000,000.
 
The government will pay back to these self-sacrificing citizens $13,000,000,000 by way of tax refunds, which is an additional post-war reserve.
 
The industrial owners have an option of $14,000,000,000 of government plants and equipment – which they expect to get for a song.

As stated above, in 1943 big business netted profits to the tune of $8,600,000,000 after paying taxes and deducting plenty for reserves, wear and tear, obsolescence and what not – and even after the government took back that $5,300,000,000 of “exorbitant war profits” through renegotiation of contracts.
On the other hand, what are the workers getting out of the war?
Wage rates have been frozen by the Little Steel formula, and only by dint of working almost to physical exhaustion has the workers’ pay looked like anything approaching respectability. Wages are automatically reduced by the twenty per cent pay-as-you-go tax and again by the ten per cent bond purchasing pledge. The purchasing power of the worker’s dollar has been slashed by the constantly mounting cost of living, by violations of ceiling prices, by black market operations. The value of the worker’s dollar has been further diminished by the inferior quality of everything he buys.
After three years of war, the American workers have got so “much” out of it that they have to strike in self-preservation – both to get more wages to enable them to live and to check the arrogant anti-labor policy that the capitalists have put over under cover of “war necessity.” And already the cutbacks in war orders begin to throw workers out of jobs and into the army of unemployed.
When the soldier returns home he will be part of that mass of working people who – without any $55,000,000,000 in reserve – will be struggling to solve the problems of unemployment, of decent wages, of fair conditions of work, of housing, of medical care, of education. And every thinking soldier coming from the mass of unprivileged and underprivileged people of this land, understands that each blow struck by the workers to defend and extend labor’s rights is a blow struck for him also.
 




“It is clear that we cannot hold the wage line if the Congress deprives us of the means necessary to hold the cost of living line.”
How many people who have regarded the President’s veto of the anti-subsidy bill – sustained by Congress – as a “great victory” for labor, are aware of the meaning implicit in that sentence from the President’s veto message?
If words have any reliable meaning at all, then the above quoted sentence signifies that in the opinion of the President the subsidy payments have held the cost of living line. This is obviously false – for the simple reason that the cost of living line has not been held.
 
Impressive but Misleading
It was very impressive when the President enumerated how prices would rise if subsidy payments to the food profiteers were discontinued. Butter, he said, would go up ten cents a pound, cheese eight cents, hamburger four cents, bread one cent, flour seven cents on a ten-pound bag. The President mentioned one or two other commodities on which the prices would go up if subsidies were discontinued.
We know, however, that the cost of most of these commodities had gone up by leaps and bounds before the food profiteers were bribed with $1,250,000,000 subsidies to stop them from pushing still higher the prices of this very insignificant number of the total list making up the necessities of life.
But what about the cost of living as a whole – what about that long list of other commodities making up the wherewithal of life?
It has been authentically proved by the labor representatives on the President’s Cost of Living Committee that prices have gone up 43.5 per cent since 1941. The President’s clever oratory and ability to turn a few figures into false shapes should fool nobody.
This is exactly what the subsidy issue at this time was designed to do. By vetoing the anti-subsidy bill, by Congress sustaining the veto, by food subsidy payments continuing, one is supposed to conclude that the President now has “the means necessary to hold the cost of living line.”
So, now what is expected to happen? Why, labor is supposed to “HOLD THE WAGE LINE.”
 
“Psychological Considerations”
Very revealing on this subject is a letter written by Chester Bowles, OPA Administrator, in the New York Times of February 11. He points out that the $1,250,000,000 paid out in food subsidies meant a direct saving to consumers of only $378,000,000. “This $378,000,000 savings would not in itself justify the use of these subsidies.” But Mr. Bowles goes on to say: “However, there are other considerations, some of them psychological ...”
What are the psychological considerations which Mr. Bowles and also his chief in the White House have in mind?
“Today, some labor groups feel that wages should be allowed to go higher ...” Mr. Bowles reminds the editor of the New York Times.
Just as the President intends to play subsidies for all they are worth against wage demands, so also does Mr. Bowles regard the “psychological considerations” involved here as most important.
Without regard for facts, Mr. Bowles speaks about “the present balance between wages and prices (imperfect though it may seem to the various groups concerned).” A very mild word indeed is “imperfect” to describe the 28.5 per cent gap between the fifteen per cent of the Little Steel formula and the 43.5 per cent increase in prices.
 
A Drunkard’s Balance
The demands of steel, rubber, auto, packinghouse and many other workers for wages commensurate with the present cost of living bothers the political as well as the industrial bosses. It is clear that subsidies have been kept mainly as a weapon against higher wages.
That is why “the present balance between wages and prices (imperfect though it may seem to various groups concerned)” was not disturbed by discontinuing the subsidy payments. With the important case of the United Steel Workers now before the War Labor Board, it is hardly the psychological moment for the political bosses to add even another small argument to the already well-sustained, case for higher wages.
The fact that the political bosses did not discontinue the subsidy payments at this time makes the representatives of big business on the WLB a bit more authoritative in their assertion that the “board has no authority whatever to hear any arguments in favor of changing the wage stabilization policy.” For did not the President’s veto of the anti-subsidy bill, forsooth, “hold the wage line” by continuing “to hold the cost of living line”?
Such flim-flam will not influence the rank and file of labor in its wage demands. But you may be sure that the labor leaders who have been so very amenable to the wiles of the White House will have their ears dinned full of the most specious arguments in best Rooseveltian style.
They will be admonished to “hold the wage line” since – isn’t it true? – the President is holding the price line. They will be warned that the demon of inflation will get them if they disturb Mr. Bowles’s non-existing “present balance between wages and prices.”
However, the rank and file of labor are more influenced by the bread-and-butter considerations behind their demands for wage increases than with the “psychological considerations” of the politicians. Also, they are tired of the way in which their leaders accommodate themselves to the nuances of White House policy at the expense of the pressing needs of the working man.
“Psychological considerations” won’t be a substitute for burying the Little Steel formula, whose carcass hangs like lead around labor’s neck.
 




At the World Trade Union Conference held last February in London, the delegates charged its administrative committee with the responsibility of getting representation for organized labor at the various peace conferences.
Following this directive, the CIO invited to these shores the administrative committee of the WTUC – all set for an honored and conspicuous role at the San Francisco conference.
To the embarrassment of Sidney Hillman and Philip Murray, it soon became plain that the arrangers for the San Francisco conference had given not one thought to the CIO, and their foreign labor guests. First, there was the danger of being left behind for lack of pre-arranged transportation. Second, the union leaders were entirely forgotten in preparing San Francisco hotel accommodations, and the laborites were exiled across the bay to Oakland? Third, not only were the WTUC committee not given official recognition at the big powwow, they had difficulty even in getting standing room at the general sessions.
From the opening of the San Francisco wind-jamming fest till May 2nd, the representatives of organized labor assembled in Oakland, waited patiently – hat in hand – for recognition by Stettinius and the other big shots. Then they began to tug at the coattails of the well-groomed big boys, to call attention to their existence.
The tugging took the form of a demand addressed to Stettinius. This demand for official participation in the San Francisco conference was signed by Sidney Hillman, Walter Citrine, Louis Saillant and M. Tarasov, respectively of the United States, England, France and Russia.
“We believe that the 60 million workers whom we represent must be given a voice in the determination of the historic issues which your conference is called upon to decide.” Thus modestly did the laborites – still hat in hand – state the case for labor.
The demand concluded with a mild threat – but so mild a threat – “that the workers whom we represent would find it difficult, indeed, to understand the refusal of your conference to give their representatives an official consultative status so that their views on these crucial questions might be effectively presented and fully explored.”
If anything has been done up on Nob Hill about the Oaklanders’ demand for recognition at San Francisco or about their two amendments, that fact has not been blazoned in headlines. In fact, careful reading of the New York press reveals no word of news on either topic.
Thus have the representatives of 60,000,000 organized workers in thirty-five to forty countries of the world, taken it on the chin – the blows being handed out by the imperialist statesmen of the Big Three. It is a humiliating spectacle, this begging to be recognized.
And the liberal reporter I.F. Stone writes in The Nation:
“To be quite frank about it, the conference, for all its glamour, is a meeting of pretty much those same old codgers to whose fumbling we owe World War II ... Given the same men, the same parties, the same social systems, can one expect a different result?”
These are the “old codgers” before whom labor representatives stand – hat in hand – at a time when labor’s responsibility is to take leadership – to blaze the trail to a new social system. But these labor representatives begging at the backdoor of the imperialists are themselves old codgers with antiquated ideas of class collaboration. If the world is to be saved from even bloodier wars and a lapse into, utter barbarism, labor will have to project a new courageous leadership.
 




That organized labor has not raised a howl against the Pay-as-You-Go Tax Bill that the President has just signed and made law is another sad commentary on the subservience of labor leaders. For this tax law puts a fast one over on labor, if anything ever did.
The outstanding feature of the bill, as far as labor is concerned, is that taxes are to be paid on a given payroll period – that is, by the week, semi-monthly or monthly, as the case may be. The obvious conclusion from this is that while a worker is employed, he will be paying taxes.
 
Labor Gets It in the Neck
Formerly taxes were reported and paid on the yearly period. A worker paid on the basis of his annual employment. So that, if his yearly income was not taxable, he didn’t pay a tax.
Now the government has decided that it is not interested in the worker’s unemployed periods – BUT ONLY IN HIS PAYROLL PERIODS. Regardless of the fact that his unemployed periods may drag down his yearly pay below the taxable level, he still will have the pay-as-you-go tax on the wages he earned. This is the latest injustice that has been perpetrated against the workers by the President and Congress.
It is true that the bill provides for a yearly accounting on March 15, when a report will be made to show whether the taxpayer owes the government money or whether the government owes the taxpayer money.
If the taxpayer owes the government money, it will have to be paid on March 15 – without any ifs, ands or buts. However, if the worker’s yearly income has fallen below the rate of his pay-roll periods and the government therefore owes him money, he will receive – not a refund – but a CREDIT. So the worker gets it in the neck – and no doubt about it.
Another angle to the pay-as-you-go way of collecting taxes is that it is by no means just a war measure. To the boss politicians the idea of getting money out of workers while they are at work – without worrying about the periods of unemployment – is too good for only temporary use.
Every post-war plan thus far publicized by the promoters of American imperialism involves the continuance of heavy taxation. To police the world will require lots of money. The workers will be expected to pay as they work, regardless of what may happen to them when they cannot find work.
 
Forgiving the Bosses
Much is being made of the provision in the new tax bill, which forgives the entire 1942 taxes to low-bracket taxpayers. Thus a worker owing $50 for the 1942 taxes will not have to pay it. A worker owing $66.67 will be credited with $50. But –
Taxpayers paying OVER that amount will be forgiven SEVENTY-FIVE PER CENT OF THE 1942 or 1943 taxes, whichever is smaller.
It is not the workers as a class who will benefit by this seventy-five per cent forgiveness. The big boys of industry with salaries running into hundreds of thousands will pocket the benefits of this provision. The big corporations whose war profits mark a new high in “the rewards of private enterprise” will harvest the seventy-five per cent forgiveness. Billions upon billions of blood money will remain untaxed under the new bill.
And here is something else to ponder over. No matter how much money is accumulated in the voluminous bags of the big boys, that money can never – no never – cause “inflation.” But should the workers ask for an increase in wages to keep up with living costs, immediately the bosses and their politicians go into convenient paroxysms about “inflation” – because the workers will have too much money!
 
FDR’s About-Face
No story on the new tax bill is complete without telling about the President’s about-face on the point of forgiveness. At first he held with Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau that the government could not afford to cancel any taxes. The President opposed the Ruml Plan. Then, after all, he signed the bill forgiving seventy-five per cent of the taxes, thus making a present of billions to those who can most afford to pay taxes.
Already the effects of this handsome present to the big boys are being felt. The President, needless to say, still wants more money to wage the most costly war in history. In his last message to Congress he asked for $16,000,000,000 additional taxes. The new bill provides only $3,000,000,000 additional. The President is going to deliver another tax message to Congress in which he will make certain recommendations.
The outstanding one will be for compulsory savings. That means you, little man. Out of your wages, which cannot now cover the high cost of living, you will pay as you go – and you will also be compelled to “save” as you go!
Another pet of Congress to raise money is the sales tax. The President is now blowing cold on a sales tax. He says it will hit the poor too hard. This is undoubtedly true. But the President has been known to brush aside such truths before. Odds are heavy that a sales tax too is just around the corner.
 
A Tax Plan for Labor
All along the financial burden of the expensive and cruel luxury of war has been loaded on the working people. All along the leaders of labor have followed a compliant policy The result is that the government makes presents to the rich – while concocting new tricks for extracting money from the workers.
Labor Action calls on organized labor to demand a tax policy that will soak the rich.

Let all war profits be confiscated! Not a cent of blood money should be allowed to remain in the hands of the big boys!
 
Let the government tax the capital piles of the big corporations!
 
Let the government expropriate the accumulated fortunes of America’s Sixty Families – the three per cent of the people who own ninety-six per cent of the national wealth!

Here is a tax program for labor to press immediately – or the workers will be squeezed dry by the war while the rich get away with their juicy war profits.
 




If a man is held up by gangsters, ambushed, beaten and robbed, it might be said that it’s his own fault for not staying home where he belongs.
Only by virtue of such cock-eyed and distorted reasoning can it be claimed that the strike of the miners is responsible for the Connally-Smith anti-strike bill. On this sinister anti-labor measure the Senate and House are almost in complete accord, and they are now hell-bent to pass it before June 20 – the deadline set by John L. Lewis for a new miners’ contract.
The congressional ganging-up against labor has been well prepared. The master minds have had the Connally-Smith bill in readiness for many a month – waiting for the best opportunity to spring it on labor. The golden opportunity has now come, but not through the action of the miners. That kind of action or the threat of it, would do more to stop anti-labor legislation than a million pious speeches. The opportunity has come to the labor” haters as a result of the weakness of the labor leaders. These weak-kneed labor leaders justified their appeasement of the bosses partly on the ground that it would halt threatened anti-labor legislation. Well, they appeased the bosses, yielded labor’s rights. Result: the reactionaries did not retreat before this sign of weakness; they pressed forward.
Every fascist-like restriction that their fertile minds, inspired by hatred for labor, could conceive, has been included by the senators and representatives in this repressive bill which is now before a joint conference committee for final agreement.
With the passage of the measure, a $5,000 fine and a prison, term of one year would be the penalty meted out to any worker or labor leader advocating a strike. Not only that, but any worker having anything to do with such an erring fellow worker or labor leader would be subject to like punishment.
The House sought a make a distinction between privately-operated plants and government-operated plants by allowing workers in the former to take a secret ballot strike vote and then “cooling off” for thirty days. But the Senate emphatically says nothing doing – no voting – no “cooling off” – JUST NO STRIKES.
Both the House and Senate versions of the bill recognize the graveyard of the War Labor Board as the place for burying labor’s grievances. The pro-boss contingent likes the washed-up WLB.
The House would furthermore take away from unions every vestige of independence, would require them to register and to submit financial statements, and would even prevent unions from using their money as they wish.
Not satisfied with such crippling provisions, the most extreme anti-labor boys both in and out of Congress want this golden opportunity used to put a work-or-fight clause into the anti-strike bill – which, in fact, the President has openly threatened.
Naturally, congressmen, the boss press, syrupy radio commentators and the National Association of Manufacturers, whose agents the foregoing all are, wrap themselves in the flag, beat their chests with patriotic ardor, and swear that an anti-strike law with sharp teeth in it must be passed so that no more strikes can hold up war production.
But these pay-triots lie in their teeth. They are not interested primarily in war production – BUT IN WAR PROFITS. As witness their machinations and delays to get the last ounce of fluid gold out of their cost-plus war contracts.
Is Congress purely and simply interested in war production? Then why not pass a law abolishing the Little Steel formula and restoring collective bargaining? This is what the workers now want and must have to enable them to cope with high prices. That is why they are restless. That is why they are striking.
But such a just solution would result in the bosses parting with some of their war profits and in workers being able to buy the wherewithal to live. Better try coercive legislation on the workers than place them in a position to make inroads on “the rewards of private enterprise.”
In the bitter class struggle of the miners, who want a wage to enable them to live against their bosses, who bulge with order books and a new high in profits, the President, Congress and every government agency have revealed themselves in their true class alignment. None of them tells the bosses to take their posteriors off their money bags long enough to give the miners their just and modest demands. All of them are against the miners and other striking workers. Their enmity for the working class is expressed in the Connally-Smith anti-strike bill. This outrageous measure, camouflaged as a war measure, is, however, designed to restrict labor and serve the bosses after the war also.
In their militant actions, the miners, rubber, auto and other fed-up workers have asserted the inalienable , right and the basic power of workers to strike. No mere law on the statute books can kill that right, or take away that power. Even the Nazis, masters of labor suppression, have not been able entirely to prevent strikes of discontented workers pressed beyond endurance.
But an anti-strike law, like the one now being railroaded through Congress, can make a lot of trouble for the workers and their unions. Organized labor must oppose, the Con-nally-Smith anti-strike bill. PROTEST, DEMONSTRATE, FIGHT AGAINST ITS PASSAGE. IT IS NOT BY A SHOW OF WEAKNESS BUT BY A SHOW OF STRENGTH THAT THE CONNALLY-SMITH BILL WILL BE DEFEATED!
 




In spite of the well known reactionary character of the American Legion, there are some thousands of union men in it. There are also several posts in industrial centers, composed mainly of union men. Although workers obviously have no business in a pro-fascist outfit organized by big business, AFL President William Green has nevertheless sent out a letter encouraging the formation of union Legion posts and urging eligible union men to join as legionnaires.
In June 1942 a conference of trade union Legion posts was held in Chicago. Another is planned for, the near future. There has been some talk of labor “reforming” the Legion.
In the opinion of Labor Action, this is an impossible task – and a harmful waste of labor’s organized effort.
The purpose, composition, backing and entire history of the American Legion must once more be placed before the scrutinizing eye of the worker. At this time it is especially urgent for labor to know every pro-or semi-fascist force in this country, and to fight it to the death.
The anti-labor record of the American Legion since its organization in 1919 should be well known to every worker. The American Civil Liberties Union, in its 1921 report, listed at least fifty acts of violence committed by the Legion against progressive elements in the year 1920 alone. Liberal speakers and labor organizers were tarred and feathered. Eugene Debs meetings were broken up. Kidnapping and crippling its innocent victims were common practice. Because of “connections” with the Chambers of Commerce and with the judiciary, such heinous crimes went entirely unpunished.
In 1937, the national commander of the Legion in effect admitted that strike-breaking is one of the functions of his outfit. He issued an order that from then on no strike-breaking was to be done IN UNIFORM. Legionnaires IN MUFTI could go right on breaking strikes.
It is no accident that the Legion is that way. It is anti-labor according to plan. During World War I those who had vigorously “fought for democracy” by expanding the size of their fortunes, saw a great danger to their social position from the returning soldiers who had had a bellyful of war and had got a whiff of the revolutionary air circulating over Europe. Big Business organized the American Legion as its own reactionary reception committee for the returning soldiers.
Prof. William Gellerman of Columbia University, in his book, The American Legion as Education, gives full information about the origin of the Legion. Here is a typical excerpt: “The American Legion was in no sense a ‘spontaneous expression of Americans who helped crush autocracy.’ On the contrary, it is evident that it was intended to circumvent any spontaneous organization on the part of ex-service men.”
In Prof. Gellerman’s book can be found absolutely reliable facts about the agents of big business who got the Legion going, about big business contributions to support it, about the bankers, business executives and corporation lawyers who have absolutely controlled and still control it.
 
Its Financial Support
The list of Legion commanders since its organization includes none but corporation lawyers, directors, treasurers, presidents, – banking, insurance and Wall Street big shots – real estate, public utility, oil magnates.
On the question of financial support for the Legion, there is in evidence, for example, a letter on Swift & Co. stationery, dated December 26, 1919, referring to the quota of $100,000 that the meat packers were to raise in Illinois alone, and stating: “We are all interested in the Legion, the results it will obtain, and the ultimate effect in helping to offset radicalism.”
To Swift & Co. and their brethren, “radicalism” includes everything from a demand for a union and a living wage to a demand for the overthrow of their profit-grubbing capitalist system.
Prof. Gellerman concluded from his investigation that “The American Legion is a potential force in the direction of fascism in the United States ... In the American Legion program of suppression we see fascism in its incipient stages.”
 
Mussolini Its Hero
Nor is this merely an abstract conclusion. When the Legion was organized, Mussolini was its hero. Mussolini was invited to make the principal address at one of its first conventions. The Scripps-Howard press interviewed the Legion’s commander, Alvin Owsley, Texas lawyer, in 1922, and quoted him as saying:
“If ever needed, the American Legion stands ready to protect our country’s institutions and ideals as the fascisti dealt with the destructionists who menaced Italy!”
There is, furthermore, documentary evidence in the files of the government to show that in 1934 the Legion actually planned a fascist seizure of power. General Smedley Butler was chosen to lead the American fascist march on Washington, but the general instead spilled the beans before a committee of the House of Representatives investigating Nazi and other propaganda.
The leading spirit of this putsch movement was a director of the Guaranty Trust Co., a Morgan bank, who was also a director of. Anaconda Copper Co., Goodyear Rubber Co., Bethlehem Steel Corp. Others of like social position were also named by General Butler, whose testimony further revealed that the Remington Arms Co. was to have supplied the guns.
You see, therefore, that the American Legion is not an erring child of well-meaning parents, who can be set right by a good influence. The Legion is a reactionary monster that was created by the brains and money of labor’s powerful enemies.
 
No Place for Unions
It is today the creature of the most ruthless elements of the capitalist class. Its interlocking with the anti-Negro, anti-Jew, anti-labor villainous Ku Klux Klan, with the ditto American Christian Association and other like outfits, is constantly being brought to light. The Legion is an integral link in the chain forged by big business powers to shackle labor in totalitarian bondage.
WHAT BUSINESS HAVE UNION MEN IN SUCH AN OUTFIT?
The union posts of the Legion that will meet in conference soon should vote to get out of this pro-fascist organization of the bosses. And right now is not too soon to start a campaign to that end.
If union men who are veterans of the First World War wish to retain their identity as ex-service men, why not organize as auxiliaries of their unions? Such a step would be progressive and serve an excellent purpose. For union auxiliaries of ex-service men could be the rallying places for the returning soldiers of World War II – THUS SAVING THEM FROM THE GRIP OF THE REACTIONARY LEGION.
Union men must rally around their unions, must build all their auxiliary organizations around their unions, must make their unions strong and militant – to fight such loathsome anti-labor forces as the American Legion and the capitalist powers behind it.
 




One of the most common ways of lying is to take a fact which is the exception to the rule, pretend it is the rule, and proceed to draw utterly false general conclusions.
Representative Albert J. Engel, reactionary Republican from Michigan, has been tramping around to war plants – actually only forty-seven out out of the tens of thousands in the country – with pad and pencil in hand, taking down “statistics” of this unreliable kind.
He found a girl of eighteen making $65 a week. He inquired at a bank where workers deposit their pay checks and was told the checks average from $60 to $110 a week. He learned that newly trained tank welders in certain factories are being paid $67 a week. And, horror of horrors, he was told of a machine-gun assembler making $8,741 annually and he remarked: “Think of paying a machine-gun assembler $241 more than the base pay of Lieut.-Gen. Stilwell, who commands the armed forces in the Chinese theater.”
 
Are High Wages Justified?
“Is there any one in or out of labor circles who can look those facts in the face and justify them?” asked Mr. Engel with a dramatic flourish.
Certainly! Labor Action most certainly can – assuming Mr. Engel’s figures to be facts. The congressman has himself reported – from his personal investigations – THAT CORPORATE PROFITS ON WAR CONTRACTS RANGED AS HIGH AS 53 PER CENT AFTER PAYMENT OF ALL TAXES. So why shouldn’t workers whose toil produces the war material on which the bosses are reaping their war harvest, why shouldn’t the workers get high wages?
We might add that senators and representatives get $10,000 a year. Every workers has a right to ask: Why should these gentlemen receive such high salaries? On the basis of labor and productivity, a good many of these legislators are highly overpaid. As a matter of fact, on the basis of labor and productivity, many of these gentlemen owe the people of the country a large rebate!
Another point worth noting in connection with the salaries of senators and congressmen is that they are decided upon by themselves!
Furthermore, it should be noted that generals would be very unimportant persons indeed – way off in China or anywhere else – if there weren’t these tank welders and gun assemblers who produce materials of war. From the standpoint of basic importance, therefore, the machine-gun assembler actually rates as high pay as the lieutenant-general or general, or at least as a senator or congressman.
 
What the Workers Really Get
But the workers are not getting high pay. They, therefore, have other things to worry about than the pay of generals. These generals, who have none of the living problems of the workers, seem to get along all right. Here are some facts about workers’ wages which are not exceptions but the rule:
Secretary of Labor Perkins made it known some months ago that in July, 1942, there were 16,000,000 workers in this country making less than $16 a week. ON A YEARLY BASIS THIS ADDS UP TO LESS THAN $850, OR LESS THAN ONE-TENTH THE ANNUAL PAY OF A LIEUTENANT-GENERAL – NOT TO MENTION A GENERAL’S PAY.
More recently – on July 2, 1943 – President Roosevelt stated:
“It is too easy to act on the assumption that all consumers have surplus purchasing power and that the high earnings of some workers in munitions plants are enjoyed by every worker’s family. This easy assumption overlooks the 4,000,000 wage workers still earning less than forty cents per hour, and millions of others whose incomes are almost as low.”
From these facts Mr. Roosevelt has drawn the entirely erroneous conclusion that these underpaid workers must be fooled with such political twaddle as the payment of subsidies to the food bosses. However, what we are interested in now is that the President’s figures must considerably understate the actual case. For we have grave doubts that in one year’s time 12,000,000 of the 16,000,000 workers getting less than forty cents an hour and less than $16 a week in July 1942 have graduated out of that class.
But, of course, Mr. Engel does not want to lower the wages of these sub-sub-standard workers. Perhaps to him $16 a week is about right as the reward of those who toil and sweat to produce the wealth of this wealthiest nation on earth. He’s after bigger game – the war workers who get more than $16 a week.
 
Average Wages Are Low
But how about that girl getting $65 a week? Is she typical? Are the wages of those $67-a-week tank welders average? Are pay checks of $60 to $110 really the run of the mill? And is not the machine-gun assembler getting more than a lieutenant-general very extraordinary indeed?
Again we call into court official government figures from the U.S. Department of Labor. In September 1942 the average wage in all manufacturing industries in this country was not $110 nor $67 nor $65 nor $60. IT WAS THIRTY-SEVEN DOLLARS AND EIGHTY-EIGHT CENTS. In the manufacture of non-durable goods the average wage was AS LOW AS TWENTY-NINE DOLLARS AND SEVENTY-ONE CENTS. In the manufacture of durable goods the average was higher – FORTY-FOUR DOLLARS AND FORTY-SEVEN CENTS.
Let us assume that all war workers are in the higher-paid category. There is still a far cry between the average of $44.47 and the exceptional figures Mr. Engel puts to propaganda use to beat down wages.
The wage freeze, presidential hold-the-line edict, Little Steel formula, WLB stalling on wage demands and the entire anti-labor campaign have certainly not been conducive to raising the average wage since September 1942.
What has the cost of living and the tax squeeze done to that $44.47? The Consumers Union gives an eloquent answer. A recent thorough survey made by it of consumers in all parts of the country and at different income levels reveals the following:
 
Workers Face “Actual Disaster”
To meet the skyrocketing prices of food and other necessities – five per cent of the families earning below $1,500 are borrowing to make ends meet; in higher income brackets, 2.8 per cent are borrowing to pay their larger bills; 15 per cent of the lower income families are drawing on meager savings; 11.4 per cent of higher income families are drawing on savings also – 55 per cent in the former category are buying less of everything; in the latter category, 44.6 per cent are buying less food and clothing – all groups are cutting down on amusements and similar items – all groups have to count every penny they spend.
Consumers Union concludes from its survey that a large section of the nation’s population is faced with “ACTUAL DISASTER” – quite a different conclusion from that drawn by Congressman Engel that wages should be reduced.
The real facts mean that the struggle for higher wages is an absolute necessity for all workers.
 




The Senate has overridden the President’s veto of the anti-subsidy bill. The farm bloc has its own ideas on what will further the interests of big business farming.
The extreme crisis on the food front is due to one cause, and one cause alone. The largest private profit interests of the country dominate the food industry, as they do every other branch of the country’s economy. These interests are bent on using the war to increase their fortunes, come what may.
The picture has not been changed because the President has prevailed on the House of Representatives to give its very reluctant and very limited- – if not nominal – agreement to the temporary payment of some food subsidies. Even if the Senate had followed the action of the House in sustaining the veto, the food crisis would remain unrelieved.
To hail such feeble and farcical gestures as a solution of the muddled food question is to play the part of the ostrich. To interpret such misleading maneuvers as a yielding by the rapacious big farm bosses to the needs of the people, is to understand nothing about politics.
Just how ominous the food situation is, is indicated by the recent increase in ration point values on meat, canned fruits and other items. There is no meat to be had for love or money because the cattle kings are keeping millions of pounds of meat on the hoof for higher profits.” The OPA scratches its head and produces a “solution” – RAISE THE RATION POINTS ON THE MOST POPULAR CUTS OF MEAT SO MAYBE PEOPLE WON’T ASK FOR THEM.
The high prices of fresh, fruit put this indispensable food outside the reach of most working class families – the War Labor Board admitting a 57.9 per cent increase in the prices of fresh fruits and vegetables from October 1942 to April 1943. THE OPA “SOLVES” THIS PRICE PROBLEM BY RAISING THE RATION POINTS ON CANNED FRUITS SO THAT PEOPLE CAN’T BUY EITHER CANNED OR FRESH FRUIT. And pours ,oil on the fires , by increasing the prices of canned vegetables.
So critical is the food situation that a milk strike is threatened by the dairy producers.
So tight is the control by black markets that a strike by the kosher butchers of New York City against the poultry ring accomplished absolutely nothing.
So rapidly are prices rising that even the timid leaders of the CIO and the AFL, who hesitate to fight for the basic needs of their workers, have had to warn their smiling pal in the White House. They told the President that there must be a roll-back in prices or there will be an unrestrainable movement by all workers for a roll-up in wages.
Mark Sullivan, shrewd Washington reporter for the New York Herald Tribune, observes: “To persuade the labor leaders not to make their demand, Mr. Roosevelt undertook to roll back prices of food. It was for this he used subsidies.” Mr. Sullivan says that the President’s insistence on present subsidies “appeased the labor leaders” and “prevented them from demanding a general raise in wages.”
But what real grounds are there for labor leaders to feel “appeased?” What reasorf is there for labor not demanding wage increases to meet the stratospheric food costs? What hope is there for a solution of the food mess in all this business about subsidies?
Oh, yes! Food subsidies will allow for a roll-back in prices, we are told. What, of ALL prices? Oh, no! The President is speaking about a roll-back only of the prices of meat, butter and coffee. IF prices of these three items can be rolled back, that will be very nice indeed. Then we can butter our meat, which we can’t get at all, with butter that we often can’t get, and wash it down with coffee.
Seriously speaking, the roll-back proposed by the President is so trifling that it won’t be seen against the mountainous height of all prices. According to the calculations of the United States News, they might save the average family about fifty cents every week. Some saving!
How about all the other necessities of life? There are fruits and vegetables, canned foods and dairy products, shoes, clothing and household supplies? The prices of all these commodities roll up and up and up.
How about quality, on which every consumer is cheated? And the no-grading holiday that the food bosses are enjoying at our expense? All these and many other grievances are part and parcel of the food problem and of the high cost of living. It isn’t a gesture of “appeasement” that the working people want but a real solution!
The workers must understand what this subsidy plan is all about, why Congress first rejected it, and why the House finally consented to a makeshift acceptance only after the President’s veto message to the effect that he didn’t want his hands tied in his attempt to “appease” labor with this gesture of a roll-back in prices, though the Senate still can’t see the president’s point.
The idea of the subsidy plan is to roll back prices without the bosses sacrificing any profits. So that the bosses can keep on pocketing profits in the war style to which they are accustomed, the government pays – with a subsidy out of the U.S. Treasury, which, incidentally, is replenished BY TAXES EVERY WORKER PAYS – the difference between roll-back price profits and former profits.
The bulk of the subsidies go to big business farming, beef producing, dairying, processing. This is true of all government subsidies and benefit payments in general – THE BIG BOYS GET MOST OF THEM. For instance, of the 1943 increase in farm parity levels amounting to $1,500,000,000, big business farming gets at least sixty per cent.
Then why, if the big boys get the subsidies, did Congress – dominated by big business and the farm bloc – oppose subsidies and submit to the President their anti-subsidy bill? The answer is that subsidies are small potatoes compared to the profits that come their way when the big boys set their own prices.
That is also why Congress has been trying so hard to shove the OPA off the map. Weak and ineffectual as OPA price control is, it still is a nuisance to the farming and industrial big shots who like things all their own way.
After the President’s message, the House could not longer hold its former intransigent position. The “representatives of the people” saw the point. It is one thing to pass an anti-strike law over the President’s half-heated veto, after every propaganda device has been used in an anti-labor campaign. It is another matter to ignore the strong injunction of the President not to tie his hands in making this gesture to “appease” not only labor but all elements whom the cost of living has made hot under the collar. The Senate, however, still holds out for a full measure of “rewards for private enterprise.”
That the President has made only a political maneuver is very plain. For nothing has been changed basically. Big business is still in complete control.
The beef producers who keep millions of pounds of .meat off the market for higher prices continue their strike against meat-starved people in the armed forces and in civilian life. IN FACT, THESE ARE THE VERY BOYS REPRESENTED ON THE WAR MEAT BOARD IN WASHINGTON.
The “big four” of farming still practically own and control the land and the bounty thereof – AS WELL AS THE STRINGS IN THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND IN CONGRESS.
No, nothing has been changed! So why should the workers wait around, do nothing, allow themselves to be pauperized by high prices, while the President tries to “appease” the labor leaders with an empty gesture?
The supporters of Roosevelt blame the reactionary Congress for the food crisis. The Republicans blame the New Deal. All this is simply the politics of politicians who alike are dominated by the private profit interests causing food shortages, black markets, skyrocketing prices.
The people themselves must buck these interests. To check the power and lust of big business monopolies in the food- industries – bloating themselves on the life blood of the people – the working people must get into action.
The small and independent farmers, the farm workers, organized labor in the processing industries and the organized housewives, can and must cooperate to bypass the food monopolists who strike at the stomachs of all of us. If the packing and processing industries were nationalized and put under the control of the organized workers there could be no such thing as this strike of powerful meat producers – who are keeping the workers pot empty while supplying the black market.
For organized labor, controlling the processing of meat, would naturally deal direct with the small and independent farmers and cattle, growers, get cattle slaughtered and, through cooperative markets, make meat available to the housewife. The same is true of the processing of milk and dairy products. The same is true of all farm products.
BIG BUSINESS MUST BE BYPASSED BY THE WORKING PEOPLE!
 




Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau wants $10,500,000,000 more taxes in the year 1944 than were collected in the year 1943.
The tax bill recently approved by the House of Representatives provides for only $2,240,000,000 additional taxes. The bill just agreed on by the Senate Finance Committee would add $2,384,000,000 to 1943 taxes.
 
The Threatened Sales Tax
When the House was discussing taxes, a general sales tax was considered a possibility, and the capitalist press was jubilant at the prospect of the working people paying that $10,500,000,000 on top of what they are already paying – and can ill afford.
When the matter came before the Senate, Mr. Morgenthau appeared and assured the members of the Senate Finance Committee that he still wants that $10,500,000,000 above present taxes. He also stated that he is not exactly opposed to a sales tax, though he would prefer to raise the revenue some other way.
However, talk about the sales tax has died down. And it is not because the capitalists and their politicians have suddenly acquired the milk of human kindness toward the working people. It is because organized labor has put on its fighting mitts. Labor is demanding some relief from the burdens of war so heavily piled on it, as evidenced in the widespread demands for higher wages. With elections coming, Congress does not dare now to put more fuel on the smoldering fire of labor discontent by passing a sales tax.
Yet, to the extent that Congress did try to raise more taxes for 1944, the bills of both the House and Senate represent in the main another raid on the little man.
 
Another Squeeze
The House bill increases the normal income tax from six to ten per cent, proposes repeal of the five per cent Victory tax, but imposes a three per cent special tax on the nine million workers making up the low income group. The Senate bill does not increase the normal tax and favors the continuance of the Victory tax for all groups at the reduced rate of three per cent.
But this leniency is a mirage. The Senate bill disallows the post-war refund of any part of the Victory tax. And both bills don’t, let you deduct that ten per cent credit for earned income nor do they let you,take anything off for the innumerable taxes you pay on entertainment, services and commodities. So that the two per cent reduction in the Victory tax in, the Senate bill is made up for with a vengeance.
Of the innumerable taxes you pay on entertainment, services and commodities, there will be more and heavier levies in many cases.
Furthermore, both bills contain a weapon against organized labor. They Would require labor unions to file financial statements with the Treasury Department. Though the unions would still be tax exempt, to make public the financial strength of unions is to make known to labor’s enemies – if they want the information – what the fighting resources of unions are.
 
Lenient to the Rich
In contrast to the way the House and Senate bills lay it on where it can be least borne, they are very nice indeed to the rich corporations. They make a gesture of taking more from big business by increasing the excess profits tax from ninety to ninety-five per cent. But the methods of calculating excess profits taxes make this a mere nothing. The important thing is the basic corporation tax. This was not touched. The fact that this year big business will make $8,600,000,000 in war profits, AFTER DEDUCTING ALL TAXES and other deductibles, did not make any difference to the congressional tax makers.
Furthermore, the Senate bill makes sure that in the renegotiation of war contracts, the big corporations be given every possible credit for taxes and every benefit of every doubt – including the exemption from renegotiation of “standard products.”
When the tax question was before the House Ways and Means Committee, eight organizations, including the CIO, the Railroad Brotherhoods, the National Farmers Union, and others, presented a list of tax demands. They included the following:

Restoration of personal exemptions to $250 for single persons and $1,500 for married couples, with $400 dependent exemptions.
 
Increase in personal taxes on income above $3,000, with a $25,000 ceiling on salaries.
 
Increase in the basic corporation tax from forty per cent to fifty per cent.
 
Increase in estate taxes.
 
Elimination of the phony method of computing excess profits taxes.
 
Taxation of tax-exempt securities.
 
Elimination of depletion and other allowances to oil, mining and other corporations, which permit them to get away with murder.

This tax program of the CIO, the Brotherhoods and other workers’ organizations has many good points. However, just why should the little man earning less than $3,000 a year pay any taxes at all, with big business making a war profit haul of $8,600,000,000 in 1943? In view of such tremendous war profits, why should any working man or woman, who needs every cent of earnings to live on, pay war taxes?
Labor Action and the Workers Party agree with all tax demands which would make the rich pay for the war, but we go further and say that, in all justice, the working people should not pay any war taxes at all. Let there be, besides the limit of $35,000 on salaries, a 100 per cent tax on war profits – no profits out of the holocaust of war. If that doesn’t suffice, let the government put a capital tax on the huge fortunes of America’s “Sixty Families” – this is wealth of which the American working class has already been robbed.
 




The International Executive Board of the United Steel Workers of America, CIO, has just come out for an increase in wages of seventeen cents an hour for the 750,000 members of that union. The present basic hiring wage is seventy-eight cents an hour.
This is good news for the whole working class of America.
The CIO convention recently held in Philadelphia went on record against the Little Steel freeze.
In his closing speech at that convention, President Philip Murray – who is also president of the United Steel Workers – said he was going to “present this problem to a special meeting of our International Executive Board.”
The definite demand for a wage increase for the 750,000 organized steel workers proclaims to the entire labor movement that the CIO means business. The Little Steel formula is actually junked – in accordance with the resolution of the CIO convention:
“The working men and women of America must be permitted, through the sound and stable processes of collective bargaining, to secure wage adjustments to levels necessary to maintain their morale, health and efficiency and to meet the special needs imposed on them in this war period.”
In line with this resolution, the International Board of the United Auto Workers has also recommended wage increases in the entire industry. It is expected that the first to carry out the recommendation and make specific demands will be the Chrysler department of the union, representing 70,000 workers.
Among the other CIO unions that have thus far taken action to implement the convention resolution kicking the Little Steel formula out of labor’s back door are the Aluminum, Electrical and Textile Workers.
The Executive Board of the New York State CIO also voted unanimously to urge “all its affiliates to immediately seek wage increases to meet the rapid increases in the cost of living.”
Outside the CIO, the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, an AFL affiliate representing 500,000 workers, has likewise come out in favor of wage increases in excess of the limits set by the formula.
Undoubtedly these and other unions will now follow the example of the Steel Workers Union and make definite demands with the utmost speed. Labor leaders can no longer resist the pressure from the ranks. The labor movement is on its way to end the injustice of a wage freeze with ever-mounting living costs on the one side, and on the other big business war profits for 1943 at over $8,000,000,000 clear gravy.
 
Other Progressive Demands
Besides asking for a wage increase, the Steel Workers Union will make other progressive demands. One is for “severance pay” for worker’s “when a plant or any portion thereof is permanently closed down.”
Four weeks’ pay will be requested for workers having one to three years’ continuous service, and eight weeks’ pay for those having three years or more of continuous service to their credit.
This excellent demand is also in accordance with a resolution passed at the CIO convention seeking to prevent workers from being thrown out of their jobs without any means of subsistence when war orders cease and reconversion commences. Presumably all CIO unions will make similar demands. While not in any way solving the post-war unemployment problem, such a demand should be pushed to the utmost for the temporary relief it can give,
The union will also be asking for the restoration of time and a half for the sixth and seventh days of every regular week worked – a right given up by labor leaders about a year ago.
Another protective demand to be made by the Steel Workers Union is for a guaranteed minimum weekly wage for eac*h worker for each week during the life of the new contract to be negotiated. This demand is to counteract partial lay-offs that would make deep gashes in the workers’ pay envelopes.
The five hundred locals of the United Steel Workers Union have still to vote on the recommendations of their board. They will undoubtedly push their demands with the utmost energy and determination. They are now out in front, with the whole labor movement watching them.
The auto, electrical and aluminum workers, every CIO union, every AFL union, all of organized labor likewise have to make specific demands for wage increases and for protective measures – and get behind their demands with all they have.
 
What Is Involved
It is not only necessary to smash the Little Steel formula once and for all time to enable labor to keep pace with the cost of living necessities – which in itself is as important as life itself. In a larger sense, however, it is also necessary for the labor movement to restore its militancy if it hopes to survive.
There will be grave post-war problems to solve which only labor will be able to solve.
In turn this means that the unorganized will have to be brought into the ranks of organized labor – where they can be induced to go only if the militant action of the unions is actually getting results for its members. The capitalists must not be given a chance to pit the unorganized worker against the union worker.
At the CIO convention, R.J. Thomas, president of the UAW, now on the eve of making important wage demands, delivered these stirring words:
“I think in this convention the No. 1 slogan of our convention should be the same as it was when the Committee of Industrial Organizations was organized, and that is to go out across this country and organize and, organize, and when you are through organizing, keep on organizing.”
To which sentiment must be added the reminder that when the CIO was organized, it did so on a fighting program, involving some of the greatest strike action in labor history. The rank and file ought to keep this shining precedent before them today. They also have the recent example of the miners who went out on strike four times, pioneering in the fight to break the Little Steel formula.
It is clear that the no-strike pledge must also go with the wind. In fact, it is the logical next step to the demands made by the Steel Workers Union and to be made by the other CIO unions.
 




Here is a story of war profiteering, of Wall Street speculation, of corporations gypping on taxes, of soaping the consumer – a story that is only one of hundreds about the “self-sacrificing” pay-triotism of big business.
Between good liquor and the consumer there is today many a slip, as the saying goes – first because of the extreme shortage and second because of the fantastic prices.
Supplies of liquor have suddenly disappeared from the market for a very simple reason. The distilleries are holding back their reserves.
American Distilling Co. is keeping 245,000 barrels of rye and bourbon whisky off the general market. Instead of releasing its inventory, it is letting its stockholders have this huge supply at cost. The Tom Moore Distillery Co. has pursued a slightly different course. It declared a dividend in bourbon whisky to its stockholders. Other tremendous stocks of liquor are being withheld from the public by similar methods.
With OPA ceilings on a barrel of rye of bourbon at a peak of around $62, why are these corporations not eager to sell? Believe me, there’s plenty of profit to be made at that price. For the cost of whisky to American Distilling Co. – according to its own unrestricted figuring – is $32 a barrel. In a word, the OPA deiling price allows nearly one hundred per cent profit. Not bad, what? A burden of one hundred per cent profit should be easy to bear.
But strangely enough, American Distilling Co., Tom Moore Distillery Co. and the rest of them are riot anxious to collect this pretty penny of profit – at least, not just now. And thereby hangs a tale of taxes.
The distilling concerns, along with all of big business, have been booming with wartime orders, For them, as for the others, 1943 was already a banner year many weeks ago. Weeks ago profits were already sky-high. It has ever been the aim of capitalists to pass as little as possible of their profits on to the government – even though the job of the government is to protect the class interests of these very tax dodgers.
 
How They Work It
Taking the case of American Distilling Co. as an example, if it were to sell those 245,000 barrels of liquor to the public before the end of 1943, it would have to report around eight million dollars of profit on the sale in the income tax return of a year of exceptional profits. That would mean that the eight million dollars of profit to be realized at OPA prices would be subject to the ninety per cent corporate excess profits tax.
Ah, but if the company sells the stuff to its stockholders at cost, the result quite different. There is technically no profit to report. Therefore, there is no tax to be paid by the corporation on the 245,000 barrels. And the stockholders get a nice dividend of eight million dollars – the difference between what they will pay for the liquor and what it is worth at OPA prices.
A nice bit of tax dodging!
It is estimated that such and similar maneuvers by the distillery companies will deprive the U.S. Treasury of up to twenty million dollars this year. But when Tom, Dick or Harry buys a bottle – if he can get it somehow – he can’t evade the sales tax on it.
Imagine what will happen during the coming holiday season when nearly everyone wants a little liquor around the house! Already dealers are hoarding their supplies for higher prices. With the holiday demand, there’ll be no holds on the prices. Good liquor will cost its weight in gold. Only stockholders of distillery companies and the well-to-do will be able to celebrate in style. Other mortals will be offered foul stuff at shameless prices – and will be lucky if they don’t die from it.
But this is only half of the story. For the rest of it, the scene shifts to Wall Street.
Stock market prices of distillery stocks have risen spectacularly during 1943. American Distilling Co. shares went from a low of 15 to a high of 111½ and now sell at 108. That represents a mint of unearned wealth for the insiders.
Some of this jump in stock prices is due to so-called natural causes, that is, to the wartime boost in business and profits. But that which took place , in recent weeks is due to unadulterated, old-time Wall Street finagling.
The big fellows laid their hands on as much stock as they could grab at low prices. Then rumors were set afloat that things were going to happen in distillery stocks. There were whispers of the distribution of barrels of whisky to stockholders, and there were counter-rumors. There were predictions of mergers and liquidations and what not. The result was wild speculation, with the usual “sucker” rush to get his fingers burned. Of course, the big fellows in the know padded their pockets with profits both going and coming.
When – after six or seven weeks of this frenzy – the company officially announced its scheme to sell its whisky to its stockholders at cost, the stock leaped from 78 to 111½ in one market day. On a smaller scale, the same kind of speculation goes on in all other liquor stocks.
Thus in the troubled waters of war do the capitalists fish for – and catch – bigger and better profits. Such stories of this – of OPA prices set at one hundred per cent above cost, of tax dodging by the wealthy, of Wall Street finagling – can be fully savored only in contrast to the wage freeze, the job freeze, the undodgeable tax burdens, the profiteering prices and the other hardships piled on the backs of the working people of the country.
 




While Mr. Roosevelt was in Iran, he addressed United States troops at Camp Amirabad, situated on the slopes of Teheran, where the conference between Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin took place.
The President told these men of the Persian Gulf Service Command that the conference made great progress in planning “a world for us and for our children when war will cease to be necessary.”
No doubt the soldiers in that distant land belonging to the Iranians liked to hear the President utter those words. They are nice-sounding words.
But, on examination, what do these words actually mean?
 
Is War “Necessary” Now?
In the first place, they imply that TODAY war is necessary. However, in the most basic sense, this is not true.
To illustrate the meaning of this statement, here are a few examples:
Let us say there was a time when it was necessary that a large percentage of the children of the world have rickets and grow up with all kinds of bone deformities. But rickets has been proved to be a disease of malnutrition, preventable by proper food – of which there is plenty in the world and of which, under a socialist system, there could be even more. The reason for that is that under socialism food would be produced for use, for the good of all humanity. Under capitalism, food is produced primarily for profit; needs are completely secondary.
That today children in this modern world are still bow-legged is a testimonial of social injustice – not of social necessity.
Again, there was a time when mine accidents, trapping and killing helpless miners, were claimed to be unavoidable and necessary. Now, however, scientists and engineers have the know-how for preventing mine disasters. Their occurrence today is, by and large, a social crime of mine-owners unwilling to part with a small fraction of their profits to make the mines safe to work in.
In this sense war is not necessary today, was not in 1914, and, in reality, HAS NEVER BEEN NECESSARY!
For today there could be plenty for all the world now being laid waste by war instead. Man has learned the secrets of the air, the sea, the surface and the bowels of the earth. Man knows his way around with atoms and electrons. He has fashioned machines which are miracles of production for factory and farm, for mine and plantation.
The world is teeming with millions of able hands willing to build and operate those machines for peacetime production of abundance. Wonderful means of transportation by air, sea and land are here for peoples – peacefully and for their mutual benefit – to exchange their products according to their needs.
That the peoples of the world are today exchanging bombs and destruction instead of the good things of and for life, is not a necessity. It is the outcome of capitalist imperialism standing in the way of the peoples of the earth.
 
What Did FDR Mean?
Then what did Mr. Roosevelt mean by the phrase, “a world for us and for our children when war will cease to be necessary”? Did he mean that the Teheran conference made great progress in planning to end capitalist imperialism?
Of course, this is merely begging the question. Everybody knows that Mr. Roosevelt is pledged to preserve the American profit system, which means American imperialism – that Mr. Churchill is pledged to preserve the Imperial British Empire – that Mr. Stalin is ambitious for a new Russian Empire.
Or did Mr. Roosevelt mean that with the “aggressor nations” vanquished, “war will cease to be necessary”? But this is a fantastic assumption. For how long will German and Japanese capitalism remain crushed? Again, what will prevent a new crop of “aggressors” from springing up?
For instance, according to one of the main spokesmen of the British Empire, General Smuts, Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa, Britain has become an “unequal” partner, compared to the United States and Russia, which have such tremendous national resources. What will stop England from “aggressing”? In fact, General Smuts already suggests aggressive intentions toward Western Europe!
 
Clear Thinking Needed
In this world crisis, clear thinking is of the utmost importance. One must ask: How is FDR’s “world when war will cease to be necessary” different from Woodrow Wilson’s “war to end all wars”?
World War I was the first of the World War series. World War II is the second. The Cairo and Teheran conferences did not scotch World War III because ruling class statesmen confer on the basis of the power politics of imperialism – and that means war sooner or later.
Only the working peoples of the world can end the World War series.
The correct starting point is that wars are not necessary right now – no waiting for a promised millennium created for propaganda purposes!
For the peoples of the world to arrive at the longed-for destiny of humanity to produce and exchange the things of life In peace and plenty, they must rid themselves of the motives of capitalist profits and imperialist power in international relations. That is saying that international capitalism is their enemy.
Humanity needs a socialist world!
 




The TWU workers in Madison Square Garden Tuesday night at one point set up a chant: “Two, Four, Six, Eight – Make the Mayor Arbitrate!”
Everything, of course, revolves about the word “make” and another word – HOW?
Most of the speakers at the rally attended by some 20,000 TWU and other workers – namely, Quill, international president of the Transport Workers Union; MacMahon, president of New York Local 100; Curran, of the Maritime Union – seemed to think the way to “make” the Mayor arbitrate is to be very nice to him.
For, while they all lambasted John Delaney, chairman of the Board of Transportation, as he deserves, the Mayor – the real city boss, who has kicked the transit workers around since 1939 – was gently spared.
On the burning question of strike, Quill made the position of the leaders very clear: “There is no question of strike,” he said. “There will be no strike.” He did not deem it necessary to explain the two-week ultimatum he delivered to the Mayor in December, about which fiasco the Mayor and Delaney – if they are running true to form – must still be snickering.
CIO President Murray, main speaker of the evening, almost wept with gratitude because the transit workers who had gone on spontaneous sit-downs to protest the ridiculously inadequate and discriminatory “increases” the Mayor had dished out to a handful of workers, had yielded to the exhortations of Quill and MacMahon and returned to work.
While the audience applauded the speakers generously and therefore presumably accepted their no-strike edict, the rank and file spirit that led to the sit-downs a few weeks ago has by no means been squelched. When MacMahon eloquently enumerated all the injustices suffered by the transit workers since the subways came under city ownership – including discrimination against women and pay as low as $22 a week – there was a cry from the audience: “What about the powerhouse?”
Again when he related that workers have to get side work to piece out their pay, thus ruining their health with fourteen to sixteen hours of work per day, and then asked how much longer the subways can be the safest railway system in the country under such conditions, someone called out: “Give ’em one more week!” From another part of the hall came the shout: “Powerhouse!”
Philip Murray undoubtedly heard these comments from the floor and besides had well in mind the sit-downs the men had pulled, for he kept underscoring his opposition to strikes. “Our policy is one of opposition to strikes,” was his theme song, recurring again and again.
As a result of this no-strike policy – which has caused all labor in this country to take one defeat after another and will have even more disastrous results in the future – Murray did a clumsy job of sidestepping the issue of what the 39,000 transit workers are to do. These workers right now are taking what amounts to a 17 per cent wage cut since January 1, 1941. In his forty-minute speech Murray devoted altogether too much time to general labor conditions and not enough time to what the assembled workers had on their minds.
In fact, he got most excited about the black markets. Although workers hate black market profiteers and should fight against them, it can hardly be claimed that the plight of the New York City transit workers is primarily the result of black markets. However, Murray made no more useful suggestion for action on the subject of black markets than on the subject of the transit workers’ demands for much-needed wage increases.
There he stood – the leader of five million organized workers – and the most he did was to plead with the “good citizens of the City of New York” to “help the transit workers.” Yes, the “good citizens of democratic New York” should be “neighborly.” They should be sorry for the wives and children of the transit workers – and tell all their friends about the wives and children of the transit workers who have to be fed and clothed.
Workers, of course, always want the sympathy of their communities and neighborliness is a very nice thing indeed – but is that why 20,000 workers were assembled in Madison Square Garden? For that – and to pass another resolution once more calling for arbitration called for so many times before – with no answer from City Hall?
 




New York Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union has called for a public rally at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday, February 9, at 8:00 p.m. Such a demonstration is excellent. Every worker should support it.
The union is also asking “The People of the City of New York” to “Please Write Now to the Mayor.”
Yes, it is indeed in order for all users of the transit systems to support the men and women who make possible safe travel from one end of the city to another, and to tell the Mayor what they think of his anti-labor policy.
But such supplementary measures are no substitute for action by the workers themselves. The “All-Star Entertainment” to be provided at the rally should not be permitted to obscure the issue. Unless the meeting produces a real ultimatum to the Mayor and Board of Transportation, with the full sympathy and support of those assembled in the Garden, it will be another fizzle.
Within TWU Local 100 itself exists the best possible proof of the efficacy of rank and file action. The 1,200 employees of the Fifth Avenue Coach Co. – members of the local – who in the recent past showed their mettle in an admirably militant strike, now get an eight per cent wage increase without having to strike for it. The Fifth Avenue Coach Co. still remembers the bus strike!
But the 32,000 employees on New York City’s subways and other transit lines – also members of the local – are still taking the insults of the city’s Mayor and Board of Transportation instead of wage increases to catch up with the runaway cost of living. The city transit workers have not engaged in united militant action to enforce their fair demands. Their officers make strike threats that they have no intention of carrying out.
 
What Who Holds Dear?
Messrs. La Guardia and Delaney are no dopes. They thumb their noses at a union which does not use its power, while that union – imitating big business – spends its less plentiful and precious money on full-page ads pleading with the Mayor: “For the Sake of All We Hold Dear, Let us Arbitrate!”
But what the Mayor and Board of Transportation of the city hold dear, is not what workers hold dear. Philip Murray, CIO president who conferred with Mr. Delaney, said about this absolute-ruler-by-divine-right:
“I came away with the distinct impression that he not only was hostile and antagonistic to the union and therefore incapable of negotiating with it in good faith, but also that he is utterly indifferent to the needs and welfare of the employees whose fate he holds in his hands.”
Mr. McMahon, president of Local 100, claims that the city makes a net profit of $1,000 a year on every one of its 32,000 transit workers. This profit is one of the things the Mayor and the Board of Transportation hold dear.
Some three years ago, when the Mayor negotiated the purchase of the IRT and BMT subways from the banks which owned them, the TWU protested that $315,000,000 was much too high a price because it represented water-flooded stock. However, the city fathers placed the profits of bankers above the protests of workers. They paid the exorbitant price – and the labor of the transit workers produce the handsome interest that the banks are getting on this unwarranted purchase price.
The workers themselves, however, get handouts of one cent and two cents an hour – presumably to meet the official 21 per cent rise in the cost of living.
 
Quill Squirms Out of a Hole
On December 23, Michael Quill, international president of the TWU, seemed to be talking turkey. He threatened that unless the case of the transit workers – kicked around from the City Hal1 to the White House and back for more than two years – was submitted to arbitration within two weeks, the 32,000 transit workers would strike. The two weeks expired, and a membership meeting was called on January 6. The newspaper PM predicted about this meeting: “... It is a foregone conclusion that the rank and file will demand a subway strike.”
But that proved to be exactly what the leadership did not want. On January 5, Mr. Murray wrote another of his famous letters to the Mayor, and then sat himself down on the lid of rank and file discontent. Mr. Quill and Mr McMahon put their posteriors to the same use, and at the membership meeting employed their combined eloquence to divert the workers from striking. Another one of those resolutions calling for arbitration was passed.
Mr Quill is an expert at squirming out of holes. He squirmed out of his strike threat of a fortnight before by implying that to strike would be to adopt an “anti-war position” and would be playing into the hands of Messrs. LaGuardia and Delaney, whom he chastised by calling them “pro-Hitler” reactionaries. This weak-kneed backing and filling, this unprincipled playing around with the rank and file, Philip Murray designated as “responsibility, statesmanship and patriotism.”
 
Ranks Boiling Mad
The leadership’s sitting on the lid has not, however, stopped the boiling underneath. Beginning January 25 a series of spontaneous strikes broke out on the subways. On the BMT, 800 repair shop men quit and demanded that Delaney come down and explain the so-called pay increases they had received. Some men got one cent an hour, some two cents, some ten cents, and some got nothing, with no apparent reason for the disparities, for the men are doing the same kind of work. On the IRT 2,500 men in eight shops sat down, incensed by the insults handed them in their pay envelopes. At one of the IRT power stations 320 men struck. Out in Jamaica 121 workers at the IND inspection barn protested at the employment of a Board of Transportation sto0ge. At the 207th Street repair shop of the IND 600 men laid off for 4 hours.
Quill, McMahon and available union officials hot-footed from one struck shop to another, persuading the angry men to go back to work. Quill swam so hard against the stream of rank and file strike sentiment that his appendix gave out. However, the workers are set for action. For instance, the power house men who were induced to return to work are reported to have said that unless there is a settlement in a week, they will walk out and stay out.
The mock increase, now in effect, with which the Mayor hoped to placate the transit workers – who are struggling against the overwhelming odds of high prices, high taxes and high everything else – leaves 20,000 of these workers out in the cold with no increases at all. Of the workers who received raises, many “benefited” to the extent of one or two cents an hour. Only a handful of mechanics were given anything like a substantial increase. Even at that the garage mechanics on the city lines get only 85 cents an hour while garage mechanics on the Fifth Avenue Coach Co. lines makes $1.10 for the same work. Among the workers whose wages were not increased at all there are thousands of married men earning less than $25 a week, and among those who did get a dry bone there are thousands who still make only a little more than $25 a week.
In September 1941, the New York City transit workers were big-heartedly allowed an eight percent increase in wages by their bountiful masters, whereas the Little Steel formula permitted 15 per cent increases on the basis of January 1, 1941, cost of living levels. Actually, therefore, from January to September 1941, the transit workers had taken a 15 per cent wage cut.
With the 8 per cent wage increase in September that cut was reduced to 7 per cent. But the cut has been deepening as the cost of living has continued upward, until today the wage cut amounts to around 17 per cent in terms of the purchasing power of the dollar. But their leaders tell these outrageously exploited workers that if they strike they will be aiding the “pro-Hitler” reactionaries.
The transit workers of New York have not only been the mat for the muddy feet of the city fathers, they have been stepped on by Washington as well. The WLB, whose functions are supposed to cover “all industries and all employees,” refused to take the case of the transit workers under its jurisdiction. This refusal, be it remembered, came as a result of the desire of the White House to appease the Southern democrats and other bourbons in Congress whose ambition it is to allow each bunch of reactionaries to remain supreme in its own bailiwick.
The case of the New York City transit workers has reached a climax. The vacillations of the leadership not only endanger the immediate demands of thee workers but the union itself. The rally at Madison Square Garden must mark the beginning of militant action.
 




Last week there was introduced in Congress the Austin-Wadsworth bill to draft all men and women in the country. This legislative gem, produced by Senator Austin of Vermont and Representative Wadsworth of New York, would require all men between the ages of eighteen and sixty-five and all women between the ages of eighteen and fifty, to be conscripted by the government to any job assigned them in war industry, agriculture or any other occupation deemed essential.
This bill would take away, at one fell swoop a substantial part of the freedom that labor possesses. It is another attempt – using the smoke screen of war conditions – to put a noose around labor’s neck.
While the right of the worker to dispose of his own labor power is hardly the acme of human freedom, still it does distinguish the “free” worker under capitalism from the feudal serf and the chattel slave.
Furthermore, this labor-conscription bill would be a powerful weapon in the hands of the bosses against militant unionists. As we all know, bosses have their ways of exerting political pressure on all kinds of boards. The labor-drafting boards which this bill would establish could simply – at the bosses’ instigation – draft for other work the most active and faithful unionists – thus, dispersing their strength, and breaking up a union stronghold – while replacing them with cadres of “safer” workers also drafted.
Since the bill was introduced in Congress it has become even clearer that the real aim of its sponsors is to weaken the unions, disorganize the workers and place them at the tender mercies of their exploiters.
The New York Herald Tribune, that journalistic pillar of American capitalism, came out with an editorial letting the cat out of the bag in the following paragraph:
“The bill, as drawn up, does not deal too honestly with the situation created by the closed shop issue. It says to its prospective draftees that they are free to join a labor union if they desire. It does not say in so many words that they shall not be forced to join a union. Little imagination is required to suggest the weakness of this omission. Suppose, for example, that a free American is told that, for his country’s sake, he must mine coal and that in becoming a coal miner, he must pay dues to Mr. John L. Lewis, whose union has a closed-shop check-off contract with all the coal operators. It is one thing to tell him he has to work for Uncle Sam, quite another to insist that he work for Lewis also.”
These are not mincing words. Here is revealed the ardent hope of the boss class to re-establish the open shop as a step back to the boss paradise of the sweat shop. Note that the American worker reduced to industrial serfdom is still to be “A FREE AMERICAN.” But “most important in the above is that John L. Lewis is singled out as the embodiment of all that is horrible. For Lewis has – so far as least – been the most reluctant of all the labor leaders to abandon entirely the interests of the workers on the altar of war profits. His announced intentions to fight for a $2.00-a-day wage increase for the miners at the expiration of their present contract, has not sweetened the disposition of the bosses toward him.
The worker must not forget that when the New York Herald Tribune uses the words “work for Lewis” that means – in workers’ language – BELONG TO A UNION. The payment of union dues is not “working for Lewis.” A union must have finances, as every worker knows. It is up to the rank and file to see that dues are fair and that the union he belongs to serves his interests – AND FOR THIS IT MUST BE A MILITANT UNION. What the class for which the New York Herald Tribune speaks wants is to bust the unions and make the workers helpless against the bosses’ onslaughts.
The authors of the Austin-Wadsworth bill got the point made by this capitalist sheet and are more than willing to strengthen the anti-union import of the bill. In fact, they have submitted an amendment to the bill – to supply the “omission” pointed out by the Herald Tribune – as follows:
“Provided further, that every person assigned to serve under this act, including every accepted volunteer, shall have the right to join any union or organization of employees, but no such, person shall be obliged to join any such union or organization if he or she should not freely choose so to do.”
What a golden opportunity this clause would afford the bosses to negate closed shop agreements and “maintenance of membership provisions” in contracts! How they could shift, transfer, finagle, and presto a plant would; have a new roster of employees not in the union and not “obligated to join.” What a weapon against the union! What a giant stride back to the open shop!
It is important to record here that the above proposed amendment to the labor-draft bill to make it even more obnoxious, did not spring whole from the heads of Senator Austin and Representative Wadsworth. In that pie was also the finger of one Ernest L. Bell, Jr., of Keene, N.H., who is executive secretary of the new-born Citizens’ Committee for a National War Service Act – organized two months ago for the express purpose of furthering the labor-draft bill.
Want to know something about this Citizens’ Committee for a National War Service Act? None of the “citizens,” you may be sure, are workers. The committee consists of American Legionnaires, corporation lawyers, poll-tax politicians – the gentry looking for every opening to hit labor in the solar plexus.
Mr. Bell was formerly state commander in New Hampshire of the American Legion. Grenville Clark, a member of the rich man’s law firm of Root, Clark, Buckner & Ballantine, is secretary-treasurer of this committee – and incidentally a friend of President Roosevelt.
Bills, like this one to conscript labor presumably as a war measure but aimed at the unions; bills like the Hobbs so-called anti-racketeering bill that would make it easy to fake criminal prosecutions of unions, and impoverish them; these are all symptoms of the same boss tactic. Not content with up to 2,420 per cent increases in war profits, they become pay-triotic pioneers to meet every real or imagined “war emergency” with an anti-labor measure that will pay dividends not only for the duration but in the post-war period as well.
Every local union should pass a scathing resolution stating that the workers recognize in the Austin-Wadsworth and Hobbs bills hidden attacks on the unions, and protesting against their passage. Labor should also hold meetings to demonstrate its protest and get public support against such hypocritical measures.
But labor must take more fundamental action as well. The workers are foolishly supporting the capitalist class in wielding political power against them. For the workers still follow the boss parties and vote into office the very sponsors of anti-labor bills.
Whereas, with the mighty instrument of a real Independent Labor Party based on the unions, labor could not only protect its ground but fight for new gains. And not alone that. For the road of class-conscious political action leads beyond the bounds of an Independent Labor Party operating within the confines of the capitalist system – to a workers’ government and socialism.
 




Secretary of Agriculture Wickard is a master of understatement, In his annual report to the President, just released, he says that “we may have to revise some ideas about supplies of food available to consumers in the next few months, even of the foods which we appear to have in comfortable quantities.”
However, Donald Montgomery, who for seven years was consumers’ counsel of the Department of Agriculture, formulates the bungled food situation into the human equation. He says:
“It will mean hunger, the hollow as well as the hidden kind. It will mean starvation for many of our American people. No question about that. Maybe those who starve won’t fall over dead in the street. There are other ways to starve that are slower, less obvious, and less disturbing to public pride.”
The working people who are faced with the stark reality described by Mr. Montgomery must put a very pointed question to Mr. Wickard:
“Will the dollar-a-year men in the Department of Agriculture use their key positions for the production of food for the people – OR FOR PROFITS FOR THEIR COMPANIES?”
This is merely a rhetorical question. Everyone knows of the excellent job dollar-a-year men have been doing – FOR THEIR COMPANIES! The Truman and other congressional reports have disclosed the unrelenting efforts of these self-sacrificing representatives of big business in government, to steer war orders – at most attractive contract terms – to their real paymasters. There are forty-three such stooges in the Department of Agriculture – by Mr. Wickard’s own count. The Associated Press reported that “Mr. Wickard directed that they be invited to accept positions as full-time, paid employees and relinquish compensation from a private corporation or similar enterprise.”
That’s a laugh – no, a howl! Mr. Wickard does not throw the dollar-a-year stooges of the big farm interests out of his department on their ears. No, not that. He makes respectable “full-time, paid employees” out of them.
About the “relinquishing” of compensation from their firms and backers it need only be said that there are ways of “relinquishing” that DO NOT RELINQUISH – even though the same is not true about starving.
So the set-up in government is this: 1) Congress – influenced by the farm bloc, which has just succeeded in getting an increase in parity that will slap at least ten per cent onto food prices; 2) the Department of Agriculture – honeycombed with camouflaged dollar-a-year men; and 3) an OPA whose outstanding accomplishment is raising ceilings on consumer goods, now headed by a man appointed because of his ability to get along with the reactionary Congress.
Where are YOU, little men and women, who – even if you don’t fall over dead in the street – must necessarily suffer from the “slower, less obvious, less disturbing” ways of starving during this war!
The only place you can be – or be represented – is on your own, self-organized, food committees of workers, poor farmers and housewives. The organized little men and women (workers and workers’ housewives) must themselves find the ways to enforce price controls and real rationing – and to get food produced for consumption regardless of the profits of the big business and big farm interests. That’s where the little men and women of the country will be represented – and that’s what they must do without wasting time getting going.
For the profit interests move fast. This increase in parity is just the beginning. Mr, Montgomery states: “The lobby wants Congress to change the definition of parity prices. But don’t let that fool you. For ten years parity has been a justification for raising prices. Whenever the big farm organizations get their prices near to parity they change the definition and keep on going.”
The latest change in the definition of parity will put $1,500,000,000 more into the pockets of “the farmers.” Of this vast sum SIXTY PER CENT will go to twenty-five per cent of all the farmers – to the top-notchers, the wealthiest, including the big farm outfits closely connected with big business and big banking.
However, the poorest half of the farmers – those bitterly in need of more money – will altogether get only THIRTEEN PER CENT of the $1,500,000,000 parity increase. Another instance of the rich getting richer!
Nor is this the climax of the indecent story of the recent increase in farm parity levels. The high point is that the consumers will pay $3,500,000,000 more for food this year because of Congress’ generosity to the big farm interests.
The reasons why the consumer will pay not only the $1,500,000,000 due to increased parity but also $2,000,000,000 more than that, are not mysterious. Normally – under the unjustifiable profit system – every layer of money-makers between the producer and consumer must get theirs. But in war times normal profits are not quite enough. The war profiteers are having their field day – with the OPA almost outrightly assuring them by its rulings for ever higher prices, that not the ceiling but the sky is the limit.
The forty-three camouflaged dollar-a-year stooges in the Department of Agriculture are not there to protect your interests either, as you well know. The department is going to be handing out lots of money. It will subsidize this and it will subsidize that. Running true to form, the inside men will do their level best to get as much as possible of that money into the right pockets – those already-bulging pockets that will get sixty per cent of the increase in parity, those already-bursting pockets that always get the lion’s share of government subsidies.
Neither Congress nor the Department of Agriculture nor the OPA – nor all of them together – can or will prevent the catastrophe Mr. Montgomery describes. They are all drawn irresistibly to the side of the moneyed interests.
However, you can expect further attacks on wages from any or all these departments. While raising the pay of the dollar-a-year men to give them the cloak of respectability, Mr. Wickard declared – and this is the most positive part of his program: “Some form of wage control will be necessary to narrow the differential between farm and industrial wages.”
So get going, little men and women. Fight like hell for decent wages. Organize your committees of workers, of poor farmers and of housewives to solve the food problem. You have a great responsibility. If men, women and children are not to starve right here in the USA, you yourselves have to do something about curbing the greed of the big farm interests – about fixing and keeping fair prices – about honest rationing – about killing the black markets.
 




For months President Roosevelt has been promising to submit a plan to roll back prices and stop the skyrocketing of the cost of living. The suspense was getting unbearable. At last he has submitted his plan.
It consists of two parts. One was contained in his message to Congress November 1, asking for the continuation of subsidy payments beyond December 31, when the present appropriations end. The other was the appointment a few days later of a committee from the War Labor Board to investigate the rise in the cost of living.
This is all the President has to offer to the people victimized by war-profiteering prices. Can these measures really roll back and hold back the cost of living?
First, let us examine the President’s” appointment of this price-investigating committee.
 
What Prices Does FDR Mean?
Honest figures on the cost of living are indeed necessary. When the President, in his aforementioned speech to Congress, declares that since 1939 prices have gone up only twenty-six per cent, a worker raises a quizzical eyebrow and wonders what prices the President is talking about.
For, since 1941 – let alone 1939 – the worker is paying on the average fifty to sixty per cent more for food, twenty-five per cent more for rent, and so much more for everything else from clothes and shoes to shoestrings and clothespins, that, considering the sharp decline in the quality of goods, it is (hard to estimate the real increase.
Workers squeezed by the President’s hold-the-line order on wages don’t need the report of his committee on the cost of living. They know what a dollar gets them over the grocer’s counter. If there is more need for statistical proof of run-away prices, the unions have their accountants, statisticians and economists. They have presented plenty of figures to bear out the above situation.
But the best way to expose, while disposing of, the President’s price-investigating committee, is to quote Robert F. Whitney, New York Times Washington correspondent, on the subject:
“This move, coinciding with the decision of the Congress of Industrial Organizations to scrap the Little Steel formula, was interpreted as a ‘delaying action’ which insured retention of that wage program for at least two months.”
So, we see that one-half of the President’s plan is not designed to roll back prices but to hold down wages as long as possible. The CIO leaders very wisely did not fall for Roosevelt’s strategy. They have announced their intention to go ahead with wage demands, beginning with an increase for the steel workers. It is up to the rank and file of labor to put unrelenting pressure on the leaders to continue this good start and not to.yield – as they too often do – to the requests of their “friend” in the White House.
So much for the committee appointed by the President. Now we come to the subsidy program, which is regarded by liberals and labor leaders as the white hope for rolling back prices.
Allen S. Haywood, a vice-president of the CIO, speaking over the radio recently, said:
“For a year or more, labor has been demanding that the government keep faith with it by rolling back living costs. The President has tried to do this through a program of food subsidies, but he has been blocked and obstructed by Congress at every turn.”
Labor leaders persist in calling the congressional kettle black and the presidential pot white, though to normal adult eyes they both look pretty much the same color.
It is true that earlier this year the President appeared to have a tussle with Congress on appropriations for food subsidies. Congress represents the interests and position of the food monopolists, who oppose price fixing. Even though the big farm corporations, big meat packers, big food processors of all kinds are the main recipients of government subsidies – and NOT the small, hard-working farmer – these capitalists consider government subsidies mere chicken feed.
For example, a recent convention of food processors strongly opposed subsidies and acclaimed the “principle of free competition.” See what that means today! With shortages the rule and the demand extremely high, “free competition” would allow prices and profits to zoom even above present lofty heights. That’s what big business in the food industry wants – and Congress aims to please ... big business!
But the President also yields to the power of these interests. He is only making a gesture toward labor in asking for subsidies. He does not really go to town to get them. And this can be easily proved.
Back in May 1943 or thereabouts, the President indicated that it would take around $1,500,000,000 in subsidies to roll prices back to the September 1942 levels. To roll back prices to the September 1942 level from today’s level would take much more – because prices are now much higher.
But in his message to Congress, the President does not fix – nor even mention – a definite sum. He leaves the all-important point of ‘how much’ open, giving Congress the loophole it wants to make only a token appropriation.
However, the real question is: Can the working people actually get any worthwhile relief by this method?
 
How Are Subsidies Working Now?
We must consider that a subsidy program is now in effect. Subsidies are being paid out by the government to the tune of $800,000,000. Specifically, just what foods are being subsidized?
In his message the President reported that $450,000,000 of the total subsidy payments went to roll back the prices of meat and butter. But for the most part of this year meat was not available – except through the black market. Lately butter also is a precious rarity. And when it is on hand, storekeepers sell only a quarter of a pound, for which the housewife grudgingly pays half a cent or a cent over, making the price of a pound several cents higher than the ceiling. Thus, the civilian consumer has not been benefited very much by that $450,000,000 paid mostly to the meat and butter barons. The President also reported that a subsidy is being paid the dairy farmers to cover the; increased cost of cattle feed – in order to keep down the price of milk and milk products.
But when a housewife pays seventeen cents for a container of Borden’s cottage cheese that a few months ago cost eleven or twelve cents, she can indeed see how the Borden company gains by the government subsidy. She benefits little or nothing by the subsidy.
Similarly the President was proud that “the water had been squeezed out” of the price of cabbage and lettuce. True, the outrageous price of cabbage was deflated – whether due to the presidential squeeze or to other causes. But not so with lettuce, which is priced so high that it must be regarded by a working class family as a delicacy rather than a necessity.
Going from these specific items to the whole cost of living in 1943, while the big boys are gobbling up most of this $800,000,000 government subsidy, prices are continuing upward almost uninterruptedly. That is a reality that must be emphasized.
 
Why Have False Hopes?
These facts are here presented so that workers shall not have false hopes that the subsidy program will solve the problem of war-profiteering prices.
A broad hint of what is required to control runaway prices is contained in the shameful situation in which the Office of Price Administration makes a study of profits in the canning and packing industries – and then suppresses its findings! How damning the profits of these food monopolists must be if the OPA is not permitted to publish them!
There is only one way to break the power of these enemies of society and to stop their enrichment at the expense of all of us. Capitalists and their friends and politicians are not going to do it. Committees of labor, hardworking farmers and housewives without any representatives of industry and the so-called “public” on them – must be organized and demand the power to fix prices on the basis of examining the books of the big food and farm corporations.
These real representatives of the common people will not be afraid to reveal the extent of war profits. They will not be shy about preventing the rich from getting richer. If prices are to be controlled and the people are to be fed, labor must take charge.
 




The Communist Party, playing Joe Stalin’s politics in this country, has many ways of putting over its line.
The method of operating through “front” organizations is pretty well known to American labor.
However, it is not so widely understood that the Stalin-liners work hard at molding public opinion through “front” newspapers, magazines and pamphlets seemingly published by non-party people.
The fact is that the Daily Worker, the New Masses, the Morning Freiheit and the other openly Communist Party publications are but a small fraction of its total output. Scores of English and foreign-language publications “front” for the Communist Party.
A case in point is the four-page letterhead-size weekly calling itself In Fact. And to show how much it thinks of itself, it adds: “An Antidote for Falsehood in the Daily Press.” This sheet is – beyond the shadow of a doubt – a Stalinist wolf in sheep’s skin.
 
Who Edits In Fact
In the first place, its editor, George Seldes, has been a fellow-traveler since 1936. The why and wherefore of his sudden conversion from an enemy of everything Russian to a supporter of everything Stalinist are not clear. But the fact is indisputable.
Seldes was chairman of the Stalinist Citizens Defense Committee. He supported the American Peace Mobilization, which “fronted” for the Communist Party in the days when the Stalin line was to lighten Hitler’s burdens by keeping America out of the war. Frederick Woltman writes of Seldes in the November issue of the American Mercury: “As a matter of course, his name was prominent in every party-line document whitewashing the Moscow blood purges.”
This is the “unbiased” editor of In Fact. His associate editor is Bruce Minton, editor of the New Masses and a dyed-in-the-wool CPite.
Under Seldes, In Fact has been able to reach 100,000 readers. About these readers, Mr. Woltman writes:
“It is read not only by those who like to be referred to as intellectuals, liberals and progressives, but by many well-heeled conservatives. Many thousands of other Americans get slants and alleged facts indirectly, by word of mouth, through In Fact readers. All these people apparently think they are getting fresh ideas and inside information not to be had elsewhere. Most of them would be astonished, even horrified, to learn that they are getting substantially the same ideas and the same ‘facts’ available at any given period in the Daily Worker and the New Masses, frequently couched in the same familiar party-line phrases.”
But not only the above enumerated people fall for the disguise worn by In Fact. Needless to say, the Stalinist-controlled unions boost this camouflaged sheet. For instance, Curran’s International Longshoremen’s & Warehousemen’s Union passed a convention resolution that “All locals of the ILWU are urged to take advantage of club subscriptions offered by In Fact.” Other unions are also roped in.
At this year’s convention of the United Maritime & Shipbuilding Workers Union a resolution was sneaked in by the Communist Party faithfuls by which the whole convention went on record as recommending to all locals that they subscribe to this Stalinist sheet. The delegates, who had just thrown one of the Executive Committee members out of his high post for being a member of the Communist Party, unanimously and without discussion decided to boost a Communist sheet. Apparently the right hand didn’t know what the left hand was doing!
There is an infallible test of the Stalinist line: What was the attitude toward the war BEFORE June 22, 1941, and what is it SINCE that day when Hitler so violently ended the honeymoon period of the Stalin-Hitler pact?
 
In Fact Then and Now
During the period when Stalin was on Hitler’s side, In Fact smeared its pages against the “imperialist war,” went in for exposing “war-mongers,” lashed “British imperialism,” wrote of conscription as “one of the symptoms of fascism.”
This was not principled opposition to war based on the interests of the working class. It was simply rooting for Stalin’s team. For the exact opposite line was taken by In Fact after Hitler got off Stalin’s team.
Today in In Fact, Roosevelt is a democratic demi-god. During the Hitler-Stalin pact period, In Fact flayed the President’s “campaign to abridge democracy at home, his wish to force dollar imperialism down the throats of hemisphere nations.”
Today In Fact cannot find words bad enough to describe the Chicago Tribune, the New York Daily News and the other isolationist papers. But before June 22, 1941, these same papers were patted on the back by In Fact for being “anti-war” and “critical of British policy.”
These days anybody who comes out for the second front that Stalin is demanding immediately becomes In Fact’s kindred spirit, regardless of past relationships. Thus when Wendell Willkie returned from his global jaunt with second front ideas, In Fact regarded him as a right guy. Its readers are supposed not to know that before that pivotal day when Hitler parted company with Stalin In Fact considered Willkie “the closest thing to a native American fascist,” because he was trying to speed up America’s entry into the war.
Since it was launched in May, 1940 – in order to take on a pro-labor coloration – In Fact has been agin’ Wall Street and big business. It has always made much of so-called “exclusive” exposures of this or that big business scheme. But there is a difference.
During the Stalin-Hitler alliance period, In Fact shouted at Wall Street for wanting to push the country into the war. Today it howls because big business doesn’t push the war effort hard enough.
During the Stalin-Hitler alliance when Nazism was only a matter of taste in Stalinist policies – In Fact sported one labor policy; now it has another.
Then it oh-so-bravely refused to be “panicked into support of wage cuts, strike-breaking and abandonment of the Bill of Rights under the guise of a war for freedom and democracy.”
But today there is nothing In Fact likes better than the no-strike pledge. Taking away the very essence of labor’s Bill of Rights is democratic in In Fact when it is for the other party-liners. In Fact is among those Stalinist stalwarts who make little distinction between John L. Lewis, union head of the striking coal miners, and Fulton Lewis, Jr., radio spokesman for big business.
Obviously In Fact has changed its war line in the same unprincipled way as the Daily Worker, the New Masses and the whole kit and caboodle of the Communist Party – by order of the dictator in the Kremlin. Like the whole CP outfit, In Fact too hopes that this chameleon stunt – which brands it for what it is – has been forgotten, and that it can wedge itself into the labor movement to spread there the poison of Stalinism.
 




WASHINGTON – The action of the House in sending to the Senate the Commodity Credit Corporation Bill, calling for an end to the food subsidy program after December 31 of this year, carried by a vote of 278 to 117, will only aggravate the wage situation in the country. All forecasts are that the Senate will concur in the House action.
It is expected that Roosevelt will veto the bill, since his entire program for the wage freeze depends on subsidies given to the big food corporations as a means of keeping down prices. But prices of course have not been kept down, and the workers of the country are clamoring for higher wages.
The House action was carried out in behalf of the war profiteers, who stand to gain millions more through higher prices – unlimited prices. Roosevelt’s fears that this will set the stage for widespread wage demands are based on the fact that even before the House action a number of unions have denounced the Little Steel formula and have demanded wage increases.
The CIO convention, in response to the pressure of the rank and file, formally went on record against the Little Steel formula. Since the convention, Murray’s own union, the United Steel Workers of America, has gone on record to demand a wage increase.
Long before that, however, the railway workers were pressing for wage increases and the unions in that industry have been preparing to take a strike vote.
The miners’ union set the stage; other unions are following suit. As the situation becomes more unbearable for the workers, more and more unions will join the cry for higher wages.
*
In the past week the War Labor Board has already – for one involved reason or another – chiseled thirty-one cents a week off miners’ wages as set by the Ickes-Lewis agreement.
Also in the past week a Senate subcommittee favored the wage increase of eight cents an hour for 1,100,000 railroad workers. This is, to be sure, less than the rail unions demanded, but nevertheless overrules Czar Vinson, who opposed this increase recommended by a special committee.
The action of the WLB against miners’ wages – small though the cut is – indicates the assurance already felt by labor’s enemies because the miners’ strike is behind them.
Contrariwise, the action of the Senate sub-committee in favor of an increase in rail wages registers fear of a railroad strike on which a vote is now being taken.
 
Pointing a Moral
The moral of these latest developments on the wage front is obvious. Not that the miners lack militancy. Quite the contrary. They were the first workers to break out of the wage-refrigerator – and they have left the door wide open for all labor to follow suit. The point is this: the powers that be “relax” into their regular anti-labor practices as soon as labor lays down its “big stick.”
One may say this point was also brought out by the flip-flop executed by Chairman Davis of the WLB within the space of a week.
On November 5 he wrote to Vice-President Wallace, plainly declaring that labor is bearing alone the brunt of the hold-the-line edict. Was it merely a coincidence that this “pro-labor” view was stated at the same time that the CIO convention came out against the Little Steel formula and President Murray talked big about demanding more pay for the hundreds of thousands of steel workers?
The Little Steel formula was looking pretty sick. Did Davis see that, too?
But less than a week later Chairman Davis protested and denied and asserted that his statement was “widely misunderstood and misapplied.” He wanted everyone to know that as far as he is concerned the Little Steel freeze is still in full force and effect.
What happened between Mr. Davis’ first and second declarations? Well, the wage demands for steel workers have not yet materialized. Things seemed to quiet down – and so did Mr. Davis. It begins to look as if labor leaders are again engaged in the fruitless game of playing along with President Roosevelt, this time pinning highest hopes on FDR’s altogether inadequate subsidy plan for a rollback in prices. But it looks pretty hopeless. The subsidy plan is going down the river as big business is winning its fight for higher prices. Militant action en wages must be taken.
 
ILGWU Against Wage Freeze
Another large union came out against the Little Steel freeze last week, namely, the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, with a membership of 500,000. President Dubinsky said he would demand a wage increase in excess of the Little Steel limit because, as stated in a resolution passed by the executive board, “The only real effect of the Little Steel formula to date has been the practical freezing of wages. Stabilization of living costs is largely wishful thinking, while the true inflationary forces, the industrial combines which control living necessities, are having a field day.”
These are true words. They not only correctly characterize the Little Steel outrage and the so-called stabilization program, but place the guilt for the present price crisis where it belongs, namely, on the capitalist class and its political servants. Wage demands are the only solution along these lines.
The CIO News reports that the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers Union “this week called for wage adjustments to meet the rising living costs ...”
The Textile Workers Union has issued a demand for a wage increase of “not less than ten cents an hour for all textile workers.”
Another move on the wage front was the letter of William Green, AFL president, to Chairman Davis of the WLB, in which Green expressed resentment at the implications of members of the board that more drastic anti-labor legislation should be passed. “Statements such as these made by the NWLB make it increasingly difficult for labor to participate in the work of the NWLB as now constituted,” Green stated.
 
The “Forgotten People”
While labor leaders hesitate to take action, the New York Times has started a campaign to pit the unorganized workers against the organized. Its correspondent on labor matters, Louis Stark, wrote several articles on the “forgotten people.” There are, as he pointed out, 15,000,000 clerical, white collar, professional and other unorganized workers who have not received even the fifteen per cent wage increase grudgingly allowed by the Little Steel formula. They haven’t been able to get this because, as unorganized individuals, they have not been able to protect their interests.
This fact gives the mentally spry editors of the Times an opportunity to brush aside the thousands of claims of ORGANIZED labor lying buried in the graveyard of the WLB, and nonchalantly declare that the “WLB has adopted a procedure which is bound to favor organized labor against the unorganized groups.”
From this false statement the Times proceeds to draw the fantastic conclusion that even the fifteen per cent wage increase permitted by the Little Steel formula is much too lavish. The clever idea of this capitalist
newspaper is that practically no allowance should be made to workers to meet the rise in living costs – except to those workers earning $25 a week or less.
Of course, labor leaders and union papers have protested against the anti-labor propaganda that Mr. Stark’s articles gave the capitalists and their spokesmen a chance to make. But here too words of protest are not enough. Action is required to get these “forgotten people” the wage increases long overdue. The necessary action is an all-out drive to organize the unorganized so that all labor will have the protection of united action.
If organized labor hesitates longer at this crucial point, the anti-labor forces will simply be given further chance to strengthen their lines.
Funeral rites must be given the Little Steel formula by coming out at once with definite wage demands in every industry.
Labor’s right to strike for its demands must be reasserted by taking back the no-strike pledge and wiping the Smith-Connally bill off the books.
No wedge must be allowed to exist between organized and unorganized labor. A militant unionization drive on the basis of specific demands for the unorganized workers must be undertaken at once.
No other course can protect the workers in this critical situation.
 




There are more ways of cutting wages than by the direct method of cutting wage rates.
Every time prices go up ten points real wages do down ten points. High prices are a wage cut. And there is no roll-back in sight.
Also, every worker sees in his pay envelope that the income taxes he is now paying are an actual monetary wage cut. In addition, to the extent that bond-buying is compulsory, this too is equivalent to an income slash in the sense that the worker cannot use that money for his immediate needs.
These are huge slices right out of a worker’s pay.
But now there is the threat of a ten per cent sales tax – which can mean nothing else but a brand new ten per cent wage cut on top of all the rest.
This new burden is being pushed onto the working people because the Administration wants to raise for war financing $10,500,000,000 more taxes in 1944 than this year – and big business. Wall Street, America’s “Sixty Families,” the rich, want you and me to pay most of that $10,500,000,000.
The National Association of Manufacturers has made it clear to its political servants in Congress that the NAM “believes fiscal and tax policies should be adopted that will ... encourage the system of free enterprise.” That is the way the capitalist class says: “Hands off our war profits!”
Both Republican and Democratic politicians now considering the tax question in the House Ways and Means Committee, hear their masters’ voice.
Thus the committee has rejected the idea of increasing individual income tax rates on higher income brackets. It has likewise refused to raise estate and gift taxes.
It has no intention of increasing corporation taxes and even balks at stepping up excess profits taxes.
But the committee did retain a three per cent victory tax on the incomes of nine million families who earn so little that they do not come within the income-tax-paying brackets.
The Associated Press reported from Washington on October 25:
“Without the adoption of a federal retail tales tax or some other new levy there appears very little likelihood the new revenue bill now being drafted would provide more than $2,000,000,000.”
That leaves $8,500,000,000 of the $10,500,000,000 that the Administration wants to prosecute the war. With the exception of on increased liquor tax and other small items, “some other new levy” is just talk.
The big boys are out for that ten per cent “federal retail soles tax.” They are out for another ten per cent slash in the buying dollar of the people.
And they are not all Republicans on the House Committee which is so willing to take $8,500,000,000 more out of workers’ wages. Chairman Doughton is a Democrat. Representative Robertson, chief advocate of the sales tax, is also a Democrat.
The propaganda batteries of big business have, of course, opened up a ceaseless barrage to get public opinion “used” to the idea of a steep sales tax. The main argument – if it can be called that – is that a sales tax will “retard inflation.”
When big business reaches into the workers’ pockets, it uses “inflation” as its excuse.
This new attack on wages in the form of a sales tax must be fought by labor with all it has. It is not enough for Murray and Green to “lobby” in Washington. That method has won little for labor.
Labor can really take vigorous and telling action against the sales tax. The unions are in a position to expose it as the scheme of big business to duck taxes and pass them on to the people.
Furthermore, the rank and file of organized labor can hold public meetings to protest the passage of the sales tax and bring into the fight all the common people who will suffer from it.
Labor’s tax fight needs to go beyond the mere aim of defeating the sales tax.
The existing tax load is already unjust and unwarranted. It should be lifted from labor’s back.

Let the rich pay for the war.
 
Let the government confiscate all war profits.
 
Let the government limit individual salaries and incomes to $25,000 a year.
 
Let it place a capital levy on the vast accumulated fortunes of America’s plutocracy.

 




Malnutrition and actual hunger threaten the working people of this country – unless the production and distribution of food is taken out of the hands of the capitalists and politicians. The burning question of food for the people is now clearly defined: Will the people eat – or will the food barons be allowed to accumulate profits as usual, and better?
Even bread and milk – the mainstays of life – have not been exempted from the selfish machinations of the economic and political bosses working hand in glove. The new year has been ushered in with boosts in the prices of bread and milk!
In the case of each of these indispensable foods, the OPA and Mr. Wickard claim that it was a toss up between raising prices, paying government subsidies to the private owners of these food industries, or cutting down their profits. THE GOVERNMENT CHOSE TO BOOST PRICES SO THAT PROFITS SHALL CONTINUE.
The statement at the beginning of this article that malnutrition and actual hunger threaten the American working people is no propagandistic gag.
James Staniford, a Washington correspondent writing for the magazine, American Mercury, states: “the United States has the greatest food producing plant in the world. In spite of it, however, Americans face hunger and all that the word implies – -malnutrition, bent and ill-formed bodies, increased susceptibility to various types of physical ailments and a lack of stamina and staying power.”
Mr. Staniford failed to add that this calamitous prospect is due – along with “the unusual demands of the war – to the fact that the production and distribution of food is the source of enormous private profit for a bunch of bloated capitalists and bankers who also dictate political policy.
 
Borden Profits
An instance in point is the 1942 profits of the Borden Company which amounted to ELEVEN AND A HALF PER CENT a share on the market value of its stock. Such profits, however, do not stay the hand of the OPA from ordering an increase in milk prices to FIFTEEN CENTS A QUART in the New York area. Nor do such swollen profits bother the conscience of the dairy bosses.
The Vice-president of the Borden Company hastens to inform the public that “Whatever adjustments are allowed, the industry will take advantage of them, because it has been too hard hit not to welcome this easement of a difficult situation.”
The difficulties of the Borden Company resolve themselves into the aforementioned eleven and a half per cent profits on the market value of its stock.
The price-raising order of the OPA which applies to milk in the New York, Chicago and Duluth-Superior areas, will soon be extended to include Boston and other Massachusetts districts, Denver, Si Louis, Toledo, Memphis, Louisville, Kansas City and areas in Indiana.
Higher prices for milk will, of course, affect the already exorbitant prices of butter and cheese. Furthermore, there is talk in Washington about reducing the butter-fat content of fluid milk, thus giving the consumer even less food value for the twenty per cent increase in price.
The Department of Agriculture – Mr. Wickard’s bailiwick – in 1941 issued a statement that scarcely one family in four had a diet that measured up to a satisfactory level. Will increasing the price and decreasing the quality of milk improve this alarming situation in 1943 – which was already worse in 1942 than in 1941?
The ten per cent increase in the price of wheat flour just allowed by the OPA will also be passed on to the consumer – in spite of Mr. Wickard’s fancy plan to keep bread prices the same. Just whom is he trying to fool? Wickard bread will contain less sugar, milk and fat. And if it will be sold unsliced, that will constitute an element of waste. Every housewife knows that slicing bread at home involves considerable waste. Neither will putting a few vitamin pills more into the flour make up for the decrease in the food value of bread. Honest doctors and dietitians are exploding the idea that pills can take the place of vitamins in their organic form as contained in food. Price of Bread
But the big baking companies are by no means satisfied with these “minor” ways of robbing the consumer. They will not pass up the opportunity for an outright boost in the price of bread afforded them by the OPA increase in the price of wheat flour. Big business bakers are right on the job pushing with all their might for higher bread prices.
Higher prices that are transformed into more profits, must mean less; consumption of the necessary foods. What else can this procedure result In? Malnutrition and actual hunger will be the ghosts at the feast of war profits. Mr. Wickard himself reported to the President in 1941 that to provide every American with a satisfactory diet there would be needed for consumption 50 per cent more milk, 12 per cent more eggs 33 per cent more tomatoes, citrus fruits and other vitamin C products, and 80 per cent more leafy, green and yellow vegetables.
Will the price-boosting policy of the OPA and of Food Boss Wickard – to allow big business “adequate” profits – help the people get the required food? Or will not the deplorable situation existing in 1941 – which became worse in 1942 – grow truly alarming in 1943?
Because the bosses of the food industry will not produce food except for profit – the government has chosen to raise the prices of all foods so that the Borden Company and its brethren may not be interrupted in the fascinating pastime of scooping up profits to the tune of eleven and a half per cent.
 
Profiteering Sit-Down
The people must remember that in the early days of the war program the big bosses would not accept government contracts for war goods until certain profit returns were assured them. Today, as many workers know from their own experience, the bosses are more concerned with “COST PLUS” than with anything else. The question must therefore be put: Can the production of the wherewithal of life be allowed to remain in the hands of these profit-seeking citizens?
Rationing is, of course, absolutely essential. But if the production of food is permitted to remain on a guaranteed profit basis, the people will never be able to tell what are actual food shortages, and what are shortages due to big business “sit-down strikes” for more profit.
Price fixing is also absolutely essential. But with the bosses and politicians in control, how are the consumers to know what prices are fair prices?
There is no other way out: The food industries must be under the control of the people themselves through committees of workers and working farmers. Rationing and price fixing must also be carried out by committees of workers, working farmers and housewives.
This is no program for some distant future. In 1943 there will be such suffering from lack of food as this nation has not known – unless feeding the nation is undertaken by the people themselves.
This program will benefit the city and farm workers, the small retailers and small farmers. Such a step will mean more and better food for every man, woman and child. Only big business will be irritated by the controls on its criminal profits.
 




With great fanfare and after much delay, the Department of Agriculture and the OPA have announced the rationing of 200 processed foods – in cans, in bottles and dried – to be followed by the rationing of meat, dairy products and other foods.
Every rational person will go one better than Mr. Henderson, retiring OPA chief, and agree that it is not only “desirable” but absolutely imperative “to institute rationing that we may share and share alike.”
For many months Labor Action has been demanding rationing as the only democratic way of meeting the alarming food shortage, not in the middle of February and later – but right now.
There is, however, the kind of serious rationing under which all could really “share and share alike” – and then again there is the kind that won’t have that desired result because it can’t.
Is the rationing of canned foods scheduled for February – which will later apply to meat and which will in fact be the model for all rationing – the effective or the ineffective kind?
No fault is found with the points system of rationing. That method could be made to work – provided it is mixed with other altogether indispensable ingredients. These missing essentials are:

RIGID PRICE CONTROL WITH DECREASES IN THE PRICES OF MANY BASIC ITEMS.
 
NATION-WIDE WAGE INCREASES TO MEET THE COST OF LIVING, WITH VERY SUBSTANTIAL RAISES FOR THE SUB-STANDARD GROUPS.
 
COMMITTEES OF WORKERS, FARMERS AND HOUSEWIVES TO SEE THAT THE RATIONING PROGRAM IS NOT NULLIFIED BY THE BLACK MARKET.

Without the above, rationing will be a farce. However, neither Secretary of Agriculture Wickard nor Elmer Davis nor Leon Henderson – all of whom spoke on the radio on Sunday – has the remotest intention of supplying, these missing parts for a rationing program that will work.
On the subject of price control, Mr. Wickard’s speech gives cause for deep suspicion as to the seriousness of his rationing program. He is quite complacent on the subject of prices. He said: “Already we have acted to see that food prices, along with other prices, don’t get too high. So we do not have rationing through higher prices.”
This is maddening irresponsibility on Mr. Wickard’s part. He flies in the face of a truth the grimness of which every working class housewife understands. Food prices are too high – AND THERE HAS BEEN RATIONING THROUGH HIGH PRICES.
Even before the butter shortage developed, many a working class family could not buy it because of its price. Many a working class child does not get even one egg a week because of the price of eggs. On account of the excessive cost of meat and poultry, low income groups don’t get any share at all of these commodities but throw out their hard-earned money for fat-laden sausage meats or cuts so inferior that they are full of fat, bone and stringy tissue. To these groups even canned soups have become a rationed luxury because of the mounting price.
 
Workers Must Take a Hand
Mr. Wickard and his kind speak from the depths of their own contentment with life and not from the point of view of the struggling working class. Therefore neither he nor Mr. Henderson saw fit to say anything about the label-posters who are gayly price-profiteering under the OPA policy that everything is in a name – never mind what’s in the can.
Nor did either of these contented gentlemen deign to mention the little deal between the Administration and the powerful farm bloc under which deal will be permitted “moderate increases in ceiling prices on farm products.” CERTAINLY INCREASED FARM PRICES ARE CLOSELY CONNECTED WITH THE MATTER OF RATIONING CANNED, BOTTLED AND DRIED FARM PRODUCTS. How much of the rationed food will the working class housewife be able to buy if the prices are allowed to climb beyond her reach?
That is exactly where they are going – if workers and housewives do not themselves rise to the emergency and take matters in hand.
 
Silent on Wages
On the subject of increasing wages to meet the cost of living and thus enable the working-class family to get its rightful and legal share of rationed food, Mr. Wickard was as silent as Mr. Henderson and Mr. Henderson as silent as Mr. Davis. That subject – along with other military secrets – must not be discussed. Indirectly, however, Mr. Wickard very summarily dismissed the whole subject of wages in typical bureaucratic manner. He said: “Malnutrition is not altogether a matter of poverty. Sometimes it is a matter of ignorance!”
Could Mr. Wickard – with all his knowledge of proper nutrition – keep himself and family from suffering malnutrition on an income of less than SIXTEEN DOLLARS A WEEK?
There are 16,000,000 workers in this country who get for their labor less than $16 a week. Rationing alone will not enable these underpaid workers to “share and share alike.” Their wages have to be doubled, even trebled, to put them abreast of the cost of living.
Donald Montgomery, who has just resigned as consumers’ counsel in Secretary Wickard’s Department of Agriculture, reveals that THIRTY-EIGHT PER CENT of the people of this country will not be able to buy all the meat to which they will be entitled when meat rationing comes. MORE WAGES IS WHAT THIS THIRTY-EIGHT PER CENT OF THE POPULATION MUST HAVE.
Even the better-paid workers are getting a pretty raw deal. According to the figures of the CIO, the cost of living index has far exceeded the 15 per cent formula established by the WLB. Wage increases are long overdue. The constantly rising cost of living daily makes the position of the workers worse. Rationing alone will not help. Workers must have the money with which to buy the rationed foods. THEY MUST BE PAID MORE FOR THEIR LABOR.
 
What Kind of Rationing?
On the third essential point, namely, who will carry out the rationing program; the plan is of course, that the government will do it, probably through the OPA.
The workers have had experience with the OPA’s way of “enforcing” price ceilings. There are more holes in OPA ceilings than in Swiss cheese, with chiselers and profiteers constantly boring more holes.
That is not the kind of rationing the working people want, thank you. But under the OPA or any government agency – operating bureaucratically and closely connected with private interests seeking only their own aggrandizement – rationing will have the same fate as price control of consumer goods.
Black market operations are bound to develop and further reduce the supply of goods available to the working people. Already a black market is sprouting for rationed fuel oil and gasoline and for still unrationed meat. In England, rationing has been in effect for several years – and for as many years the black market has been cutting big slices out of the supplies of rationed goods.
Workers haven’t the means to patronize the black market, which reserves the choicest of everything for the rich. The black market menace must be fought by the working people through committees of workers, farmers and housewives. Only such committees have the power to prevent rationing from becoming a farce.
To summarize and impress these points on the mind of the reader, it must be emphasized that rationing is urgent – to be effective, however, it must be fortified by:

LOWER PRICES AND STRICT PRICE CONTROL.
 
WAGE INCREASES TO CORRESPOND TO THE COST OF LIVING.
 
COMMITTEES OF WORKERS, FARMERS AND HOUSEWIVES – THE ONLY AGENCIES THAT CAN MAKE A GO OF PRICE CONTROL AND RATIONING.

 




With the rationing of canned and dried foods beginning March 1, we get a realistic idea of the extent of the food shortage.
The consumption of items which have been the backbone of the American diet will be cut down to 43 per cent of normal. From 30,000,000 cases of canned fruits and vegetables each month civilian consumption will be slashed to 13,000,000 cases.
Back in November 1942 James F. Byrnes, economic stabilization director, was very reassuring. “A POSITIVE PROGRAM THAT WILL GUARANTEE OUR PEOPLE THE BASIC LIVING ESSENTIALS THAT THEY MUST HAVE AT PRICES THEY CAN PAY,” is what he promised.
That was only sand thrown in the eyes of the worried people. From March 1 on an individual will get for his 48 points a month one small No. 1 can of peas, one small can of tomatoes, one large can of peaches – and that is all of such vegetables and fruits as are so extensively used – THAT IS ALL FOR A WHOLE MONTH.
The housewife is told not to be panicky. She to assured that the stores are bursting with fresh fruits and vegetables that she can buy instead of the rationed canned foods. But can she?
Realizing the cynical humor implied in the advice to housewives to buy fresh fruits and vegetables at prices beyond her capacity to pay, the OPA hurriedly placed “emergency price ceilings” on fresh tomatoes, snap beans, carrots, cabbage and peas.
Why “emergency ceilings” were put on these five vegetables alone, only the great minds in the OPA know. IT HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH THAT HUMBUG CALLED PARITY.
That is why such common vegetables as lettuce and sweet potatoes are excluded Irom the “emergency ceilings.” Others, like, broccoli and spinach, aren’t covered because they are limited in quantity anyway at this season of the year – so why not let the prices go merrily up?
But even with the “emergency ceilings,” which are effective from February 23, the prices of the five favored vegetables are exorbitant. String beans cost 23 cents a pound, cabbage nine cents a pound, tomatoes 27 cents a pound, anemic carrots 10 cents a bunch, half-empty green peas 15 cents a pound. These are A&P Supermarket prices in New York City.
No wonder the housewife is panicky. AT SUCH PRICES SHE MUST LET THE NICE FRESH VEGETABLES REMAIN IN THE STORE BINS.
Just what is a working class family going to eat?
Meat is almost unobtainable and when obtainable, untouchable because of price. Fish is very dear. Butter and fats are, scarce. Supplies of dried beans and dried peas are already 20 per cent below normal. The high point values of ordinary prunes and raisins – so indispensable for certain minerals and vitamins – will make them prohibitive.
Mr. Byrnes’ “positive program that will guarantee our people the basic living essentials that they must have at prices they can pay” – has gone the way of all such official “guarantees.”
The Kiplinger Washington Agency, circulating its weekly letter privately to business men, made a most interesting disclosure about the food shortage in its letter of February 6. Mr. Kiplinger informed his paying clients that even if there were no lend-lease demand and no drain into the armed forces, the USA could not supply the 1943 food requirements, because food production in this land of plenty HAS BEEN GEARED ON THE BASIS THAT ONE-THIRD OF THE NATION NORMALLY GOES HUNGRY.
Increased employment for war production has put wages into the hands of wageless millions, placing them in the market for food. Without the demands of the armed forces and lend-lease, the government estimates it would require the cultivation of 30,000,000 more acres of land to be able to feed all three-thirds of the nation! But food production has shrunk while war production has expanded. And, there IS the drain of lend-lease and of the armed forces.
The Roosevelt Administration has known right along about the peacetime curtailment of food production. But instead of doing something to get more food produced, it issued false and frequent assurances to the people. The only perceptible food policy that the government has consistently followed is to yield to the demands of the rich farm corporations growing richer on the war.
The menacing mess of food shortages, outrageous prices, black market cornering of scarce goods, is the result of government bungling plus aiding and abetting private-profit manipulations. The present food emergency is an unequivocal condemnation of the government, its agencies and big-business-farming corporations.
This is only the second year of war for the American people and already hunger lurks around the corner. All the signs point to a long war. What will another year of war bring if food control is allowed to remain in the hands of big-business-farming corporations with the government in their tow!
The working people must take certain urgent measures on their own and in their own behalf. Committees of workers, farmers and housewives just have to get into action.
These committees are a crying need to expose and smash the black markets that get the cream and half the milk of available supplies, thus making a mockery of rationing. Such committees must start functioning not only to keep prices from rising but to effect price cuts so that working people can buy what there is to buy.
Furthermore, committees of small farmers and workers must get in on the ground floor, contest the profit manipulations of the big-farm bloc, and get people’s control of he production of food as an elementary step for self-preservation.
 




Captain Eddie Rickenbacker’s name is spread in screeching letters on a leaflet being, used by the Ku Klux Klan in its terroristic campaign to keep the citrus workers of Florida from joining; the United Cannery Agricultural & Allied Workers, CIO.
Rickenbacker is as anti-labor as the KKK – which is now adopting the Rickenbacker angle. These vile enemies of everything even smelling of progress are trying to make the public believe that they are “protecting” the men in the armed forces. Actually they are out to bust the unions so that when the soldiers return home they will become an army of unorganized workers at the complete mercy of the organized bosses.
Here is the Rickenbacker leaflet in full:



HERE YESTERDAY – TODAY – FOREVER
AMERICANS
SOLDIERS SAILORS MARINES are now working, fighting and dying every hour in the day and night that this country will be saved and that all AMERICANS can remain FREE. They work any place and at any hour and many die in a fox hole for $50 a month.
Some so-called AMERICANS won’t work at all or demand higher wages, then loaf on the job or try to browbeat LOYAL MEN and WOMEN. CAPT. EDDIE RICKENBACKER in a speech on February 2, 1943, said: “Men returning from this war do not want and will not accept regimentation of their lives or planned economy; it is time now that Congress should provide legislation that upon release or discharge any member of our armed forces could be employed by any employer without joining any organized labor union,” and that all men found stalling on the job and not working at all should take the place of a man at the front and maybe die in a fox hole fighting the Japs and Germans. WE THINK SO TOO.
ARE YOU ON THE JOB?
THE KU KLUX KLAN
IS WATCHING!



These leaflets are distributed not only to intimidate sharecroppers and farm and orchard workers – but to rouse the KKK rabble to its sadistic orgies. As is well known, the KKK’s anti-Negro, anti-Semitic and anti-Catholic program is also a way of mobilizing race and religious hatred into mob violence against labor. For the KKK is the “secret weapon” of the big landlords and big corporations of the South to their unrelenting opposition to the organization of factory and farm labor.
The tie-up between Rickenbacker and the KKK is not confined to a leaflet. The ownership of all big business, industrial and farming, Southern and Northern, meshes in with finance capital centered in the money strongholds of the North, This is where Rickenbacker, president of the big Eastern Airlines, comes in – along with the bosses behind the KKK.
The present vicious thrust of the KKK is concentrated at Orlando, Fla., where the Florida Citrus & Allied Workers, Local 4, UCAPAWA has organized 80,000 citrus workers The union is about to have a National Labor Relations Board vote and the KKK is out to squash the union by terrorizing its members.
The KKK has to its credit innumerable murders, many more floggings, tar-and-featherings and vicious assaults upon innocent people. But this does not prevent the boss-owned radio stations and newspapers from accepting the “patronage” of the KKK to further its mob-rule. On January 30 the KKK issued a mobilization call to its gangs over the Orlando radio. On January 31 the Orlando Sentinel-Star had the ad:
“WANTED – 4,000 or more of the 8,000 KLANSMEN from Orange, Seminole and Oceola Counties. There is work to do! Write P.O. Box 1212, Orlando, Fla.”
Needless to say, the most innocent of the activities of these Klansmen is the distribution of the Rickenbacker leaflet, pasting them on billboards, etc. They are told: There is work to do! They understand that!
The KKK in Orlando is directed by KKK Kleagle Fred Bass. It is interesting to note that this Bass is also chairman of the Americanization Committee of the American Legion, indicating how closely interwoven are the reactionary organizations and leaders – from Rickenbacker to the KKK to the American Legion!
In 1935 Fred Bass was accused of complicity in the murder of Frank Norman, a union organizer – but not by any court of “justice” in the bourbon South. At that time Bass said:
“I broke up the Unemployment Council and anyone in Orlando can tell you Fred Bass gets the credit ... The sheriff knows any time he needs men, all he has to do is ring up Fred Bass and inside an hour he has five hundred men. ‘Course, sometimes it’s necessary to take the law into our hands. We string up a n—r now and then – f’r example like. Not officially, but it comes to the same thing.
“Over in Lakeland, a fellow named No’man – Frank No’man – he got foolin’ around with n—rs and unions and he got the works. I don’t think he’s dead ... But this No’man was a red. I ran honestly say that. Sometimes we gotta show people what we think of those stinkin’ troublemakers.’’
Bass very eloquently summed up the code of ethics and justice and government – the American way of life as carried out by the KKK – on behalf of the Southern bosses. The KKK finds itself in complete accord with Captain Eddie Rickenbacker – hero.
 




Officials of OPA, discussing price control at a recent convention of some wholesalers’ association, stated that “THE PLAN OF SELF-ENFORCEMENT WILL BE GIVEN A CHANCE IN THE COMING MONTHS.”
This and other straws show the way the wind is blowing. The in-adequacy of the OPA – for long apparent to the housewife – is now becoming clear to the OPA itself. It is passing the buck – to the public. Long ago Labor Action predicted that no bunch of boss politicians, could separate profits from food – so that the latter can be supplied to the masses.




According to government sources quoted in the press this week, fully 17 per cent of all meat sold to consumers in this country is black market meat!



But the “public” – into whose lap the OPA tosses the thorny food problem – is too all-inclusive. It takes in those very elements to whom the crisis in food is a welcome opportunity for profiteering, such as the “legitimate” big-farm bloc and the illegitimate black market manipulators. The “public” includes bankers and brokers, bosses and business men, large chain stores and wholesalers – that fraternity united by the profit-motive, to whom high prices mean more profits.
 
How Stop Chaos?
The interest of the masses in getting food at available prices can be carried out only by committees of their own – namely, committees of trade unionists, working farmers and working-class housewives. This is the part of the “public” upon whom depend the control of prices and rationing, and the freeing – from the grip of private profit – of food for mass consumption.
The anarchy and chaos reigning on the food front make absolutely imperative the immediate organization and functioning of such working class committees. “Anarchy and chaos” are exactly the right words, the proof of which is far more plentiful than many foods.
Canned and dried foods, for instance, have been rationed at such high point values that many are almost prohibitive. Comes along the American Institute of Food Distribution, a top-notch research organization, with the statements that “the government’s 40 per cent purchase of the 1942 canning pack is open to question” and that “the reserve stockpiles seem to be excessive.”
IN FACT, THE INSTITUTE INDICATES THAT ONLY 15 PER CENT OR PERHAPS 13 PER CENT EVEN OF THE 1942 CANNING PACK WOULD HAVE BEEN SUFFICIENT FOR THE ARMED FORCES.
So – what are the working people to make of that? Is the government right or is the research organization right? Some really reliable research is definitely called for. Committees of organized workers, working farmers and housewives could supply it.
Again, on the one hand the Army buys up the entire crop of No. 1 Idaho potatoes. A couple of weeks later it cancels 50 per cent of the order. Why did it order twice as much to begin with? Where is the rhyme or reason?
 
Ceilings – and Meat
Beginning April 1 meat, and cheese as a meat substitute, will together be rationed at four ounces per person per day – a ridiculously small ration if you consider what is left of four ounces of meat after it is cooked. How do the workers know that such deprivation is indeed necessary? Certainly the official handling of the food situation to date does not inspire confidence.
Ceilings are being put on meats to become effective with April 1 rationing. Most of the ceilings are an outrage – bacon, for example, being about 58 per cent above 1939 prices. But even such high ceilings are meaningless because the powerful farm bloc does not allow ceilings to be placed on cattle and hogs – from which, as everyone knows, meat comes.
Thus the OPA, which set ceilings on meat, taking profits well into consideration, is still at loggerheads with the Department of Agriculture and Congress, which are pretty much under the thumb of the rich farm corporations – hankering after even greater profits. If the working people are to eat any meat at all, they will have to do something about it – outside the realm of profits and politics.
The above enumeration by no means exhausts the instances of the pandemonium on the food front.
 
It Is – And It Isn’t
To go on, then. Meat not being available, the housewife is big-heartedly urged to buy chickens – though she is not told where to get the money to pay the fancy prices. But – presto, a poultry shortage also develops. Why? Poultry dealers – with an eye peeled for the most profitable pastures – send their supplies to the markets where the ceiling prices on poultry are higher or where there are no ceilings at all. What kind of ceiling system is this anyway?
To cap the climax, Mayor LaGuardia makes an eleventh-hour revelation that there isn’t so much poultry on hand after all – there actually being in storage now only 55 per cent of the amount of a year ago.
In a recent issue of the New York Times, John D. Morris writes an article under the head: Policing Food Front Up to Housewife in the End.
It is unusual for a writer in the boss press to be so blunt, but Mr. Morris hits pretty near the mark. However, the “housewife” is as helpless as an unorganized individual as a worker is as an unorganized individual.
WITH ORGANIZATION THERE IS STRENGTH.
WITH ORGANIZATION THERE CAN BE WELL-PLANNED ACTION.
 




Chaos and confusion still reign supreme on the food front.
On the one hand Secretary of Agriculture Wickard boasts that 10,000,000 more acres of land will be planted in food crops.
On the other hand, canners have announced that they are seriously considering cutting down the canning of food because the government purchases of the 1942 pack for the armed forces, lend-lease, etc., are still stacked in the warehouses – and, by the way, there is considerable dispute as to whether the government needed to buy as much as it did of the 1942 pack.
At any rate, if the canners reduce operations, much of the additional 1943 crops will simply be spoiled.
Thus the bureaucrats muddle along – and workers pay for it.
*
The housewife was told that if she was caught without butter or oil when the freeze was unexpectedly announced beginning at midnight on March 22, she might substitute meat fats.
That is what one might call rubbing salt into an open wound – for where is the meat the average housewife can buy from which to get fat?
*
On March 19 the House voted to increase farm parity prices once more – making the second increase in 1943, which is not yet three months old! Thus the farm bloc continues its victorious march to the heights of war profiteering prices.
If the Senate also approves the Pace bill, at least 16 per cent will be added immediately to consumer prices of food.
Ostensibly the Pace bill is for the benefit of the farm family, by allowing the cost of family labor as well as hired labor to be included in parity levels.
However, because of the octopus ownership and control of every phase of farming by the big farm corporations, most of the increase in parity prices will, in the final count, be in their pockets. Of the first 1943 boost in parity prices, those on top got 64 per cent, while the great mass of farmers got only 13 per cent.
Lobbying in Congress pays those who can afford it.
*
When canned goods rationing went into effect, the OPA placed ceilings on beans, cabbage, carrots, peas, tomatoes, lettuce and spinach.
But no housewife has any way of knowing what the ceilings are supposed to be. When beans are 25 cents a pound one day and 29 cents the next, and she makes a fuss about it, she is told the beans are entirely different, coming from another state, and of course are of much better quality.
One gag is as good as another – as long as the housewife is forced to pay more for the same goods.
*
The mystery has never been solved as to why the OPA picked out just seven vegetables upon which to put ceiling prices – so that they can be violated.
Why is it not required of the dealer even to give a fluky explanation as to why turnips went up from three cents to eight cents a pound – why sweet potatoes or yams went from three pounds for 22 cents to 12 cents for a single pound – why cauliflower is 40 to 50 cents a head?
*
Secretary of Labor Perkins admitted that government cost-of-living indexes do not give a true picture of the rising cost of living.
This, she explained, is due to the fact that the statisticians do not take into account shifting from one kind of food to another, or shopping in higher-priced stores when things are not obtainable in lower-priced ones.
Between mid-January and mid-February, for example, fresh fruits and vegetables went up 3.8 per cent, according to government figures. Prices of canned goods stayed about the same. But, because supplies of canned goods were short, more families had to buy the higher-priced fresh food. This made the rise in their cost of living much higher than government statistics showed.
Notwithstanding this fact, these government cost-of-living indexes remain the basis for the operation of the Little Steel formula – which keeps wages down to a mere 15 per cent above the miserable wages of January, 1941, While – Even by these inadequate government indexes the rise in the cost of living has more than doubled 15 per cent.
More power to labor in its present fight to break the unfair limits of the Little Steel formula!
*
When milk gets to be 20 cents a quart – as is the aim of the farm bloc – will they tell us to drink wine – OR WATER?
 




While the workers are digging into their pockets and coughing up plenty dor taxes, Congress is busy with its various new tax plans. There is quite a raft of them – the Ruml plan, the Carlson bill, the Robertson bill, to name a few. There is also talk of increasing the tax rates and of imposing a national sales tax – showing which way the wind is blowing.
All of these schemes and any of them will carry out the fundamentally unfair policy of saddling onto the working people the main burden of financing the war. Even the tax plans of the AFL and CIO accept that boss policy and offer nothing basic to lighten the taxes on the workers.
Basically there is no reason why the working people should bear ANY of the fantastic cost of this war. The working people should not be taxed at all – neither on their wages nor on what they buy as consumers. There are other sources for war taxation – much more ample than a worker’s wages.
There are, first of all, the stupendous war profits taken in, hand over fist, by industry – about which readers of Labor Action have a good idea. All profits are unclean because they come from the exploitation of labor. But war profits are of a particularly filthy character.
Every cent of war profits should be confiscated by the government. War profits must be abolished in toto. That is one source for financing the war.
An equally vast source is the accumulated wealth of America’s “Sixty Families.” These tremendous fortunes – comprising the ownership of perhaps ninety-five per cent of the total wealth – are absolutely scot-free of taxes, the Morgans, Rockefellers, Mellons, Fords, duPonts and all the branches of their family trees, own the bulk of the banking, industrial and farming wealth; of the utilities, of wholesale and retail business, and whatever else you can think of.
But all these fortunes – the extent of which one cannot even imagine – running into hundreds of billions of dollars, are considered holy – in themselves never to be taxed (except when passed on in inheritance). It is only the annual profits on this enormous untaxed wealth that the tax collector nibbles at. THEREFORE, THERE MUST BE A YEARLY LEVY ON THIS ACCUMULATED CAPITAL. Let the Sixty Families disgorge – instead of working people getting themselves into debt trying to pay taxes and to meet the cost of living with frozen wages.
Another logical source for financing the war is the salaries of the “captains of industry” – RUNNING INTO SIX FIGURES. In 1941, Eugene Grace, president of Bethlehem Steel, “earned”(?) $537,724 and Tom Girdler of Republic Steel got a “wage” of $275,000 – besides the income from various other sources.
But in July 1942 – IN THE MIDST OF THE WAR BOOM – 16,000,000 American workers were still earning less than $16 a week, and the average war wage was $37 a week.
Which of these categories is better able to pay taxes – the “captains of industry” or the “deck hands of industry”? HEAVY TAXES MUST BE PLACED WHERE THEY BELONG – ON THE HIGH INCOME BRACKETS, including salaries and other sources of income.
The above three points form substantially the tax plan of the WORKERS PARTY and have the wholehearted support of Labor Action. To abolish war profits by 100 per cent confiscation – to tax the six-figure incomes down to four figures – to levy yearly taxes on accumulated fortunes – this is a tax program for the whole working class. Such a plan carries out the eminently just principle that the workers should not be made to finance the war as well as bear its other burdens.
However, this just principle certainly does not occur to the law-makers. If a true representative of labor proposed it in Congress, it would undoubtedly produce paroxysms of wrath. With congressmen – as with the National Association of Manufacturers – the Ruml plan is one of the favorites because it will “forgive” the 1942 taxes. Since profits in 1942 were a lush growth, the rich would be getting away with murder under the Ruml plan.
True, the workers would also be “forgiven” their 1942 taxes. But —
President Roosevelt has asked for $16,000,000,000 additional taxes in 1943. And while he opposes the Ruml plan, his basic scheme is similar to that of Congress – hit low incomes as hard as possible. Already there is talk in Congress of increasing the income tax rates and of imposing a sales tax. With the influence that the National Association of Manufacturers has upon the “representatives of the people,” you may be sure that they will see to it that the load of new taxation is put on labor’s back just as was done in 1942. The “forgiveness” of 1942 taxes would very soon be forgotten by the workers – staggering under a new load made even heavier by the “forgiveness” to the bosses of their 1942 taxes.
The tax plan of the AFL and the CIO is very similar to the Robertson bill. The idea of this bill is to cancel only the 1942 normal and surtax on all incomes, and not the entire tax. This would “forgive” the workers the entire tax because they pay only normal and surtax, but would make those subject to higher taxes pay them.
As a temporary expedient, this plan seems to have something to recommend it. But it does not seek to solve the tax question on a principled working class basis. On the contrary, the AFL and CIO leadership are accepting the capitalist idea that it is just to tax the working people to pay for the war. Here is another instance of the class collaboration of union officialdom. It compromises with the powers that be – and gives labor the small end of the compromise.
All the tax schemes up for congressional consideration contain the pay-as-you-go feature. Superfically, pay-as-you-go looks like a plan to accommodate the workers. But is it? Isn’t it rather a plan to get the workers’ money while the getting is good? For politicians know – as well as you do – how uncertain a thing is employment.
To make assurance doubly sure, any tax bill passed will undoubtedly authorize the bosses to withhold at least twenty per cent of a worker’s wages each week, to be applied on his income tax. To wait until 1944 for workers to pay taxes on their 1943 wages might be waiting for mass resentment to reach explosive form. This essentially is the intention of the Roosevelt Administration.
Such is the array of bills before Congress. While the tax question is up before the lawmakers – who will, as usual, protect “sacred” wealth and profits, it should also be on the floor of every union local – for discussion from the point of view of the workers. Labor Action suggests a rank and file discussion of the following proposition:
Why should the workers – whose wages are being squeezed in a pincer movement – bear an unsufferable tax burden when (1) war profits are enormous; (2) incomes in six figures are not taxed enough; (3) the hundreds of billions, accumulated by the Morgans, Rockefellers, Fords, Mellons, duPonts from labor’s sweat, are not taxed at all, except for local realty taxes.
 




The vast majority of railroad workers have not received a wage increase since 1941.
Brushing aside this most pertinent fact, crafty spokesmen for the railroad monopoly are talking hard and fast to convince the special board holding hearings on the railroad unions’ demands for wage increases, that such increases should not be granted.
For instance, the vice-president of the New York Central beats his chest and assures the workers that he is looking out for their interests in refusing the wage increase. For, don’t you see, “any further wage increase for railroad employees will invite the disaster of inflation, with consequent injury to wage earners themselves.”
However, the ghost of inflation no longer scares the workers – for two very good and sufficient reasons.
One is that the purchasing power of the dollar has decreased and prices have become inflationary WITHOUT WAGES GOING UP!
The other reason why workers don’t scare, when the bosses pull their inflation puppet-ghost out of the closet, is that the workers see that inflationary prices and big war profits go together – so that when bosses cry “cheese it – inflation,” they only voice their objection to parting with even an inchy-binchy bit of those profits by increasing workers’ wages.
So the railroads – like all the bosses – have tightened their purse strings against wage increases – even though railroad workers are now comparatively worse off than other groups of workers. IT IS A WAR-FATTENED PURSE THAT THE TRANSPORTATION MONOPOLISTS ARE GUARDING.
 
Fat Railroad Profits
A.F. Whitney, president of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, testifying before the aforesaid special wage board, said that last year the Class I roads of the country had an all-time stupendous net operating income of $1,480,940,760 – after deducting taxes and all the other deductibles. This year, Mr. Whitney said, railroad dividends are being boosted by FORTY-FIVE PER CENT.
The financial pages of the papers bear out Mr. Whitney. For instance, the take of the Pennsylvania Railroad for the five months ending May 31 was $1.82 net per share – as against only $1.21 a year ago, OR AN INCREASE OF FIFTY PER CENT. Wall Street has confidence in the railroads coming in with a pirate’s loot this year – for, since the beginning of the year the market prices of railroad stocks have risen by from one-third or one-half.
As to some of the methods used by the railroads in getting their “just rewards,” there is a report, dated September 8, 1942, by Thurman Arnold, former assistant United States
Attorney General. This eye-opening report would have been completely suppressed by the boss press – presumably as unfit to print, or as giving information to the enemy. But the Railroad Brotherhoods pushed the report but into the light of day.
Mr. Arnold found that the financial giants behind the railroads made a little deal with twenty-three domestic air lines to stop the free development of air freight transportation – so as not to take away from the railroads any business they don’t want to give up. The effect of this “progressive” agreement – whereby the air lines pledged to charge at least twice as much as the railroads, and actually charge seven times as much – is that “all cargo on the domestic air lines of the United States is the exclusive monopoly of the railroads.”
Grover Loening, technical consultant for a government department, is quoted by Mr. Arnold as follows:
“This monopolistic contract exerted a very great influence in retarding the development of air cargo carrying in the United States, 90 that we find ourselves today in this war emergency having to make literally frantic efforts to catch up to a position that we could have well had many years ago ...”
The full-page ads of big business – which are charged to the government on cost-plus contracts – would have the innocent reader believe that the bosses are making all kinds of “sacrifices” for the war – and that without them there would be no economic development, no industrial progress. The Arnold report clearly shows how the railroads have “sacrificed” for the war and how they have “furthered” the improvement of transportation.
 
Artificially High Rates
The railroads have forced artificially high rates not only in air transort but in all transport “without regard to carrier costs or the value of the services rendered.” This is accomplished by deals and combinations, in the art of which capitalist “enterprise” is very efficient.
The tremendous increase in the volume of rail traffic due to government war orders has, of course, actually reduced the ton-mile costs of transportation because of the heavy car-loadings per haul. But the railroad magnates, being all-out for war profits, this does not constitute a reason either for reducing rail rates or for paying higher wages to railroad workers.
Mr. Arnold cites a most interesting instance where the railroads did reduce their rates. Before Pearl Harbor – to enable the steel interests, closely connected with the railroad monopolists, to sell to the Japanese at an attractive price, steel now used against American boys – the railroads charged only seventy-four cents per hundred pounds for transportation
from Bethlehem, Pa., to Portland, Ore. THE MOST OBLIGING UNCLE SAM WAS THEN PAYING ALMOST TWICE AS MUCH, OR. $1.43 PER HUNDRED POUNDS, FOR TRANSPORTING THE SAME STEEL PRODUCTS THE SAME DISTANCE.
So here we have another species of MERCHANTS of DEATH, the railroad monopolists. However, it is not exactly right to say “another species.” The big bosses are all one – one for profits – one against labor. Whether in steel, in copper, in oil, in transportation – they are knit together by interlocking ownership and by the tentacles of high finance. All benefit from the machinations of each.
THE CRISIS THE WORKERS TODAY FIND THEMSELVES IN CALLS FOR UNION MILITANCY AND FOR A PROGRESSIVE PROGRAM LEADING TO WORKERS’ CONTROL OF ALL INDUSTRY AND TRANSPORTATION.
 




When Congress reconvenes in the fall, one of the first things it is going to take up is a new tax law. While Congress is vacationing, the ground is being prepared for heavier taxes – ON LABOR.
The President states that the government must have at least twelve billion dollars more revenue, and he genially assures us that we aren’t going to mind paying it – NOT MUCH!
Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau puts out all kinds of charts to show that the British and Canadians pay higher income taxes than we do. SO BE PREPARED!
Representatives and senators are stating their points of view on this and that aspect of new taxation, from which we get a pretty good idea of the way this evil wind is blowing.
The rate of income tax on incomes below $10,000 is going to be raised.
Exemptions for family status and dependents will very likely be decreased.
A compulsory saving feature may be included in the new bill.
Senator Byrd of the Senate Finance Committee has expressed himself in favor of a “stiff” SALES TAX,
There is even talk of an “excess profits” TAX ON WAR WAGES – in line with the lying boss propaganda that not the bosses but the workers are the war profiteers!
Thus the long hand of the capitalist government will reach deeper into the slack pockets of the workers. HOWEVER, INDICATIONS ARE THAT THE NEW TAX BILL WILL CONTINUE HANDLING THE WAR-FATTENED BOSSES WITH KID GLOVES.
Washington correspondents are cautiously dropping bits of opinion to the effect that the big boys of business will not be made to “suffer” by the new tax bill. The present excess profits tax set-up, which allows the big corporations and the wealthy to get away with their bloody war swag, will probably remain as is.
The allowances to big business for so-called depletions and for this and that, will continue.
The exemptions to holders of certain kinds of securities and other forms of wealth will stand.
Bernard Baruch, supposed to be wizard on war economy, some time ago made the statement: “Even with a fixed price structure and a high excess profits tax there will be HUGE war profits.” However —
There is no high excess profits tax. The excess profits tax machinery is a network of convenient holes. And there is no fixed price structure. We all know that.
Therefore, war profits are not only “huge” – à la Baruch. They are super-colossal – à la Roosevelt. AND ALL PREDICTIONS ARE THAT THE NEW TAX BILL WILL ALLOW THEM TO REMAIN SUPER-COLOSSAL.
On the other hand, what’s going to happen to workers’ wages if the contemplated tax bill is passed? What will be left to the worker’s family to live on when MORE THAN twenty per cent will be sliced off his wages each week?
What will be left of that when a definite compulsory percentage will be taken off for so-called saving or bond purchases every week WITHOUT FAIL?
What will be left for buying the necessities of life at war profiteering prices TO WHICH A SALES TAX WILL BE ADDED?
What will be left even to the highest paid workers after all: these inroads into their wages PLUS A POSSIBLE “EXCESS PROFITS” TAX because they get a little more than the average wage?
THESE ARE TERRIBLE PROSPECTS FOR THE AMERICAN WORKING PEOPLE.
What is union labor going to do in the face of this newest threat? Will labor allow the fast one that is being put over on it to get faster with each passing year? Will labor continue to be the sucker for the rich? The working class must save itself from the swamp of relentless war exploitation into which we are all being pushed. If justice were done, the workers would pay no cent of war taxes.
 




According to the figures of the War Production Board, there has been a dropping off in the production of airplanes and war materiel.
The Rickenbacker gang takes this as an occasion again to lambaste “absenteeism” – whether it exists or not. Other super-patriots willy-nilly shout about the shortage of labor, for the need of a labor draft, for the drafting of fathers, or for whatever is their pet panacea.
However, some scribes of the capitalist press – in their effort to get more for the class that hires them – have come out with the truth concerning the curtailment in production of airplane engines and of other war goods.
 
Reactionary Upholds Business
Thus David Lawrence in his column in the New York Sun gave as one reason for the drop in production the displeasure of the war materiel manufacturers with the indictments and criminal proceedings following the Truman Committee reports on the sale to the government of defective engines and parts. THE BOSSES WANT TO BE PAY-TRIOTIC IN THEIR OWN PECULIAR WAY – OR NOT AT ALL!
In a later column, Mr. Lawrence gave an additional reason for the falling off in production!
“Management strain,” he says, “and the destruction of incentive, particularly the government’s failure to set up a termination of war contracts solution that will not discourage management during the war.”
Ralph Hendershot, financial editor of the New York World-Telegram, supports this view that the bosses lack “incentive” – poor things! THEIR WAR PROFITS RUN ONLY ALL THE WAY UP TO 2,400 PER CENT!
Says Mr. Hendershot:
“And one of the chief reasons is that the government has not made adequate provision for payment adjustment when contracts are cancelled ... It is only natural that the corporations should weigh future possibilities ... They know they will have need of all their capital to reconvert to a peacetime basis after the war, and they cannot afford to take too many chances.”
What chances are the bosses taking, with the government providing them with modern plants free, gratis and for nothing – with plenty of operating capital from Jesse Jones’ treasure chest – and with 1943 profits mounting above the 1942 bonanza?
What do all these reasons for slowing down production of planes boil down to? Just this: THE BOSSES HAVE GONE ON A SIT-DOWN STRIKE!
 
Bosses Are Fighting Mad!
They don’t like to be prosecuted for being merchants of death and passing off defective war materiel. Presto! They slow down production. They don’t like the government’s delays in adopting a policy regarding cancelled contracts. Presto! They cause production to fall off, thus putting pressure on their own government conducting a war caused by their own capitalist system. They keep an eye and a half cocked on peacetime business and profits – and don’t worry too much about the boys over there.
Yes, the bosses go on their own kind of strike when, as and if they choose. They did so right at the start of the war when the auto industry refused to convert to war production until they got their juicy cost-plus contracts.
They strike now when they don’t like government regulations – even the kid-glove OPA kind, as happened when boss slaughterers refused to take care of a large shipment of steers, thus depriving the consumers of thousands of pounds of precious meat. They are striking now by slowing up the production of planes arid other war goods because they don’t like the Truman Committee, because they want advantageous contract adjustments and because they are already anticipating post-war profits.
Yes, the bosses strike when, as and if they want to. And nobody calls them unpatriotic. Nobody shrieks about sabotaging the boys in the foxholes. Congress does not stampede to pass an anti-strike bill against the bosses.
 
Standards for Worker and Business
Quite the contrary! These “grievances” of the war-fattened exploiters are, most naturally, “just” ones and must be alleviated. By all means! Mr. Lawrence thinks that “within the next fortnight there ought to be some constructive suggestions for the handling of the problems that have brought such a serious setback on the airplane production front.” And Mr. Hendershot states: “It would seem, therefore, that some definite provision should be made at this time to correct the situation. And Congress is probably the only agency that can get the job done.”
And what is the job Congress is to do? See to it that the Truman, Committee doesn’t pry into the unscrupulous production methods of the bosses. See to it that the government adopts a pleasing, profit-yieldihg policy regarding cancelled contracts. See to it that post-war business and profits are given WARTIME consideration.
DEFINITELY THERE IS A DOUBLE STANDARD – ONE FOR THE BOSSES AND QUITE A DIFFERENT ONE FOR THE WORKERS.
For the workers there are no-strike pledges and a Connally-Smith anti-strike bill. For the workers there are invectives of the vilest kind from the whole capitalist press and from every radio commentator directly or indirectly linked to the National Association of Manufacturers.
Are not the grievances of labor as legitimate as those of capital? Of course not – NOT IN THE EYES OF THE CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT AND NOT IN THE EYES OF ALL THE SERVITORS OF THE CAPITALIST CLASS. For the grievances of the bosses pertain to the harvesting of profits – always legitimate under the profit system; while the grievances of labor pertain merely to the needs and desires of human beings – AN ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT PROPOSITION.
 
Where the Administration Stands
The discontent of labor has to do with grievances over conditions and wages which have been buried in the graveyard of the War Labor Board for months and even years.
The anger of labor has to do with the infamous Little Steel formula, which holds wages down while prices and profits go skyrocketing.
The demands of labor are, for instance, those of miners wanting an adequate wage for their dangerous work and portal-to-portal pay as miners all over the world get.
The grievances of labor pertain to such things as union recognition – a democratic right – for which labor is euphemistically assured this war is being fought.
To these grievances of labor the Roosevelt Administration has responded by using troops to break strikes. Congress has responded with the Connally-Smith anti-strike bill. Another “solution” offered for the discontent of the workers is to impose a military regime on them as in the Army, namely, the labor draft. And, lo and behold, as further means of restraining workers from giving expression to their just grievances, the genial friend of labor in the White House has come out with an executive order, to withhold dues from unions involved in strikes.
Yes, there is a double standard – one for the bosses and quite a different one for the workers. But it is to be expected that the ruling class will be the favored class – UNDER CAPITALISM THE CAPITALIST CLASS IS THE RULING CLASS, THE PRIVILEGED CLASS.
Labor cannot rely on any supporters of this system which inevitably favors the bosses – not on the Roosevelts, Wallaces, Willkies, and not on the no-strike pledgers in its own ranks who really serve the capitalist class. The working class itself must blaze its path to a better life. It must fight against the no-strike pledge and against the Connally-Smith anti-strike law.
Only by using their economic and political might can the workers improve themselves. They must struggle not only for a decent living standard – but for all the PLUSES of life. And they must realize that the working class .must make itself the governing class under a workers’ government marching on toward socialism.
 




In appealing to the striking miners in Alabama and Illinois to return to work, their union president, John L. Lewis, said:
“I know how discouraged and embittered you are because of the shabby treatment you are receiving. You are denied a wage that will provide adequate food for your families while the coal operators are making the greatest profits in history.”
Apparently for this very reason, the 22,000 miners out in Alabama continued their strike which is at this writing in its seventh day. Lewis acted at the request of the War Labor Board, which said: “This strike is contrary to labor’s no-strike pledge and the national policy.”
However, the miners who get coal out of the earth never gave a no-strike pledge. Moreover, they have a policy which is not to work without a contract.
For six months now the miners have been waiting for a contract, and while the so-called truce period expires on October 21, a contract is not yet forthcoming.
John J. Hanratty, international representative of the UMW, urged the men “not to argue the whys and wherefores” of the case, but to “get on your muckers and get into the mines today if that is necessary to produce a record tonnage of coal tomorrow.” And he added: “If any man tells you that your union is giving you this advice ‘with fingers crossed’ he is either a fool or a liar.” However, he also told the strikers that they are “conspicuous among groups denied even a fair return for their labors” and the miners don’t see why they should not ask the reason why portal-to-portal pay is being denied them.
A United Press dispatch about the strike contains this passage: “An example of the response of the miners was in these words of one employed at the Mylan [?] shaft of the Tennessee Coal & Iron Co.: ‘To hell with the union and to hell with the WLB. No contract, no work; and this time that stands.’”
It is very doubtful that this irate striker meant to hell with the union in the same sense as he meant to hell with the WLB. Miners know too well the importance of their organization. They are, however, angry about the advice to return to work before their grievances are settled and at the union leaders who give it.
 
A Silent Understanding
A special report to the New York Times of October 19 gave this significant description of how the miners are conducting their strike:
“According to reports from the striking areas, the miners were refusing to attend meetings lest they incur the penalties of the Connally-Smith Act and they had somehow set up some form of a ‘silent understanding’ with each other whereby they did not even need to speak, but would act as individuals as long as their wage grievances were not redressed.”
The miners seem to have the know-how.
The result of the strike so far as the WLB is concerned is the announcement of a public hearing on October 21 to listen to arguments on the proposed contract agreed upon a long time ago by the UMW and the Illinois coal operators but opposed by the Appalachian operators.
The WLB also proudly asserts its policy not to consider a case “at the point of a gun” and threatens not to hold the hearings after all unless the striking men return to their jobs. Without the muzzle of the strike in their hacks, the WLB members, did not see fit even to call a public hearing.
The Appalachian operators have made haste to state that they reject the terms of the proposed agreement, that it is a “subterfuge” covering a “hidden wage increase” – and of course, these capitalists bursting with war profits are worried about the “hold-the-line” order, you bet! So, the same old run-around begins again.
 
The Questions Posed
The miners have again pioneered for the labor movement. The Alabama and Illinois mine strikes pose to the whole labor movement once more the need to fight to end the Little Steel wage formula, to repudiate the no-strike pledge, to call labor’s representatives off the WLB – and to put labor in a position to bargain collectively for its legitimate demands.
For the miners themselves, the Alabama and Illinois strikes again pose the question of nationalizing the mines and placing them under workers’ control.
 




The week of October 4 most of the capitalist press of New York City and vicinity slobbered all over itself, weeping crocodile tears for the mothers, children, old people and invalids who did not get their regular milk deliveries.
The New York Times wrote an editorial entitled A Shameful Strike. The New York Post called the mild drivers’ action proof – no less – that a labor draft is called for. That’s the kind of “labor” paper the New York Post is.
The big business Sheffield Farms Company – whose employees became “sick” on receiving the War Labor Board decision that 959 of them were to be fired – bought advertising space in the metropolitan press to assure its customers that it was oh, so sorry; but it wasn’t their fault, don’t you know? At the same time, the news columns contained long statements by F. J, Andre, president of Sheffield, about how “TREASONABLE” their employees are. On the second day of the suspension of milk deliveries – when the
Borden employees caught the “sickness” which got their fellow workers in Sheffield – the papers tried the tear-jerking stunt of printing lerge pictures of women, with baby carriages, buying milk direct from the Sheffield depots for their little ones. Sob, sob!
Besides all this, the WLB issued ultimatums to the workers and their leaders unfaithfully opposed them in their action.
 
Job Security Involved
This gives some idea of the batteries of propaganda that were opened up against the employees of Sheffield and Borden when they refused to take lying down the decision of the WLB that job insecurity is the accepted principle of “American democracy.”
For that is exactly what is involved.
After eighteen months of dispute as to whether or not the powerful dairy trust had the right to fire its employees wholesale – on the excuse, of course, of “war necessity” – the WLB decided in favor of the trust.
“Freedom from Fear” – those empty words written in the Atlantic Charter and babbled about so much – does not apply to fear of losing a
job, The WLB decision means that 959 milk drivers will be out on their ears. How or where they will earn a living for themselves and their families was not the concern of the WLB!
No wonder drivers were suddenly afflicted with “asthma,” “sore arms” “sore backs,” “bad colds” – and called up that they could not come to work.
No wonder pasteurizers and platform men – when they heard of the afflictions of the drivers – caught the “germs,” became “ill” and went home.
No wonder the Borden employees an the second day got the contagion from the 3,500 Sheffield workers. They understood mat for any workers to be deprived of their bread and oleomargarine is a threat to all workers. That was enough to make them very sick indeed.
It is no joke to be turned out of a job that a worker has learned, where he has joined the union, where he has hoped to be able to continue making a living for himself, his wife and children.
 
Milk Trust Benefits
The pretext for this anti-labor and anti-human decision is that the war situation demands the skip-a-day delivery of milk. Ostensibly the purpose is to save rubber and gasoline. But —
For some time now milk deliveries in and around the metropolitan area have been made by horse and wagon.
So how much rubber and gas will be saved by throwing 959 drivers out of jobs?
However, the milk trust will save on its labor costs, It will make more profits at the expense of these jobless workers.
Here is a case that should be fought in the finish. It involves the vital issue of whether the bosses shall be allowed to use so-called “war necessity” as the pretext for curtailing their working staffs, for piling more work on fewer workers – for adding to their own profits by taking the bread out of the mouth of labor.
This question is so very important because once the bosses reorganize their operations on the basis of the curtailed working staff, that will be the set-up for the post-war period also. Then what? The Shame of It
The housewives and other working class elements inconvenienced by the milk drivers’ “illness” should turn their wrath against the War Labor Board and the milk trust, who have acted on the capitalist principle of each one for himself and the devil (of a milkman) take the hindmost.
The shame about the milk drivers’ action is not that some of the community suffered inconvenience, but that the whole working class community did not rise up in sympathy with the men robbed of their jobs for the benefit of the milk trust.
Yes, the whole working class population should, with one voice, have demanded the immediate restoration of these workers.
 




It has been the aim of civilized man to gain freedom from want and from arduous labor – through the use of the machine.
What is more, the machine has certainly come across. It is able to give to the human race all the good things of life and plenty of time in which to enjoy them.
Is that crazy! Quite the contrary. For instance, look at the Ford Willow Run plant. It is a marvel of labor-saving devices – the very acme in mass production technique. But —
It produces none of the good things of life; Instead it turns out a death-dealing bomber every two hours. Furthermore, it doesn’t save its workers any labor. In fact, they have never toiled harder in all their lives.
In the Ford plant certain operations which used to take 1,500 man-hours now take only 300 man-hours – or one-fifth of the time. Another process which meant six hours of labor now is finished in thirty minutes – or in one-twelfth of the time. Salvage of working hours on a large scale is typical of the whole of war production.
But on these very labor-saving machines which are one of the wonders of the world, the workers slave on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Every day of the week they toil long after their regular working hours. They are driven so long and so hard that overpowering exhaustion gets many of them – and industrial accidents steadily mount as a result.
Yes, a process in Ford’s plant is cut to one-fifth of its former labor-hour requirements – but deaths of factory workers for the first two months of this year were one-fifth more than the 1941 fatalities. The machine has come across and saves labor – but workers toil more, and more dangerously, instead of less. Doesn’t that sound, crazy?
 
Crazier and Crazier
Now how about those good things of life that the machine can produce in mass? Bombers at the rate of one every two hours are certainly not among the good things of life. Nor can machine guns turned out as fast as breadsticks be eaten.
Mass production leaps ahead, but the standard of living is shoved back a whole decade – to that of 1932, according to the estimate of Mr. Lean Benderson, famous for his perforated ceilings. Definitely, this is crazy – and far from the goal that civilized man has set for himself.
And isn’t it crazy that thousands upon thousands of the men and women who operate the modern machines for tremendous mass, production go “home” to shacks, trailers, barns and hen-coops! Yes, this is the way the housing situation for the workers of the Glenn L. Martin bomber plant near Baltimore has been “solved,” to cite only one instance.
 
Trouble with Wise Alecs
At this point some wise Alec shouts: “This is a war!”
Yes, that’s exactly the idea: Look at the crazy waste of war!
But what this wise Alec means to imply is that in peacetime the modern machine does give mankind freedom from want and from arduous toil. The trouble with wise Alecs is that they have conveniently short memories.
What happened to the modern machine for mass production in the post-war depression of the ’20s? What happened to it in the all-time record depression of 1929–1939?
The machinery of production stood idle or partly idle. True enough, the workers were saved arduous labor – in fact, all labor, even the bother of eating.
So where does the goal of mankind come in? Just at what point – under the present capitalist-imperialist set-up – do human beings get the good things of life and plenty of time in which to enjoy them?
The answer is never – never under the crazy profit system. During the imperialist wars inherent in this mad system, human beings are allowed unrationed “sacrifices” of every kind while the machines mass-produce for death. During the depression periods between wars, unemployment with widespread poverty and misery sets in. That is the dizzy, unvaried gyration of capitalism because – The hand at the controls is that of a ruling class drunk with power and crazy for profits.
But do you want to know something? The powerful working classes of the earth can unite to remove that crazy hand from the controls and create their own abundant socialist society. That ain’t crazy!
 




The more one examines the capitalist system – which is the one the peoples of the world are living under – the more cock-eyed and crazy it appears.
Let us look for a moment at the part of the war which pertains to the United States and Japan. This is, of course, a way of examining the capitalist system – for this war is full-blown capitalism.
Everyone knows by now why the war in the Far East is being fought. The rich resources of this blessed part of the earth have been in the hands pf the United Nations. Japan now wants them. The fight is on by the dispossessors against the possessors.
Neither of them cared or cares a hoot in hell about the teeming millions inhabiting these regions. No, that is not true. They do care. BOTH THE JAPANESE AND ALLIED IMPERIALISTS CARE ABOUT THE AMOUNT OF DIRT-CHEAP LABOR THEY CAN EXTRACT FROM THE NATIVES.
That millions of people submitted for so long to slavery and gruelling exploitation at the hands of invading foreigners, was crazy. That today, like a siren call, arises from the throats of these millions the cry for independence, is not so crazy.
But let us return to the United States and Japan.
Why the Present War?
While the American, British and Dutch imperialists were the foreign invaders squeezing the wealth out of the Philippines, East Indies, Thailand, Malaya and Burma, the American capitalists felt pretty safe. They were sure of getting – very cheap – the raw materials that American workers turn into finished goods.
The United States was getting from the Far East 95 per cent of the rubber used here. From the same part of the earth came most of the tin consumed here. Many other raw materials found their way across the wide stretches of the Pacific into American factories, where American labor creates profits for the bosses – A VERY CRAZY ARRANGEMENT, WHEN LABOR CAN BE CREATING THE GOOD THINGS OF LIFE FOR ITSELF.
But the wiley Japanese imperialists saw no reason why the status quo (so comfortable for America’s bosses) should not be changed – changed just enough to give them the controlling hand – just enough to give them a monopoly of the raw materials of the Far East. And then, if the great customer across the Pacific should want to buy, it would have to pay the Japanese piper.
This little re-arrangement meant only fighting the present insane war. It meant only throwing all the Japanese resources in men and material into the seething cauldron of war. It meant only the expenditure of hundreds of billions of American wealth and tens of millions of American lives for the Yankee imperialists to try and stop the Japanese – as is now being done.
SO NOW YOU AND I ARE IN IT. AND SO ARE THE JAPANESE EQUIVALENTS OF YOU AND ME. AND THAT IS CRAZY – BECAUSE WE HAVE NOTHING AGAINST THEM AND THEY HAVE NOTHING AGAINST US.
Then what happened?
The Japanese moved into the good hunting grounds where the Allies have been poaching – and presto! rubber, tin, etc. ceased coming to these shores.
 
Gets Crazier All the Time
That made things stir. The good neighbors in South America – whose rubber industry was destroyed because East Indian labor is even cheaper than South American – are again encouraged to produce rubber. And artificial rubber is put into production with the prospect that it will be stronger and cheaper than the natural product.
The same is true of metals. Various light metals have been released for use. The production restrictions on aluminum have been broken. Magnesium – a lighter, stronger and cheaper metal than aluminum – is being produced in large quantities.
Here you see emerging one part of the crazy pattern of capitalism. South America has always been there – able and more than willing to produce rubber. But the colossus of the North could get it cheaper from the East Indies. The formulae for synthetic rubber were for a long time in the vaults of Standard Oil et al. – but there was no profit then in releasing the new product. Aluminum and magnesium could long ago have been produced economically and plentifully to take the place of light metals from the Far East – but it suited the aluminum monopoly to curtail production and keep prices and profits up.
So the war is being fought to retain the open door for American capitalists to the raw materials of the Far East. But already in the course of the war it be comes evident that the raw materials being fought over can be produced right here – and could have been produced in peacetime as well, if not for the octopus of private profit. HOW ABOUT THAT FOR INSANITY!
Now look at the Japanese side. As pointed out, they are ambitious for a monopoly of the Far Eastern resources. Some of these resources they hope to consume themselves. The rest, however, they planned to sell at monopoly prices – if they win the war and stay in the lands they have invaded. But ...
The United States – which took 700,000 of the 800,000 long tons of crude rubber produced in the Far East – will now be a producer of synthetic rubber and getting rubber from South America. If the war lasts a long time – as it seems to be going to – synthetic rubber will become cheap, plentiful and durable. So it will be with other products and with other customer nations.
See the crazy mess! Japan fights a war to get the sources of raw material – but the war itself makes these raw materials no longer as precious as they were before the war, because of successful substitutes. Screwy, isn’t it?
Because of this nightmare of topsy-turvy capitalism American and Japanese men are finding their destiny in the unfathomable depths of the Pacific, victims of a world system bereft of all reason.
Reason dictates that the people of the world unite to create international socialism – the world organization for peace. The natural resources of the earth and the new products made possible by science, all can be used and distributed according to human needs – with common sense international planning by the working people of the world.
THAT IS SANE. THAT IS THE ONLY SANITY.
The delirious actions of capitalist imperialism gone mad can be halted by the workers of the world marching toward socialism.
 







Saturday Evening Post Makes a Feeble Effort to Cure Capitalism of Its ‘Guilty Conscience’ – But It Can’t Be Done Because the Rotten Capitalist System IS Guilty and Incurable!




If there is anywhere a boss suffering from an inferiority complex, the average worker has certainly not come in contact with him. The average boss battles labor’s demands for betterment, holds out for his war profits on government contracts, pushes the OPA for higher prices for his commodities, has his dollar-a-year representative in Washington to go-get for him.
But the Saturday Evening Post is of the opinion that “One of the worst handicaps of our system of free enterprise has been the fact that so many of its beneficiaries (meaning the bosses) have inferiority complexes.” In the issue of July 11, one-half of its editorial page is devoted to advising the “beneficiaries” of the capitalist system to “STOP NURSING THAT GUILTY FEELING!”
And why have the “convinced believers in individual initiative and free competition” a guilty feeling? You’d be surprised. They “are disturbed by the fear that there may be something to the charges thrown at them by pinks and collectivists.” These sensitive bosses wonder if they have not “produced for profit and not for use, or been just plain predatory.”
 
Facts Teach Their Own Lessons
Time was when these “sufferers from an inferiority complex” blamed all their labor troubles on the “reds.”
Everything would be for the best in the very best of all possible worlds, if it weren’t for the socialist trying to give the worker a social goal and the union organizer trying to give the worker the leadership for organization. There was nothing wrong with the “system of free enterprise.” IT WAS ALL PROPAGANDA.
To which nonsense both the socialist and union organizer replied:
“Poverty, unemployment, industrial crises, wars are not the product of the socialist and the union organizer. They are the stink weeds of the capitalist system. They smell to high heaven. Conditions make the workers learn the lessons of industrial unionism and conditions compel the million masses to strive for a better social system.”
Now if, as the Saturday Evening Post claims, the capitalists have acquired an “inferiority complex” about their system of society, it is not the propaganda of the “pinks and collectivists” that has done them in. Conditions have been the workers’ best teacher, and conditions have shaken the faith of capitalists in their own system. If the editorial of the Saturday Evening Post has any meaning at all, it spells fear on its part that the “beneficiaries” of the system of free competition no longer have faith in it. So this smooth-sheet journal engages in a frantic effort to re-sell “good old” capitalism to the faithless capitalists. But before we know it, it is putting sales pressure on the workers.
“After all, it ought not to take unusual powers of observation to note that, if social gain is translated into terms of living standards, food, clothing, shelter, leisure and opportunity for spiritual development, our free enterprise system has produced more social gains than any other yet devised.”
This is definitely meant for the lower crust.
But to the sane human being the above looks like an ill-advised joke at this time. Fires, explosions, destruction, death, maiming, Sickness, want, starvation are running riot over the face of the world in the throes of war – a war as natural and inevitable an outgrowth of capitalism as old age is a natural and inevitable sequence of youth – and the glib editors of capitalist sheets blab about “the social gains” of capitalism.
These spokesmen for an outworn and vicious social system – for their own reasons – make no distinction between the scientific and technological progress of today and the capitalist system. The former sets the mark for production, but the latter determines how that production is used. History proves that the supreme use of capitalist production is total war.
 
An Argument That Won’t Hold Water
The apologists of every social system that has passed into history have always sought to justify its continuance by saying: “It’s the best yet.” Doubtless the patricians of the doomed Roman Empire used that limping argument, also the feudal lords, and now the whitewashers of capitalism. But human progress continues only by mankind looking forward – not back.
The Post editor tries to give some justification to this reactionary argument by pointing to the “collectivism” of Germany and Russia. Is what exists in these countries better than the system of free competition? he implicitly asks. But this is only giving humanity a choice between different kinds of cancer. The answer is very simple. Humanity wants no kind of social cancer.
Not the totalitarian Nazi dictatorship which is the ultra-ruthless and efficient organization of capitalism, to wage the most daring imperialist war in history. Not the equally ruthless dictatorship of the Stalinist bureaucrats who have betrayed the October Revolution, fastened themselves on the backs of the Russian masses to exploit them, and participate in the imperialist war with no other purpose than to continue their own power. And not the “system of free competition” which has long ago become a myth – the reality is American monopolist capitalism rapidly being transformed by the war into its own brand of totalitarianism.
 
Really! This Gag Is Too, Too Old!
To the socialist accusation that capitalism “produces for profit,” the Post editor asks: “Who got the real profit from our automobile industry – the stockholders or the owners of 30,000,000 automobiles?” That is so old a gag that it has long flowing whiskers.
The vast capital accumulated by the automobile industry tells the story of who got the “real profit.” It might be mentioned – in passing, – that the 30,000,000 “automobile owners” include millions who own tireless, brakeless, roofless jalopies used by them in their ceaseless hunt for a livelihood which capitalism does not allow them. As if to clinch his case for capitalism, the editor declares:
“Because there have been confusion, stupidity, bad distribution and poverty amid plenty’ under a free economy, we mistakenly assume that such things are not possible, in a socialist economy.”
That all-inclusive “we” will be handled later. But it is no mistake for the workers to assume that the socialist society will make bad distribution and poverty amid plenty impossible.
For under the socialist society the means of production will be free to provide for the needs of the people. The capitalist profit-makers will have passed into the limbo of history. The working people will be in control of industry and government. A little confusion, a little stupidity, there may be. However, not as the characteristics of socialism, as they are the characteristics of capitalism; but merely as the natural mistakes made by human beings on the road to a better life.
 
The Facts Speak for Socialism
And now to the kernel of this significant editorial. There is purposely a merging of the classes – the use of “we” to indicate both the exploiters and the exploited. There is also the deliberate fusing of all so-called “collective systems” into one. No distinction is made between fascism and socialism. However, out of this studied mishmash emerges the editor’s twofold purpose: To turn the eyes of the workers away from socialism – and the eyes of certain of the “beneficiaries” of “our system of free enterprise” away from fascism.
But the editor himself indicates the futility of his effort. His final cry is for “a new and better propaganda technique.” He concludes:
“It ought not to be beyond the means of a great productive society to make its virtues so apparent that people will stop hankering for socialistic beehives. Up to now, however, the precise means of accomplishing this easy exercise in persuasion has eluded us.”
Precisely. Because history is made by facts, not fictions.” The fact is that “our system of free enterprise” will not survive the war – not because of lack of “a new and better propaganda technique,” but because; it is outworn. Whether fascism or socialism will be the order of society after the war depends on what the working class does. Its struggle for socialism cannot be postponed.
 




Without any camouflage, the post-election attack against the forty-hour week is really a murderous assault against wages.
Workers are actually putting in many more hours than forty. In fact, they work too long and get too tired – as testified to by the 11,000 industrial casualties EVERYDAY.
What bothers the bosses and the political boosters of boss profits is that the workers are being paid time and a half for work beyond the forty hours.
All talk about a forty-eight-hour week is so much dust in the eyes – thrown by labor’s worst enemies. What they are aiming at is to take away from workers who daily risk their life and limb a few dollars – the few dollars the workers now make on time and a half.
How much are workers making anyway? With this bountiful overtime pay, are they rolling in wealth? A good question – to which there is a very factual answer!
Yes, there is a war boom. Yes, workers are being paid time and a ball over forty hours. BUT WITH ALL THAT “PROSPERITY,” 16,000,000 WORKERS IN THE UNITED STATES ARE EARNING LESS THAN $16 A WEEK!
These figures are for July of 1942, issued by Secretary of Labor Perkins. And these figures mean that at the height of the war boom one-third of the working force of the country gets old-time, sweat-shop wages. That’s capitalism for you!
All right. Let’s come up the scale. Let’s see how the better-off workers are making out
The average wages in all manufacturing industries reached $37.88 a week in September. Out of this small amount must be paid the following long list of items: food, clothing, rent, entertainment, education; household furnishings and furniture; doctors, dentists, hospitals; debts and insurance; income taxes, victory taxes, war bonds; rising prices and consumers’ taxes. Has something perhaps been omitted? Well, just keep the change.
Secretary of Labor Perkins obligingly breaks this figure down a bit and reveals that the average wages in the manufacture of non-durable goods are only $29.71 – not $37.88. With a wife and kids and the above list of necessities, these workers cannot be exactly rolling in wealth.
These days non-durable goods means mostly civilian production. So let’s see how the other workers, the favored war workers, are wallowing in the lap of luxury.
Elsa Maxwell – that lady columnist who knows from nothing except how to gush – recently wrote in the supposedly pro-labor New York Post the following fabulous lie about wages: “Experienced workers average from $100 to $200 a week.” Thus Elsa Maxwell, the party-throwing expert of high society.
However, Secretary Perkins has statistical responsibilities which demand some regard for the truth. She assures us that in the production of durable goods – which these days is mostly war production – the average weekly wage in September was $44.47.
Go back and look at the list of necessities that $44.47 has to cover! Of course, with $44.47 a worker can do a little better than with $29.71. He can do a lot better than with $16 – which is next to nothing at all. But he won’t have much money to hide under the mattress. If he can get by without resorting to the loan sharks, he’ll be a mighty good financial manager.
The labor-haters in Congress are paid $200 a week out of public funds. Nearly all of them have some other sources of income – honest and otherwise. They get fees of one kind and another. They get returns on investments. Where do they get off to attack labor’s overtime pittance? And what of the big industrial boys who are the powers behind the congressional throne? There’s Tom Girdler of Republic Steel pocketing in salary alone $275,000 in 1941 – and Ferguson of Newport News Shipbuilding being paid $127,000 – and Love of Burlington Mills rewarded with a $179,652 salary – and Grace of Bethlehem “earning” a salary of $537,734 – to take a few at random.
Where do these fattened leeches, sucking their profits from labor’s toil, get off attacking the workers’ bit of overtime!
Obviously the bosses and their politicians believe the worker and his family are beings of inferior flesh. They consider themselves the “Aryan” class in American society – with the workers created as their eternal slaves!
In the last week there has been an ominous lull in the war these foes of labor are waging against the forty-hour week and against the workers’ overtime pay. Doubtless preparations are being made for the next encounter.
Is organized labor also preparing for a counter-offensive? This is what it must do!
 




“One can only hope at most, now, that there will be a breathing space between this war and the next. One cannot guarantee that there will be such space.”
Thus did Pearl Buck, noted novelist and idealist, addressing a group of world-famous Nobel Prize winners, bluntly speak her sincere opinion, according to her own lights, about this war – which is a good deal more than most so-called idealists are doing these days.
Mrs. Buck is bitterly disillusioned. But it is the fate of all idealists who lack the scientific instruments of Marxian investigation to be disillusioned. Revolutionary socialists, Marxists, were not disillusioned about the war. They knew from the beginning what Mrs. Buck sees only now.
“It is even more inconceivable today that our enemies, Germany and Japan, should win. But the strange thing is that the shadow of war does not grow less as these enemies grow weaker ... It is because we see a certain fate coming closer to us, and these victories do not hold back its march.”
The relentless, inevitable, world-shaking event Mrs. Buck refers to is the fight for freedom of “the peoples of Asia and of Africa” and “many among our own people here and in South America.”
 
Who Will Lead the War for Freedom?
It is strange, that, although Mrs. Buck champions freedom for the colonial masses, she yet speaks with a degree of horror and foreboding of their coming fight for it. Why the horror and foreboding? Mrs. Buck says that this will be the “war between the principles of democracy and the principles of fascism” which “has no geographical boundaries.” Is that not something to rejoice at – especially since she herself calls this “THE REAL WAR FOR FREEDOM”?
Undoubtedly Mrs. Buck is confused and frightened. She is confused as to the nature of the real contending forces; she sees it too much as a struggle between the races of the East and the races of the West. And, in the following passage, it is not clear whether she is afraid of fascism, of the fight of the colonial peoples for freedom, or of both.
“All the victories now being won do not make us safe. Those of us who are Jews are not safe, here or anywhere in the world. Those of us who are women are not safe here or anywhere in the world. The determination to continue rule over colonial empires endangers us, the avowed will to maintain white supremacy at all costs in our own country endangers us. All those who belong to those testing places of democracy, the minorities, the Jews, the Negroes, the women are endangered. All who are the agents of civilization, the intellectuals, the poets and artists and writers, the liberal in mind, the thinkers, the men and women of ideas, the idealists are endangered.”
Indeed it is an amazing thing that she makes no mention at all of the working class – as if it did not exist. Yet it should stand at the head of the above list for two very good reasons. One is that the working class is the first and foremost target of fascism. Another is that the working class – not the intellectuals, poets, artists, idealists – is today the only possible agent of civilization. It is the class with the revolutionary mission of ending this and all wars. It is the class with the revolutionary mission of creating the world-wide brotherhood of man, unexploited and unoppressed by ruthless, profit-seeking, colony-grabbing imperialists.
Because Mrs. Buck does not see human progress in terms of a progressive class clearing out of the way the obstructive, exploiting, war-making, reactionary classes, she has no program to offer. Her exposé of this war is brave and commendable. But when she asks “What shall we do?” her answer is deplorable. She thinks, apparently, that, by “speaking out,” the idealists can influence the practical statesmen of imperialism “to make this war into a war for freedom.” It is the fate of such people as Mrs. Buck who have no guiding and comprehensive understanding of human events, to contradict themselves endlessly. For of these statesmen she herself said;
“Will political France fight so well on our side, when the moment comes, if she knows that there would be no empire at the end of the war? Would imperial Holland be so enthusiastic for the Allied cause if her empire were no longer to exist if the United Nations won? There are many persons who argue that England herself would be less enthusiastic if her empire were not to be restored to her intact at the end of this war.”
Mrs. Buck and her group might just as well “SPEAK OUT” to the lion in the act of devouring the lamb.
“Certainly,” Mrs. Buck correctly stated, “the peoples of Asia are now coming to believe that for them our victory will have nothing to do with freedom and equality.”
In the same way the workers and peasants of Russia in the last war came to believe that a victory for the Allies would have nothing to do with freedom and equality for them. They, therefore, under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, turned the war into a war for freedom. Thus they brought a speedy end to the terrible slaughter of 1914–18. Unfortunately, because the workers of the West did not come to their aid, world freedom was not then established.
This war of 1938–194? will be over when the workers of all lands join with the oppressed of the colonial countries to form a THIRD CAMP – the United Working and Oppressed Peoples of the World. Better yet, all wars will be over. Freedom – not. abstractly, as envisaged by idealists – but concrete working class freedom will have been won.
This is the answer to Mrs. Buck’s “What shall we do?”
 
Imperialism Is Common Foe of Exploited
Mrs. Buck does not understand the coming war for freedom, just as she did not at first understand the imperialist nature of this war. For she says of the coming fight of the colonial people against imperialism that “none yet sees clearly either friend or foe.” This is exactly what is very plain to the socialist.
The socialist sees the exploited working people of all capitalist countries as the friends of the oppressed colonial peoples. Their common foe will be every imperialism. The colonial peoples will drive the imperialist robbers out of their lands, and the working peoples will beat them to the ground in the homelands of capitalism.
Mrs. Buck – with all her plain speaking on the nature of World War II – still places her hopes to the rotting corpse of capitalist “democracy.” In that rests her basic misunderstanding and error. But the socialist knows that the principles of democracy now reside only in the exploited, oppressed working people of the world. The democracy that will man the trenches against fascism is workers’ democracy. There is no other democracy left.
 




The working people of this country are still pop-eyed over the tax bill just passed by Congress – pop-eyed and wondering how they will pay regular taxes, victory taxes, war bond purchases, taxes on a long list of commodities, and still be able to buy AT WAR PRICES what they need to live on.
But in the nation’s capital the theory is that THAT’S your worry.
For no sooner was the ink dry on this iniquitous tax bill than the tax experts got busy on a “BIGGER AND BETTER” one for next year.
Morgenthau has already submitted his ideas for the new bill to the Congressional committees – and we are assured by Washington reporters that it will make this year’s tax bill look like a chapter out of Paradise Lost.
And that’s only taxes – WHICH IS NOT EVERYTHING BY A LONG SHOT!
The President goes further and nonchalantly tells his press conference that “officials are seriously considering a compulsory savings plan to drain off an estimated $5,000,000 in EXCESS purchasing power.”
“Excess” purchasing power – and every worker worrying how to keep his standard of living from collapsing altogether!
Undoubtedly now is the time for labor to get busy. To wait until next year – is to wait too long. Washington is hell-bent to take the shirt off labor’s back to pay for the war – AND IT MUST BE STOPPED,
We ask every worker to consider carefully what Labor Action proposes as labor’s tax program. It is either our program or Washington’s plans for lifting more and more money out of labor’s already half-empty pockets.
Labor Action comes out for a 100 per cent tax on war profits. Is there anything fairer than this demand!
The Department of Commerce reported that last year, 1941, AFTER ALL CORPORATION TAXES WERE PAID, corporation profits were 30 per cent more than in 1940 – and 75 per cent more than in 1939.
In April 1942, representatives of the Bendix Aviation Co. themselves admitted before the Vinson Committee to making as much as 122 per cent profit on government contracts. This gives a rough idea of the drift.
Maybe you think the new tax bill will fix this. You are mistaken – and how! According to figures given by Standard Statistics, known as the largest organization advising the rich on their investments, profits AFTER THE NEW TAXES ARE DEDUCTED will be MORE than they were last year.
For instance, Lockheed Aircraft, which “earned” $6.89 a share in 1941, will “earn” $10.30 in 1942; Bohn Aluminum, which “earned” $5.48 in 1941, will “earn” $9.05; Borg-Warner, which “earned” $3,20 in 1941, will “earn” $4.30; Eaton Manufacturing, which “earned” $6.20 in 1941, will “earn” $7.60. These figures include the post-war rebate that the government promises to the self-sacrificing capitalists of the nation.
Lest we forget what it is that these profits are being made out of, here is a quote from that popular book on the Battle of the Philippines entitled They Were Expendable, a quote every congressman with his hands in labor’s pockets should read:
“They were burying the dead – which consisted of collecting heads and arms and legs and putting them into the nearest bomb crater and shoveling debris over it. The smell was terrible. The Filipino yard workers didn’t have much stomach for the job, but it had to be done and done quick because of disease. To make them work, they filled the Filipinos up with grain alcohol.”
That’s what war profits come from!
That is also what war profiteering salaries come from. Labor Action stands for an absolute maximum income of $25,000 – with no “ands,” “ifs” and “buts” – $25,000 maximum BEFORE taxes and with no phony allowances.
The following is a partial picture of salary increases in 1941 over 1940: C.B. Smith of American Airlines, 49.2 per cent; Victor Emanuel of Aviation Corp., 21.7 per cent; B.H. Fleet of Consolidated Aircraft, 58.4 per cent; Walter F. Rockwell of Timken-Detroit Axle, 218 per cent; Tom Girdler of Republic Steel, 56.7 per cent (from $176,000 to $275,000); H.L. Ferguson of Newport News Shipbuilding & Drydock Co., 81.5 per cent (from $70,400 to $127,080); J. Spencer Love of Burlington Mills, 95.5 per cent from $91,939 to $179,652); Eugene Grace of Bethlehem Steel, a mere 12.4 per cent – but — from $478,14.4 to $537,734.
There are many other salaried war profiteers in Mr. Grace’s class as well as in the other categories mentioned above.
Yes, these swollen salaries come from the same gruesome source as do the war profits of these companies – profits which, by the way, are figured AFTER paying out such huge slices in salaries.
Furthermore, Labor Action stands for a government levy on capital to cover the cost of war. The accumulated wealth of America’s Sixty Families – the Rockefellers, Mellons, duPonts, Fords – is not sacred. That fleeced wealth has nothing to do with the wherewithal of life. BUT WORKERS’ WAGES HAVE.
That wealth is robbers’ swag – wealth produced by labor but never received by it. The working class has been amply taxed FOR ALL TIME in this accumulated wealth of America’s Sixty Families. It is high time to tax labor’s exploiters.
Especially so when we consider how much will be added to the pile by war profits, by war-melon salaries – and by the post-war legacies of plants built and paid for by the government which will doubtless go to such companies as the Big and Little Steels, Chrysler, Goodrich, Goodyear, etc., for a song and dance, if not for nothing.
Organized labor must come out full force against a sales tax on consumer goods, against all taxes on wages, against forced savings. LET THE CAPITALISTS PAY FOR THEIR WAR. The only tax program that accords with labor’s vital interests is that presented by Labor Action.
Labor must raise its voice now – as an independent political force – for a 100 per cent tax on war profits, for maximum salaries of $25,000 BEFORE taxes, for a levy on the wealth of the Sixty Families!
THIS IS LABOR’S TAX PROGRAM. There is no other!
 




Wendell Willkie returned from his trip around the world and made what sounded like a very liberal – if not revolutionary – speech.
“Down with the Colonial System” – “Down with imperialism” – “Up with the Freedom of the Asiatic People” – these, presumably, are Willkie’s brand-new slogans.
Unless one believes in Santa Claus, he knows instinctively that there is a fly in this ointment – or two or three. There is no Santa Claus – and the would-be President of this imperialist nation does not come out for the end of world imperialism – that is, NOT REALLY.
 
Hand-Writing on the Wall
There are two reasons behind Willkie’s venture into “revolutionary” international politics. One is immediate, connected with the urgent need on the part of the United Nations to change the course the war has thus far taken. The other reason is more far-sighted and has to do with the future of American imperialism – in short, with feathering its nest.
As to the first point, it is obvious to Mr. Willkie, as to everyone else who doesn’t wear blinders, that the Far-Eastern colonial people will not fight to defend the status quo. To enslaved peoples it naturally does not seem worth while to give up their lives in the fire of war for the privilege of continuing to be exploited and tortured by the somewhat slower processes of imperialist rule.
If the colonial peoples fight the Japanese, it will be as independent peoples, battling to maintain and make secure their independence. Willkie is intelligent enough to see the hand-writing on the wall – and politician enough to pretend that the hand-writing is his own slogan.
 
His “Anti-Imperialism”
To understand the second reason for Willkie’s messiah-posturing one must know a wee bit about the history of American imperialism. It must be remembered that America is a comparative newcomer among the imperialist nations. It came upon the scene as an independent nation when the old capitalist systems of Europe were already well established – with their world empires seemingly locked in their safe deposit vaults.
As the United States grew in economic power, as it expanded and branched out into the world market, it had to batter down the closed doors of British, French, Dutch, German and other imperialisms. In that perverted sense, America has always been “anti-imperialist.” But this kind of “anti-imperialism,” when translated into realistic language, simply meant “ME TOO!” Strident, young Yankee imperialism was pushing through the closed doors barred to it by the old-time world-wide exploiters.
This is the explanation, for instance, of the open-door policy of the United States in China. On the face of it, it sounded like freedom itself – the open door. In actuality, it meant only freedom for the American merchants and investors to exploit the Chinese masses along with the British, German and French exploiters. When the American breed did ease into China, they grabbed the same kind of extra-territorial privileges that the other capitalist nations enjoyed, and merrily proceeded to rake in profits out of the sweat of the Chinese people.
Where the United States capitalists did not have to buck up against the superior forces of the European empires, its “anti-imperialism” was put under the mattress for safekeeping. That happened, for instance, when the “outposts of democracy” were established in the Philippines, in Hawaii and other Pacific islands. Also when, with the aid of the “keep off the grass” sign known as the Monroe Doctrine, the American strain of imperialism took roots in the Caribbean, in Central America, in South America.
 
“Me Too!” – “Me Alone!”
In a word, American imperialism is “anti -imperialist” when it is knocking at the doors to trade and profit lacked by other powers. But it forgets all about “anti-imperialism” when its own exclusive hunting grounds are involved. The determining force, in both cases, is lust for profits and interest, for investments, markets and expanded capital, for raw materials and cheap, exploitable labor.
Does Mr. Willkie’s fine-sounding speech mark a departure from this proved imperialist policy? On the contrary – IT IS RIGHT IN LINE WITH THIS POLICY!
American imperialism stands to gain only if British, Dutch, French colonial masters are permanently driven out of their colonies. The Japanese and German military machines have successfully attacked the European empires on the war front. The peoples of the colonies have themselves successfully attacked on the internal political front. European imperialism is caught in a vise. Mr. Willkie gives the screw a little turn. Now if, in addition, the upstart imperialist gang of Japan and the die-hard imperialist gangsters of Germany are licked by the “arsenal of democracy,” then, for the first time in history, all the doors of the world will be wide open to economic penetration and domination by American capital – without the bother of climbing over the numerous barriers set up by those powerful old-time competitors, the British. Dutch, French and German colonial masters.
 
The Spider and the Fly
To Mr. Willkie, representative of Morgan interests and would-be President of capitalist America, the vision of such limitless opportunities for exploitation brings high enthusiasm. Certainly, down with the BRITISH colonial system. Definitely, down with JAPANESE imperialism. And up with the freedom of the Asiatic peoples to be under the tender mercy of American capitalism alone. Once the “anti-imperialism” of American imperialism meant “Me Too!” Today it means “Me Alone!”
This is the correct interpretation of Mr. Willkie’s new-found “idealism.” His palm itches and his heart overflows with “friendship” for the Asiatic peoples – the kind of friendship that the spider has for the fly
Any AMERICAN who comes out with the slogan “Down with Imperialism” can be sincere only if he means to begin at home. “Down with Imperialism” coming from the mouth of an American must mean “Down with AMERICAN Capitalism” and “Down with the Profit System HERE.” Therefore, neither Mr. Willkie nor Mr. Roosevelt nor any other prophet of the profit system can be sincere about freeing the colonial peoples.
But the American working class can be sincere. It has no reason to exploit its fellow workers anywhere.
It can help the Asiatic peoples in their splendid struggle for freedom – but not by taking the slippery hand of a Willkie.
 
Socialism Is Freedom
The working class must make its stand against its own capitalist system – whose lust for profits and interest, for investments, markets and expanded capital, for raw materials and cheap exploitable labor, can mean only exploitation at home and abject slavery for the backward peoples.
At its best the “freedom” Mr. Willkie dangles before the nose of the Asiatic peoples could be what was promised the Filipinos under the false label of “independence.” The economic domination of those islands by American capitalism was so complete that any “independent” government could be nothing more than a puppet on the strings of American control.
Mr. Willkie is right about the progressive role to be played by America today – but not through the Willkies. Progress lies only in America’s working class. Yes, the American working class can he the pioneers of a new freedom – the freedom Which only international socialism can today bring.
The lead of the American workers will be eagerly followed by the workers of England and Germany, of France and Italy, or Russia and Japan. Then world imperialism will collapse. Then ALL the peoples of the world will indeed be free.
 




In his speech before the International Students’ Assembly on September 3, President Roosevelt used many fine-sounding words. For instance, he spoke of the “hope for a new life that can be lived in freedom, in justice and decency.”
The hope for a new life that can be lived in freedom in justice and decency is not crazy. What is crazy is to suppose that such a life can come through an imperialist war. THAT IS MADNESS.
There are many ways of proving that to expect a shining new world at the end of the war is to have a bad case of bats in the belfry. One way of proving this is to put Harold L. Ickes, Mr. Roosevelt’s own Secretary of the Interior, on the stand.
In a recent article in Collier’s magazine, Mr. Ickes made no bones about the whys and the wherefores of the war. “Germany herself is practically without oil resources,” writes Mr. Ickes. Further, as a source of oil, “We can ignore Europe in the main.” Therefore, “HITLER REACHES FOR THE WORLD’S OIL,” blazes the headline over Mr. Ickes’ article.
The four main oil areas outside the United States, Mr. Ickes authoritatively tells us, are Central and South America, Russia, the Far East and the Near East. A glance at this enumeration reveals that the United Nations were “oil-logged” – the Axis nations were “oil-starved.”
So Germany, Italy and Japan reach for the “world’s oil” – which means the oil resources held before the war by the United Nations. ISN’T IT MENTAL AND MORAL DEPRAVITY TO PLUNGE THE WORLD INTO HELL – OVER PETROLEUM!
To be sure, in this day and age petroleum is indispensable to all nations and all peoples. It is used for heat in homes and factories. It is used for motive power on land, on sea and in the air. It is used to run machines in the factory and on the farm. It must be had for lubrication. It is burned to generate electricity. It has many other basic uses. Without it modern life is impossible.
So what! Does that make it less criminal to kill millions of human beings, to annihilate cities, to destroy hundreds of billions of dollars of wealth – for oil!
There is a way – a sane and sensible way – whereby mankind can peacefully share oil and all the resources of the world needed for modern life. That is the way of the working people emancipated from domestic and foreign bosses, producing and exchanging raw and finished material for human use, according to human needs. THAT IS THE WAY OF THE ENLIGHTENED WORKING PEOPLE – OPPOSED TO THE LUNACY OF IMPERIALIST CONQUEST.
Is the present war being fought for this sane method of international exchange? Will victory for the United Nations lead to the kind of world to which Mr. Roosevelt pays lip service? Hear Mr. Ickes on the subject.
Mr. Ickes does not pussyfoot. He calls this war a “STRUGGLE FOR MASTERY OF THE WORLD” – not a struggle for a new world in which imperialist competition will be no more. To Mr. Ickes the future of the world is a matter of “WHO CONTROLS ITS OIL RESOURCES” – nothing more humane than that.
Mr. Roosevelt’s picture of life “without fear of the horrors of war” cannot be realized either on the basis of the United States winning world mastery or on the basis of Germany winning world mastery – through control of oil and other resources. Whichever one is the victor, its mastery will before long be challenged by the vanquished. This war will lay the basis for the next. The crazy whirligig will go on endlessly – -until the international working classes establish sanity by overthrowing all the master-minded imperialist rulers of the world.
Is there perhaps somebody – still wet behind the ears – with the idiotic notion that Mr. Ickes wants world mastery for the United States so that it can become the good Samaritan and distribute oil and other raw materials equally among all nations? A reading of Mr. Ickes’ article would quickly dispel such a fantastic notion.
Mr. Ickes knows that control of oil resources eventually means control of world markets. He has his eye cocked for “ACCESSIBILITY OF FOREIGN MARKETS,” for “EXPANDING FOREIGN TRADE,” – which is exactly why Hitler wants world domination through control of oil and everything else controllable!
That idealistic picture of a shining new world at the end of the war is Hollywood stuff. The material realities of the delirious war dance of world imperialism cannot be mistaken. THAT CRAZY BUSINESS HAPPENED ONCE BEFORE.
Some workers – who do not understand the pivotal position the working class holds to make a really better world – reason, unfortunately without benefit of reason, along the following lines:
“Well, the world being the rotten thing it is, if American imperialists win the war, American industry will get orders and at least we will have jobs – rather than the German workers.”
Yes – If they live that long! Yes – but when and for how long! And why, for heaven’s sake, should the American working class be satisfied with a state of misery for hundreds of millions of fellow workers in Europe and in the colonial countries!
This is as crazy as anything the mad hatter ever conceived. For – at this stage of technological advancement and international communication – it is possible for the working people of the whole world to have economic security, work for all, plenty of the goods of life, permanent peace – AND MASTERY OF THEIR OWN DESTINIES.
Yes, sanity is possible on this earth. Not, however, through the aberrations of an imperialist war – but, on the contrary, through the united struggle of the international working classes against international imperialism – THROUGH SOCIALISM.
 




Now it can be told – the full story of the General Cable Co. strike. And it is a hair-raiser.
Every worker by this time knows how the Navy moved into the Bayonne plant to break the strike of the General Cable Co. workers who refused to abide by the decision of the War Labor Board denying a pay increase.
It is also common knowledge that as soon as the strike was broken, the government walked out again, turning the plant back to the company – the workers having been “put in their place” and “shown where they get off” asking for a wage increase to meet the scandalously high cost of living.
It was not only fixed bayonets that did the trick. There was also the occult threat that workers who refused to toe the line would forfeit their draft exemption status, or at least would be fired and blackballed from a job in any other war production plant – which would result in the same thing.
This was indeed “noble” service that the Navy performed for the General Cable Co. But that is not all. Now the rest can be told.
All the time that the Navy was so busy breaking the strike, a sealed indictment was outstanding against the General Cable Co. for defrauding the Navy on war contracts. GET IT?
Criminal charges had been brought against the General Cable Co. and its president, Dwight R.G. Palmer, for conspiring to fix prices – along with other companies – at an artificially high level on more than $55,000,000 worth of cable the Navy has bought since 1940.
The indictment was returned by a grand jury in Newark A WEEK BEFORE IT WAS ANNOUNCED BY ATTORNEY GENERAL BIDDLE. However, fearing that if the indictment were made public during the strike, the workers would be rip-roaring mad and refuse to return to work, the Navy requested that the indictment be sealed and its announcement delayed. THE GRAND JURY AND MR. BIDDLE OBLIGED, COOPERATING WITH THE NAVY AND THE GENERAL CABLE CO. TO BREAK THE STRIKE.
On the $55,000,000 Navy contracts involved, the indicted companies made profits ranging from 35 per rent to 70 per cent. But the WLB did not see fit to grant to the General Cable Co. workers a moderate pay increase.
Besides the General Cable Co., the companies indicted are: General Electric, Rockbestos Products, Okonite Co., Collyer Insulated Wire, National Electric Products, American Steel & Wire, Anaconda Wire & Cable and Phelps Dodge Copper Products.
Over a period of YEARS this conspirative combine of cable manufacturers submitted identical bids on the cable bought by the Navy. On twenty sets of bids opened between 1939 and 1942, the nine companies made bids which conformed to each other to a penny. In this way prices were up – and profits likewise.
The Navy certainly found a queer way of “retaliating.” It helped the General Cable Co. force the workers back to the grind at the same wage – presumably so that the company can keep for itself all the fraudulent profits it made.
 




At the time when the auto, rubber and other mass production workers in the Middle West went through their most militant and constructive period, a rabble-rouser named Gerald Lyman Kenneth Smith was using all his demagogic powers to throw a monkey-wrench into the workers’ efforts.
When the sit-down strikes were making labor history – giving roots to the CIO and establishing a decent standard of living fof the workers – and when the bosses were frantic with fear of labors might, Gerald Smith was ladling out to the fighting workers huge doses of “Americanism” in an effort to bulldoze them. The industrialists around Detroit made no attempt to deny that they hired Smith as a strike-breaker – and paid him plenty for it.
Many workers in Pennsylvania towns, in Akron, Flint, Toledo, Chicago and Detroit must recall participating in CIO picketing of Gerald Smith’s harangues. They must remember hissing and booing his scab-inspiring meetings.
This strike-breaker, financed by the most reactionary elements, is now making a bid for political power. He is a candidate for the Republican nomination to the United States Senate from Michigan. This labor-hater seeks the political support of the workers in Michigan in this election. But his aim goes beyond that. With headquarters in Detroit, where he speaks over the radio every Sunday night and is heard in Michigan, Indiana and Ohio, he makes his demagogic appeal for wider support among workers.
GERALD SMITH IS A DANGEROUS MAN. HE CONSIDERS HIMSELF A “MAN WITH A MISSION.” THAT MISSION IS TO LEAD AN AMERICAN FASCIST MOVEMENT. THE WORKERS MOST CRACK HIM DOWN.
If Smith wins in the primary in September, he will run for the seat in the Senate now occupied by Prentiss Brown, Democrat. Smith hopes to make political capital of the discontent that the masses feel against various of the Roosevelt measures and deeds (such as wage freezing). Workers must not be fooled by Smith’s opposition to the powers that be into aiding an American fascist and giving this enemy of labor the boost he wants up the political ladder.
 
Smith Has His “Thyssens”
Just as Hitler had his Thyssens, so Gerald Smith has his pillars of capitalist society. The motor multi-millionaire Horace Dodge was the first to discover Smith’s value to the reactionary ruling class and to express his appreciation financially. One reason for Smith establishing himself in Detroit is to be near this benefactor.
“King Henry” Ford is reported to have been paying for Smith’s radio time. Though Smith denies this, he admits: “I am a great admirer of Mr. Ford and he says he is a great admirer of me.”
Smith has also had the backing of a member of the Pullman family. In New York the Park Avenue crowd idolized him and gave him money. Over-dressed dowagers, empty-headed debutantes, retired stockbrokers and other parasites consider him a crusader against “those awful workers” – the savior of their ill-gotten wealth and social position. His pockets are constantly replenished by the donations of corporation officers and manufacturers’ associations. Fritz Kuhn and other unmasked emissaries of Hitlerism have added their “drop” to the Smith bucket.
Today this Galahad of American fascism boasts that he gets $1,560 a week from “good, sound, middle class Americans who send their dollars in one at a time.” Hitler also received the support of the misguided German lower middle class. This unfortunate class, crushed by the merciless onrush of top-capitalism and afraid of the movement of the workers for the liberation of all humanity, desperately and foolishly looks to a “strong leader” for salvation – with what tragic results has been dramatically illustrated in Germany.
The abysmal insincerity of Gerald Smith can be gauged by the jump he made from the pulpit into the political camp of Huey Long, the kingfish of political dictators. In this corrupt machine, at the feet of this unscrupulous political boss, is where Smith – erstwhile Servant of God – got his political education. Today he is hand-in-glove with such Southern bourbons as Senator Reynolds of North Carolina.
Gerald Smith is too clever a politician to indulge in the wild-eyed, foaming-at-the-mouth type of race hatred, but his anti-Semitism is clear-cut nonetheless. He publishes a paper called The Cross and the Flag. The Ku Klux Klan is too close to this combination to allow any misinterpretation. Smith’s kinship to the anti-Semitic Christian Fronters is deeper than water. The most rabid anti-Semites flock to his fold and he rejects none of them. Smith, like the Nazi-admirer Father Coughlin – The Cross and The Flag like Social Justice – stands for that Hitler product a “Christian America.”
There is no doubt whatever that all the anti-Semitic elements in the country are for Gerald Smith. And he, on his part, is worried about Father Coughlin losing his “four freedoms.” This apologist for Hitler is, according to Gerald Smith, “being persecuted.” Smith declares: “I am his defender.”
There is also no doubt that all the Jim Crow elements are behind Smith. He is a politician from the deep South. His fraternal connections with the Jim Crow, poll-tax politicians testify to where he stands.
To disclaim his anti-Semitism Smith points to the fact that he has the support of one of the richest and most successful Jewish lawyers in Detroit. However this does not prove Smith’s love for minority races. It only demonstrates that Smith is so anti-labor that this rich Jewish lawyer, who represents boss interests in Detroit, reacts to Smith just as the bosses do. It proves that class lines are stronger than race. Hitler also had his RICH Jewish supporters (the Jewish worker was, of course, against him) – before he came to power. They, like so many of the rich, saw in him the destroyer of labor’s power.
 
A Strike-Breaker’s Way of Life
Smith is fond of shouting that he “loves and defends the American way of life.” Every faker, every capitalist politician, every would-be fascist dictator in this country is – quite naturally – a champion for the “American way of life.”
Obviously, their way is not that of the workers.
Gerald Smith’s way of life is the one which sides with the bosses against the workers as he did in the great sit-down strikes. His way of life is the one that invokes the wrath of all powers that be against striking workers – and takes pay from the bosses to do so. His way is apparently the way of Huey Long, of Coughlin, of Hitler, of the whole fascist-Nazi gang.
Concretely the choice for the workers is not between Prentiss Brown, representative of a discredited political party and a discredited social system, and Gerald Smith, protagonist for putting brass knuckles on that system to pound the working class into submission. The choice is not between representatives of good old capitalism without any trimmings and of capitalism with new-fangled fascist trimmings. IT IS WHETHER THE WORKERS SHOULD CONTINUE TO RELY ON ANY VARIETY OF BOSS POLITICS OR START RELYING ON INDEPENDENT WORKING CLASS POLITICS.
 
Away with Fake Messiahs
New times require new actions. The rank and file of labor must get itself into politics as an independent labor force – with an independent working class party. Labor, through its OWN party, ought to be putting up for candidacy fellow workers of outstanding integrity and ability to protect the workers’ interests everywhere and against anyone – but especially against false labor leaders.
Hitler exploited the post-war suffering of the German people. He promised them the Nazi millennium. He gave them the hell of a Nazi dictatorship. Gerald Smith exploits the discontent that the war and its conduct have thus far engendered in the American people. The people will grow more discontented with all the workers of the capitalist system and will yearn for a change.
But the change the people want will not come through a fascist demagogue. The choice for the workers is not between things as they are and things as a fascist dictator will make them. The choice is between things as they are and things as the workers CAN MAKE THEM if they stop relying on fake messiahs AND RELY INSTEAD ON THEIR OWN STRENGTH AND ABILITY.
 




The name Jan Valtin may not be too familiar to the average worker. Yet he has merited a certain amount of attention because of a book he wrote entitled Out of the Night. Among other things, this autobiographical work described both the Nazis and the Stalinists in action in Germany. The open brutality against the workers by the Nazis was fully matched by the unscrupulous betrayal by the Stalinists not only of the workers at large but of their own party members.
What Valtin did not intend to emphasize in his book but which nevertheless sticks out like a sore thumb, is that he himself cleaved to the crooked Stalin line through all its treacherous zig-zags. Only when he personally became the victim of Stalin’s disloyalty to his own party did Valtin start squawking. Whether this delay was due to stupidity or complicity, the result is the same.
However, judging by an article written by Valtin in the last issue of the American Mercury, it may well have been colossal stupidity. At least this article warrants giving him the benefit of the doubt. For this sample of muddle-headedness cannot be surpassed.
 
Lack Understanding
An analysis of it deserves precious space in Labor Action only because the confusion of mind there displayed is typical of those Stalinists who are not conscious traitors of the working class in the interest of Stalin. The lack of understanding of important issues disqualifies the former for working class leadership – as does treachery disqualify the latter.
The subject of Valtin’s article is revolt in Europe – indeed a very important one. Valtin undertakes no less a job than to teach “America and Britain” a few lessons in “the science of revolution.” Why? So that “America and Britain” may engineer the European revolution against the Nazis.
And Valtin isn’t writing about a make-believe revolution. He wants “America and Britain” to impart to the European underground movement “the science of revolution – tested, specific laws formulated by Karl Marx and first successfully applied by Lenin in the Bolshevist Revolution of 1917.”
There is no doubt at all that this is the kind of revolution and the technique of revolution that the European masses will have to employ to gain their freedom. That is a certainty in this world of uncertainties.
Where, then, does the muddle-headedness of Valtin come in? In that he thinks there is even the remotest chance of “America and Britain” engineering such a revolutionary movement. For by “America and Britain” Valtin means none else than Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin, Queen Wilhelmina and the other ex-rulers of the United Nations.
It would seem, therefore, that Valtin, having presumably spent many years of his life waging the class struggle, knows absolutely nothing about classes. Otherwise, he would understand the essence of the European situation. Churchill, Queen Wilhelmina and the other representatives of the ruling classes of the United Nations pace the floor, crack their knuckles in worried apprehension and render up prayers to the Almighty that the European masses may not do the very thing that Valtin wants “America and Britain” to help them do.
When the European masses use the science of revolution, as taught by Karl Marx and as applied by Lenin, to gain their independence from the Nazis, it will also be to gain their own independence. They will not do so simply to exchange masters. They will sound the death-knell of the capitalist system of the world. This is the very last thing that the American and British rulers wish and they are acting accordingly.
 
A Muddled View
Nevertheless Valtin naively complains that “not nearly enough is being done” to organize the revolt within Europe. He is fussed because “there are no schools in democratic countries teaching revolutionary technique.” Does he think the ruling class is going to teach the working class how to take power? Valtin asks that “the potential strength of millions of anti-Nazi trade unionists in Germany and the conquered countries” be not ignored. Nor is it being ignored! The bosses of Valtin’s “America and Britain” are in a blue funk over the potential strength of these revolutionary workers.
That is why they “simply promise the patriots of Europe succor and liberation” instead of giving them “continuous education in revolutionary techniques” and instead of “putting weapons of deliverance into their hands,” as Valtin urges them to do.
Under what bushel does Valtin hide his muddled head that he does not see what is going on in the world? The rulers of the United Nations have all proved themselves very adept in the science of CRUSHING revolutions. For instance, Britain is right now busy trying to crush in blood the Indian movement for independence. Or would Valtin call this ruthless act of imperialist aggression an innocent phase of the war for “democracy”? And how about Stalin – Valtin’s erstwhile leader? He has used his evil power to destroy the revolutionary movements of Germany, France and Spain – to say nothing of his extermination of the Russian revolutionists.
Very generously, however, Valtin gives his unasked-for advice to the enemies of revolution on how to engineer the European revolution. He tells them not to “overlook the fundamental fact that when oppressed people are subjected to protracted famine and terrorism they gradually lose their fitness to revolt. Fatigue and bleak resignation then replace their fighting spirit.”
 
What Rulers Want
As if modern rulers do not know this – and not only the Nazi rulers. The rulers of the United Nations also do not trust the fighting spirit of the European masses. They want a military victory over the Nazis by force of arms, and a Europe fatigued and resigned will fit into their post-war plans for dividing the spoils of war much more easily than a Europe freed through mass revolt. A Valtin may impress the “cultured” ladies who attend his lectures and worship anyone who has written a book. But a worker who feels the currents of class society in which he lives must laugh out loud at the idea of American and British bosses and politicians engineering a European mass revolt for freedom.
The European masses will rise up and fight for freedom from all masters. But it will be IN SPITE OF their imperialist “friends;” And though Valtin, who supposedly worked for the German workers’ revolution, writes now as if there is no such thing as a German working class, the odds are overwhelming that the German workers will be fighting shoulder to shoulder with their fellow workers to free Europe from all oppression.
 




On October 10 the New York Times carried on its front page the headline “New OPA Food Price Order Permits Rise in 11 Groups.”
What Kind of Farce Is This?
The President threatens to go over the head of Congress if it doesn’t give him the power to “stop inflation,” as he put it. Congress – after much wrangling – gives him certain powers. The President creates the job of stabilization director and gives it to Associate Supreme Court Justice Byrnes. Leon Henderson of the OPA trumpets throughout the length and breadth of the land that now prices will be fixed on everything.
But —
WITHIN A WEEK the New York Times carries on its front page the headline “New OPA Price Order Permits Rise in 11 Groups.”
Yes – what kind of farce is this?
Such practical jokes the working class cannot afford. IT CANNOT AFFORD THEM FOR THE SIMPLE REASON THAT THE “FIXERS” IN WASHINGTON ARE NOT JOKING ABOUT PUTTING CEILINGS ON WAGES.
Along with the announcement of the new price boost, Mr. Henderson handed out a little soothing syrup to the little man and his wife to the effect that “the ultimate effect on consumers would be a slight increase in prices, a cent or two at most, on items affected.”
BUT THERE ARE SEVERAL HUNDRED ITEMS INCLUDED IN THE ELEVEN GROUPS OF FOOD ON WHICH PRICES WILL GO UP. A cent or two on several hundred items adds up to dollars, AND WHERE ARE THE DOLLARS TO COME FROM?
However, there is no assurance that the increased prices will amount to ONLY a cent or two. FOR ON CAREFULLY READING THE NEWS ITEM IT BECOMES CLEAR THAT MARK-UPS ARE PERMITTED FROM 7 PER CENT TO 25 PER CENT. And this on several hundred items of food – all daily necessities.
For instance, breakfast cereals – those foods that we are told are an excellent source of much needed vitamin B – can be marked up as high tis 8 per cent by certain jobbers and wholesalers. You can bet your empty cereal box that the increases will run much higher by the time the retailer posts the prices that the housewife will have to pay.
WITH WAGE CEILINGS WHAT THEY ARE, WHERE IS THE MONEY GOING TO COME FROM? Mr, Henderson carefully explains that his new price-raising order will “permit certain essential foods to flow through wholesale and retail channels to the consuming public.”
But why were they not flowing to the consuming public before Mr. Henderson’s farcical order? Because – mind you – channels of food distribution were not finding it PROFITABLE to handle these essentials. This is not the explanation of Labor Action alone. It is the reason given by the OPA itself. To the “fixers” in Washington such reasoning is apparently beyond dispute. But what about the worker? Is it good enough for him? Is it good enough for the working class housewife?
A hundred times – NO!
Mr. Henderson’s explanation simply underlines in deep black the fact that the distribution of food for the masses is controlled by the rules of the profit game. It simply makes as clear as the nose on a face that the Washington “fixers” are guided by the interests of the profit-making class – not by the needs of the people.
That is why the Washington “fixers” are serious about wage ceilings but make a farce of price ceilings. IN THE FINAL ANALYSIS, THE ECONOMIC LORDS OF PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION BENEFIT BY LOW WAGES AS THEY DO BY HIGH PRICES,
The victims of this farcical policy are the “little people” – the workers, the working farmers, the struggling little retailers.
An end to this farce!
Labor Action calls for joint committees of trade union workers, working class housewives and working farmers to fix and control prices and rationing. These elements of the population can truly protect the interests of the little people. THEY CAN PREVENT RUNAWAY PRICES BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT INTERESTED IN INCREASING PROFITS.
 

