

Knock on Any Door
by Willard Motley
D. Appleton-Century Company, 1947, 504 pp., $3.00.
When Nick Romano, the hero of Willard Motley’s remarkable first novel, was a child, he saw a crowd watching a cat playing with a mouse, allowing it to escape for a moment and then slapping it back to its corner. Filled with pity, he picked up the mouse and took it away safe in his pocket.
For the reader that scene acquires greater significance as the novel progresses. For it illustrates the humane impulses in Nick which his environment forces him to repress. Moreover, the reader soon sees that Nick himself is the victim of a cat-and-mouse game which capitalist society is playing with him.
An altar-boy at the age of twelve whose parents thought that he was destined to priesthood, Nick’s whole life changes when his father loses his little business during the depression. A sensitive, gentle child, he is suddenly deprived of security and affection when his family moves to a strange, tough neighborhood in the slums and his parents become absorbed in their struggle for a livelihood.
At school, the teachers, soured by their daily struggle to maintain order over unruly pupils in crowded classrooms, are vindictive and disagreeable. The understanding and sympathy which his stern, embittered father, his nagging, querulous mother and his spiteful teachers fail to give him, however, he finds in the companionship of Tony, the leader of the kids, from whom he learns to play hookey and to steal. The gang is now Nick’s home and school. He becomes successively a petty thief, mugger and hold-up nan until, at the age of twenty-one, he meets his pre-determined end at the electric chair.
On at least two occasions Nick tries to break away from the path along which he is being impelled. Each time, however, he is thrust back by forces beyond him.
Nick’s first attempt to alter the pattern of his existence is his resolution, after he is almost caught, to give up thieving. However, a stolen bicycle which he is keeping for Tony is found in his yard, and Nick, without informing on his friend, goes to reform school for a theft which he did not commit. The brutality of the reform-school authorities hardens him and makes him resolve not to submit to the law.
He leaves reform school, begins to frequent the pool halls and dives of West Madison Street in Chicago and thoroughly absorbs this way of life. At this time he meets and falls in love with Emma, a beautiful, sensitive girl who all her life has retreated from the squalor and poverty around her into a romantic dreamworld. This might be the chance for both of them to escape from the destruction which lies ahead of them, but it is too late for their marriage to be successful, and their destruction, instead of being averted, is accelerated. Nick has West Madison Street too much in his blood to get away from it. He is unable to work steadily at a job. Unwilling to be supported by Emma, he goes back to crime. In no way can he fulfill the duties of a husband. He, who since the age of sixteen had only known cheap prostitutes, is impotent with his wife. Emma, in despair at finding her dream, which she had thought realized in Nick, shattered, commits suicide.
Emma’s suicide drives Nick to desperation. His motto had always been “Live fast, die young and have a good-looking corpse.” Now an inner restlessness causes him to recklessly court death, The inevitable which he invites happens. In a gun-battle he kills a vicious and sadistic cop, the terror of West Madison Street, who has always been for Nick, without Nick’s quite realizing it, the incarnation of the repressive forces of a society which has victimized him from an early age.
Nick’s capture, trial and execution furnish a terrific climax to the novel. Up to this point we have been watching in fascination how Nick’s character is being molded and his life is being shaped by his environment.
At the climatic finish, however, when Nick is caught like a cornered rat and his life becomes the prize of a tense legal game between the opposing attorneys, he becomes more than an object of psychological interest for us. We identify ourselves with him, as the twelve-year-old Nick Romano had identified himself with the mouse which adults were watching with detached curiosity till he could stand its torments no longer. We share the fright which inwardly grips him as he tries to maintain his tough-guy exterior. We accompany him to the electric chair in what is perhaps one of the great death scenes in literature and, when the current jolts through his body, it seems as if a part of us has died with him.
Nick went out of life, blindly defying the society which claimed that he was paying his debt to it by his death, but which never acknowledged a debt to him for what it had deprived him of all his life. This society, which executed Nick for a crime of murder, itself daily commits murder by condemning millions of human beings to half-lives robbing them of the full existence which their realized potentialities could give them. “Knock on any door down this street in this alley” of the city, says Motley, and you will find those whose personalities have been twisted, like Nick’s, or stifled or crushed, like his mother’s and his wife’s – and “the city is the world in microcosm.”
 



A Treasury of Science
edited by Harlow Shapley, Samuel Rapport and Helen Wright
Harper and Brothers, 1946, xii 772 pages, $3.95.
The purpose of this book is stated in the preface: “We envisaged the audience as the person without specialized knowledge; we accepted as our purpose to give some realization of how the scientist works, of the body of knowledge that has resulted and of the excitement of the scientist’s search.”
To do this the editors have culled extracts and selections from scientists like Eddington, Huxley and Haldane who have been able to summarize lucidly for the benefit of the layman the findings in their fields and from the scientific interpreters like Kaempfert, de Kruif and Dietz who have been able to mediate between the specialists and the general public. The result is a book which is sometimes tough sledding but generally interesting and often fascinating.
The editors have arranged their material according to a plan that has logical sequence. The first part, an introduction by Harlow Shapley, describes the thrill of sharing in scientific discovery through reading and the extracts of the second part describe scientific method, the life of the scientist, the satisfaction he gets from making the universe and its workings more coherent to us. his elation at penetrating into the unknown.
The followings parts present the findings of the various sciences, beginning with the universe at large and ending with man. The subdivisions of each part continue the logical progression. Thus the third part, The Physical World, is subdivided into The Heavens, The Earth, Matter, Energy, Physical Law; the fourth part, The World of Life, is subdivided into The Riddle of Life, The Spectacle of Life, The Evolution of Life; the fifth and final part, The World of Man, is subdivided into From Ape to Civilization, The Human Machine, The Conquest of Disease, Man’s Mind and Man’s Future.
One may, therefore, dip into the book to read in and around his special interest, whether it be psychology or astronomy, or read it through from beginning to end. In reading it through, the reader will find the answers which science is able to give to such questions as what are the chances of life existing on other worlds, how far away are the stars, how old is the earth, how long has mankind been on earth, how long will the earth be able to support life – and how science is able to arrive at its estimates.
He will get a conception of the immensity of the universe (“our sun is just one star in a system of thousands of millions of stars; and that whole system is just one galaxy or thousands of millions of galaxies”) and of the complexity of the human machine, “the [brain] waves reflect the electrical activity of the ten billion cells which make up the cortical tissue of the brain. These cells may be likened to so many batteries whose frequency and intensity of electrical discharge are determined by relations between the chemicals which fill the cells and those which circulate outside in the blood”).
The conspicuous deficiency of this anthology is its omission of Marxism, the science of man as a social animal, which lays bare the laws behind the relations and antagonisms of men and behind the development of society, including the direction taken by natural science. The reason for this is explained of Marxism itself. Marxism has not been accepted as science by the official guardians of learning because its findings go counter to the interests of the ruling class of modern society, the capitalists. Just so did the reactionary Catholic Church of the seventeenth century refuse to accept Galileo’s proof that the earth revolves around the sun.
The absence of Marxism is not only an important gap in the book; it results in a false picture of the future of science and of society. We get a vivid impression of the great vistas being opened up in each scientific field, as knowledge accumulates, at a geometric ratio. There is no mention of the fact that progress is being held back or diverted to the purposes of destruction by an obsolete social system.
Yet today most of the physical science professors are under contract to the military authorities. This book was first published before the atom bomb exploded. Since then, many scientists have swung from the extreme of complacent optimism to that of fearful foreboding.
 

