

‘Only by learning to assimilate the results of the development of philosophy during the past two and a half thousand years will it be able to rid itself on the one hand of any isolated natural philosophy standing apart. from it, outside and above it, and on the other hand also of its own limited method of thought, which was its inheritance from English empiricism.’ 
It is clear from this passage that Engels considers empiricism to be a barrier to the dialectical conception of the world. Hansen’s talk about ‘consistent empiri-cism’ is sheer nonsense. The point about empiricism, a reliance on ‘the facts as they are perceived’, is that it cannot be consistent. 
Empiricism, and its transatlantic younger brother, pragmatism, refuse to admit the possibility of answer-ing the question: ‘What is the nature of the objectively existing external world?’ They thus leave the way open to subjective idealism which explains the world in terms of mind alone. Empiricism, ignoring the history of philosophy, rejects the dialectical theory of know-ledge as ‘metaphysics’. Only the dialectical materialist view can explain the world, because it includes a materialist explanation of the development of our concepts as well as of the material world which they reflect. Empiricism must be rejected, not made ‘con-sistent’. There are many sides to this methodological error of Hansen’s. 
Trotsky warned the SWP leadership in his last writings that they must encourage a determined struggle on the theoretical front against the ‘American’ philosophy of pragmatism, a more recent development of empiricism; unless this was done, then there would be no real Marxist development in the U.S. Today Hansen and Cannon are ‘confirming’ Trotsky’s warning in a negative fashion. In the discussion concerning the future of the Fourth International, Hansen leads the tendency which calls for ‘unification’ with a revisionist tendency on the basis of purely practical political agreement on immediate tasks. From this point of view he rejects an examination of the history of the split and of the differences between the tendencies. This is only part of his substitution of impressionism for scientific analysis (see Trotskyism Betrayed [1] and C.S.’s reply to J.H.’s Report to the Plenum, [2] International Bulletin No. 11). What is the methodological basis of Hansen’s approach here? The dominant question for him is always ‘what will work best?’- asked always from the narrow perspective of immediate political appearances. This is the starting point of pragmatism, the ‘American’ development of empiricism by Pierce, James and Dewey. It leads Hansen to advocate unity with the Pablo group because that will ‘work’ better as an attraction for people pushed in a ‘leftward’ direction, even if the causes of the split are never clarified. Such an approach, as we have explained in earlier documents, destroys the theoretical basis of the movement . The incorrect concepts and methods of our political work can only be overcome through conscious theoretical and practical struggle, not by sweeping them under the carpet. 
Pragmatism and the Cuban Crisis 
Cannon’s letter to Dobbs, [3] summing up the Cuban crisis, could similarly serve as a model of the prag-matist method. After a lifetime of struggle for revolu-tionary Marxism, particularly against Stalinism, he denies that whole career in two pages with the kind of politics which Hansen’s pathetic essay in ‘theory’ is meant to justify: ‘What else could he have done under the given circumstances?’ asks Cannon. What were these ‘given circumstances’? 
‘1. The U.S. naval blockade was set for a clash with Soviet ships which would escalate into nuclear war. Kennedy gave clear notice that the U.S. would not stop. at the use of the most forceful measures.
‘2. The Pentagon was ready to bomb and invade Cuba and crush its revolution. Newspaper accounts report that this was one of the alternative moves considered even for (from?) the start, and it was to be put into effect if Moscow did not yield on the missile bases.’ 
Cannon replaces class analysis of social forces and political tendencies with pragmatic prescriptions. The so-called ‘given circumstances’ (equivalent of Hansen’s ‘the facts’) are the product of a policy of class- collaboration by Khrushchev and the Stalinist bureau-cracy in relation to U.S. imperialism. We must evaluate Khrushchev’s conduct as part of the process which produced these circumstances. Only in that way can Marxists work out their political programme in relation to other class tendencies. 
Empiricism versus Revolutionary Politics 
Indeed Cannon’s letter on Cuba illustrates the class role of empiricism and pragmatism, those tendencies in philosophy which accept ‘the given fact’, etc. Inevit-ably this acceptance becomes what Trotsky once called a ‘worshipping of the accomplished fact’. In effect this means accepting the forms of consciousness proper to those who are adapted to the existing structure, such as the bureaucracy in the USSR and in the labour movement. They develop their ideas as ways of rationalising and justifying their own position between capitalism and the working class. Cannon’s justification of Khrushchev, like the recent contributions of Murry Weiss in justification of the Stalinist bureaucracy, and the constant avoidance of the questions of political revolution and construction of revolutionary parties in the workers’ states by SWP spokesmen and the Pabloites, are an abandonment of principled revolutionary politics, flowing from the abandonment of dialectical materialism in favour of empiricism. Dialectical analysis insists on seeing facts in the context of a whole series of interrelated pro-cesses, not as finished, independent entities about which ‘practical’ decisions have to be made. In the sphere of politics, that means to see each situation in terms of the development of the international class struggle, to evaluate the policies of the various poli-tical forces towards this situation in terms of their relation to these class forces and to their whole previous course. This is why it is nonsense to pose the Cuban problem as Cannon poses it-’What else could he have done under the given circumstances?’ Taken to its logical conclusion, this type of argument can be used to justify anything. It is not even sur-prising, once the extent of this theoretical departure from Marxism is grasped, that Cannon utters an absurdity like ‘ ... people unaffected by imperialist propaganda have, I believe, breathed relief over the settlement and thanked Khrushchev for his sanity. Bertrand Russell and Nehru expressed themselves along this line.’ Who would have thought that at the same time, Nehru was head of a government engaged in armed conflict, with imperialist support, against the Republic of China? In the course of that conflict mass arrests of Indian Communists were carried out. At the same time, Soviet fighter planes were being supplied to the Indian government by Khrushchev. No doubt Nehru praised Khrushchev (as well as Kennedy and Macmillan) for this piece of practical ‘wisdom’. Perhaps Cannon will say ‘What else could he have done under the given circumstances?’ Cannon’s method leads to this end not by a trick of logical development, but because the forces for whom he becomes the apologist are tied in reality to imperialism and its present needs. Trotskyism is no more an exception to the laws of history than any other phase in the development of Marxism and the labour movement. Once theoretical development stops, then the movement is subject to the dominant ideo-logies of the time, however gradual and subtle the process of adaptation-and however venerable the ‘cadre’. 
Hansen’s Method 
Hansen’s document ‘Cuba—The Acid Test’ [4] is there-fore an important contribution to the international discussion. It states explicitly the empiricist and anti--dialectical basis in method for the opportunist ten-dencies in the SWP’s politics as well as for their unprincipled and un-historical approach to the problem of unity and development of the world Trotskyist movement. From the beginning of the discussion, the SLL, described by Hansen as ‘the ultra-left sectarians’, have insisted that basic differences of method underlay the different political lines and attitudes to organisation. Hansen now confirms this. His insistence on ‘the facts’, as being the same for empiricism as for Marxism is effectively answered by Lukacs: 
‘These facts are indeed not only involved in constant change, but also they are-precisely in the structure of their objectivity-the products of a historically determined epoch: that of capitalism. Consequently this “science” which recognises as fundamental to their value for science the immediately given form of phenomena, and takes as a correct point of departure for scientific conceptualisation their form of objectivity, this science finds itself planted simply and definitely in the ground of capitalist society, accepting uncritically its essence, its “objective” structure, its laws, as an unalterable foundation of “science”. In order to progress from these “facts” to facts in the real sense of the word, one must penetrate to their historical conditioning as such and abandon the point of view which starts from them as immediately given: they must undergo historical-dialectical analysis ...’ (History and Class Consciousness)
In support of his capitulation to empiricism, Hansen quotes the verdict of Hegel. 
‘Generally speaking, Empiricism finds the truth in the outward world; and even if it allows a super-sensible world, it holds knowledge of that world to be impossible, and would restrict us to the province of sense-perception. This doctrine when systema-tically carried out produces what has been latterly termed Materialism. Materialism of this stamp looks upon matter, qua matter, as the genuine objective world.’ (The Logic of Hegel, translated from the Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences, p. 80). 
Hegel’s opposition to empiricism is correct in one sense. If ‘empiricism systematically carried out’ led to dialectical materialism, then why would Hegel, the Absolute Idealist, figure so decisively in the develop-ment of Marxism? The ‘materialism’ to which empiri-cism leads, according to Hegel, is of course mechanical materialism, which remains unable to explain the role of consciousness and the material unity of the world, including human action and thought. This ‘defect of all hitherto existing materialism’, as Marx called it, meant that ‘it could not be consistently carried out, and it left the door open to dualism and subjective ideal-ism. Hegel overcame the dichotomy of subject and object, introducing a unified conception of a dialec-tically interconnected whole, by making spirit the content of all reality. Marx had only to ‘stand him on his head’ to arrive at dialectical materialism. This is in fact how dialectical materialism developed, through contradiction, and not through Hansen’s businesslike logical formula of ‘empiricism systematically carried out’. The relation between empiricism and dialectical materialism has a history, which shows a struggle of dialectical materialism against the empiricists and their development in positivism and pragmatism. It is contrary to the method of Marxism to examine empiricism for its ‘strong points’ and its ‘weak points’. As a trend in philosophy it has formed the soundest basis for pseudo-scientific attacks on materialism ever since Marx, and in politics it has always formed the philosophical basis for opportunism. 
Hansen avoids this type of discussion by quoting Hegel and then introducing his own paraphrase of Hegel. Hegel said that empiricism systematically carried out issued in ‘materialism’, by which he naturally meant the materialism of his own day. We must surely appreciate historically what Hegel meant when he said that empiricism ‘systematically carried out’ led to materialism, which ‘looks upon matter, qua matter, as the genuine objective world’. The vulgar materialism of that time had a metaphysical view of the world, seeing the given facts of experience as fixed, dead, finished products interacting according to mechanical principles, with mind reflecting this reality in a dead, mechanical fashion. Hansen must surely agree that it was this kind of materialism which Hegel attacks here. He could hardly have had in his head the theory of dialectical materialism as the product of ‘empiricism systematically carried out’. The dialectical materialist method of thought was born only after Hegel, through the struggle against Hegel’s dialectical idealism. And yet Hansen, with a very clumsy sleight of hand, uses his quotation from Hegel to identify ‘empiricism systematically carried out’ with dialectical materialism: 
‘I would submit that “Lenin and others” did not bring from Hegel his opposition to empiricism on idealistic or religious grounds. On the other hand Marxism does share Hegel’s position that vulgar empiricism is arbitrary, one-sided and undialectical. But ‘empiricism “systematically carried out”? This is the view that the “genuine objective world”, the material world, takes primacy over thought and that a dialectical relationship exists between them. What is this if not dialectical materialism?’ 
‘Facts’ are Abstractions 
The vital phrase ‘a dialectical relationship exists between them’ (matter and thought) is introduced from the outside by Hansen. It leaps over the whole development to dialectical materialism through the Hegelian school and ‘standing Hegel on his head, or rather, on his feet’! All Hansen’s respect for ‘the facts’ does not seem to have helped him to proceed from the simple ‘fact’ that ideas have a history as part of the social-historical process, and that the vulgar materialism of the bourgeoisie cannot be systematically developed into dialectical materialism by a mere stroke of the pen. It took some years of very hard struggle, of determined theoretical and practical grappling with the objective development of bourgeois society in the first half of the 19th century, to achieve that result. 
When we attack empiricism we attack that method of approach which says all statements, to be meaning-ful, must refer to observable or measurable data in their immediately given form. This method insists that any ‘abstract’ concepts, reflecting the general and historical implications of these ‘facts’, are meaningless. It neglects entirely that our general concepts reflect the laws of development and interconnection of the process which these ‘facts’ help to constitute. Indeed the so-called hard facts of concrete experience are themselves abstractions from this process. They are the result of the first approximation of our brains to the essential interrelations, laws of motion, contra-dictions of the eternally changing and complex world of matter ... of which they form part. Only higher abstractions, in advanced theory, can guide us to the meaning of these facts. What Lenin called ‘the concrete analysis of concrete conditions’ is the opposite of a descent into empiricism. In order to be concrete, the analysis must see the given facts in their historical interconnection and must begin with the discoveries of theory in the study of society, the necessity to make a class evaluation of every event, every phenomenon. The empiricist, who pretends to restrict himself to the bedrock of ‘facts’ alone, in fact imposes on the ‘facts’ an unstated series of connections whose foundations are unstated. With Hansen and the Pabloites, their new reality is actually a list of abstractions like ‘the colonial revolution’, ‘the process of de-Stalinisation’,  ‘irreversible trends’, ‘leftward-moving forces’, ‘mass pressure’, etc. Like all statements about social phenomena, these are meaningless unless they are demonstrated to have specific class content, for class struggle and exploitation are the content of all social phenomena. This discovery of Marx is the theoretical cornerstone which Hansen has lost, with all his talk about ‘the facts’. 
Empiricism: a Bourgeois Method 
All this argument that ‘the facts’ are the objective reality and that we must ‘start from there’ is a preparation to justify policies of adaptation to non--working-class leaderships. 
Empiricism, since it ‘starts with the facts’, can never get beyond them and must accept the world as it is. This bourgeois method of thought views the world from the standpoint of ‘the isolated individual in civil society.’ 
Instead of taking the objective situation as a problem to be solved in the light of the historical experience of the working class, generalised in the theory and practice of Marxism, it must take ‘the facts’ as they come. They are produced by circumstances beyond our control. 
Marxism arms the working class vanguard in its fight for the independent action of the Labour move-ment; empiricism adapts it to the existing set-up, to capitalism and its agencies in the working-class organisations. 
‘In the beginning was the deed,’ quotes Hansen. But for Marxists, action is not blind adaptation to ‘facts’, but theoretically guided work to break the working class from petty-bourgeois leaderships. To ‘join in the action’ led by such trends, merely seeking ‘to help to build a revolutionary-socialist party in the very process of the revolution itself’ is a renunciation of Marxism and an abdication of responsibility in favour of the petty-bourgeoisie. 
Hansen says: 
‘If we may express the opinion, it is an over-statement to say that anyone finds himself “prostrate before the petty-bourgeois nationalist leaders in Cuba and Algeria” because he refuses to follow the SLL National Committee in thinking that a Trotsky-ist can clear himself of any further responsibility by putting the label “betrayed” on everything these leaders do. It is an error of the first order to believe that petty-bourgeois nationalism â petty--bourgeois nationalism, has no internal differentia-tions or contradictions and cannot possibly be affected by the mass forces that have thrust it forward.’ 
In the first place, no one has said that there cannot be differentiation within the petty-bourgeois national movement or that they remain unaffected by mass pressure. Who has denied that? What is at stake is the method by which this ‘fact’ is analysed and what consequence it has for the construction of independent revolutionary parties to lead the struggle of the work-ing class. Hansen and the Pabloites, on the other hand, use this ‘fact’ of ‘left’ swings of some petty--bourgeois nationalists to justify capitulation to those forces. Is this point separate from the differences over method and philosophy? Certainly not: Marxist analysis of the whole modern epoch has established that the political leaderships representing non-working--class social strata can go only to a certain point in the struggle against imperialism. The objective limits to their revolution lead them eventually to turn against the working class, with its independent demands which correspond to the international socialist revolution. Only a course of the construction of independent working-class parties aiming at workers’ power, based on the programme of Permanent Revolution, can pre-vent each national revolution from turning into a new stabilisation for world imperialism. The struggle to create such parties has been shown to involve a necessary fight against opportunists and counter-revolutionary trends within the movement, in par-ticular against Stalinism which subordinates the work-ing class to the nationalists, bourgeois and petty--bourgeois, on the grounds of the theory of ‘two stages’, which conforms best to the Stalinist bureaucracy’s line of an international understanding with imperialism. It is in line with these ‘facts’, facts established through the struggles and theoretical work of Lenin, Trotsky and others, that we evaluate the posturings and the actions of present-day political tendencies, and not by regarding the latter as facts ‘in themselves’ or as ‘given circumstances’ à la Hansen and J. P. Cannon. 
Class Analysis is Needed 
Hansen and the SWP leadership approach the whole international situation in this non-Marxist, empiricist manner. Hansen complains about the SLL ignoring facts, refusing to analyse ‘new reality’, since they don’t seem to fit the prescriptions of Lenin and Trotsky. On the contrary, comrades in the SLL have made a small beginning in analysing the real class basis of the surface ‘facts’ of the present situation. Hansen is satisfied to list the ‘mighty forces of the colonial revolution and the interrelated process of de--Stalinisation’. We have published several articles (see Labour Review 1961 and 1962, articles by Baker, Kemp, Jeffries, and the resolution ‘World Prospect for Socialism’) beginning a class analysis of the relation of these two processes (struggles in the colonial coun-tries and crisis in Stalinism) to the international revolution of the working class against imperialism. We have yet to find any such attempt in the publica-tions of the SWP or the Pabloites. What we do find is a search for the most positive or progressive trends within the Stalinist and nationalist movements. This means taking surface ‘facts’, like the pronouncements of the Chinese or Russian Stalinist leaders, and abscribing to them positive or negative values. Germain [5], for example, arrived at the conclusion that apart from the idea of the revolutionary International, there existed ‘bits’ of the Trotskyist programme in a ‘broken’ way in the various Communist parties of the wor1d, from Jugoslavia with its factory committees, through Italy, Russia and China, to Albania with its insistence on the rights of small parties! No doubt this is a good example of empiricism systematically carried out. It would be interesting to ask minorities within, say, the Albanian Communist Party what the ‘pragmatic’ consequences of this ‘systematic empiri-cism’ have been for them! (See also the ‘critical support’ for various wings of Stalinism in the IS Resolution on the 22nd Congress.) 
Was Evian a Victory? 
But to return to Hansen’s reply. It is of the greatest interest that Algeria is almost completely dropped from the argument. This is because the SLL’s accu-sation about ‘prostration’ before nationalist leaders is best exemplified there. 
In earlier documents Hansen made great play of the SLL’s condemnation of the Evian agreement between the Algerian government and French imperialism. We said that this was a ‘sell-out’. Hansen said that here was an ultra-left mistake, showing failure to recognise that at least Evian included national independence and should be welcomed as a victory. We proceeded from an analysis of the class tendency which has asserted itself through the FLN leadership in arriving at a compromise with French imperialism, preventing the Algerian people from going on to win their own revolutionary demands. Those who concentrated on the ‘victory’ and speculated about Ben Bella develop-ing in the direction of Castro only helped Ben Bella to deceive the masses, and turned the energies of Socialists towards alliances with the bourgeoisie rather than the construction of an independent revolutionary party. We characterised this as a well-known form of opportunism, and we say now that by this kind of approach the Pabloites and the SWP are sharing in the preparation of defeats for the working class of Algeria instead of carrying out the responsibilities of revolutionary Marxists in constructing working-class parties. Pablo himself works as a functionary of the Algerian government in some technical capacity. By itself, this fact could mean anything or nothing. The important question is his political line and that of his organisation. There is not the slightest doubt that Pablo’s position in the administration will not be endangered by this political line (which does not at all mean to say that he may not be removed). Hansen’s articles in The Militant and the campaign of the Pabloites on ‘aid to the Algerian Revolution’ are confined to an appeal to aid the poverty-stricken victims of the legacy of French imperialism. Instead of a campaign in the labour movement, we have a humanitarian appeal. Pablo and his friends even press for the organisation of volunteer technicians and administrators to go to Algeria, take their place as servants of the Ben Bella government, and thus counteract the possibly reactionary influence of French and American aid and personnel. In this way the ‘objective’ conditions will be created for a move to the left rather than to the right on the part of Ben Bella. In the course of all this, the Algerian Communist Party was banned, a new French aid programme was announced, and the direct control of Ben Bella’s clique established over the Algerian trade unions. Meanwhile Ben Bella makes great play of tidying up the ‘bootblack’ racket and takes a ‘firm stand’ in telling the French to explode their bombs farther South in the Sahara. Are not these ‘Trotskyists’ conniving at the suppression of any democratic rights for the working class while the nationalist leaders carry out ‘left’ measures ‘on behalf’ of the masses? If this is not prostration before the national bour-geoisie, what in the world constitutes such prostration? Hansen claims that ‘everybody knows’ we need revolu-tionary parties, the only difference is on how to construct them. But in practice the Pabloites are not for the construction of such parties, they avoid the necessity of such construction. If objective develop-ments in the ‘new’ reality will inevitably push petty--bourgeois nationalists towards revolutionary Marxism, perhaps the role of Trotskyists is only to encourage these background ‘objective forces’. 
Pierre Frank, prominent leader of the Pablo group, recently visited Algeria and reported his findings in The Internationalist, supplement to Quatrieme Interna-tionale, No. 17, 13.2.63). There is hardly need to comment on the meaning of the following passages; 
‘If the government is composed of variegated social and political elements, one must say never-theless that the central nucleus, the decisive nucleus found at present in the Political Bureau of the FLN (National Liberation Front) is based on the poorest masses of the cities and above all the countryside. This is its main strength. But it cannot automatic-ally head toward extensive nationalization of the economic structure without running the risk of catastrophic consequences. For some years, it will have to permit a development of bourgeois forces, to compromise in certain spheres with foreign capital and to create bastions in the countryside and the towns in order to pass later to the construction of a socialist society. This will not be done without crises or without international and domestic deve-lopments that will run counter to this difficult orientation. 
‘To conclude: Everything is in movement. It is an experiment, a struggle that must be supported throughout the world, but which demands constant determination of bearings so that the development of the various forces operating on the terrain can be gauged. In this way we can contribute to this new revolutionary experience with its altogether specific traits, its difficulties and its potentialities, and help it move toward the socialist outcome.’ 
At the level of methodology, this illustrates the extreme consequences of a ‘contemplative’ rather than a ‘revolutionary-practical’ attitude. To the former, empiricist recognition of the ‘given circumstances’, ‘the facts’ is a natural starting point (and finishing post). At the political level, it illustrates the capitu-lation to existing forces, existing forms of conscious-ness in the political movement, amounting in the end to support for the servants of imperialism, which flows from the abandonment of the dialectical method. 
Who has Corrected Whose Errors? 
Hansen says that we are harking back to the original differences of 1953 instead of demonstrating that the Pabloite revisions of that year have resulted in an opportunist course by the Pabloite ‘International’. Because Hansen accepts the present position of the Pabloites on Algeria does not alter the fact that this course is an opportunist one. In any case, Hansen must still answer our question (See reply of C.S. to Hansen’s Report to the Plenum. International Bulletin No. 11) in connection with this matter of ‘correcting errors’. He advocates unification on the grounds that the Pabloites have corrected their course of 1953. But the Pabloite Executive Committee insists that unification is possible for the opposite reason-the SWP has overcome its failure at that time to ‘understand’ the programme of Pablo (Declaration on Reunification of the World Trotskyist Movement, June 23/24, 1962). 
In the advanced countries too, we have drawn attention to the current policies of the Pabloites. Hansen pretends that our criticisms have amounted only to seizing on isolated statements of Pabloite sections; ‘Not even leaflets put out by this group of comrades (the Pablo group) in this or that local situation escape the sleuths. A phrase torn from a leaflet distributed at the Renault plant in Paris in defence of Cuba against U.S. imperialism serves for elevation to front-page attention in The Newsletter in London, so hard-pressed are the leaders of the SLL to find evidence of the revisionism of the IS.’ (Cuba- The Acid Test , p. 30). 
In the first place, our reply to Hansen’s last Plenum report on unification (International Bulletin No. 11) goes through Pabloite material on the main political questions of today, and it is nonsense to say the SLL has made no general criticism. If Hansen wrote ‘Cuba â The Acid Test ’ before reading this reply, perhaps he will now defend the Pabloites against what we wrote in it. Secondly, what is wrong with examining the leaflets put out by Pabloite sections? It is precisely the way policies work out in the work of sections which illustrates most clearly our differences of method. Surely the section in Paris is a fair example of a Pabloite section-the nerve centre of the Pablo International is there. And is the Renault factory just ‘this or that local situation’? It is a vital con-centration of French workers. In 1953 was it not a leaflet put out in the Renault factory which came under the scrutiny and attack of the SWP when it made the public break from Pablo? Thirdly, if Hansen claims that the passage criticised by The Newsletter was torn from its context, why does he not produce the context and demonstrate our methods of distortion? He cannot do this; the phrase concerned put interna-tional working-class solidarity action on the same level as ‘aid’ given by the Stalinist bureaucracy. Hansen prefers to quote not a single word either from the leaflet or from The Newsletter’s criticism! 
 
(We omit here a short reference to the Italian section of the IS, as it was based on a faulty translation of an article in their journal.) 
Cuba and Spain 
The major part of Hansen’s attack on the ‘ultra-left sectarians’ is concerned with the attitude of the SLL towards Cuba. Hansen begins his document by trying to make an amalgam of the SLL and its IC supporters on the one hand, and the Posadas group which recently broke from the IS on the other. Hansen knows these are absolutely separate and dis-tinct tendencies. He makes literally no evaluation whatsoever of their political content or the evolution of their present position. They are both opposed to ‘unification’, therefore, he implies, they must be responding to the same social forces and must be essentially similar. Here again we have an excellent illustration of the pragmatist method. The objective relations between these tendencies, their history, and their response to the major political problems, are ignored. It is useful, it ‘works’, to identify them with each other as saboteurs of unification-they are ‘ultra--left currents’. Hansen reports that the Posadas group includes in its programme the prospect of a nuclear war against capitalism. This is thrown together with the SLL’s opposition to characterizing Cuba as a workers’ state. Posadas, says Hansen, must agree that Cuba is a workers’ state, because it would be ‘political death’ to think otherwise in Latin America. The differences are thus to be explained geographically. Politically the Posadas group and the SLL are the same—ultra-left sectarians, driven to this by their fear of unification. How is this cussedness to be explained? Hansen is unclear: the heading of the Trotskyist ‘mainstream’ (the SWP leadership and the Pabloite IS) towards unification comes from the ‘mighty forces of the colonial revolution and the inter-related process of de-Stalinisation’. 
‘The Trotskyist movement has not escaped the general shake-up either. The Chinese victory, de--Stalinization, the Hungarian uprising were reflected in both capitulatory and ultra-left moods as well as strengthening of the main stream of Trotskyism. What we have really been witnessing in our move-ment is the outcome of a number of tests—how well the various Trotskyist groupings and shadings have responded to the series of revolutionary events culminating in the greatest occurrence in  the Western Hemisphere since the American Civil War. The move for unification and the symmetrical resistance to it are no more than logical con-sequences to be drawn from reading the results, especially those supplied by the acid test of the mighty Cuban action.’ 
Where is the explanation? Two opposite viewpoints are here ‘explained’ by the same thing. They were just different ‘logical’ results of approaching the same events. Could anything illustrate more clearly the barren consequences of refusing to deal with the history of the controversies and splits, and to probe to their basis in theory and method? Hansen found it more ‘practical’ to produce, by sleight of hand, an identification of his opponent, the SLL, with the views of the Posadas group. 
The note by the French comrades, appended to this reply, raises similar points about the demagogic results of these methods of controversy. As they point out, their own document on Cuba comes under fire from Hansen but has not been issued to the members of Hansen’s party. They also correctly indicate the un-principled character of the argument which runs: nobody who counts in Latin America agrees with the SLL characterisation of Cuba; therefore it is suspect and shows how stupid and sectarian they are. As the French comrades remark, the ‘opinions’ of the Soviet and Spanish people were often quoted in a similar way against Trotsky’s characterisation of the state and the ruling cliques in both countries. In addition, they take up Hansen’s laboured jokes about their reference in an earlier document to a ‘phantom’ bourgeois state in Cuba. What Hansen must do is explain why such a concept is a matter for joking, and in what way he thinks it departs from the kind of analysis made by Trotsky of the class forces in Spain in 1936-37. Either Hansen has forgotten, or he chooses not to remind his readers, of the concept advanced by Trotsky at that time of an ‘alliance’ with the ‘shadow of the bour-geoisie’. Perhaps he knows some good jokes about that too. 
It would be pointless to take up every step in Hansen’s documents in a similar way. His whole method is to argue from incidents and impressions, combined with the vaguest generalisations like ‘the might of the colonial revolution’ and the ‘interrelated process of de-Stalinisation’. 
Our Record on Cuba 
On the question of Cuba itself, Hansen raises no new arguments in the discussion and no new facts on the regime there. We see no need to reply in detail to Hansen’s caricature of the record of The Newsletter in defending Cuba before and during the blockade of October-November 1962. Hansen concerns himself entirely with the pages of The Newsletter: we take every responsibility for everything written in our journal, but we would also point out that Hansen was in Europe during the crisis. He, and The Militant correspondent in London, made not the slightest effort to acquaint themselves with the campaigning activity of the SLL during the crisis. Hansen correctly says that there were many demonstrations against the blockade—and he contrasts this with the ‘insular’ Newsletter! This is nothing but a slander. SLL members were right in the forefront of everyone of those demonstrations. They instigated and led a great many of them. The first mass meetings and demon-strations in Britain were led and addressed by our members. No one except the SLL organised a single factory-gate meeting against the blockade. Our comrades also fought tooth and nail to turn the protests especially into the Labour movement and to the factories. They had to fight resolutely against the right wing and the Stalinists in order to do so. They led these demonstrations against imperialism, and in defence of the Cuban Revolution, at the same time educating the workers and students in the role of the Soviet bureuacracy. They explained the causes of Khrushchev’s contradictory policies, instead of joining Russell and the pacifists in praising his ‘brilliant’ diplomacy. In order to do this they had to fight the Stalinists, a fight which won the support of many Communist Party members for Marxism. That could not have been done without training the SLL in the spirit of revolutionary Communist methods of work and a struggle against revisionism. How well would our comrades have performed had they been armed with the heritage of Pabloism—‘the new situation restricts more and more the capacity of counter--revolutionary measures by the bureaucracy’—or with Cannon’s apologia: ‘What else could he have done under the given circumstances?’; and calling up of Nehru and Russell, ‘unaffected by imperialist propa-ganda’, in his support? We are proud of our record in the Cuban events of last autumn, and we are ashamed of the identification of ‘Trotskyism’ with the capitulation to the Soviet bureaucracy of Cannon and the Pabloites. Hansen’s long list of quotations from The Newsletter is really only a mask for that capi-tulation. 
Abstract Norms 
Hansen’s case is basically the same as Pablo’s in 1953. ‘Objective’ forces pressing towards Socialism make it impossible for the Soviet bureaucracy to betray, and press even petty-bourgeois groupings to adopt a revolutionary path. We have seen above how in Algeria this means calling on Marxists to simply help along the ‘objective’ forces that will favour a course to the left by Ben Bella and his nationalist government. For all the talk of firmness against imperialism which is supposed to be involved in calling Cuba a ‘workers’ state’, the actual ‘defence’ of the Cuban Revolution by the SWP and the Pabloites was unable to even separate itself from the counter--revolutionary bureaucracy of Khrushchev! This is one of the things we mean when we say that Hansen is not analysing Cuba from the point of view of the development of the international class struggle, but by the application of abstract norms to isolated cases. 
Hansen approaches the question of definition of the Cuban state by trying to relate it to the history of such discussions in the Trotskyist movement. The analysis of that discussion is certainly a vital part of the Marxist answer to the problems posed by Cuba today, but it will have to be along a different line to that taken by Hansen. He takes the SLL National Committee to task for ridiculing the imposition of abstract norms from Trotsky’s definition of the USSR to the economy and political system of Cuba today. He says that we thus ‘sever the connection’ between the present and the past discussion. 
Hansen even says we have cut out Trotsky’s defi-nition of the USSR ‘by declaring it has no relevance to the Cuban discussion’. Is that the same thing as saying that the question of the Cuban state cannot be resolved abstractly by ‘criteria’ from this earlier discussion? It is always easier to demolish your opponent if you write his case afresh in your own terms. The real point of a historical analysis of the development of our concepts is to establish the way in which they scientifically develop by reflecting the objective world. Just as Trotsky’s definitions of the USSR were hammered out on the basis of changing conditions in the USSR and in the world, of struggles against revisionist trends, and of the struggle to build a new International, so the historical threads of the discussion today must be seen as part of the struggle to build a revolutionary International able to lead the working class to power. The whole political line of the different tendencies in the Trotskyist movement must be the content of an analysis of their discussion on these questions. What looks like ‘historical’ analysis turns out in Hansen’s hands to be the most rigid and unhistorical treatment. 
Petty-Bourgeois Leaderships and the Working Class 
For example, he criticises Trotskyism Betrayed for failing to characterise the Soviet bureaucracy as a petty-bourgeois bureaucracy. Hansen’s insistence on this point has a specific purpose: ‘What was new in this situation-and this is the heart of Trotsky’s position on the question—was that a reactionary petty--bourgeois formation of this kind could, after a poli-tical counter-revolution, wield power in a workers’ state and even defend the foundations of that state while being primarily concerned about their own special interests.’ It follows therefore that under certain circumstances petty-bourgeois formations will be forced to lead the revolutions of workers and peasants and abolish the capitalist state. Says Hansen: the SLL leaders accepted this for Eastern Europe and China, why not for Cuba? (They should even be more willing, he suggests, since ‘the Cuban leadership is in every respect superior to the Chinese’.) We now see what Hansen means by ‘continuity’ in the discussion. Trotsky saw that a petty-bourgeois bureaucracy could lead and even ‘defend’ a workers’ state. After the Second World War this petty-bourgeois formation could even take the leadership in the extension of the revolution and the establishment of new, ‘deformed workers’ states’. So why should the SLL strain at the notion that petty-bourgeois leadership can lead the establishment of workers’ states in countries like Cuba? There you have the whole of Hansen’s playing with ‘the history of the controversy’. He picks out from the history one aspect, the characterisation as petty-bourgeois of certain social groups. This aspect is selected because it is the one essential to the justification of his present political course. Now it is, of course, absolutely essential that the characterisation ‘petty-bourgeois’ be very precise. This class is con-tinually being differentiated into the main classes of society, bourgeois and proletarian. Its various poli-tical representatives reflect this intermediate, depen-dent and shifting position. They are capable of no independent, consistent political line of action, Only if a petty-bourgeois intellectual joins the proletariat, in Marx’s terms, can he achieve that independence and consistency of theory and action. The bureaucracy in the labour movement was often characterised by Lenin and Trotsky as petty-bourgeois in terms of its way of life, its approximation to the standards and acceptance of the ideology of the middle classes, its going over, in the special conditions of rich im-perialist countries, to the way of life and social functions of the middle classes. They formed part of the ‘new middle caste’ of society in the imperialist countries, In the USSR the bureaucratic ruling group consisted of the elements listed by Hansen â ‘a reflection of the peasantry, the remnants of the old classes, the elements who switched allegiance from Czar to the new regime—all these and the political--military administrative levels of the new government who, under pressure from the Capitalist West, drifted from the outlook of revolutionary socialism or came to prominence without ever having understood it’. 
The term petty-bourgeois is not at all sufficient to characterise this bureaucracy for the purpose of the present (or any other) discussion. A decisive sector of the Soviet bureaucracy was Stalin’s faction in control of the Bolshevik Party and the Soviet state. The historical relation between this party, this state, and the Soviet working class gave a specific character to the bureaucracy. It was not at all simply a question of relation between old, middle classes and a new governing elite. The existence of nationalized property relations established by a Soviet revolution, with the Bolshevik Party in power, gave us a historically -produced petty-bourgeois stratum at the head of the first workers’ state, a group which represented, as Trotsky so painstakingly insisted, not the general laws of development of classes in the transition from capi-talism to socialism, but the particular and unique refraction of these laws in the conditions of a back-ward and isolated workers’ state. In extending this ‘capacity’ of the petty-bourgeois, as petty-bourgeois, to defend and even extend workers’ states, Hansen and Co. do precisely what Trotsky fought against in the discussion. Our French comrades are right to insist that the evaluation of the history of this discussion in the Trotskyist movement is more than a day’s work, and the pre-condition of any useful results will have to be a much more serious and scientific handling of Marxist concepts than is displayed by Hansen with his easy identification of a ‘petty-bourgeois formation’ like the unique bureaucracy of the first workers’ state with the petty-bourgeois leadership of the July 26th movement in Cuba. 
Hansen on Permanent Revolution
In the coming months the French and British sections of the IC will publish contributions on the history of the discussion of ‘workers’ states’. Mean-while we confine ourselves to differences in method to which Hansen draws attention, particularly in relation to Cuba, Nothing that Hansen says in ‘Cuba—The Acid Test ’ answers the main argument in our section on Cuba in Trotskyism Betrayed. But before taking up particular points from Hansen’s document it might be useful to state the general position from which we think Marxists must begin. One reason for doing this is that Hansen accuses us of treating Cuba only as an ‘exception’, and of seeing no continuity between past and present discussions on the character of the state. Castro set out as the leader of a petty--bourgeois nationalist party. His party has led a revolution and been able to hold power in Cuba. How has this been possible? What is its significance? 
In the Russian Revolution, the petty-bourgeois (the ‘democracy’) could not resolutely seize the power on its own account, let alone ‘retain’ power, because of the strength of the proletariat and its ally the peasantry at that period. Given resolute revolutionary leadership, the working class proved able to overthrow the ‘democracy’ and achieve power. This power, in the view of Lenin and Trotsky, was an international breakthrough. It was seen essentially, in this back-ward country, as a power to be defended ‘until the workers of Western Europe come to our aid’. 
In this summary are contained the basic ideas of the ‘permanent revolution’. Those countries who arrive at the stage of bourgeois-democratic revolution late cannot achieve this revolution under the leadership of the bourgeoisie. The latter, and its spokesmen in the petty-bourgeois parties, are too incapable of an independent development. Their relation to inter-national capital and their fear of the proletariat make their task an impossible one, and they will run to the support of reaction. The proletariat is the only class which can carry through the tasks of the bourgeois--democratic revolution. But in the course of its revolutionary actions and the creation of its own organs of struggle, there arise independent class demands. From the first stage of the revolution there is a rapid transition to workers’ power. The condition for the maintenance and development of this power and its social base is the international socialist revolution. 
Petty-Bourgeoisie in the Anti-Imperialist Struggle 
The nations drawn into the struggle against im-perialism now cover the entire world. The class com-position of these nations varies enormously. In many of them, there is no industrial proletariat even to compare with the Russian proletariat of 1905, or the Chinese of 1919. In many of them, the development of industry has been forcibly restricted in the special interest of the ruling imperialist powers, so that the population consists almost entirely of a poverty--stricken peasantry. This peasantry is not at all identical with the ‘peasantry’ of Marxist writings in the 19th century. In many cases the majority of cultivators are landless sharecroppers and occasional wage-labourers. The special requirements of extractive and primary processing industries often create a special type of worker-migrant workers, spending half their time employed in mines or on plantations for low wages, the other half unemployed or back in small--scale cash-crop production or subsistence agriculture. The actual relationship of exploitation between inter-national capital, banks, native money-lenders and merchants, landlords, etc., on the one hand, and the direct producers, peasants and workers, on the other, presents new and original forms. These forms are often hideous combinations of the ruthless drive for profit of advanced finance-capital and the backward social relations of feudal sheikhdoms and chiefdoms. At the political level, the peoples of these countries suffer the same deadly combination. All the horrors of modern war are visited upon them, either in direct conflict between the imperialist powers or through the equally effective ‘pacifying’ activities of the United Nations. In each case, we must see a particular com-bination of the forces and the laws analysed by Trotsky and Lenin in their work on imperialism and the Permanent Revolution. 
Cuba is one of those countries where capitalist development has been almost entirely a function of foreign investment and control. The dependence of the economies of Latin American countries upon a single crop or resource (for Cuba, sugar) has often been described. The national bourgeoisie could never be an independent social force in Cuba. It could function only as a political or commercial executive for U.S. investments. Under these conditions the petty-bourgeois democratic ideologists could not long play their classical role in the bourgeois revolution, that of providing a political leadership tying the workers and peasants first to the bourgeois struggle against absolutism or for independence, and then tying these lower classes to the new regime. In the Russian Revolution the Social Revolutionaries and the Men-sheviks attempted to do this. The leadership of the Bolsheviks over a proletariat concentrated in a few advanced centres, particularly Petrograd, in the vanguard of a peasant war, won Soviet power. The alternative would have been a repressive regime founded on the capitulation of the petty-bourgeois parties to the counter-revolution. Even in Germany and Italy, more advanced countries with much larger working classes, the failure of the proletarian revolu-tion was replaced within a short time, not by bourgeois democracy, but by the naked oppression of Fascist regimes. Mankind had entered an epoch where the alternatives were Socialism or Barbarism, in the shape of Fascist reaction.  
Capitulation to Soviet Bureaucracy 
In the world today, we have a more advanced stage of the same situation. Not only barbarism but com-plete annihilation presents itself as the alternative to Socia1ism. This fact on a world scale, together with the preservation of the workers’ state under bureaucratic domination in the USSR and the setting up of similar regimes in other backward countries (Eastern Europe and China), have led some ‘Marxists’ to view the present situation as qualitatively different. The Stalinists have concluded that the threat of war and the power of their own military forces make practic-able a strategy of peaceful competition with the leading imperialist powers, and peaceful and Parlia-mentary roads to Socialism within the individual nations. This is quite clearly not a theory but an ideological apology for the actual capitulation of the Soviet bureaucracy, determined above all to preserve its privileges by balancing between the working classes and imperialism. The current Sino-Soviet dispute raises these questions for discussion throughout the Communist Parries. Never was there greater need for theoretical clarity and decisiveness by the Trotskyist movement, for only the scientific development of the theory of Permanent Revolution can provide any answer to the problems raised. In our opinion the revisions of Trotskyism by Pablo, leading to the split in 1953, and now manifested in opportunist policies for the advanced countries, the workers’ states, and the colonial countries, were a political capitulation to the forces which stand between the working class and the overthrow of imperialism. The power of the Soviet bureaucracy, and the slowness of the European and U.S. labour movements to resolve the crisis of leadership in the 1930s and 1940s, had an impact on the ideas of Pablo and his group which was not interpreted scientifically, in a class way, but impressionistically. This abandonment of the dialectical method, of the class criterion in the analysis of society and politics, resulted in the conclusion that forces other than the proletariat organised behind revolu-tionary Marxist parties would lead the next historical stage of struggle against capitalism. We have seen how Hansen explains this for China and Eastern Europe. We remember Pablo’s insistence that the Stalinist parties in countries like France could lead the working class to power. We have seen since then the ‘rehabilitation of the revolutionary peasantry’ by Pablo and the current belief that petty-bourgeois nationalist leaders can lead the establishment and maintenance of workers’ states. In Cuba, even an ‘uncorrupted workers’ regime’ has been established, according to these ‘Marxists’. All this is possible because there is a ‘new reality’; as Hansen says: ‘To this we must add that the world setting today is completely different (?) from what it was in 1936-39. In place of (?) the entrenchment of European fascism, the Soviet Union has consolidated a position as one of the two primary world powers. The Soviet econo-mic structure has been extended deep into Europe. China has become a workers’ state. The colonial revolution has brought hundreds of millions to their feet. De-Stalinisation has altered the capacity of the bureaucracy to impose its will in flagrant fashion as in the thirties ...’ 
The similarity here to the analysis of the ‘new situation’ presented by the Stalinists is remarkable. They, too, discuss at the level of ‘the strength of the Socialist camp’, ‘the colonial revolution’, ‘the defeat of fascism’ and ‘the growth of the Soviet economy’. They, too, try to protect themselves from the forma-tion of new revolutionary parties by claiming that it is their defensive reaction of ‘de-Stalinisation’ which assures the future of the Communist movement. Those who refer to Lenin are ‘dogmatists’! Capitulation to the bureaucracy in political questions will eventually involve a descent into their methods of thinking, in narrow empiricism and pragmatism, combined with demagogic generalisations. This is the type of thinking which underlies the present revisionist barrier to the building of the Fourth International.  
The SLL’s Position on Cuba 
Let us briefly now summarise the ‘refutations’ made by Hansen of our position on Cuba as stated in the document Trotskyism Betrayed and see how they stand up. 
1. We criticised the ‘normative’ method of applying separate ‘criteria’ abstractly and unhistorically with-out specific historical and class analysis. We de-manded instead a class analysis of the political forces and of the government and state in Cuba. Hansen replies by accusing us of ignoring the historical con-tinuity in the discussion on the class character of the USSR, China and Eastern Europe and Cuba. We have seen above the way in which he establishes this ‘continuity’—by finding in it justification for accept-ance of petty-bourgeois formations as leaders of the working class. We have tried, in anticipation of future analysis, to lay down the general Marxist frame-work for a discussion. We have suggested that the analysis carried out over the last two years in Labour Review form the basis for a class evaluation of the nationalist and Stalinist forces in Cuba and other countries. 
2. We stated categorically that the new unified party (IRO) [6] of Castro and the Stalinists could not be a substitute for the construction of a revolutionary Marxist party in Cuba. Hansen does not take up this question at all. He presumably defends the position stated earlier by Cannon, that the Trotskyists should take a loyal place within the IRO. Hansen replies to the French comrades that in their writings, ‘The meaning of the attacks on the Cuban Trotskyists (by government officials and spokesmen) is exaggerated and placed at the wrong door besides not being properly balanced against the ideological influence which Trotskyism exercises in a significant sector among the Cuban revolutionary vanguard.’ [7] 
He still must explain the clear statement of Guevara that no factions shall exist in the IRO, whose ‘democratic centralism’ will thus be of the Stalinist type. He must explain who is responsible for the attacks on Trotskyists. And he must not ask us to take seriously his gentle hint that the SWP or someone else has secret influential friends by Castro’s side. When did that become a Marxist argument, and what has it got to do with the question whether a Marxist party can be built? No doubt we will also be told that in Algeria there is ‘ideological influence’ by Trotskyists like Pablo in ‘a significant sector among the revolutionary vanguard’, but we find it difficult to get excited about that. Hansen had the opportunity in this part of the, argument to expand on his earlier theme: ‘We all know the ABC—we need revolutionary parties—but the question is how to go ahead and build them.’ But he has nothing to say except that it is ‘exaggerated’ to defend the Cuban Trotskyists from attack by the State apparatus and that it should be remembered we have some friends in there. 
3. We stated our opinion that the dictatorship of the proletariat had not been established in Cuba, and that therefore the label workers’ state was wrong. Hansen does not take the question head-on—or perhaps this is one of those old ‘norms’ of Lenin which are too old fashioned to apply. To our argument that the state machine remained a bourgeois structure despite the absence of the bourgeoisie, Hansen replies only with attempted ridicule, despite the fact that, as the French comrades have pointed out, this involves him in the necessity of revising Trotsky’s conclusions about Republican Spain in the 30s (Spain-The Last Warning 1936). [8] The SLL, says Hansen, should revise their opinion because: the imperialists disagree about it being a bourgeois state; the ‘people’ of the USSR and the other workers’ states disagree(!); the Cuban people disagree; other Marxists disagree; and finally, the present SLL position was once stated by Pablo himse1f, before he learned better. All these arguments amount to precisely nothing (see the letter from F. Rodriguez, in this bulletin). [9] 
Hansen does not take up at all the question of Soviets or workers’ councils as the form of State power, and the meaning of a ‘militia’ without such workers’ self-government. He does not say how this ‘militia’, controlled in fact through the army by the centralised state apparatus, differs from ‘the people in arms’. Is it not a fact that the arms supply is regulated through the army and not through the militias? Through the State apparatus and not through workers’ councils or committees? Why does not Hansen take up our argument that the old state machine was not smashed but was staffed with personnel from Castro’s own movement, later supple-mented by the Stalinist bureaucrats? Is it a ‘norm’ from Marx and Lenin which must now be dropped? We insist that so long as the petty-bourgeois leader-ship of Castro keeps hold of this state machine, bureaucratically independent of any organs of workers’ power, in control of force in Cuban society, then it will function as the main hope for the re-entry of the bourgeoisie into Cuba, nationalization notwithstanding. 
4. Essentially connected with the last point was our characterisation of Castro’s government as a Bonapartist regime resting on bourgeois state founda-tions (Trotskyism Betrayed, p. 14). Certainly Castro has leant heavily on the proletariat and the poor peasantry up to now, but he also is careful to preserve a relationship with the rich peasants, and the exigencies of the economy may force him to rely on them more and more. Hansen should think out how far he is prepared to go with Castro in such an eventuality. Already Pablo, with whom Hansen wants to unite, has been working out a theoretical line to justify Ben Bella’s insistence that in Algeria the peasants are more important than the workers. If Hansen is to answer the case far saying Castro is a left Bonaparte, balancing between imperialism and the working class, then he must give an alternative explanation for the absence of proletarian democracy in Cuba. If Cuba is an ‘uncorrupted workers’ regime’ how do we explain the absence of workers’ councils? What explanation is there other than the preservation of the independence of the State power by Castro and his movement, against the working class as well as against imperialism? Stalin’s regime was also charac-terised by Trotsky as a Bonapartist one. Does that mean that Cuba, like the USSR, is therefore a workers’ state? No: we say that Stalin’s was a bureaucratic regime resting on the proletarian state foundations conquered by the Soviet workers in 1917; Castro’s is a Bonapartist regime still resting an bourgeois state foundations. If the Cuban revolution can be success-fully defended from foreign invasion, then the next stage will be a short period of dual power, with the workers and peasants led in their Soviets by a new revolutionary party behind the programme of the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
5. Hansen makes no reply to our statement: ‘The attack on Escalante was motivated by a desire to keep power centralised in his own hands and not by hostility to bureaucracy or any other such thing.’ (Trotskyism Betrayed, p. 14). Hansen still writes as if it does not need proving that Escalante was removed from office as a step against Stalinist bureaucratism. But we must repeat that he leaves several points unanswered. What is the significance of the fact that the majority leadership of the Cuban Stalinists also condemned Escalante, and that Pravda welcomed his removal as a blow against ‘sectarianism’? Does it mean that they are now taking their place in Castro’s crusade against Stalinism? But would not this imply that the Stalinist movement is reforming itself along the right lines? Or does it mean that the Cuban CP and Pravda decided to humour Castro for the time being, acknowledging his strong position in Cuba itself? In that case the nature of the relation between the July 26th movement and the Stalinists should be exposed by the SWP, and its implications for the nature of the new ‘united revolutionary party’ recognised. 
The main basis for interpreting Escalante’s removal appears to be the speech of Castro ‘Against Sectarian-ism and Bureaucracy’. In this speech Castro gave many examples of favouritism and bureaucratic dis-crimination in the State administration. Escalante and his group, according to Castro, used their power to staff the state apparatus at all leve1s with their own (Communist Party) nominees. All this seems to be very fine, but if the speech is read carefully, and compared with earlier speeches and writings, it be-comes clear that there is more there than meets the eye. 
In condemning Escalante’s appointments, Castro repeatedly remarks that the men appointed were not proved revolutionists but Party intellectuals, some of whom were under their beds while the revolutionaries were risking their lives against Batista’s regime. The clear implication of this part of the speech was to assert the leadership of the July 26th group over that of the Communist Party, and to threaten the Com-munist Party with calling up the sympathies of the people behind the ‘real revolutionaries’. It was prob-ably against this very real danger to their own bureau-cratic positions that the Stalinists decided to join in the attack on Escalante and cut their losses. It is very interesting to compare this speech with Castro’s equally well-known one, also published by the SWP, in which he claimed to have always been at least close to communism. In this latter speech, made at a stage when he was more dependent on the Communist Party for the staffing of the State bureaucracy, Castro almost apologised for whatever hostility he had shown to Stalinism in his earlier career. He explained that only his ‘lack of understanding’ prevented him from being a Communist; he thus glossed over the betrayals of Cuban Stalinism in the past. He called upon the militants of the July 26th Movement to learn Marxism from the old hands of the Communist Party. What else can we call these rapid changes in emphasis except the adaptation of a Bonaparte to the changing neces-sities of preserving his domination? Could anyone suggest that they bear any relation to a serious or revolutionary evaluation of Stalinism as a political trend? 
In this matter, do Castro’s speeches to the populace bear any relation to the process of ‘educating the masses’ at which he is supposed to be so adept? An article from Hansen on this question would be in-teresting. In ‘Cuba—The Acid Test ’ he makes only the briefest references to the question: ‘the alleged take-over of Castro’s forces by the Cuban Communist Party has been sufficiently exploded by events’ (p. 28). 
Hansen chooses here to ignore the point that even if he was right about the significance of Castro’s actions ‘against bureaucratism’ this would largely con-firm what had been said about the dangers to the Cuban revolution of Castro’s dependence on the Stalinists in staffing the State apparatus. He makes no analysis of the actual relations between the July 26th Movement and the Communist Party, and simply refers once again to ‘the measures taken by the Castro regime against Stalinist bureaucratism’ (Cuba—The Acid Test, p. 16) as if nobody could question their ‘revolutionary’ or progressive character. But a reading of Castro’s own speech makes the matter quite clear. In condemning the bureaucratic appointment to State positions of Communist Party members by Escalante, Castro is defending not workers’ rule, proletarian dictatorship, but the independence of the State machine. He insists in so many words that the state must have the right to place all personnel. These officials will be loyal to the State and not to any outside organisation. The assertion of the worth of the July 26th fighters against those who were ‘under their beds’ is a justification of this independent power of the centralised state apparatus itself, under the direct control of Castro’s government. Guevara’s speeches against workers’ control in industry, and the attacks on the Cuban Trotskyists, are in the same line. 
6. Hansen repeats all the arguments about nationali-zation carried out by the Castro government, without introducing anything new to the discussion. We had indicated that nationalization today could mean many different things, and was often carried out on a large scale by bourgeois governments, particularly in back-ward countries. The longer capitalism continues in the absence of proletarian victory in the advanced coun-tries, the more capitalist economy will have to adopt measures which conform to the character of modern industry, division of labour and communication, yet still restricting the economy within the contradictions of capitalism. Hansen makes a terrible hash of the argument at that point. He says: if nationalizations like those in Cuba can be carried out by a bourgeois state, doesn’t this lead you to the conclusion that capitalism can still have a progressive role? This is only the argument of the revisionists (‘Capitalism can make itself work’) stood on its head. Hansen is taking at their face value the claims made by the governments and capitalist spokesmen for such changes. The fact is that the economy of Cuba, or Israel, or Egypt, or any other country, will be hampered by such a frame-work from becoming part of the rationally planned international economy of Socialism. Does the use of atomic fission prove that science and industry can still advance under capitalism, and that Marxism is wrong? Or doesn’t it demonstrate that every technological advance, so long as imperialism is not abolished, turns into its opposite, i.e., that all development involves greater economic and political contradictions? 
Hansen does not take up the relevance of his criteria of ‘nationalization’ for say, Egypt or Burma, where a military-nationalist government recently nationalized the banks and many foreign holdings. Perhaps these will have to be called workers’ states, since if somebody else (bourgeois or petty-bourgeois governments) nationalized these enterprises, that might imply further progressive roles for the capitalist class and the capitalist system. We raised the question of the SWP’s evaluation of these states in our earlier document, but Hansen gives no reply. On the question of nationalization of the land, one small point will show the incompleteness of Hansen’s presentation. Hansen says that the alienability of land (whether it can be bought and sold) is ‘beside the point in this discussion’ but takes the opportunity to attack the SLL for its ‘ignorance of the facts on this question’. He goes on: ‘It so happens that the Agrarian Reform Law specifies that the “vital minimum” of land, to which a campesino gets a deed, “shall be inalienable”. Exempt from taxes, this land cannot be attached and is not subject to contract, lease, sharecrop or usufruct. It can be transferred only by sale to the state, or through inheritance by a single heir on the death of the owner, or, in the event there is no heir, by sale at a public auction to bidders who must be campesinos or agricultural workers: Now a very interesting omission from this passage (a passage whose only meaning is that the Castro government has tried to create a stable, small and middle peasant class in Cuba) is that besides the vital ‘minimum’ there is also the possibility of much larger holdings, up to a maximum of 1,000 acres. Between the minimum and the maximum, the land can be sold on the market. Hansen’s correction of our ‘ignorance’ here may perhaps serve as a model of how to start with ‘the facts’. 
7. Finally, we raised the question of a new revolu-tionary party in Cuba. Hansen ignores this completely. He prefers the ‘facts’. 
Hansen’s Silence 
In this reply to Cuba—The Acid Test we have restricted ourselves to the methodological principles raised by Hansen, and to a number of illustrations of the differences between us on these principles, par-ticularly on Cuba. Other questions which we took up in Trotskyism Betrayed are ignored by Hansen, and we await his reply. For example, we took several pages to answer the accusation of ‘subjectivism’ in our evaluation of the world situation. Taking up Trotsky’s Transitional Programme and the International Resolu-tion of the SLL (World Prospect for Socialism) we showed that our evaluation of the relation between leadership and the objective contradictions of capitalism was the same as Trotsky’s. Hansen makes no attempt to return to the attack an this point; perhaps he thinks it enough to say that ‘the world setting today is completely different from what it was in 1936-39’. (p. 28). We also made a detailed reply defending our characterisation of the Algerian leadership and the Evian sell-out. Once again, nothing from Hansen in reply (see above). What kind of discussion is Hansen going in for? We try to take up all the points raised, to carry them to the end, and Hansen simply drops them. Such discussion soon becomes profitless. Similar treatment is given to the question of the Leninist approach to party-building. We tried to establish, from the documentary evidence, the falseness of Hansen’s claim that Lenin and Trotsky had built the Party primarily through flexibility and unifications. We pointed out the essential theoretical firmness and the ability to insist on splits characteristic of Lenin, and Trotsky’s recognition of this essence. Hansen replies not a word. 
Finally, we take up once again the relation between the revolution in the advanced capitalist countries and in the backward nations. We especially insisted an the political implications of the SWP’s statement that ‘the pronounced lag in the West, this negative feature (was) the most important element in the current reality.’ All the talk of the revisionists about ‘favourable objective forces’ amounts in fact to the opposite of what it appears. Times are good, and getting better, but for what? Far the construction of revolutionary parties around the programme of the Fourth International? No! For the emergence of Marxists from the petty-bourgeois political groupings, a development which Trotskyists should direct all their efforts to supporting! This is the most that can be gathered from Hansen and the Pabloites. Their ‘deep entry’ and their silence on the principled questions of new revolutionary parties, Soviet demo-cracy, and the political revolution, are designed to find ways of ‘getting in on the act’. Someone else is going to do the job, and at the moment the Stalinist bureau-cracy and the nationalist leaders are getting on with it. As for the advanced countries: ‘In fact experience would seem to indicate that the difficulty of coming to power in the imperialist countries has increased if anything since the time of the Bolsheviks.’ This is used to back up Hansen’s agreement that the construc-tion of revolutionary parties is an ‘absolute necessity in the advanced capitalist countries’. In the advanced countries it’s difficult: you need Marxist parties. But in any case the ‘epicentre’ of the revolution is elsewhere, and there it can be done by someone else. In effect the ‘parties’ of Hansen and the Pabloites in the advanced countries become cheer-leaders for the petty--bourgeois nationalists in Algeria, Cuba, etc. Hansen chooses to ignore the line of those Pabloites in Europe who ‘keep their heads dawn’ in the Social Democracy, hoping to be discovered as the core of some future centrist parties, rather than constructing independent parties in opposition to the reactionary leaderships. 
Hansen’s document, Cuba—The Acid Test, is a serious warning to Marxists. It parades as a serious contribution to an international discussion, yet ignores a whole series of vital questions raised immediately before, questions concerning the whole record and orientation of Bolshevism. 
In place of this, Hansen insists on ‘the facts’, and in particular, the fact of the Cuban Revolution. Into this part of the discussion he introduces nothing new except a demagogic distortion of the SLL’s position and a crude attempt to gain something from the different evaluations of the Cuban state by the French and British sections of the IC. 
All this indicates that Hansen is running away from the fundamental political questions. His insistence on ‘The Acid Test’ of Cuba is a plea for ‘commonsense’ to override theory. It is this which underlies the wholly different concepts of building the International now dividing the SWP and the SLL. Without revolu-tionary theory, no revolutionary party. 
The great benefit to be derived from Cuba—The Acid Test is that it makes explicit the foundations of this abandonment of revolutionary theory, of dialectical materialism. Hansen has now placed out in the open his defence of empiricism as a method, a method which has a natural expression in the politics of opportunism. It is to these politics that Hansen’s method now leads. It is for this reason that he and Cannon drive for unification with Pabloism, whose opportunist and liquidationist revisions 1953 have not been in any way corrected. All that has happened is that the theoretical stagnation of the American Trotskyists has led them inescapably to the same end. 
Adapted unanimously by The National Committee of The Socialist Labour League on 23rd March, 1963. 
ADDENDUM 
It is characteristic of the Castro regime that not a single leading body of the ORI is elected. While Castro inveighs against sectarianism and dogmatism in the party, he is at the same time responsible for the installation of an autocratic and self-perpetuating bureaucracy. 
For example, the ‘reorganising process’ in the ORI is carried out by the National Board—which is appointed. Who reorganises the National Board? Presumably Castro. There is no freedom for dissident tendencies and no provision for minority representa-tion. 
All policy decisions are made behind closed doors by a small clique of Castro and his supporters. There is no democratic debate and little discussion. For instance, during the last missile crisis, it transpired that ‘some people’ in the ORI favoured UN inspection. Who these people were and what chance they had to express themselves we do not know. We had to wait until Castro spoke to get what facts we could. 
Again recently the workers of Havana were treated to a piece of organisational skullduggery without pre-cedent in the revolution. This was the decision to dissolve the acting Provincial Committee (37) of Havana, its executive board and Secretariat. It was replaced with a small Provisional Executive Board (11) with ‘limited functions considered indispensable at this stage’. 
The ostensible—and official—reason for this arbit-rary action was the failure of this important leading organ to carry out the ‘reorganising work’ but the real reason was probably a political one—the elimination of the remnants of Escalante’s forces in the ORI. 
The Provincial Committee—one of the most im-portant in Cuba—has no right of appeal to any Congress of the ORI for the simple reason that there has been no democratically convened Congress, and there is little prospect of seeing one in the future. 
At the same time, too, all the party organisations in the Province of Havana have been placed under the direction of eleven Regional Commissions which are not subject to election and renewal. 
The bureaucratic centralisation going on in the ORI is the antithesis of working-class democracy and is the surest symptom of Bonapartism in the revolution. 
We do not wish to make a fetish of democracy—nor do we wish to minimise the importance of the bullet vis-à-vis the ballot in a revolution. But dictatorship if it is to remain popular and viable must be tempered by the widest democracy. Comrade Cannon in his own inimitable style expressed this thought succinctly when he wrote: 
‘When the founders of scientific socialism said the workers must emancipate themselves, they meant that nobody would do it for them, and nobody could. The same holds true for their organisations, the instruments of struggle for emancipation. If they are really to serve their purpose, these organisations must belong to the workers and be democratically operated and controlled by them. Nobody can do it for them. So thought the great democrats, Marx and Engels.’ (Notebook of an Agitator, p. 239, Pioneer Publishers 1958). 
We cannot say more. 

1. Reprinted in Trotskyism Versus Revisionism, Volume Three , (New Park Publications, 1974) p. 235.
 
2. Reprinted in Trotskyism Versus Revisionism, Volume Three , (New Park Publications, 1974) p. 292.
 
3. Published as an appendix to this document and originally appearing in the same issue of Fourth International .
 
4.  Cuba —The Acid Test: A reply to the Ultra-left sectarians , by Joseph Hansen, Nov. 20. 1962, Reprinted in 
Trotskyism Versus Revisionism, Volume Four , (New Park Publications, 1974) p. 20.  This document is also available online at,
http://www.marxists.org/archive/hansen/1962/11/acidtest.htm
 
5. ‘Germain’ was the pen name of Ernest Mandel.
 
6. In July 1961, the Integrated Revolutionary Organizations  (IRO) was formed by the merger of Fidel Castro's 26th of July Revolutionary Movement , the People's Socialist Party  (the old Communist Party) led by Blas Roca and the Revolutionary Directorate March 13th  led by Faure ChomÃ³n. On March 26, 1962 the IRO became the United Party of the Cuban Socialist Revolution  (PURSC) which, in turn, became the Communist Party of Cuba on October 3, 1965 with Castro as First Secretary.
 
7. The Socialist Workers Party, while initially defending the Cuban Trotskyists against the repression of the Castro regime,  had within a few months,  made an about face and supported the repression. This episode remains one of the seamier chapters in the history of opportunism. An excellent chronicle of the history of Cuban Trotskyism is available in the doctoral dissertation of Gary Andrew Tennant.  An extensive discussion of the repression of the Cuban Trotskyists from this document is available online at,
http://www.cubantrotskyism.net/PhD/chap7.html#sec712
 
8.http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1937/xx/spain01.htm
9. Published separately in the same issue of Fourth International.



‘An important element in the strength of a party or a class is the conception which the party or the class has of the relationship of forces in the country.’ – Leon Trotsky, 1931.
‘But it is absurd to think of a purely “objective” foresight. The person who has foresight in reality has a “programme” that he wants to see triumph, and foresight is precisely an element of this triumph.’ – Antonio Gramsci.
‘The decisive element in every situation is the force, permanently organized and pre-ordered over a long period, which can be advanced when one judges that the situation is favourable (and it is favourable only to the extent to which such a force exists and is full of fighting ardour); therefore, the essential task is that of paying systematic and patient attention to forming and developing this force, rendering it ever more homogeneous, compact, conscious of itself.’ – Antonio Gramsci.
‘... every shortcoming in historical duty increases the necessary disorder and prepares more serious catastrophes.’ – Antonio Gramsci.



(In this article I have drawn heavily upon Gramsci, The Modern Prince and to a lesser extent on Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness.)




GRAMSCI, brilliant intellectual and founder of the Italian Communist Party, and Trotsky, towering example of revolutionary leadership in theory and in practice, had good reason to write the words cited above. Trotsky, exiled by the Stalinist bureaucracy, was urging a policy of United Front on the Communist Party of Germany as the only defence against the danger of Nazism. Gramsci, after the defeat of the Workers’ Councils movement in Italy, in which he himself was so prominent, found himself in Mussolini’s jail. Eventually Trotsky met his death, 20 years ago, at the hands of Stalin’s agents; Gramsci’s health was destroyed in prison and he died a young man, a few days after his release in 1937.
Neither of these two men, the most original Marxist thinkers since Lenin, is regarded with favour by the official ‘Communist’ movement. Despite Khrushchev’s admission that the trials of the 1930s were based on confessions extracted by torture, the slanders about Trotsky’s plot against the USSR, his alliance with Hitler, and so on, are allowed to remain as part of the total censorship on his work that exists in the Communist Parties. In 1957 a small selection of Gramsci’s writings was published by Lawrence and Wishart. However, The Modern Prince, longest essay in this selection, was quite heavily cut, and precious little space was devoted to Gramsci’s major contribution on Workers’ Councils. One appreciates the great effort made by Dr. Louis Marks, the translator, to bring even this much of Gramsci to English readers; at the same time it must be said that the cuts in The Modern Prince are unacknowledged, and that several of the omitted sections (dealing with Rosa Luxemburg, with ‘Caesarism’, etc.) would have posed awkward questions for Stalinists.
 
Stalinism and Historical Materialism
It is characteristic that these two men should have laid great stress on the role of human consciousness, and of revolutionary leadership. Stalinism can no more entertain such an emphasis than can Social-Democracy. Reformism and opportunism are tied to the existing structure of power: a confused mixture of notions of fair play and expediency is the nearest they ever get to theory. Their political actions are based on an adjustment of the partial and temporary interests of sections of the working class to the existing economy and state power. This is why opportunists abhor theory, for theory insists on an understanding of each problem in terms of the all-round development of society, focused in our epoch on the working-class struggle for state power. Nor are the Stalinists in any better position; in the ‘Communist’ movement Marxist doctrine has hardened into an ideology: that is to say, particular phrases are taken from Marx and Lenin and used to justify the particular course taken by the Soviet bureaucracy. The authority naturally accruing to the Russian Communists after the October Revolution facilitated the spread of the degeneration of the Russian to the other Parties in the Communist International. These parties were ‘shaken up’, their leaderships changed, their structure arbitrarily fixed (under the name of ‘Bolshevisation’ of course!) until they were transmission belts for the international policies of Stalin’s bureaucracy, rather than revolutionary parties of the working class. [1] In latter years, despite the ‘exposure’ of Stalin by Khrushchev, the political consequences of this relationship have even deepened, though of course they will inevitably produce a reaction inside the foreign parties, and eventually in the Soviet Party, Peaceful competition between the Soviet and the US economies is now clearly stated to be the major form of the conflict between imperialism and socialism. For this to go on, peaceful relations in the rest of the world must be preserved. And so the ‘Communist’ parties ‘take the lead in the fight for peace’.
As a part of this process, certain theoretical distortions of Marxism play an important part. Above all, Marxism is twisted into an economic determinism. The dialectic is abstracted from history and reimposed on social development as a series of fixed stages. Instead of the rich variety and conflict of human history we have the natural series of slavery, feudalism, capitalism and socialism through which all societies pass. The USSR’s present structure is thus sanctified as an ‘inevitable’ successor of capitalism and any ‘criticisms’ of its social and political structure must be regarded as ‘secondary’. An apparent touch of flexibility is given to this schematic picture by the doctrine that different countries will find their ‘own’ roads to Socialism, learning from the USSR but adapting to their particular national characteristics. This is of course a mechanical caricature of historical materialism. The connection between the struggles of the working class for Socialism in, say, Britain, Russia and Vietnam, is not at all in the greater or lesser degree of similarity of social structure of those countries, but in the organic interdependence of their struggles. Capitalism is an international phenomenon, and the working class is an international force; the USSR is result of the first break-through of the world revolution, a result distorted by Russia’s particular economic development before and after the October Revolution, and by the impact of imperialism and the fate of the working-class movement since then. Trotsky laid a firm basis for the study of the relation between the Soviet workers’ state and the world working class in his writings between 1928 when ‘Socialism in One Country’ was first theoretically presented, and his death in 1940.
There are many Socialists who are naturally repelled by the bureaucratic distortion of Soviet society and of the Stalinist parties, as well as by the shameful record of Social-Democracy, and fail to escape from the distorted theory and method of Stalinism. Retaining that fundamental characteristic of Stalinism, loss of confidence in the ability of the working class of the advanced capitalist countries to conquer power, they dress up this loss of nerve with ‘theoretical’ ideas which have been current in the anti-Bolshevik sections of the Left since the October Revolution and even before. Elsewhere in this issue Brian Pearce takes certain historical questions bound up with the periodical ‘discovery’ that the USSR is a capitalist state, a discovery which of course leads away from certain uncomfortable political duties, such as the defence of the USSR against imperialism. In this article I want to take up another argument closely bound up with these same ideas, viz., that the root of the trouble lies in the Leninist concept of leadership of the working class by a centralized party and Lenin’s ‘party of a new type’.
 
The Role of Consciousness in History
Although this argument takes various forms (Lenin’s type of party was suited to autocratic Russia but not to democratic Britain; leadership will emerge naturally from the working class; all organizations develop bureaucracy; the success 1917 was a ‘historical accident’ taken advantage of by a brilliant Bolshevik elite; Rosa Luxemburg and Trotsky predicted the degeneration of the party etc., etc.), it is always underpinned by a false conception of the role of theory and consciousness in history, a tendency towards economic determinism, a notion that the laws of social development are something ‘natural’, standing above men and deciding their destinies. Political events and tendencies are seen as the ‘natural’ and inescapable reflection of economic interest; Marx’s concept of the political and ideological superstructure on the economic basis becomes a ‘mere superstructure’ of the economic struggle, as one of the founders of the new ‘Workers’ Party’ recently put it. This implies that politics is only the froth of history, whereas Marx was quite clear that it is in the sphere of politics that men become more or less conscious of the economic contradictions and fight out the issues. Precisely in politics, in the struggle for state power, is the decisive conflict fought out. Trade union and industrial struggle is a school of politics for the working class, in the older capitalist countries decades of trade union struggle were a necessary prelude to real class conflict; but the overthrow of political power and the institution of proletarian dictatorship is a qualitatively different question. For this, organization of a more advanced character, and therefore theory of a much wider and deeper character, is required. This means a political party which subordinates all partial struggles to the construction of a leadership firmly welded to the working class and completely devoted to the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism. Such a task requires the ability to learn from all past class struggles in society, particularly the failures and successes of the working-class movement, and an understanding of this history in relation to the total existing structure of society, not only in relation to the daily experience of the working class. The consciousness and organization required to achieve the greatest social overturn in history, these are the basic reasons for what has come to be known as democratic centralism, the bogey of so many ‘Left-wingers’.
The revolutionary party must incorporate as far as possible the understanding of capitalist society derived from all past theoretical advances and their testing-out by the working-class movement in history. In this tradition and theory there resides a more scientific truth than the working class can derive from its experience of exploitation and day-to-day struggle. Rather than humbly bowing before the experience of the class at ‘the point of production’, rather than assuming that the workers’ own experience will give rise to revolutionary consciousness, Marxists must on the contrary subordinate their political and theoretical work to the revolutionary party. This is the meaning of revolutionary discipline: that the consciousness represented by the Marxist party constitutes a higher consciousness of the historical tasks of the working class than does the immediate consciousness of the class itself. Only by accepting the discipline of the party, then, does the individual Marxist achieve the prospect of playing an independent historical role. This has nothing in common with the bourgeois notion of ‘free’ individuals imposing their reason upon the world. Rather, an objective analysis of capitalist production demonstrates that the working class is its gravedigger; the working class is consequently the only independent and decisive force in the modern epoch. But classes and social movements have to be welded together as forces by consciously grasping their situation and organizing to overthrow the classes which stand in their way. The relation between party and class is an aspect of this process; it is not enough for the workers to constitute a class ‘objectively’, by reason of their all being wage-labourers: from being ‘a class in itself’ the proletariat must become ‘a class for itself’.
Now Lenin’s primary concern was to find the form of organization and strategy which would express this political independence of the working class. It is true that in Russia his opponents, the Mensheviks, were victims of the mechanical idea that the bourgeoisie was destined to come to power after the defeat of Tsarism; they therefore disagreed with Lenin’s notion of the proletariat leading the struggle against Tsarism, and so the political independence of the class did not arise for them until after the bourgeois revolution. However, Lenin’s conviction that the working class was the leading independent force in the modern era was part of his general view of ‘imperialism’ as the final stage of capitalism. The fundamentals of organization required for a politically independent working class are not in anyway specific to Russian conditions. Indeed, the essence of Lenin’s position against the Mensheviks should be much easier to grasp in a country which is highly mechanized, where a large proletariat confronts a bourgeoisie firmly established in power.
 
Imperialism and Lenin’s Conception of the Party
It is important to stress the connection between Lenin’s characterization of our epoch and his ideas on organization. Imperialism, with its rapid expansion of capital investment, the organization of production on a very large scale, more and more domination by finance-capital, and the concentration of standing armies and repressive forces equipped with weapons based on the highest levels of technique of mass production, has given rise to social forces and ideas which restrict and hold back the working class. In the imperialist countries themselves, a considerable stratum of the working class identifies its interests with the expansion of capitalism itself. The new bureaucratic state provides a larger number of administrative jobs for the upper layers of the working class and absorbs most of the disappearing old middle class. A new social group of functionaries, officials, managers, teachers. has grown up, and on the basis of this group, together with the skilled working class, a strong opportunist tendency developed in the Labour Movement. In Britain, the early defeat of Chartism and the subsequent prolonged economic expansion led to the development of craft unionism at the expense of political organization. When the new general unions had come on the scene, and the need for independent political representation was recognized, it was not revolutionists who presented themselves as the leaders, but men with a very different standpoint. Fabianism started not from the conception of the working class as a revolutionary force, with the struggle for reforms as part of the building of that force, but from the idea that the state should intervene to alleviate the insecurity and poverty caused by the unrestricted operation of the capitalist market. The more extreme reformists thought that state ownership of certain industries might be necessary to achieve this. In Germany, although the Marxist phrases of the Erfurt programme continued to dominate the statements of the Social-Democratic leaders, a similar development was taking place. The SPD (German Social Democratic Party) became a church of the working class rather than a revolutionary party. When the war of 1914-18 broke out, not only did the SPD deputies vote war credits to their ‘national’ governments, like almost every other reformist party in Europe, but they boasted of the service they had given the nation by helping create a disciplined, organized and cultured working class. This conduct of the SPD at the outbreak of war closed a chapter in the history of Marxism. In the epoch of imperialist wars there must be parties of men steeled to resist all jingoism and patriotism, to proclaim the slogan ‘Turn the imperialist war into a civil war!’ The working class of each country had the duty of ‘revolutionary defeatism’ since the main question was one of cracking the front of imperialism.
To many ‘orthodox’ Marxists this turn by Lenin was a leap in the dark, adventurism, folly, typical of the ‘Blanquist, ‘voluntarist’ tendencies for which he had been so often criticised. But Lenin’s ‘fantastic’ slogan was deeper and nearer to the needs of the masses than all the ‘realism’ of the old Social-Democracy. The German Social-Democratic leaders ended up, at the height of the Revolution in 1918, failing to support the demand for the Kaiser’s abdication; and they gave ‘Marxist’ reasons for doing it: ‘For the Social Democracy, the external form of the State is unimportant’! And when pressure from below forced their hands they issued a public statement to the effect that ‘in insisting upon abdication, they had been motivated solely by the thought that only abdication could preserve order and prevent the spread of anarchy’. Without a doubt, a big factor in the fright of the Social Democratic leaders was the fact that the Russian Bolsheviks were already in power, and there was no telling where the process might stop in Germany. But again a ‘Marxist’ rationalization was offered: Scheidemann said afterwards, ‘Political actions can, essentially only confirm an economic development’. It was just this kind of ‘Marxism’ that Lenin had to defeat in the course of building a revolutionary party in Russia. His whole effort was to assert the dominance of the role of the proletariat in determining the course of history in the 20th century, a dominance flowing not from any ‘voluntarism’ but from the nature of the crisis of capitalism, the character of imperialism as the highest form of capitalist contradictions.
Kautsky and others in the old Social-Democracy fell down on just this point. They were great exponents of Marxism as an explanatory theory of past history, but Marx’s conclusion about the necessity of proletarian dictatorship on the basis of modern socialized production was not fully grasped. To do this meant seeing the working class, its consciousness and its organization, as themselves decisive forces in history, not just as the result of history. That is the meaning of Gramsci’s remarks at the head of this article. It is the direct opposite of Scheidemann’s ‘Political action can only confirm an economic development’ and of all nonsense about politics being ‘only the superstructure of the class struggle’. An interesting example of Lenin’s method in these questions may be found in his writings during the period of reaction following the 1905 revolution. A certain Levitsky, somewhat in the strain of our own ‘proletarian’ Left-wingers, objected to the Bolshevik strategy of the working class leading the struggle for liberty against Tsarism. This he saw as a watering down of principle and advanced the slogan ‘Not hegemony in the national struggle for political liberty, but a class party!’ Lenin roundly condemned this sectarian nonsense, which amounted in effect to an abandonment of the political field to bourgeois leadership. [2]
 
Spontaneity and Sectarianism
In the Socialist Labour League recently, a small minority developed the idea that as the Labour Party was drifting rapidly to the Right, the only way for the Marxists to preserve their integrity was to set up a party quite independent in every way from the Labour Party. The Labour Party had ceased to be a working-class party in any sense, and a party must be formed which concentrated on the ‘real’ class struggle at ‘the base’, ‘the point of production’. Not only did Behan and the others show by this trend their utter misunderstanding of the Marxist theory of society and politics, but their conduct gave a valuable lesson in the political importance of theoretical weakness of this kind, showing that with an incorrect theoretical approach and a wrong method, first-class historical blunders can be made. Just when the crisis in the British working-class movement approaches precisely its political peak, just when the contradiction between Social-Democracy and the historical needs of the working class is most sharply expressed in the issues of public ownership, defence and the relation between the organized working class and the Labour Party – at this point the cry goes up: abandon ship! It is the industrial struggle that matters above all! ‘Reformism is best exposed at the point of production’! – once again those who fail to grasp the nettle of political action explain their failure with the most resounding of ‘Marxist’ phrases. Precisely by clinging to such abstract generalities do men get left behind by historical development. The essence of dialectics is not the ability to stand by and pronounce what is base and what is superstructure, but to know when, where and how to act. Behan insists on the need to go back to the programme of the Industrial Rank-and-File Conference of November, 1958, as if nothing has happened in the trade union movement and the Labour Party since then. To confine the demands and activity of the working class at this point to the factory level would amount to betrayal; this is what was meant by the reply given to Behan’s group at the Socialist Labour League Conference. Our resistance to sectarianism is not a doctrinal one only, but part of the lessons learned from the beheading of the German working-class movement, among others, when the Communist Party failed to follow the policy of the United Front of the working class from 1929 onwards.
One of the interesting features of sectarians is their ability to take up very opportunist positions on certain questions, and particularly on questions or organization. Again the basic theoretical weakness here is lack of understanding of the role of consciousness. To criticise Brian Behan’s Workers’ Voice would amount to the mistake of taking on not the strongest but the weakest statement of one’s opponents’ case, and so I take certain points in the first issue of that journal only as an aside, and in order to introduce some more general points. In line with his idea that the class itself must lead the revolution, Behan writes that any workers’ organization, shop stewards’ committee, etc., may submit amendments to the Constitution of the Workers’ Party. This gives an appearance, of course, of a party open to the working class, not dictating to it but responding to it, and so on. But it is clearly only another example of the old ‘economism’. Certainly no workers’ party will be successful which is not responsive to changes in the moods of the working class, but that is a matter of tactics, of timing, of the form of propaganda, etc., and certainly not a question of programme, policy, constitution, which are determined on a basis of theory. The correctness of the policy of a Marxist party is not the extent to which it corresponds to the immediate consciousness of the workers. It is a matter rather of correct theoretical appraisal of all the social forces at work in a given period, including the role of the class and the party itself.
This raises the old question of the working class ‘throwing up its own leadership’ in times of struggle. It is a fact that in every section of the working class there spring up first-class militants with great organizing power and ability to advance the consciousness of their fellow-workers. Without such spontaneous rank-and-file leadership there could be no talk of revolution. But a revolutionary leadership is not just the sum of all these rank-and-file leaders, not just the ‘linking-together of rank-and-file committees’. There must be beyond that, above that level, a political leadership. It is not just a matter of daily struggle between employers and workers, which might even culminate in ‘one big strike’, but of the conquest of state power, of asserting the revolutionary role of the working class in the transformation of every aspect of capitalist society. The place of the workers in capitalist production is the basis of their revolutionary historical role, but to assert that role they have to be organized politically and theoretically as well as industrially, and the theory required to do this represents a higher form of consciousness than that which flows from the experience of the proletariat. If Lenin was right to condemn the ‘Economists’ for bringing no theory to the Russian workers other than the news that their industrial struggles were vital, how much more necessary it is to insist on advancing the theory required by the British working-class movement, with its scores of years of industrial organization, its opportunist leadership, and the complex international problems of leadership that have developed since Lenin’s day?
This brings out another fundamental weakness of sectarianism: its tendency towards idealism. All the talk about ‘no compromises’ and keeping clear of the rottenness of reformism amounts to a fear of rubbing up against reality, and is accompanied by the search for some section of workers which remains unaffected and pure despite the economic boom, as a jumping-off ground to defeat reformism. No doubt it is a healthy reaction against bureaucratic reformism to insist on the roots of militancy in the working class itself, but there is no substitute for fighting the political battle. It is not enough to know that reformism is rotten, to condemn it roundly, and to insist on one’s separateness from it; the point is, to take it seriously as a force in the British working class and defeat it on the arena of struggle. At this point, the political mistake of sectarianism ties in with the theoretical mistake of economic determinism or ‘economism’. Somehow, it is assumed, the working class will develop revolutionary consciousness because it is exploited. But the ideological struggle within the working class is real, it has to be bitterly fought and won before the class can be fully mobilized for battle. When we say that the long-drawn-out crisis of British imperialism rots away the social basis of reformist politics, that is not to say that the reformists simply leave the scene and leave a vacant place for a naturally radicalized working class desiring a new form of party. Such a party has to be built in the course of struggle with the reformists, and it has to be built by those who grasp the historical process theoretically; it does not grow ‘naturally’ or ‘organically’ out of the economic base.
 
Theory and Ideology in the Working Class
When we say that political ideas and movements reflect the economic base we should remember that such reflection is a series of conscious acts. Men’s consciousness is formed in an environment of social institutions controlled by the ruling class, institutions of repression and institutions for educational conditioning, staffed by people trained to operate these institutions as though they were part of a naturally or divinely ordained system. The majority of labour’s own organizations have become tied to this structure of established institutions, and are staffed by the ‘labour lieutenants of capitalism’. The proletariat’s consciousness of its role has to be achieved in struggle against all these institutional forms and their ideological results. Without the highest degree of centralized organization, these ideological battles cannot be won. The crisis of imperialism, which is expressed in the colonial struggle, the arms race and atomic war as well as in the tendency towards slump, constantly produces cultural decay and breakdown. Movements of the extreme Right, like Fascism, are able to call upon depraved elements of the intelligentsia to mobilize petty bourgeois, lumpen proletarians and even numbers of industrial workers behind the most foul and hideous social programmes. The alternative of socialism or barbarism did not pose itself only after Hiroshima, but was clearly before the eyes of the Bolsheviks and Rosa Luxemburg during the First World War. We are in an epoch which has been correctly characterized as one of a crisis of leadership. What is needed above all is a strongly disciplined leadership able to develop the theory of Imperialism, the Permanent Revolution, the relation between the Workers’ States and the world revolution, and to establish its leadership of the working class. Unless this crisis of leadership is solved there will be no ‘natural’ growth towards Socialism but there will be all the danger of war and barbarism. In this vital sense those who protest against ‘vanguardism’, against ‘too much centralization’, represent a reactionary tendency in the working-class movement.
The opponents of democratic centralism like to talk about the inevitable crisis of capitalism as the source of revolutionary action in the working class: this is counterposed to the so-called ‘voluntarism of the Leninists, who are supposed to think they can suck revolutionary situations out of their thumbs. But preparation of the class and of the party is the decisive question in social crises. It is true that periodically capitalism has undergone the most profound crises. We need only mention the Great Crash of 1929 and the consequent depression, and the post-war situation (1945) in Europe, when there returned, particularly in France and Italy, capitalists discredited by their war record and faced with the armed working class. In neither of these cases was revolution the outcome. Instead, helped by the Social-Democratic and Stalinist betrayals of the working class, the capitalists were able to ride the storm and in the earlier case to establish regimes which destroyed the possibility of revolution for many years. The elementary mistake of supposing that in the Marxist view consciousness and organization directly reflect economic need is one that must be conquered if there is to be a victorious revolution. The ideological reflection of changes in the economy lags behind. The machinery of this ‘lag’ is the structure of ruling-class power and education. There is necessary a theoretical leap in the working-class movement, the development of leadership which can grasp the significance of the underlying crisis in society and inform the activity of the class with that consciousness. What is important for the revolutionary class is that it must not remain determined in its thinking by the existing economy and institutions. As Gramsci puts it: ‘An appropriate political initiative is always necessary to free the economic drive from the tethers of traditional policies’. (My emphasis – C.S.)
Important here is the difference between the working class and other revolutionary classes in history. When Lenin says that the only weapon of the working class is organization, he means that whereas the rising bourgeoisie, for instance. developed its own economy, its art, its religion, its , schools, its philosophy, and so on, as the expression and organization of its social consciousness, before the political overthrow of the feudal political system, the proletariat does not construct the institutions of the new society within capitalism (despite the Fabians and the New Left). Capitalism is the only system of production in history whose inner dynamism has pushed it to develop the productive forces incessantly and to drive out all other forms of production. In order to mobilize for the overthrow of feudalism, it was sufficient for the bourgeoisie and its allies to recognize and feel the political restrictions upon their growing economic and cultural strength. Their own organic development within feudalism drove their ‘own’ institutions into conflict with the political regime which prevented their natural expansion. But bourgeois power is total social power: capital dominates all relationships like an elemental natural force. In order to seize in consciousness the nature of this power and to organize for its overthrow, there is necessary a scientific consciousness of the whole system of social relationships, and not just a sense of the degradation and exploitation suffered in the process of production, or the abstract knowledge that planned production for use would be more reasonable. There is no repository of this consciousness, and no guarantee of its necessary constant development in theory and practice, other than the proletarian party. To talk about the working class ‘itself’ as an undifferentiated, potentially revolutionary whole is to substitute myth for reality.
Because it is exploited in an inhuman system, commandeered and degraded in the service of capital, the working class is unevenly developed, apathetic under most circumstances, split into different sections, often backward in its view of most cultural and social problems, unless there is a conscious leadership differentiated from the class itself, not at the daily service of capital, determined to explode the false consciousness in which men grasp reality under capitalism. Abdication from the responsibility of constructing such a leadership, under the guise of ‘faith in the workers themselves’ is capitulation to the forces that numb the consciousness of the working class – the institutions of capitalist society itself. The centralized party is needed by the working class, then, for the purpose of ‘breaking up the unity based on traditional ideology, without which the new force (the working class) would be unable to gain awareness of its own independent personality’. (Gramsci). The working class cannot make do, like the bourgeoisie in its revolutionary period, with a crude empiricism or idealism. Because the whole of the capitalist structure must be grasped in consciousness and because this whole and its laws of development are different from the immediate consciousness and experience of the proletariat, dialectical theory, advanced theory based on the notion of developing contradictions in the material world, is the basic element of revolutionary theory. Marx’s achievement was to show the working class a mode of action based on this dialectical approach to history. Bourgeois thought had ceased to develop just at this point, and it took the highest synthesis of philosophical and scientific thought to make the leap forward. It is in this sense that one should understand Lenin’s insistence that the programme and strategy of the revolutionary party are based on theory, and that this theory is brought to the working class from outside, from bourgeois intellectuals. The development of theory among the revolutionary workers themselves, once that leap has been made is, of course, a necessity for any revolutionary party. So long as the working class is not mobilized by a Party based on such a theory, its consciousness remains determined by bourgeois culture, a culture which leads man to see society as a set of separate things, not open to his own control and overthrow, but naturally fixed and with independent reality. Marxist theory explains, on the other hand, that the world of men is a manmade world, that the powers standing over men are products of labour, and that if the whole system of labour-exploitation is abolished, man will become free, will dominate social reality instead of being at its mercy. A revolutionary party is one whose strategy and tactics flow from this total conception. Without it, the working class struggles only against partial features of bourgeois domination and, unable to see their connection, tends to fall back after partial victories and defeats.
 
Revolutionary Crises and the Vanguard Party
Of course, the building of a leadership capable of theoretical firmness and of combating those tendencies in the Labour movement which reflect other classes, is not the whole of the task by a long way. The actual organization in a revolutionary crisis, the rapid changes of tactics necessary, the planning of insurrection and military operations, all this quite clearly requires centralized authority and discipline of the highest order, and only a leadership developed over a long period will be capable of the task. While this phase of the development of the working-class leadership is not our immediate subject, a few general points should be made here. Certain ‘anti-vanguardist’ groupings, such as that represented by the journal Socialisme ou Barbarie, put forward the idea that the nearer the revolution approaches, and the more the working class itself fills the historical stage, so the leadership ‘must prepare its own dissolution’. It is difficult to see exactly what this can mean but at best it probably means that as the class itself approaches revolutionary consciousness, the leadership can safely quit the scene. Of course, the outstanding characteristic of revolutions is the entry of the broadest masses into political action, but that is a very different notion from supposing that consciousness of the historical process is clearly fixed in the minds of the people. The possibility of victory in such crises depends above all on the preparation of a leadership, and is inextricably bound up with the earlier phases discussed in this article. Those masses intervening in revolutionary actions are what Lenin called the untrained, undisciplined, undirected forces. The depth of the crisis arouses tremendous force, but the great task of the party, the ‘disciplined, trained units’ is to give this force its maximum results, to make sure that it is not broken against a wall, dissipated in useless channels, and so on. Rosa Luxemburg, whose shabby ‘friends’ emphasize her weakest point, and are incapable of learning from her strength, encountered this dilemma in January, 1919. The working class of Berlin was led by rioters and provocateurs to expose itself to bloody repression by the Social-Democratic government; the young Communist Party had had no time to organize the insurrection or to knit together its followers in the rest of Germany. Such a situation could confront the most mature leadership; and the correct lead to the workers would be to sound a tactical retreat, as the Bolsheviks did in the ‘July Days’ of 1917. But the German Communists lacked the authority and the confidence for such a lead, and the suppression of the Berlin riots was only the beginning of the terrible carnage of 1919, as workers in city after city took up arms against the government, only to be crushed and murdered in thousands.
Rosa Luxemburg had criticized Lenin’s centralism and ‘overstress on organization’ and she had trusted a little too much to the ‘organic’ growth of the struggle of the working class. Even though she had realized before Lenin the reactionary tendency of Kautsky and the German Social-Democratic leadership, she lacked Lenin’s political sense and initiative in seeing the need for organizational expression of the opposition tendency in European socialism. It was not a question only of the Right wing having fallen into conservative habits of distorting Marxism, but of the victory of an alien class tendency in the movement. And since the world had entered the final stage of capitalism, the construction of a leadership devoted unswervingly to the political independence of the proletariat was vital. Because this conclusion was not drawn earlier, because Rosa clung to the view that an ideological (not organizational) struggle within the movement would be sufficient to win the working class, the Left turn of the masses in November, 1918, in Germany did not result in automatic support for Rosa’s Spartacists, the future Communists, but for the ‘Independent’ Socialists, who appeared to the masses as the Left of Social Democracy. In other words, the shift in the masses was not automatically reflected in revolutionary politics, but was ‘mediated’ through the existing organisations and forms of consciousness.
One of the favourite references for opponents of the centralized ‘vanguard’ party conception is the Paris Commune of 1871. It was as a result of the brief experience of workers’ rule in that city that Marx sharpened his views on the state and revolution. It was now clear, he said, that the bourgeois state must be smashed, not ‘taken over’, and that the new state, the proletarian dictatorship, must be the rule of the workers themselves. Latter-day critics of Leninism hold up this picture as a contrast to the centralized ‘dictatorship’ of Stalin’s state and Lenin’s party, but in the process they make a mistake which Marx himself could never have made. The conclusions drawn from the Commune about the form of the proletarian dictatorship are not in any way the same thing as the requirements of a revolutionary party to conquer power! Socialism ou Barbarie and similar tendencies argue directly from the form of the future proletarian state to the character of the workers’ party under capitalism. But such a party must above all be capable of action and leadership, and it is not identical with the class. We have mentioned the argument that in revolutionary situations, ‘the class itself’ comes to the fore, and makes the leadership more and more superflous. Perhaps the best antidote to that argument comes from Marx himself. In a letter to Kugelmann, he made a criticism of the political leadership of the Commune which sets him quite apart from those who invoke him against the Leninists. He criticized the Central Committee of the National Guard for holding democratic elections at a time when it should have exerted its authority, prolonged its ‘dictatorship’, in order to crush the enemy. For this, the best proletarian elements would have to go to the front, and so a more stringent regime would have been necessary to retain revolutionary authority in Paris itself. But in the absence of a firm revolutionary leadership, it was decided that democracy must have its day; the Commune was defeated. This was only part of the consequences of lack of preparation and revolutionary organization before the Commune (Trotsky – The Defence of Terrorism).
 
Lenin and Inner-Party Struggle
Lenin’s firmness and sharpness in defending his political line and organizational discipline was derived precisely from this necessity for training a contingent which will not be ‘over-run’ by the irregular troops’ of the revolution, and not at all to any personal ambition or dictatorial habits, as his opponents unceasingly declared. Bolsheviks are determined to base their party only on the firmest theoretical principles, and to subordinate all party work to these principles. A movement of this kind examines scrupulously all political ideas in the light of the needs of the working class and the party, and ruthlessly fights against all tendencies which divert the movement from its revolutionary path. The method of analysis is always to test these ideas against the needs of the classes in society, both in theoretical argument and in the work of the party.
In the course of the 1903 conference of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, scene of the famous dispute between Lenin and Martov over the conditions of party membership, Trotsky and others of the Iskra group originally supported Lenin’s political line, but found themselves driven towards the opportunists by what they considered to be Lenin’s organizational rigidity. Trotsky later gave his verdict on this episode, and it is worth quoting as an antidote to those who are fond of using Trotsky’s early writings about dictatorship over the party.
‘It was not for nothing’, says Trotsky in My Life, ‘that the words “irreconcilable” and “unsparing” occurred so frequently in Lenin’s vocabulary. Only the highest concentration on the goal of revolution, free from everything pettily personal, can justify this kind of personal ruthlessness ... His behaviour seemed to me inadmissible, terrible, shocking. Yet at the same time it was politically correct and therefore indispensable from the point of view of organization.’
It is in this very important sense that the lessons of building the Bolshevik Party are lessons for all revolutionaries. The whole method of building the party politically is involved. Lenin, who had agreement with Martov on political questions at the beginning of the Congress, quite agreed that his difference over the rules was a small one. It became important in the course of the Congress, as it became clear that from this one opportunist formulation Martov was to fall into the hands of the opportunists. In order to preserve the narrow circle atmosphere at the head of the émigré Marxists, he was prepared to line up with the opportunists in opposition to Lenin. Lenin was not only insisting on organizational points when he hammered home the authority of the Congress and the leading role of the majority. The Iskra-ites, including Martov, had not gone to the Congress with a factional mandate – that would deny the supreme authority of the Congress, always so dearly cherished by Lenin – but what they did agree, on Lenin’s insistence, was to accept all the decisions of the Congress.
This seemed ‘innocent enough’ at the time, as Lenin wrote, but once ‘unfavourable’ decisions(e.g., on the composition of Iskra’s Editorial Board) were arrived at, the discipline was broken. Lenin, convinced that without a proletarian party of iron discipline there could be no revolution, was prepared to subordinate everything to insistence on this task. Martov’s indiscipline and veering towards the opportunists was a capitulation to the bourgeois tendency in the party, the tendency which shrank from independent mobilization of the working class for leadership against Tsarism; hence a split was necessary.
Political and organizational questions therefore cannot be separated. In an epoch where the construction of a leadership of the working class is the most vital historical problem, it is exactly on the questions of concrete planning and discipline for revolutionary work that political differences became explicit. Some Marxists seem to conceive of the party as simply a contractual discipline to stop individuals from going off the rails as they react to class pressure. But it is more than that: it must become the vanguard of revolutionary action, the representative of the general interest of the working class.
In the construction of a revolutionary party, there is a constant need to strive to maintain a correct relationship between democracy and centralism. The balance of this relationship tends to change with the objective situation. During times when the revolutionary movement operates under legal conditions, as in Britain today, it is essential to have full democratic discussion on all questions concerning the working class and the party. This does not, however, mean that democracy is a free-for-all, with nothing being decided. To the Marxist, democracy is a weapon in the struggle against capitalism. Discussion is necessary to arrive at decisions upon which the activity of the party can be based.
The constant training of new leaders in the revolutionary party requires the greatest patience by the leadership. Local autonomy and initiative, allowing the leaders and the rank and file to learn from their mistakes, is essential for the branches of the revolutionary party. The more experienced the revolutionary leadership the more flexible it will be in assisting the ranks by theory and practice to understand the need for a democratic centralist party.
In such an atmosphere differences of opinion can flourish provided such differences do not set out to overthrow the programme and policy of the Marxist movement. Fundamental differences along these lines in an unfavourable objective situation generally lead to a split. Splits of this kind cannot be avoided, and a mature leadership will see to it that the experiences of such a struggle are utilized to educate a membership in the superiority of the democratic centralist method. Any premature attempt to resolve the internal crisis, based upon excessive centralism and factionalism, will have serious consequences for the revolutionary party. That is why a revolutionary leadership must be the most vigilant custodian of party democracy and the firmest defender of the discipline and rights of the party as a whole. It is the interrelationship between democracy and centralism that constantly confuses the idealist opponents of Leninist organization. In their effort to run away from centralism they embrace a theory of spontaneity and proceed to liquidate the party into the class. The Marxist’s interpretation of democratic centralism is part of the fact that he derives his political conclusions from an objective historical study of the political situation, and not only from the existing consciousness of the class. The relation between democracy and centralism to him is based upon the constant requirements of the class struggle. The great problem in Britain today is to obtain a Marxist conception of the party. Capitalist propaganda constantly seeks to equate Marxist discipline with Stalinism. When ‘Socialist’ opponents of revolutionary discipline make the same equation, they are reflecting capitalist public opinion, regardless of their good intentions in this sense they play a definite part in obstructing the solution by the working class of its most pressing need.
 
Theoretical Differences – Practical Consequences
One aim of this article is to make a little clearer the reasons why Marxists concentrate so much attention on theoretical discussion, even on questions which appear at times to be obscure and remote from the struggle. There are always critics who say: the important thing is to get on with the struggle and get away from this arid and doctrinaire wrangling.
A good example is the ‘Russian question’. The nature of Soviet society is a vital question for Marxists and it can only be studied historically. After the Khrushchev exposures of 1956 certain prominent ‘New Left’ ex-Communists said quite explicitly that Russia had dominated the Left for too long and that in future we should concentrate on contemporary British problems. There were only jeers for those who wanted to know ‘what Trotsky said in 1924’, and yet without a study of the social roots of Stalinism, rather than the horrified turning of one’s back on it, there could be no renewal of Marxism. Even if the 1920s in Russia seemed irrelevant to British problems in 1956, it was an essential clue to the balance of forces in the class struggle and the play of tendencies in the Labour movement of the world. Not only that, but the very existence of the USSR, its bureaucracy’s domination over great parties all over the world, and its relationship with imperialism, all the time create situations where one’s evaluation of the Soviet social system takes on immediate importance, and for the movement to leave the question open is inadmissible.
One tendency which attracts a certain number of ‘Marxists’ is that which considers the USSR’s economy to be ‘state capitalism’. Now the actual consideration of ‘State capitalism’ as a theory cannot be undertaken here, but some of its adherents illustrate very well the connection between organizational and political questions. The claim that the USSR is ‘state capitalist’ is usually accompanied by the view that American, British and all advanced capitalisms are tending in the same direction as the USSR – towards a bureaucratic, state-controlled if not state-owned industry, with the workers exploited in ever larger productive units. As in Burnham’s Managerial Revolution (the product of a similar breakaway from revolutionary Marxism in 1940), the tendency of such theories is to assume that this bureaucratic centralization (‘statification’, ‘managerialism’) actually corresponds to the needs of science and technique at their present level of development, that it represents a naturally higher stage than imperialism. And so one is tempted to conclude either that all talk of the working class as a revolutionary force is nonsense (Burnham) or at least that the age of imperialism, with all the political conclusions drawn from it by Lenin, lie in the past. In the latter case what is required is a completely new analysis to tell us what sort of contradictions dominate the new society and in what sense a revolutionary class might overthrow it, whether that class is the working class, etc. What is usually done (and it is very unsatisfactory) is to cling to the idea of the working class as revolutionary while rejecting:

the economic basis (capitalism and imperialism) for this; and
the organizational consequences drawn by the Marxists.

As a result, we get among the ‘state capitalists’ a very abstract, general protest against tyranny and oppression, in many cases a strong leaning towards ‘anti-totalitarianism’ in the style of the cold war or State Department Socialists. Lenin’s organizational conceptions are seen as disastrous, for they paved the way for Stalin’s dictatorship, a dictatorship not of the working class, but over the working class. Bureaucracy ‘in itself’ is seen as reactionary since it offends against the idea of self-government by the working class.
Currently circulating in translation is a programmatic statement of the group around the French journal Socialisme ou Barbarie. This document entitled Socialism Reaffirmed arrives at the following conclusions:
‘Moreover, the objective existence of the bureaucracy, as an exploiting stratum, makes it obvious that the vanguard can only organize itself on the basis of an anti-bureaucratic ideology ...
‘The main features of a political organization that has become aware of the need to abolish the distinction in society between people who decide and people who merely execute is that such an organization should from the onset seek to abolish such a distinction within its own ranks.’
In place of the concrete development of organizational forms from the specific development of stages of the class struggle and of the type of social crisis arising under capitalism, indeed reacting in a quite topsy-turvy way to the growing concentration of bourgeois state power, we have the abstract argument from general principles. Thus, the aim is workers’ rule; therefore the means, the movement, must do away with authority. But how can the working class combat alien tendencies, how can it consolidate its victories and learn from its defeats, how can it organize to crush the powerful enemy, how can it conduct the political struggle from hour to hour, without a leadership, a leadership with authority? All the concentration and centralization of bourgeois power, its ideological weapons and its control of leading political elements in the labour movement, all of these make more vital the need for centralized and authoritative revolutionary leadership. Somehow we are asked to accept that authority in itself is a bad thing, indeed the main enemy.
This is really a retreat from Marxism. It is not bureaucratic or authority-wielding individuals who rule the lives of men under capitalism, but the force of capital, produced by men, yet alienated from them in a structure with its own law of motion, its own imperious demands in terms of human life and effort. Our aim is not the abstract one of ‘abolishing the distinction between order-givers and order-takers’ but the political overthrow of the class whose interests lie in the perpetuation of the domination of capital, in order that the forces produced by man shall be at his service. For that task we need, not an abandonment of discipline and centralized authority, but its heightening to an unprecedented degree. It is nonsense to suppose that as the working class itself comes on to the political scene, its consciousness developing to new heights, the need for organization and discipline will decline. On the contrary, a more active and politically conscious labour movement will demand it all the more insistently. Just because the rise of the working class is the most universal and world-shaking of all historical transformations, against the strongest ruling class in history, so it requires a higher level of consciousness and a higher degree of organization than any previous class in history.
 
Footnotes
1. For the process by which the Communist Party of the Soviet Union fell under the control of Stalin’s faction, representing the class pressures of the petty-bourgeoisie in Russia on the basis of the international defeats of the working class, see L.D. Trotsky, Third International After Lenin, pages 147-163, and The Revolution Betrayed, and I. Deutscher, The Prophet Unarmed.
2. Incidentally, Lenin’s insistence on the leading role of the working class even during the period of defeat makes nonsense of those of his critics who claim that only during the revolutionary upsurge did Lenin stress this role of the proletariat (e.g., H. Marcuse, Soviet Marxism).

f Slaughter: Race Riots: the Socialist Answer (1958)



Slaughter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Cliff Slaughter
Race Riots: the Socialist Answer

From Labour Review, Vol. 3 No. 5, December 1958, pages 134-137.
 
Transcribed & marked up by Ted Crawford & D. Walters  for the Encyclopaedia of Trotskyism On-Line (ETOL) in 2009.

The race riots in Nottingham and London came like a bolt from the blue to most ordinary men and women in Britain, just as they did to the Press, that self-styled watchdog of the public conscience. The Observer , usually more far-sighted than most newspapers, spoke of the race riots as something which a few days earlier seemed a cloud no bigger than a man’s hand. So long as we look only at the surface of social life, so long as we try to deal with each question separately as it arises, we shall continue to find ourselves bewildered by events like the race riots. But they are no nine days’ wonder. This must be clearly understood by every worker in the country.
Every member of the working class must endorse the condemnation by the Trades Union Congress of racial discrimination and violence. But this is not enough. Only if we can trace the social roots of racial conflict shall we be able to weed them out and with them those who profit from it. The starting point for the working class must be unity and solidarity against the employers and their political representatives—in the first place the Tory Party. All the problems the working class now faces—growing unemployment, the housing shortage, rent increases, the rising cost of living, attacks on wages and working conditions, and, above all, the threat of an H-bomb war—all these can be solved only by the unity and determined action of the working class. It is no accident that the steady growth of unemployment over the last year has been accompanied by an insidiously growing campaign around the slogan ‘Keep Britain-White’.
The crux of the matter is that the workers are under attack from the employers. The Cohen reports have openly declared that a further dose of unemployment is necessary for economic advance, and that wage increases must be curbed. The capitalist Press has for years been complaining that the trade unions have too much power. In London the busmen were chosen for attack and forced into a prolonged strike. When the dockers applied for a wage increase leading elements in the employing class decided that it was better to settle for a 7s. 6d than to take on this determined and vital section working class, whose solidarity with others has assured them of wide support in any struggle they undertake. The employers’ strategy is to divide the workers in order to break the pattern of full employment and regular wage increases. This is why unity must be preserved and strengthened and all attempts to split it smashed. This is why the TUC General Council must be condemned for its failure to draw other workers into struggle behind the London busmen, who were singled out by the bosses.
This need for united action means that the workers must smash fascists or anyone else who attempts to divert their attention towards coloured people as ‘the cause of all the trouble’. Cultivation of race prejudice, the colour bar, persecution of West Indian, Nigerians and Pakistanis, serve the same purpose as Hitler’s murder of millions of Jews. Racialism distracts the workers’ attention from their real enemy the capitalist class, and enables its agents to proceed more easily towards the real objective of breaking the workers’ organizations and bringing down living conditions.
The Press is full of spurious explanations and sham solutions for the ‘race problem’, as though it were problem separate and apart from the other problems of the working people. Much of this propaganda is very subtle. Under the guise of liberal, tolerant, ‘fair play’ attitudes it succeeds in misleading the working class, whose real need is to stand firmly on the principle that white and coloured workers have identical interests against the boss and that the Labour movement must therefore actively defend the coloured workers from attack. Unless this principle is made the basis of immediate working-class action the air will continue to full of moral bleatings while the police remain free to contribute their share of violence against the coloured workers.
Middle-class solutions to the problem of civil violence ail-ewe one thing in common—they grant more power to the police.
HOW RACE PREJUDICE AROSE
Concluding a leading article on September 3, the Manchester Guardian  suggested that the Prime Minister ‘can say unequivocally that each of us must uphold the dignity of other citizens in this country, regardless of colour. Still more effective, in killing the immediate germs, would be a broadcast from the Queen.’
Father Trevor Huddleston, whose good record in the South Africa struggle is well known, replied to a television interviewer on September 1 in a similar tone. He gave the impression that race hatred is natural to every man, and that only an individual ‘act of faith’ can preserve us from this evil.
These, and all statements like them, are based on an unscientific view of society. Although they are intended to sound noble they are worse than useless to the working class, white as well as coloured. Race hatred is not natural or inborn. It comes from the capitalist system. Race riots are not a natural disaster like an earthquake. They are the reflection of something rotten at the heart of modern capitalism. The black and brown peoples of the world will not be free until colonial rule is ended. If Britain were ruled by a foreign power, would not British workers recognize clearly the need to overthrow their foreign rulers? Would they be content with assurances that they were being ‘educated towards self-government’?
Young British workers are conscripted to fight the battles of the profit system in Africa and other colonies. They are trained to treat the native peoples as ‘wogs’, as inferior beings. If you are going to enslave a man, torture him, burn down his home and deny him the most elementary democratic rights as well as a decent living, then you cannot permit yourself to think of him as a human being.
Imperialism is the basis of race prejudice. As it developed, imperialism fostered and nurtured the idea that non-Europeans were somehow inferior, more primitive, less than human. For the defence of profit soldiers were required who accepted ideas of this kind.
For decades British workers have been put into uniform and sent overseas to shed their blood for Britsh capital in the name of Queen and country and white supremacy. They have returned home to civilian life and the natural round of capitalist society—a period of full employment and tolerable wages followed by slump, depression, forced idleness and poverty. Now the moralizing hypocrites of the capitalist Press fill the air with wailing about the behaviour of the Notting Hill mob. Their own system is responsible for training this mob. Their own system asks uniformed mobs to do worse things to coloured people every day in the ‘Commonwealth’.
From the days of the slave trade, when tens of millions of Africans were transported across the Atlantic in conditions so appalling that a large proportion died before reaching America and the West Indies, to the modern system of cheap labour and racial persecution, the peoples of the colonies have suffered untold misery and repression at the hands of British imperialism. This is the reality that the politicians and the Press want to hide so that British workers may be prevented from recognizing their identity of interests with their coloured brothers. Those MPs, whether Tory or Labour, who call for restrictions on immigration in the name of planning and sweet reason, are guilty of the same deceit. The fact is that people are leaving the countries of the Empire because of the consequences of British rule—starvation wages, the chaos of slum dwelling and unemployment.
THE REALITY BEHIND THE ‘COMMONWEALTH’
Aneurin Bevan rightly opposes such proposals, but he too is guilty of spreading dangerous illusions. In the News of the World  (September 7, 1958) he described the awful consequences of restricting coloured immigration. The trouble is, he suggests, that it would mean restricting the white members of the Commonwealth too. ‘In all probability the ties that link the members of the Commonwealth together would be broken and the greatest constitutional experiment in the history of nations would have come to an end.’
The ‘Commonwealth’, however, is not an experiment. It is the substantial remains of the oldest and strongest system of imperialist exploitation of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. From open military domination and plunder imperialism has been compelled to retreat in some places and to make deals with the new middle classes of colonial countries or with the new bourgeoisies of the white Dominions. But wherever there is a real threat of ending white privilege, imperialist profit or strategic bases, it continues to resort to traditional methods of oppression. War in Malaya; the hounding into concentration camps of the independence fighters in Kenya; torture, curfew and arrest without warrant in Cyprus; suspension of the Constitution in British Guiana and the dispatch of gunboats; military intervention in Suez: these are the realities behind Bevan’s ‘greatest constitutional experiment in the history of nations’.
The coloured peoples are the victims of generations of exploitation and repression. What about the British people? The employing class that is opening its attacks on the workers of this country today is the same class which invaded Suez and which profits from Malayan rubber. We all have the same enemy, and to talk about preservation of the ‘Commonwealth’, as Bevan does, only helps that enemy. Our unity with the coloured workers is class unity against British imperialism, not the constitutional unity of the ‘Commonwealth’.
HOW FASCISM OPERATES
Those Tory and Labour MPs who propose to solve the problem by restricting immigration are guilty of supporting the programme of the fascists, whether they know it or not.
Fascism is a movement financed by big business which seeks support from the ‘middle classes’ and the most backward workers. Fascism’s real aim is to provide a mass basis for the smashing of workers’ organizations by a State machine which permits no democratic rights and rules with the whip and the torture chamber.
To succeed, fascism must detach from the working class discontented elements who can be persuaded that something other than big business is their real enemy. This is why the fascists have recently returned to one of their favourite themes—racialism. Fascists were prominent in the Notting Hill riots and will cash in wherever they can on anti-coloured feeling. They will try to create a mob ready to use violence and to attack any scapegoat rather than the workers’ real enemy.
Any Labour leader who does not condemn fascist ideas root and branch must be disowned by the Labour movement. Instead of discussing projects for controlled immigration, Labour leaders should be outlining an active joint strategy of struggle against the employing class. Although the TUC General Council passed a resolution against racial prejudice which everyone is prepared to endorse in general, its president viciously attacked trade unionists who fight the employers with the workers’ only real weapon, the strike.
Fascism is not a strong movement in Britain, but the working class cannot afford to ignore it. There is always plenty of money from the rich for fascist movements. There are other ideas abroad besides race prejudice which will be used by the fascists. Ever since the first unemployment benefit was paid out the Conservatives have harped on the old theme that ‘the workers abuse the benefits’ and ‘there are parasites on National Assistance’.
In a television programme, ‘Does Class Matter?’ on September 1, Christopher Mayhew interviewed a group of ‘middle-class’ spokesmen. These people were ripe for fascist propaganda. They spoke of the need for definite independent organization and action on behalf of the middle class against the working class. Their view was that the prosperous, hard-working, god-fearing and thrifty sections of the population (themselves) were being milked to support the arrogant idlers of the working class with their powerful trade unions. Asked what kind of action should be taken, one woman proposed a campaign to stop the payment of National Assistance to the wives and children of men on strike. It is no coincidence that the ‘abuse of National Assistance’ is one of the ‘crimes’ also laid at the door of the coloured immigrants.
The Labour movement must smash the incipient fascist groupings and defeat all those in our movement who do not put up a determined resistance to fascist ideas and activities. Unemployment is increasing. Even if there are no immediate large-scale racial outbreaks, as there may well be, there will be a fertile ground for racialist propaganda. Only if the Labour movement really moves into action against the Tory government on unemployment and every other issue will there he a basis for decisively defeating the racialists.
The British Transport Commission is insisting on economy cuts in all services. There will be sackings on the buses and the railways to which the unions will be asked to agree. In the absence of consistent political work for unity, racial prejudice will be utilized on these issues. The BTC was itself responsible in April 1956 for sending agents across the Atlantic to Barbados to recruit 1,000 workers. The British Hotels and Restaurants Association, unable to attract enough British workers at the low wages offered, also sent to Barbados for 200 men and women during 1955. Recruits have been made to nursing, another poorly-paid profession, in the same way.
Now many of the employers concerned will be among the most vociferous in calling for restrictions on immigration. Capitalism exists for profit, without regard to the human consequences. When the employers could not find enough workers to keep the wheels turning they encouraged immigration. Now jobs are getting short and the agents of the ruling class heartlessly try to divert the blame on to the people who have been driven to this country by the consequences of the same system in their own countries.
Unemployment, like all the other issues facing the workers, is a matter for the working class to settle by its organized strength in struggle against the employers. And in this struggle the coloured workers are a natural ally and not an enemy.
WHERE DO YOUNG PEOPLE STAND?
If the workers content themselves with mere professions of tolerance, racialism can become the safety valve of capitalism. The rioting mob of Notting Hill was certainly led by fascists, but the readiness of thousands of young men to follow them is a warning signal.
Young people are brought up in a decaying capitalist society. The glamour of Hollywood, the false presentation of sex and the appeals to violence which fill the cinema and television screens and the horror comics are directed especially towards young people. Furthermore, whether they realize it or not, young people today are frustrated and confused by the contrast between the wonders of modern science and wealth, and the humdrum working-class existence to which they must reconcile themselves as they grow up. And over all hangs the sword of Damocles in the shape of the H-bomb, a permanent source of insecurity and incitement to hysteria.
Which way will young people go in a period of unemployment and struggle? This is a question the Labour movement must face. If young people do not see a clear, irresistible alternative to capitalism, if some are easily led into mob violence behind fascist slogans, the blame lies on the milk-and-water policy of the Labour Party and trade unions.
Presented with an uncompromising socialist policy, with the real initiative in the hands of the workers themselves, young people will not turn to the fascists. Before the race riots it was apparent that there was no strong anti-coloured feeling among young people. Their whole cultural life, with jazz music at its centre, belies the myth of Negro inferiority. The riot mobs were groups of young people looking for excitement, anxious to find an outlet for energy which capitalism asks them to suppress more and more as they grow up. The second night of trouble in Nottingham, for instance, involved groups of young whites and no coloured people at all. When the police intervened they were set upon by both sides. Some months ago, near Nottingham, there was an outbreak of fighting between police and so-called ‘Teddy boys’. When asked what they were fighting about, these youths said: ‘Nothing—we just wanted a fight.’
It is up to the Labour movement to show young people how to fight and what to fight for.
WHAT CAN BE DONE?
Although it is true that both white and coloured workers will finally solve their problems only by defeating imperialism, and that racialism will cease to present a serious threat to working-class unity only when the Labour movement transforms itself into an active socialist movement of the rank and file, we must nevertheless take steps now to stem the racialist tide.
To curtail immigration or to deport coloured people is no solution. Will it cure unemployment? Alan Birch at the 1958 TUC forecast some 750,000 unemployed by next January. There are only 200,000 coloured people in the country, including women and children. Labour workers must condemn those Labour MPs who propose entry restrictions and deportations, and demand their expulsion from the party. Such measures not only provide no solution, but raising them distracts Labour from the real issues and serves the ruling class in its policy of ‘divide and rule’.
Throughout the Labour movement there must be active propaganda against the lies of race hatred. In the factories and in working-class organizations any instance of racial division must be exposed and condemned. All workers’ organizations should make approaches to coloured workers’ groupings with proposals for joint campaigns of defence and propaganda. In every town and city the colour bar must be smashed by an open challenge of coloured and white together.
In the areas already affected by rioting, the Labour Parties and trades councils should be urged to raise funds for the compensation of those who have been attacked. This will help to build unity. Whether or not the official organizations can be made to act, local defence squads should be formed composed of white and coloured workers.
The slogan of the Labour movement in all areas where coloured workers live must be: ‘Protect the coloured people.’ This must be seen not as an act of charity, but as an elementary measure of self-defence for the whole working class. Where outbreaks have not yet occurred defence committees must be prepared to move into action at the first sign of racial persecution or as soon as the fascists show their faces.
Such defence committees of white and coloured workers, representing the organized working class, are the only guarantee against violence. Those who call for extra police powers, expecting the laws of the capitalist State to operate in the interests of the working class, are guilty of spreading dangerous illusions. The powers of the police will be turned against the workers; and everything in the history of the Labour movement indicates that the police will discriminate against the coloured people and their defenders.
There must be a vigorous demand for the outlawing of the colour bar and all racialist propaganda, and the Labour movement must insist on the banning of all overt fascist organizations and publications.
But the real answer is action by the working class itself. Wherever a fascist shows his face he must be defeated by the only method the fascist understands. Anyone who attempts to spread fascist ideas in the Labour movement must be repudiated and driven out. Everywhere the working people, and especially the youth, must mobilize for the defence of the coloured people. This is the only way to defeat the racialists; it is also a step in the creation of a working-class force capable of repelling the employers’ offensive and advancing to working-class power.

Slaughter Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page
Last updated: 4 October 2009





For the understanding of some of the great problems of human history, the study of religion is a necessity. What is the relationship between the social divisions among men and their beliefs about the nature of things? How do ruling classes ensure long periods of acceptance of their rule by those they oppress? Why were the ‘Utopians’ wrong in thinking that it was sufficient only to work out a reasonable arrangement of social relations in order to proceed to its construction? It was out of the examination of questions like this in the German school of criticism of religion that Marx emerged to present for the first time a scientific view of society. ‘The criticism of religion is the beginning of all criticism.’
Marx not only advanced beyond the biblical criticism of men like David Strauss and Bruno Bauer in Germany, the Rationalists in France, and the great Tom Paine, to the theory of historical materialism and the stress on the economic basis of society. He laid at the same time the foundation of a new approach to the study of religion. The Old Testament theory of creation was really turned on its head, and the first principle for understanding religion is that ‘man made God in his own image’. Feuerbach and others had realized that men projected on to a divine being all the virtues and powers of ‘the human essence’. But Feuerbach conceived of man as an abstract, universal Man, so that he gave no key to the understanding of changes in religion in different historical periods, or the precise forms of religious practice and belief, or the conditions under which religion would disappear. The same fault recurs with modern writers who try to explain religious belief and experience psychologically rather than from their social foundations.
It is of course no longer possible for serious scholars to write about religion as though it were unconnected with social reality. The two books [1] which it is the main function of this article to discuss could not have been written 150 years ago. Although Cohn is concerned with the Europe of the Middle Ages, and Worsley with those Pacific islands known as Melanesia in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, their subject matter is very similar. Each book is a description and an analysis of the Utopian religious cults produced by underprivileged and rebellious classes at an early stage of their development.
Like the religious systems of all class societies, Christianity is a set of beliefs whose meaning can be turned in different and sometimes opposite social directions. Since it is not a rational or scientific theory of the world its parts may be rearranged and selected according to the needs and inclinations of the faithful. For the revolutionary workers under modern capitalism religion is, without any qualification, part of the armoury of reaction. But in previous epochs, before the objective conditions existed for an oppressed class fully to comprehend social reality and achieve its own liberation, the framework of all social doctrine, reactionary and progressive, remained religious. The two-sidedness of Christian development (on the one hand, it served to defend feudal and then capitalist reaction, on the other it served as an ideological cover and inspiration for revolt) is rooted in the very nature of universal religions. In Marx’s words, ‘Religious misery is at the same time the expression of real misery and the protest against that real misery’. [2]
 
The Mediaeval Sects
During the Middle Ages there was always a strong, living tradition of heresy in Christendom. Even St Augustine of the fifth century, founder of the basic Catholic social teaching which justified feudal oppression, was in his early days a supporter of the Manichean heresy, with, its principles of freedom, equality and community of goods. [3] His teaching was later directed against the very powerful sects which attempted to draw communistic conclusions from the New Testament. Right through to the Reformation in the sixteenth century these rebellious sects, which insisted on the literal application of Christ’s more radical injunctions, fought hard and often with great force against the established Church and the feudal ruling class of which the higher Catholic clergy were part. They opposed the dogma of the official theologians which, as Sean O’Casey once said, amounted to something like: ‘Keep quiet, and you can hear the angels singing!’ An idea which continually inspired these groups was the conviction that in a short time there would begin the kingdom of God on earth, the millennium, the earthly paradise. Cohn’s book is the first detailed and complete study of the role of this idea, which was a survival from Near-Eastern mysticism expressed most clearly in the Book of Revelation.
The heretical sects not only preached a form of communism, but also bitterly criticized the existing social order, with its privilege and oppression, as the negation of Christian ideals. Not least, the prelates and dignitaries of the Roman Church itself were an object of their attacks. From the nepotism and luxury of the Papal court to the everyday exploitation of serf labour on the estates of every national section of the Church (the Church was the largest landowner in every European country), the Holy Roman Church came to be seen as the very personification of evil – Antichrist. Criticism of the Church varied in intensity from one end of the social scale in the ‘Third Estate’ to the other. While the rich merchants, burghers and princes tended soon to make compromises, the peasants and the urban proletariat were the revolutionary core of the heretical movements. For example, it has been shown that the political and religious struggles in medieval Florence ran a course determined by the needs of particular classes. [4] First the big bourgeoisie opposed the Church as a restriction on its freedom, and incited an emotionally charged opposition among the lower strata, but once having achieved a modus vivendi it dropped its revolutionary ideas and tried to modify the highly emotional character of the religious life that had begun to grow among the people. It co-operated with the established power to arrest the progress of the small craftsmen and workers. Thus these religious struggles of the Middle Ages were not purely religious, but largely a reflection in religious ideas and religious organization of the social conflicts of feudalism in its latter phases.
Of course, the social elements opposed to Roman Catholic domination in each rising nation comprised a very unstable unity – from prosperous princes and merchants to starving peasants and unemployed vagrants. In every case these internal conflicts were quick to show through, both in the realm of ideas and in actual armed conflict. Two clear examples of this social conflict are the early fifteenth century Bohemian national movement, first great forerunner of the Protestant Reformation, and the Lutheran national revolt a hundred years later. In both cases the wealthier classes, having achieved an initial victory, turned with sword in one hand and Bible in the other to massacre the common people who wanted to advance from religious and limited political reform to social changes in the sphere of property and work. In broad summary, the ideas traced in such fascinating detail by Cohn, the ideas of the millennium and the Free Spirit, are the ideological expression of the extreme wing of this movement, reflecting the aspirations of the most oppressed and downtrodden social classes.
Particularly interesting to English readers, and to socialists, is an appendix to Cohn’s book dealing with a hitherto little-known sect, the Ranters, who flourished in England at the time of the Puritan revolution. The ideas of this sect, here presented in their own words for the first time since their dispersal by Cromwell’s government, are quite certainly in direct descent from the continental groups of centuries before. They also bear out the view summarized above, that millenarian ideas have their roots essentially in the lower strata of society, so that they become anathema to the victorious upper-middle classes. It was as necessary for Cromwell to crush the Ranters as to liquidate Lilburne’s Levellers and Winstanley’s Diggers. A few selections from their tracts will show their lack of appeal to a class so enamoured of compromise (with its ‘betters’, of course) as the British bourgeoisie. Coppe, their finest spokesman, addresses the propertied classes thus:
‘Mighty men! ... Those that have admired, adored, idolized, magnified, set you up, fought for you, ventured goods, and good name, limb and life for you, shall cease from you.’ ‘For this Honour, Nobility, Gentility, Propriety, Superfluity. &c. hath (without contradiction) been the Father of hellish horrid pride, arrogance, haughtiness, loftinesse, murder, malice, of all manner of wickednesse and impiety; yea the cause of all the blood that ever hath been shed. from the blood of the righteous Abell, to the blood of the last Levellers that were shot to death.’
No wonder that Fox, the Quaker, found the Ranters, ‘were very rude, and stirred up the rude people against us.’
‘Hear one word more (whom it hitteth it hitteth) give over thy base nasty, stinking, formall grace before meat, and after meat ... give over thy stinking family duties, and thy Gospel( Ordinances as thou callest them; for under them all lies snapping, snarling, biting, besides covetousnesse, horrid hypocrisie, envy, malice, evil surmising.’
‘Kings, Princes, Lords, great ones, must bow to the poorest Peasants; rich men must stoop to poor rogues, or else they’ll rue for it ...
‘Howl, howl, ye nobles, howl honourable, howl ye rich men for the miseries that are coming upon you.
‘For our parts, we that hear the Apostle preach, will also have all things common; neither will we call anything that we have our own.
‘Do you (if you please) till the plague of God rot and consume what you have.
‘We will not, wee’ll eat our bread together in singlenesse of heart, wee’ll break bread from house to house.’ [5]
 
Melanesian Heresies
The movements described by Worsley arise in a context which is at first sight very different. In the twentieth century capitalism is a world system which is already in the grip of deadly contradictions. How can one draw a parallel with social phenomena rooted in the first stirrings of capitalism in feudal Europe? This objection is not without foundation. In Europe, the heresies were directed against the dominant power of the epoch. They reflected the most powerful forces of change within the social system, and persisted and developed over hundreds of years – until the victory of national states and the break-up of European feudalism. The Cargo cults, and other Utopian religious revolts of colonial areas in this century, represent a more transitory phenomenon, whose significance, course of development and historical fate have been very different. The essential economic and political framework of the Melanesian peoples today is the decline of imperialism and the world socialist revolution, despite the fact that a hundred years ago the South Seas were whole millennia behind this stage of world historical development. It is in this context that the short-lived and ephemeral character of the Cargo cults to be understood. The medieval Christian heresies, on the other hand, reflected a slowly crumbling feudalism and the classes within it searching for an ideal expression for their misery and protest. The slowly maturing process of national unification, of the break-up of feudal property relations with the growth of trade, of the growth of capitalism within the feudal system: all this had its expression in the development of the anti-Catholic heresies. As has been indicated, the inner social conflicts of this process were reflected in religious belief.
But Worsley’s Melanesians make their heresies in a new world, a world full of contradictory and uneven social phenomena, the result of the indiscriminate and plundering expansion of a dynamic and then quickly decadent economic system, modern capitalism. Over a hundred years ago the consequences of the expansion capitalism were described by Marx and Engels.
Conservation of the old modes of production was ... the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionizing of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated before they can ossify. [6]
The dispossessed medieval peasant and worker experienced only the first rumblings of this transformation. In the period of imperialism, with capitalist relations rapidly and unevenly imposed in the most primitive social conditions, the consequent social disintegration is swift and thorough. New wants are introduced, new forms of exploitation are introduced, people’s destinies become subject to the vagaries, no longer only of nature, but of the world market in raw materials and manufactured goods, and the struggle for world domination by the imperialist powers.
In many colonial or semi-colonial areas which were technologically backward and characterized by small-scale subsistence economies based on primitive cultivation, the fate of the ‘Christianity’ brought by the missionaries has been the same as that of the Roman Church in medieval Europe. People disorientated by economic and political disasters which had the force of natural calamities and yet were not of their own making at all, found in the Book of Revelation and the declamations of the Old Testament prophets a message which is at the same time a consolation for earthly misery and a unifying idea for a movement of protest against the oppressor. Worsley reminds us in this connexion of ‘the Jesuit who was strongly opposed to making the Bible directly available to Chinese peasants because of the conclusions they drew from reading it: “from any point of the exegetical compass, a Chinaman can find his way up to the great rice problem.” [7] Worsley brings together all the published data on revolt in the Melanesian area, where the social structure was very different in scale from the medieval towns or the nascent nationalities. Any village of more than 200 inhabitants was exceptionally large, and would occur only in very fertile conditions. Yet from among these peoples was thrown up a succession of prophets and’ agitators who brought from the colonialists accusations almost identical with those used against the medieval heretics. For example, Apolosi, a Fijian prophet, was accused by a Government spokesman of ‘intrigue, sedition, and lechery and debauchery on a heroic scale, ranging from drunken orgies to rape and incest’. [8]
Two essential factors explain the similarity between the millenarian movements of Melanesia and of medieval Europe. In the first place, there were background circumstances of masses of people being thrown into social insecurity through the dissolution of social bonds by the ‘external’ forces of the market, even though this was at two very different levels of economic development. Secondly, the search for ideological expressions of the frustrations and aspirations growing out of this social dislocation could work only through the ‘thought-material’ ready to hand. This relative autonomy and continuity of systems of thought always qualifies the reflection of social reality in men’s minds. As Engels long ago pointed out [9], the expressions of social thought inevitably took religious form in the period between the Roman Empire and the rise of modern industry, because of the complete domination of intellectual life by the Church, and the latter’s role in maintaining a semblance of political organization in Europe after the collapse of Rome. Similarly in Melanesia the only semblance of education brought by the Europeans was mission education, Christian dogma, the ideology of reaction and not of the progressive tendencies in capitalist society, i.e., those of natural science and scientific socialism. The discovery of their true interests was thus a tortuous path for these victims of imperialism; they had to go through the experience of the ‘thick end’ of imperialism in its most decadent phase, and in addition their path to interpreting this experience had first to go through the distorted and backward ideology which was brought by the whites, an ideology long out of date.
 
The Coming of the ‘Cargo’
Thus in the early phase of their revolt the Melanesians threw up millenarian prophets, who called on the local people to prepare for the anticipated inauguration of God’s rule on earth, or the coming of the ‘Cargo’. Many of their activities and beliefs appear on a superficial view to be irrational. They destroyed crops and stopped working. At various times they built piers or air-strips to receive the ‘Cargo’ from the ancestors. But once we understand the indigenous religion, the impact of European rule and the confinement of education to the missions, then such behaviour is seen to have a perfectly sound logic of its own.
Into the self-sufficient and comparatively static island economy there is projected a group of whites who live much better than any native and yet never do a scrap of work. They simply wait for the Cargo to arrive by sea or air at regular intervals. These whites draw the natives into commercial relations which often threaten economic insecurity for the latter, yet the whites remain rich, able to manipulate the situation, and still without working. Already the Melanesians possessed religions which concentrated on material rewards and exchanges, and they often used magical techniques to supplement the efficiency of their real techniques. In face of the idle prosperity of the whites, what else could they conclude but that some superior spiritual or magical power was in the hands of the Europeans? One could not expect an isolated and uneducated people to appreciate the historical process which in fact brought manufactured goods and new foods to the European settlers, traders and administrators!
A very common conclusion from this situation was that the education given by the missionaries was deliberately incomplete, that there were certain books of the Bible which the whites kept to themselves so that with this exclusive magic they could monopolize the good things of life. The building of air-bases and the tremendous material paraphernalia brought by Australian and United States forces during the second world war encouraged this type of belief. During the war and just after it many elaborate Cargo cults were born. The crises of world imperialism were refracted through relatively isolated and primitive societies, and specific features of western capitalism were grafted on to particular types of primitive economy. These peculiar combinations of social systems were reflected in the realm of ideas, leading to distorted and exotic religious notions.
Yet while the Cargo cults lived in a world very different from medieval Europe, they experienced a particular phase of imperialist decline which produced remarkable similarities to the religious phenomena of medieval European revolt. Very quickly the larger scale processes sweep aside temporary, isolated, accidental relationships and ideas, and consciousness broadens to embrace the wider reality. As in medieval Europe, the Utopian religious cults are not the only form of social revolt. Worsley shows how they gradually lose ground to strikes and political actions of a very ‘modern’ kind (including petitions to the United Nations!). [10] Recent news of the sugar workers’ strike in Fiji, supported by sections of the Australian working class, expresses the change of scope and significance of class struggles in this part of the world.
In Europe, the movements of revolt which included at various times the idea of the millennium were not to be emancipated from their religious trappings, despite the splendid dimensions reached by the Bohemian rising of the Taborites (who resisted the armed might of European feudalism for decades), by Wat Tyler’s Peasant Revolt, and by the German Peasant War of the sixteenth century, led by a genius of agitation arid organization, Thomas Münzer. In every national war political victories were won by the upper classes against the Roman Church, for it was the bourgeoisie, and not the peasantry or the urban poor, which at this stage of history was destined to succeed the feudal form of production and government. Until the development of modern industry, with conditions which make it possible for the first time in history for an oppressed class to achieve its own liberation, the lower classes of Europe were to meet this type of experience. The completion of the bourgeois revolution in France and in England saw the new ruling class turn on the common people who had supported its victories over absolutism. In Germany the bourgeoisie preferred the Kaiser and the Junkers to the dangers inherent in the extension of democracy to the working class. Fascism was the eventual outcome. In the conditions of crushing defeats for the first independent movements of peasants and workers in medieval times, the heretical cults turned to quietist mystical doctrines, and the pursuit of the millennium became removed to the spiritual sphere.
Worsley describes a very speedy transition in Melanesia from religious revolt to political opposition, with rational ends and means. The actual succession of phases in each particular area is different, according to the possibilities of open struggle, or the flux of defeat and partial advance; but the general tendency is always present. With the emergence of effective political opposition what remains of the mystical cults is no longer of political significance, and they soon constitute only an isolated and esoteric system of consolatory rites and dogma. Such was the fate of millenarian ideas in Europe too, but the future historian is likely to see the parallel as a very limited one. He will see the colonial peoples of our day drawn into a world social revolution in the space of decades. He will see, in the workers and peasants of this century, including those of the ‘backward’ countries, the force behind the next great stride forward in human history. The native bourgeoisie which emerges in areas like Melanesia does so in a very different context from the bourgeoisie which conquered in Europe. It is compromised by its ties with foreign capital, by the fact that it is rooted in the outer rings of Western imperialism rather than in the basic processes of its own society. It is destined to play only a very brief political and economic role. If a class is to take the reins of history on behalf of the nation it must be careful to be born at just the right time.
The most consistent support for the millenarian sects from the eleventh century onwards came from the lowest-paid and most insecure workers and vagrants of the early industrial centres and towns. In Melanesia a people whose traditional economy was precarious but adequate were decimated, exploited and dragged into the economic and political maelstrom of modern imperialism, experiencing all its irrationalisms, from rapid price fluctuations to ‘total war’. In both situations men found in the apocalyptic teachings a form for their frustrations and aspirations. In each case the biblical material was re-worked into a form determined by the particular cultural level and material circumstances of the people concerned, so that where the Melanesians had Cargo cults the depressed Europeans looked to a ‘Land of Cockayne’. But the essential content of all the millenarian cults is the same, despite the cultural differences. They are the actions and beliefs of a class which is confronted with tasks beyond its scope either to conceive scientifically or to solve practically. Thus the bourgeoisie, and not the peasantry or the urban poor, was to overthrow feudalism; in Melanesia, not the local community, but only the new links between local communities forged by new economic forces, could produce the necessary unity for the anti-imperialist struggle in its first stages.
 
Marxism as a Method of Anthropological Research
It will be clear that these books provide a mass of new and very important material. At the same time, Cohn and Worsley differ in the interpretation of their subject-matter. Worsley writes as an avowed Marxist, and he shows the indispensability of Marxist method in the analysis of changing social phenomena. Only the relation of a people to its material environment through the economic system can begin to explain religious beliefs. Only the understanding of the developing contradictions in that economic structure can illuminate the real roots of the spread and decline of fantastic ideas apparently removed from reality. In this sense, Worsley has produced a model of Marxist work in the social sciences. For the active socialist this book is very important from this very point of view, the point of view of method. It is necessary to grasp not only the limited and fundamentally reactionary role of religion in social history, but also to tackle the question of relations between ideas and social movements, for this is almost universally oversimplified or taken for granted by socialists.
Cohn goes out of his way to disavow any sympathy with Marxism. In fact he ventures the opinion that Marxism itself is the modern manifestation of the mystical pursuit of the millennium. His basic theoretical quarrel seems to be that Marxism neglects the psychological dimension in social behaviour, and that in phenomena like religion this leads to a failure to understand the fundamental patterns.
Certainly Cohn makes some very interesting suggestions about ‘paranoid’ patterns in the imagery of the heresies, but he never shows in what way these interesting parallels are explanations of the movements under discussion. In fact his own material points clearly to the correctness of a Marxist, social-historical explanation. It stands out from every chapter of his book that the millenarian idea springs up always from the same type of social milieu, that it is historically limited, and that it meets eventually with a fate determined by its social and political roots rather than by its psychological attributes. To say that the pattern of the beliefs is paranoid is to explain nothing; that there is an analogy with the imagery and obsession of paranoia may be true, but what is this supposed to show? The historian’s task is to demonstrate the origin and course of development of such forms in specific social strata and to explain why those strata embraced those forms at one stage, rejecting them at another. In such a task the elaboration of formal analogies in the pattern of emotions is of little use.
Cohn’s own description of the basic conditions for chiliasm (belief in the millennium) could not be bettered. For example:
Journeymen and unskilled workers, peasants without land or with too little land to support them, beggars and vagabonds, the unemployed and those threatened with unemployment, the many who for one reason or another could find no assured and recognized place – such people, living in a state of chronic frustration and anxiety, formed the most impulsive and unstable elements in medieval society ... And the way they attempted to deal with their common plight was to form a salvationist group under the leadership of some man whom they regarded as extraordinarily holy.
Moreover the mission which most attracted these masses from the neediest strata of the population was – naturally enough – a mission which was intended to culminate in a total transformation of society. In the eschatological [11] fantasies which they had inherited from the distant past, the forgotten world of early Christianity, these people found a social myth most perfectly adapted to their creeds ...
This was the process which, after its first occurrence in the area between the Somme and the Rhine, was to recur in later centuries in southern and central Germany and, still later, in Holland and Westphalia. In each case it occurred under similar circumstances – when population was increasing, industrialization was getting under way, traditional social bonds were being weakened or shattered and the gap between rich and poor was becoming a chasm. [12]
The first crusades appealed to many of the poor as a semi-practical, semi-holy solution of this kind. A popular epic describes the crusading army of the poor under ‘King Tafur’, who spurs on his troops to the attack with the words: ‘Where are the poor folk who want property? Let them come with me! ... For today with God’s help I shall win enough to load many a mule.’
In chapter iv Cohn explicitly states the relationship between the class hatred born of the development of inequality in wealth and the search for millenarian solutions. [13] Some of the twelfth-century proverbs of the poor leave no doubt as to the strength of class feeling:
‘I would like to strangle the nobles and the clergy, every one of them ... Good working men make the wheaten bread but they will never chew it; no, all they get is the siftings from the corn, and from good wine they get nothing but dregs and from good cloth nothing but the chaff.’
Again, Cohn asks why the focus of the millenarian cults shifts suddenly from France to Germany, and has to give social and economic reasons. No matter what ‘paranoid patterns’ may be discerned, it is surely not without interest that they become the characteristic social expression of people placed in specific circumstances. The emergence of a strong central authority to unify France, together with her decline in population and in the importance of her cloth industry in the late thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries, saw the end of such movements there and their powerful upsurge in Germany, with its political fragmentation, a decline of the imperial power, and the expansion of population and of the cloth industry! [14]
The Flagellant movement, for all its appeal to the psycho-analyst, shows similar variations according to the social and economic background. In Italy it remained predominantly respectable and orthodox, but it cut through Germany like a searing flame, taking on almost revolutionary proportions. Always the cloth areas, commercial centres and industrial communities like those of the miners were the centres of the cult of the millennium and the Free Spirit (e.g., Thuringia, Bohemia and Champagne).
So much for the origins of the movement; but on the question of its historical destiny Cohn is such a good historian that despite his prejudices against Marxism he lays bare the fundamental factors. Even though his concern is to trace the course of a system of ideas through the medieval period, he shows the necessity of appreciating the class interests behind the growth, differentiation, development and decline of the millenarian cults in the period when they were thrown into the more general process of the rise of the bourgeoisie, a class whose first step to power was of necessity to curb the might of the Roman Church and establish national order and unity. The Protestant Reformation and the European religious wars were the climax of this stage of history. In these ‘religious’ struggles the millenarian was the ideological expression of the worker and peasant allies of the bourgeoisie and the princes. As Cohn says of the Hussite national revolution of the fifteenth century: ‘It was this harassed proletariat that formed the extreme, revolutionary wing of the Taborite movement.’ [15] The feeling of the ruling classes towards this Bohemian revolution is typical of the hatred of all rulers for the oppressed; all established classes can visualize no social order but their own, and rebels or reformers are seen as the forces of chaos and anarchy. One chronicler said of the Taborites:
The Bohemians now became so strong and mighty, and so arrogant, that they were feared on all sides and all honest folk were terrified lest the roguery and disorder should spread to other peoples and turn against all who were decent and law-abiding, and against the rich. For it was the very thing for the poor who did not want to work, yet were insolent and pleasure-loving ... So the Bohemians had many secret supporters amongst the rough folk ... . used to argue with the priests, saying that everyone should share his property with everyone else. This would have pleased many worthless fellows and could very well have come to pass. [16]
Such rebels were of course soon rejected by the leadership of the national revolutions. Luther, having gained the support of the knights and the peasants to overthrow the Church in Germany, very soon changed his tune when Münzer’s peasants began to exert their own armed power against the established authority. Seven years after inciting the nation to revolt, Luther had this to say to the nobility ‘against the murderous and plundering peasant hordes’ ... [17]
They must be knocked to pieces, strangled and stabbed, covertly and overtly, by everyone who can, just as one must kill a mad dog! Therefore, dear sirs, help here, save there, stab, knock, strangle them everyone who can, and should you lose your life, bless you, no better death can you ever attain.
The wise man says: cibum, onus et virgam asino (food, pack and lash for the ass). The peasants must have nothing but chaff. They do not hearken to the Word, and are foolish, so they must hearken to the rod and the gun, and that serves them right. We must pray for them that they obey. Where they do not there should not be mercy. Let the guns roar among them, or else they will make things a thousand times worse. [18]
By now the peasants had become really dangerous, despite Cohn’s insistence that Münzer was a mystic rather than a revolutionary; he himself says:
The peasants who everywhere took the initiative in the insurrection, so far from being driven on by sheer misery and desperation, belonged to a rising and self-confident class .... impatient of the obstacles which stood in the way of advance. It is therefore not surprising that in their efforts to remove these obstacles the peasants showed themselves not at all chiliastically minded but, on the contrary, politically minded in the sense that they thought in terms of real situations and realizable possibilities. [19]
Münzer’s ideological campaigning on mystical lines nevertheless helped to steel and strengthen the peasants. Take his letter to the Count of Mansfeld: ‘Say, you wretched, shabby bag of worms, who made you a prince over the people whom God has purchased with his precious blood? [20]
* * * *
Norman Cohn and Peter Worsley have produced books which are invaluable not only to specialists but to all those who need a clear and objective view of the reality of social development in order to take part in today’s class struggles.
When Cohn suggests that modern revolutionary socialism is in the same line of development as the Utopian cults of medieval Christendom he has a small grain of the truth. Looking for formal resemblances and analogies often proves informative, giving clues to deeper connexions. But the history of ideas has a dynamic and a form not determined in the realm of ideas alone. The affinity between medieval mystic Utopianism and Marxist theory is not of the type suggested by Cohn. It holds true only in the sense that both types of idea represent the consciousness of an oppressed class faced with the need to struggle. Naturally enough, continuity of this struggle over centuries has meant the retention of certain formal resemblances and images among the people. But in essentials the pursuit of the millennium, the search for an illusory paradise, is the opposite of Marxism. The former represents ‘the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world’. [21] In the circumstances of its birth and development, it was bound to fail, to lose its connexion with social reality and become the object of mystical, socially isolated cults. By the twentieth century the conditions for the overthrow of private property and class oppression had matured in the growth of technology and science, and in the creation, by capitalism itself, of a working class capable of organization and the recognition of its real interests. Marxism is the scientific expression of the interests of the working class in the period of its assault on capitalism and its victory over property. Christian Utopianism was the hopeless expression of a class doomed to be used by others in the destruction of one system, only to fall victim to a new type of exploitation. But here is ‘the negation of the negation’. The bourgeoisie of Europe came to power on the backs of workers and peasants who were often inspired by the Christian millennium. Once entrenched, the bourgeoisie turned against the people who made its victory possible. But its own interests have driven the bourgeoisie to create an industrial system with a new type of working class, the first in history to be able to achieve scientific understanding of its interests and aims, and, on the basis of this understanding, to advance to socialism on the foundations laid by its exploiters.
 
Footnotes
1. Peter Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound. A study of Cargo Cults in Melanesia (MacGibbon and Kee, 1957); Norman Cohn, The Pursuit of the Millennium (Seeker and Warburg. 1957).
2. Karl Marx, Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, Introduction (1844). Quoted in Christopher Caudwell, Further Studies in a Dying Culture (1949), p.75, and in K. Marx and F. Engels, On Religion (1957), p.42.
3. Manicheism, widely accepted from the third to the fifth centuries, replaced Mithraism. It was founded by Mani, a Persian who lived in the third century, and was composed of elements of Christianity, of other religions and of pagan beliefs. The essential feature of the system is its dualism, whose principal elements are light and darkness, God and Satan, the soul and the body. Satan was represented as co-eternal with God, and man as created by Satan in his image, but containing particles of light. A conflict is in progress for the possession of mankind between the demons and the angels of light. When all the particles of captive light and the souls of the just have been set free the end of the world will come in a general conflagration. Manicheism spread eastward to China and westward to Europe, where it was especially strong in Bulgaria and southern France.
4. For a very fine summary of these class struggles see F. Antal, Florentine Painting and its Social Background (1947).
5. Cohn. op. cit., pp.360 ff.
6. Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party (1955 edition).p.58.
7. Worsley, op. cit., p.246.
8. Ibid., p.29.
9. Engels, The Peasant War in Germany (1956). p.55.
10. Worsley, op. cit., p.197n.
11. Eschatology is the doctrine of death, judgment, heaven and hell.
12. Cohn. op. cit., pp. 29-30.
13. Ibid., p.87.
14. Ibid., pp.98, 111.
15. Ibid., p.222.
16. Ibid., p.235.
17. This was the title of a pamphlet against the peasant movement published by Luther in May 1525, at the height of the Peasant War.
18. Engels, op. cit., p.66.
19. Cohn, op. cit., p.264. What could be closer to the process from cult to politics among Worsley’s Melanesians?
20. Ibid., p.269.
21. Marx, Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right, Introduction. Quoted Caudwell, op. cit., p.75; Marx and Engels, On Religion, p.42.

ture and Revolution: Trotsky by Cliff Slaugther 1980


Cliff Slaugther 1980
Literature and Revolution: Trotsky

Written: 1980;
Source: Marxism, Ideology, and Literature Humanities Press, 1980;
Transcribed: Harrison Fluss for marxists.org, February 2008.

More than once Georg Lukacs gave a purported summary of his own place in the history of Marxist work on literature and aesthetics. These accounts refer from time to time to the writings of Plekhanov and Franz Mehring in the period of the Second International, in which they had repulsed idealist attacks on historical materialism, and in the course of so doing had demonstrated the social and historical roots of literary works and tendencies, [1] usually in opposition to neo-Kantian critics. However, Lukacs (for reasons which are well-known, and to which we refer in our next chapter) took the greatest care to avoid any treatment of the one Marxist, Trotsky, whose work on literature was carried out after Lukacs’ own entry into the communist movement, that is to say in the revolutionary wave which followed the Russian Revolution of 1917 and overwhelmed the reformist Second International.
Trotsky’s Literature and Revolution, [2] together with a number of other articles and speeches of the 1920s, was concerned primarily to lay the basis for a Marxist response to the cultural problems raised by the Russian Revolution, and in particular to answer those who advocated a programme of ‘proletarian culture’. Here, in the turmoil of unprecedented social changes, Marxist theory and practice were put to the decisive test. Unless ‘Marxists’ in the field of literature and literary criticism see Marxism as an abstract, general doctrine, developing independently of history and purely through scholarly research and speculation, they surely cannot separate themselves and their work from the development of Marxism itself. Lukacs is one of those many Marxists who are not slow to comment on the effects of Stalinism on literature and criticism, as well as the effects of the developments in capitalism which have matured alongside it. From the standpoint of Marxist theory, it is surely unlikely that there could be any rediscovery and development of Marxism [3] against the Stalinist distortions, independently of the actual struggle which Marxists (and in particular Trotsky) carried out against Stalinism, including the proletarian culture myth which accompanied its early development. We shall suggest in later chapters that Lukacs, along with Goldmann and others, rejecting any consideration of Trotsky’s work, and at the same time claiming to disavow Stalinism, was fundamentally at one with Stalin’s positions on political and historical questions, and that this is intimately connected with his writings on literature. In the most simple terms, those who, in one way or another, came to defend the bureaucratic realpolitik, even if they did not like the look of some of its obvious theoretical and practical consequences (which they characterised abstractly and inadequately as ‘dogmatic sectarianism’), could not avoid the danger of thereby turning away from the historical and methodological principles of Marxism. Trotsky defended and developed those principles in the whole struggle against Stalinism, and in Literature and Revolution.
The First World War and the October Revolution put an end to the period in which the development of Marxism could be seen as primarily the defence and extension of a body of knowledge against its opponents in philosophy, political economy, historiography and political theory. Now the relation between theory and practice comes to the fore. There is the appearance of literary schools and tendencies which do not content themselves with an implicit or even explicit attitude towards Marxist theory, but take up a definite position in relation to the Revolution itself. The world war has a shattering effect on the relation between capitalism and its literary and artistic world, an effect then compounded by the October Revolution and the revolutions and counter-revolutions of post-war Europe. Marxists, on their side, feel called upon now to understand and develop their theory as ‘a guide to action’, and this means dealing with questions of ‘culture and revolution’ concretely, practically, and not merely abstractly and in general. It means finding answers in strategy and tactics – with ‘cultural policy’ as a part of such strategy and tactics – to the problems of actual development of organisation and consciousness in the working class in its relation with other classes and strata, including the literary intelligentsia. This did not mean that questions of the nature of culture were reducible to tactical considerations. Questions of the evaluation of literary tendencies, of the quality of literature and art produced under the immediate impact of the Revolution, of state and party policy towards literature and art, all became inextricably and inevitably intertwined with the ‘question of questions’: what were the consequences of the fact that socialist revolution made its first break in a backward country, where those preconditions for socialism which Marx took to be the product of capitalist development were absent? This is of course a ‘cultural’ question of the first order. Around this issue the crucial historical struggle unfolded.
No sooner had the international working-class movement been split between communism and social democracy than communism itself faced a split no less profound: ‘socialism in a single country’, banking on the internal resources of Russia and stability in external relations, as Stalin proposed in the Autumn of 1924 (thus reviving an old theme of social democracy); or the strategy of world socialist revolution, continuing what had been taken as read by communists before Stalin’s innovation, i.e., that while Tsarist Russia was the ‘weakest link in the chain of imperialism’, thus providing the conditions for a successful proletarian overturn, the conditions for ‘the victory of socialism’ did not exist within Russia but only on a world scale, so that the future of the workers’ state in Russia depended on the extension of the revolution at least to the advanced countries of Western Europe. It is only in the context of the opening up of the struggle between these two perspectives, with all the associated questions of the cultural backwardness of Russia, that Trotsky’s attack in Literature and Revolution on the concept and programme of a proletarian culture can be understood. In this controversy Trotsky was compelled to return many and revolution’ concretely, practically, and not merely abstractly and in general. It means finding answers in strategy and tactics – with ‘cultural policy’ as a part of such strategy and tactics – to the problems of actual development of organisation and consciousness in the working class in its relation with other classes and strata, including the literary intelligentsia. This did not mean that questions of the nature of culture were reducible to tactical considerations. Questions of the evaluation of literary tendencies, of the quality of literature and art produced under the immediate impact of the Revolution, of state and party policy towards literature and art, all became inextricably and inevitably intertwined with the ‘question of questions’: what were the consequences of the fact that socialist revolution made its first break in a backward country, where those preconditions for socialism which Marx took to be the product of capitalist development were absent? This is of course a ‘cultural’ question of the first order. Around this issue the crucial historical struggle unfolded.
No sooner had the international working-class movement been split between communism and social democracy than communism itself faced a split no less profound: ‘socialism in a single country’, banking on the internal resources of Russia and stability in external relations, as Stalin proposed in the Autumn of 1924 (thus reviving an old theme of social democracy); or the strategy of world socialist revolution, continuing what had been taken as read by communists before Stalin’s innovation, i.e., that while Tsarist Russia was the ‘weakest link in the chain of imperialism’, thus providing the conditions for a successful proletarian overturn, the conditions for ‘the victory of socialism’ did not exist within Russia but only on a world scale, so that the future of the workers’ state in Russia depended on the extension of the revolution at least to the advanced countries of Western Europe. It is only in the context of the opening up of the struggle between these two perspectives, with all the associated questions of the cultural backwardness of Russia, that Trotsky’s attack in Literature and Revolution on the concept and programme of a proletarian culture can be understood. In this controversy Trotsky was compelled to return many times from questions of immediate policy to fundamental matters of the historical role of productive forces and technique and of the nature of cognition. This was hardly surprising, in view of the fateful issues involved. ‘Proletarian culture’ was essentially a narrow pragmatic conception of a new culture constructed on the foundations of the perceived characteristics of the working class and its revolution. It soon became the instrument of policy for those who, following Stalin and Bukharin, presented the ‘building of socialism’ in a national framework in similar pragmatic terms, disregarding the absence of any of the necessary cultural and productive conditions for socialism. Instead of a new culture eventually emerging from the acquisition and reworking of all past culture, the bureaucratic conception would soon require a ‘culture’ which could be summoned by order of state in order to confirm and support the lie that socialism could be achieved by a forced march which ignored the absence of the cultural preconditions for socialism. The enthusiasts of proletarian culture in the years immediately following the Revolution would have been horrified to know that they prepared the ground for the ‘illustrative literature’ of the ‘final victory of socialism’ in 1936.
Trotsky’s introduction to Literature and Revolution states his main point very clearly:
“It is fundamentally incorrect to contrast bourgeois culture and bourgeois art with proletarian culture and proletarian art. The latter will never exist, because the proletarian regime is temporary and transient. The historic significance and moral grandeur of the proletarian revolution consist in the fact that it is laying the foundations of a culture which is above classes and which will be the first culture which is truly human.” [4]
As for ‘proletarian culture’ under capitalism, Trotsky restates Marx’s position, that the proletariat is in the first place an exploited class, separated by exploitation and oppression from the historical gains made by humanity in its struggle with nature. The proletariat develops class consciousness, concentrated into political strategy, tactics and organisation, together with the theoretical conquests which must enrich and develop through them. Only by abolishing itself as a class (by abolishing the property foundations of capitalist society) will the proletariat put itself in a position to acquire and develop culture. The bourgeoisie, before it comes to rule society, growing up in the pores of the feudal order, builds up its own type of private ownership, and along with this its schools, churches and academies, and trains its own corps of administrators, philosophers, architects, dramatists and poets; but the proletariat grows up in a capitalist society whose very condition of existence is that the proletariat shall have no property. With this lack of property and of any life relatively independent of the mode of exploitation carried out by the ruling class, the proletariat is deprived of culture in a way in which the nascent bourgeoisie was not. It can become conscious of its historical role and its aims only by becoming conscious of its lack of culture. Consequently, to proceed in cultural policy from the idea of an art and literature which correspond to the nature of this class is to court disaster, to fly in the face of reality:
“The proletarian has to have in art the expression of the new spiritual point of view which is just beginning to be formulated within him, and to which art must help him give form. This is not a state order, but an historic demand. Its strength lies in the objectivity of historic necessity. You cannot pass this by, nor escape its force.” [5]
The policy considerations which follow from this are not matters of whether to be more or less liberal in dealing with writers:
“The Marxian method affords an opportunity to estimate the development of the new art, to trace all its sources, to help the most progressive tendencies by a critical illumination of the road, but it does not do more than that. Art must make its own way and by its own means. The Marxian methods are not the same as the artistic. The Party leads the proletariat but not the historic processes of history. There are domains in which the Party leads, directly and imperatively. There are domains in which it only cooperates. There are, finally, domains in which it only orientates itself. The domain of art is not one in which the Party is called upon to command. It can and must protect and help it, but it can only lead it indirectly. It can and must give the additional credit of its confidence to various art groups, which are striving sincerely to approach the revolution and so help an artistic formulation of the Revolution. And at any rate, the Party cannot and will not take the position of a literary circle which is struggling and merely competing with other literary circles. The Party stands guard over the historic interests of the working class in its entirety. Because it prepares consciously and step by step the ground for a new culture and therefore for a new art, it regards the literary fellow-travellers not as the competitors of the writers of the working-class, but as the real or potential helpers of the working-class in the big work of reconstruction. The Party understands the episodic character of the literary groups of a transition period and estimates them, not from the point of view of the class passports of the individual gentlemen literati, but from the point of view of the place which these groups occupy and can occupy in preparing a Socialist culture. If it is not possible to determine the place of any given group today, then the Party as a party will wait patiently and gracefully.” [6]
(It is interesting to note the way in which the issues in this historic controversy are distorted in the extreme if they are viewed in an abstract ‘literary’ manner. For example, it is surely a travesty of the truth to suggest, as Raymond Williams does when discussing Lenin and Trotsky’s rejection of any policy of cultural directives, that it was ‘from the reservations’ [i.e. their reservations on complete liberty of expression] that the Stalinist ‘version of commitment’ [striking euphemism!] ‘became powerful’! At a stroke, by substituting the succession of concepts for the struggle of real forces, Williams erases the actual political and physical destruction of Lenin’s and Trotsky’s followers, a destruction which was the prerequisite for Stalin’s ‘version of commitment’. Williams writes as if there was a single continuous process ‘from the cause of humanity to the cause of the people to the revolution to the party to the [shifting] party line.’ [7] What we have here is, as so often, not an objective account of the sources, content and consequences of a particular theoretical and practical struggle [Trotsky’s battle with the advocates of proletarian culture, which merged in part with the battle against the bureaucracy’s ‘socialism in a single country’] but a deduction from the received truth that Stalinism found its source in elements already existing in the communism of Lenin and Trotsky.)
For all his opposition to any policy of ‘creation of literary schools by decree’, Trotsky was certainly not inclined to discuss literary tendencies solely in the terms they decided. His clash with the Russian Formalists, for example, is well known; and when some of the Futurists claimed that their work ‘freed art of its thousand-year-old bonds of bourgeoisdom’, Trotsky warned them of the dangers of sterility:
“The call of the Futurists to break with the past, to do away with Pushkin, to liquidate tradition, etc., has a meaning in so far as it is addressed to the old literary caste, to the closed-in circle of the intelligentsia. In other words, it has a meaning only in so far as the Futurists are busy cutting the cord which binds them to the priests of bourgeois literary tradition.
“But the meaninglessness of this call becomes evident as soon as it is addressed to the proletariat. The working class does not have to, and cannot break with literary tradition, because the working class is not in the grip of such tradition, The working class does not know the old literature, it still has to commune with it, it still has to master Pushkin, to absorb him, and so overcome him. The Futurist break with the past is, after all, a tempest in the closed-in world of the intelligentsia which grew up on Pushkin, Fet, Tiutschev, Briusov, Balmont and Blok, and who are passive, not because they are infected with a superstitious veneration for the forms of the past, but because they have nothing in their soul which calls for new forms. They simply have nothing to say. They sing the old feelings over again with slightly new words. The Futurists have done well to push away from them. But it is not necessary to make a universal law of development out of the act of pushing away.” [8]
Estimating the prospects of these ‘revolutionary innovators of form’, Trotsky first took account of the concrete class relations within which their development took place. One should not draw mechanical conclusions from the fact that Marinetti and the Italian Futurists, seeking social equivalents for their ‘revolutionary’ formal experiments, embraced Mussolini’s brand of political originality. In Russia the Futurists’ demonstrative rebellion had coincided with the overthrow by the proletarian revolution of the conditions they despised. There was no time for their experimental forms and style to be incorporated by the old circles, as so often happens, ‘because these circles do not exist any longer’. In 1924 Trotsky could therefore envisage for Futurism ‘the possibility of a rebirth, of entering into the new art, not as an all-determining current, but as an important component part’. [9]
Trotsky’s comments on Futurism make clear that his insistence on judging art ‘by the standards of art’ and on appropriating the artistic traditions of the past did not imply a rejection in this field of the precepts of historical materialism. Against those who considered the work of art such a uniquely individual product that it could not be amenable to a historical materialist analysis, Trotsky replies along the line marked out by the writings of Marx on society and individuality:
“Individuality is a welding together of tribal, national, class, temporary and institutional elements and, in fact, it is in the uniqueness of this welding together, in the proportions of this psycho-chemical mixture, that individuality is expressed. One of the most important tasks of criticism is to analyze the individuality of the artist (that is, his art) into its component elements, and to show their correlations. In this way, criticism brings the artist closer to the reader, who also has more or less of a ‘unique soul’, ‘artistically’ unexpressed, ‘unchosen’, but none the less representing a union of the same elements as does the soul of a poet. So it can be seen that what serves as a bridge from soul to soul is not the unique, but the common. Only through the common is the unique known; the common is determined in man by the deepest and most persistent conditions which make up his ‘soul’, by the social conditions of education, of existence, of work, and of associations. The social conditions in historic human society are, first of all, the conditions of class affiliation. That is why a class standard is so fruitful in all fields of ideology, including art, and especially in art, because the latter often expresses the deepest and most hidden social aspirations.” [10]
Without equating art and ideology, Trotsky can still draw the conclusion that art serves ideological purposes. The producers of ideology in other fields, such as philosophy or historiography or law, do their work from the given starting point in scholarship within the discipline and with unquestioning acceptance of the material life upon which rest their assumptions and their very existence as specialists. The artist may well find it possible to work within the framework of traditional forms, continuing to find these a vehicle for his inspiration, only to find himself one day faced with the results of revolutionary changes in the material on which he works, the consequence of imperceptible accumulated changes to which he had been blind. Perhaps the greatest artists, as Hegel suggested, are those who are able to raise their art, through original formal developments, to the level of comprehension in imagination of the implications of these tendencies beneath the appearances. In Trotsky’s view the October Revolution had clearly revealed this relation between art-forms and the content of social life:
“To speak of the bourgeois character of that literature which we call non-October, does not therefore necessarily mean to slander the poets who are supposedly serving art and not the bourgeoisie. For where is it written that it is impossible to serve the bourgeoisie by means of art? Just as geologic landslides reveal the deposits of earth layers, so do social landslides reveal the class character of art. Non-October art is struck by a deathly impotence for the very reason that death has struck those classes to which it was tied by its whole past. Without the bourgeois land-holding system and its customs, without the subtle suggestions of the estate and of the salon, this art sees no meaning in life, withers, becomes moribund and is reduced to nothing.” [11]
In his controversy with the Formalists Trotsky refused to accept Shklovsky’s notion of an aesthetic or artistic reality totally independent of social conditions (Shklovsky had drawn this conclusion from the striking resemblances in both content and treatment of narrative in cultures quite separate one from another). Besides systematic analysis of the formal structure of works of literature, art, architecture, etc., a knowledge of the historical sources of the artist’s inspiration is necessary:
“The methods of formal analysis are necessary, but insufficient. The architectural scheme of the Cologne cathedral can be established by measuring the base and the height of its arches, by determining the three dimensions of its naves, the dimensions and the placement of the columns, etc. But without knowing what a mediaeval city was like, what a guild was, or what was the Catholic Church of the Middle Ages, the Cologne cathedral will never be understood. The effort to set art free from life, to declare it a craft self-sufficient unto itself, devitalizes and kills art. The very need of such an operation is an unmistakable symptom of intellectual decline.” [12]
Trotsky felt no contradiction, then, between the recognition of art’s unique methods, its own standards, ‘its own law’s of development’, [13] on the one hand, and the recognition of the determination of its content by ‘social being’, the history of which is the history of class struggles on definite production foundations, on the other:
“A work of art should, in the first place, be judged by its own law, that is, by the law of art. But Marxism alone can explain why and how a given tendency in art has originated in a given period of history; in other words, who it was who made a demand for such an artistic form and not for another, and why ... It [art] is not a disembodied clement feeding on itself, but a function of social man indissolubly tied to his life and environment.” [14]
Trotsky goes on to make an analogy with the vital but nonetheless relative importance of form in the historical development of law. By its nature law demands formal consistency, internal coherence, and a certain rigidity. However,
“Its moving force lies in economics – in class contradictions. The law gives only a formal and an internally harmonized expression of these phenomena, not of their individual peculiarities, but of their general character, that is, of the elements that are repetitive and permanent in them. We can see now with a clarity which is rare in history how new law is made. It is not done by logical deduction, but by empirical measurement and by adjustment to the economic needs of the new ruling class.” [15]
*  *  *
It is useful to dwell briefly on Trotsky’s views on individuality and individualism, since he needs to consider these questions rather more concretely, i.e., in terms of the whole social formation and its development, than could Marx in his more abstract analysis of basic economic forms (though to the latter should be added his brief characterisation of bourgeois individualism – in The German Ideology – as a ‘historically justified illusion’). Just as the Revolution could provoke a shock of recognition of the social interconnections of law and of art, so, Trotsky suggested, did the revolutionary epoch throw a brutally clear light on the reality of bourgeois individualism. Individual enterprise could no longer provide the necessary framework to develop mankind’s productive forces; the emancipation of men from the social order based on individual capitalist appropriation was now a question of socialising the ownership and control of the means of production; individual freedom could in no way be achieved in opposition to that collective force which must expropriate the bourgeoisie, nor any longer in pursuit of a self-interest which by some ‘hidden hand’ could be thought to produce universal good. The social order which sustained the bourgeois idea of individual autonomy and freedom had reached the point of its imminent negation. But it was a fact that art and literature, throughout the era of capitalism’s challenge to feudal absolutism and then of its ascendancy, had, with whatever variations, fed upon that same individualist idea:
“Having broken up human relations into atoms, bourgeois society, during the period of its rise, had a great aim for itself. Personal emancipation was its name. Out of it grew the dramas of Shakespeare and Goethe’s ‘Faust’. Man placed himself in the centre of the universe, and therefore in the centre of art also. This theme sufficed for centuries. In reality, all modern literature has been nothing but an enlargement of this theme.
“But to the degree in which the internal bankruptcy of bourgeois society was revealed as a result of its unbearable contradictions, the original purpose, the emancipation and qualification of the individual, faded away and was relegated more and more into the sphere of a new mythology, without soul or spirit.” [16]
The great literature of the whole period of the rise and domination of the bourgeoisie is thus one of the permanent gains of culture, representing and celebrating as it does the first step to breaking the chains formed by the conviction of direct dependence on God and the unchallengeable character of the coercive force of hereditary authority. In the art and literature inspired by this historical advance men find the beginnings of the confidence needed to measure their world and experience by a human standard. Work, love, life and death, age and youth, can be faced as problems of human need, problems to be faced and resolved in the realm of the human and not accepted as visitations of blind fate or divine providence. Such was the promise. Even though poets and novelists glimpsed the anti-human and anti-artistic tendencies of capitalism, they were able to express their criticisms in terms of the humanist and individualist tradition, i.e., in terms of the conditions for individual fulfillment and not by appeal to some mystical authority. But then comes the time when the gains of the bourgeois era can be preserved and developed only by the surpassing of this framework, by ending bourgeois relations and the bourgeois class as such. An individuality which appeals to the humanist tradition and asserts itself against rather than through the collective actions necessary for human emancipation will end in impotence and mysticism:
“Our age is an age of great aims. This is what stamps it. But the grandeur of these aims lies in man’s effort to free himself from mystic and from every other intellectual vagueness and in his effort to reconstruct society and himself in accord with his own plan. This, of course, is much bigger than the child’s play of the ancients which was becoming to their childish age, or the mediaeval ravings of monks, or the arrogance of individualism which tears personality away from the collectivity, and then, draining it to the very bottom, pushes it off into the abyss of pessimism, or sets it on all fours before the remounted bull Apis.” [17]
The ‘great aims’ of the twentieth century, however, could not be achieved except by the class of proletarians, who had yet to appropriate the indispensable gains made by bourgeois individualism. And this appropriation was a condition of the elaboration of any post-revolutionary culture. Against those who set up bourgeois individualism in art and literature as an abstract opposite, Trotsky wrote:
“The trouble is that the average proletarian is lacking in this very quality. In the mass, proletarian individuality has not been sufficiently formed and differentiated. It is just such heightening of the objective quality and the subjective consciousness of individuality that is the most valuable contribution of the cultural advance at the threshold of which we stand today.” [18]
The last phrase has now a ring of bitter irony. Beyond that threshold on which the Soviet working class stood in 1924 was not at all a path of cultural advance on which they could form and develop individuality, but one upon which that individuality was sacrificed on the altar of a bureaucracy whose ‘culture’ became more and more a mixture of ideological distortion and manipulation, with the old ‘Great Russian’ coarseness, swaggering and bullying, now arming itself with modern techniques of terror. Half a century later, it is now well known that, despite the previous Stalinist success in suppressing the historical record, Trotsky’s struggle against Stalin and his faction (representing the interests of the bureaucracy with which it merged more and more) began in alliance with Lenin on Lenin’s proposal (see especially, M. Lewin’s Lenin’s Last Struggle). One of the memoranda written by Lenin in the course of this fight, and acknowledged officially to exist only in 1956, brings out particularly clearly the cultural implications of this fight:
But now, we must, in conscience, admit the contrary; we call ours an apparatus which, in fact, is still quite alien to us; which is bourgeois and tsarist mishmash, and which it was in no way possible to get rid of in five years without the help of other countries as we were ‘busy’ most of the time with military engagements and the fight against famine. It is quite natural in such circumstances that the ‘freedom to withdraw from the union’ by which we justify ourselves will be a mere scrap of paper unable to defend the non-Russians from the onslaught of that really Russian man, the Great Russian, the chauvinist, in substance a rascal and a lover of violence, as the typical Russian bureaucrat is. There is no doubt that the infinitesimal percentage of Soviet and sovietized workers will drown in that sea of chauvinistic, Great-Russian riff-raff like a fly in milk. [19]
This was only one of a series of notes and letters, dictated by Lenin during his final illness, aimed at Stalin and his group in the apparatus. The dreadful backwardness in production, the exhaustion of the masses in revolution and civil war, which as always produced its reaction, and the isolation following the defeat of the German revolution in 1923 – these were the conditions which favoured the dominance of that faction that rested on the personnel of the old state machine and on the better-off peasants and small entrepreneurs given a new lease of life by the unavoidable New Economic Policy of 1921. The programme of ‘socialism in a single country’, announced nine months after Lenin’s death and four months after the appearance of Literature and Revolution, was a succinct expression of the cultural as well as the political horizons of the bureaucracy and its allies. Had the next generations of Russian workers been able to see Literature and Revolution (as they certainly still are not), it is doubtful if they would have shared the ‘anti-humanism’ of some of our latter-day ‘Marxists’, given such passages as:
“What the worker will take from Shakespeare, Goethe, Pushkin, or Dostoievsky, will be a more complex idea of human personality, of its passions and feelings, a deeper and profounder understanding of its psychic forces and of the role of the subconscious, etc. In the final analysis, the worker will become richer.” [20]
Trotsky refused to ignore the fact that because of its position as an oppressed class, the proletariat after conquering power remained ‘uneducated aesthetically’, however ‘spiritually and therefore, artistically ... sensitive’. [21] For this reason, as we have seen, he took issue with the Futurists on their dismissal of individualism. They took from the Revolution what corresponded to their own feelings, seeing in the abstraction of the ‘collectivist nature’ of the proletariat the equivalent of their own rejection of a jaded individualism in literary and artistic circles. In this way, said Trotsky, they themselves fell into an ‘egocentrism...extreme individualism’, ignoring the cultural needs of the masses, who must absorb and transcend the old culture. Literature and Revolution is the clearest statement of this necessity, and there Trotsky achieves a noble and inspiring vision of the ‘truly human’ culture of the future. But more than this was needed, as Trotsky well knew. For the mass of workers to become ‘aesthetically educated’, to ‘absorb and assimilate the elements of the old cultures’, was not a matter of repeating the history of those cultures but rather of a ‘free and conscious’ plan and choice based upon them. The condition of this freedom was a material one: the productive foundation for socialism laid by capitalist development itself. Marx had written in 1845:
“... this development of productive forces (which at the same time implies the actual empirical existence of men in their worldhistorical, instead of local, being) is an absolutely necessary practical premise, because without it privation, want is merely made general, and with want the struggle for necessities would begin again, and all the old filthy business (‘all the old crap’) would necessarily be restored ... “ [22]
Revolution in backward Russia confirmed this cryptic formula. It was entirely consistent for the bureaucracy, which rejected the strategy of world revolution necessary to transform that situation, to reject also the cultural policy conclusions drawn by Trotsky:
“The proletariat also needs a continuity of creative tradition. At the present time the proletariat realizes this continuity not directly, but indirectly, through the creative bourgeois intelligentsia which gravitates towards the proletariat and which wants to keep warm under its wing. The proletariat tolerates a part of this intelligentsia, supports another part, half-adopts a third, and entirely assimilates a fourth. The policy of the Communist Party towards art is determined by the complexity of this process, by its internal many-sidedness. It is impossible to reduce this policy to one formula, to something short like a bird’s bill. Nor is it necessary to do this.” [23]
In later years Trotsky returned to the question of the relation between the artist’s individuality and the Revolution. In the period of his exile, when the Stalinist betrayal and terror were at their height, the immediate question was no longer one of the policy of the young Soviet state and the principles which should guide it. The victorious ‘Thermidorean bureaucracy’, as Trotsky termed it, had now successfully transformed the world communist movement into its instrument. Its use of the ‘weapon of culture’ within the USSR, and internationally, demanded a literature which was above all acquiescent in the vast lie machine and brutal terror with which all opposition was being liquidated. In a situation where Fascism had triumphed in Italy, Germany and Spain and a world war had become inevitable, and in which the revolutionary movement was in danger of total destruction at the hands of the Stalinist leadership, Trotsky saw a world – historical crisis of all mankind, in which the relation between political commitment and freedom of artistic creation was thrown into the sharpest possible relief, particularly in contrast to the conformist literature required by Stalinism. It is for this reason that ‘Towards a Free Revolutionary Art’, [24] published over the names of Andre Breton and Diego Rivera in the autumn of 1938 and drafted in collaboration with Trotsky, constitutes more than a propaganda manifesto (though in the latter aspect it has inestimable importance). It bears the same relation to the theory and practice of a Lukacs of those years as did Trotsky’s mortal combat with Stalinism to Khrushchev’s ‘if we had opened our mouths, we would have lost our heads’ in the ‘secret speech’ at the Twentieth Congress:
“In the contemporary world we must recognise the ever more widespread destruction of those conditions under which intellectual creation is possible. From this follows of necessity an increasingly manifest degradation not only of the work of art but also of the specifically ‘artistic’ personality.” [25]
At the historical limit of the development of capitalist society, then, the inimicality of capitalism to artistic production reaches its own extreme. Again, how shall the artist defend his individuality and respond to the need to create, unless he identifies with those forces which can remove the social order, which was built on individual appropriation?
“Only naturally, he turns to the Stalinist organisations which hold out the possibility of escaping from his isolation. But if he is to avoid complete demoralisation, he cannot remain there, because of the impossibility of delivering his own message and the degrading servility which these organisations exact from him in exchange for certain material advantages.” [26]
Breton and Rivera called upon artists and writers to turn to ‘those who with unshaken fidelity bear witness to the revolution ... [and] who, for this reason, are alone able to bring it to fruition, and along with it the ultimate free expression of all forms of human genius’. [27] Two conditions were required, if art were to play a revolutionary role. And here Trotsky (in a situation where, as we have noted, the relations are more starkly revealed) reverted to the positions he had first developed in Literature and Revolution. In the first place, there must be complete opposition to any restriction on artistic creation, let alone commands from above (whether from the state in the USSR and its apparatus abroad, or through the demands of capital):
“In the realm of artistic creation, the imagination must escape from all constraint and must under no pretext allow itself to be placed under bonds. To those who urge us, whether for today or for tomorrow, to consent that art should submit to a discipline which we hold to be radically incompatible with its nature, we give a flat refusal and we repeat our deliberate intention of standing by the formula complete freedom for art?” [28]
However, Trotsky and his collaborators affirm that not only the defence of this freedom but also the production of artistic works of true stature in our day will in their opinion come only from participation in the revolutionary struggle to resolve mankind’s mortal crisis:
“It should be clear by now that in defending freedom of thought we have no intention of justifying political indifference, and that it is far from our wish to revive a so-called ‘pure’ art which generally serves the extremely impure ends of reaction. No, our conception of the role of art is too high to refuse it an influence on the fate of society. We believe that the supreme task of art in our epoch is to take part actively and consciously in the preparation of the revolution. But the artist cannot serve the struggle for freedom unless he subjectively assimilates its social content, unless he feels in his very nerves its meaning and drama and freely seeks to give his own inner world incarnation in his art.” [29]
Trotsky found himself at the very centre of the most critical development in Marxist theory and practice, in the Russian Revolution, and it is from the necessity of striving for an all-round development of Marxism to fight through the critical years which followed that the strength of his work on literature derives. All his resources had to be concentrated on the fundamental questions of historical materialism: the relation of intellectual or ‘spiritual’ culture to the development of productive forces as a whole; the relation between art’s own development and the stimulus and demands of the class struggle; the associated problem of the relation between individuality and social forms. These questions were certain to arise in acute form in the period of transition from capitalism; but because the first step in the socialist revolution had been taken in backward Russia, which then remained isolated, they came up for review and development in even sharper form. What is remarkable is that, in the context of those historical events and the political and theoretical battles in which he took the leading role, Trotsky was scrupulously careful to demarcate the specific problems presented by the analysis and understanding of art and literature, in their most fundamental relation to philosophy, to dialectical materialism. From what standpoint? It was not of course only a question of meticulous scholarship and breadth of vision, which characterise all Trotsky’s works. Like Marx, he wrote in order that others should learn to accept the same responsibilities as he had for the struggle for human emancipation. Revolutionary practice must proceed always in a struggle to master consciously all sides of the historical totality.
In his efforts to overcome the great problems which were accumulating in the field of cultural policy Trotsky felt compelled to correct all oversimplified and mechanical views of the sources of a new art. And here he expanded on the opinion we have already noted in Marx and many before him, that it is important to distinguish between the artistic and scientific modes of comprehending the world: in the field of poetry we deal with the process of feeling the world in images, and not with the process of knowing the world scientifically.’ Neither Trotsky nor any other Marxist pretended that this ‘feeling the world in images’ is an activity of which we have a scientific account. There is great scope for historical, biographical and psychological research on that score, and it is obvious that to think that somehow the secret of the process can be deduced from the general principles of Marxism would be nonsense. The works of artists come to be accepted by us as creative because we experience a transformation of our feelings on the reception and contemplation of images. This response is not totally separated from thinking and analysis (any more than is the work’s production) but neither is it the same thing. Why and exactly how it is that we are affected in this way by sensuous, representative images we do not know. But we can know from the study of history why it is that certain of these images and certain types of image-making arise and are important at particular times, or even for very long periods.
For example, Trotsky goes into some detail to ‘place’ the Futurists historically and to trace the effects of their history in a failure to achieve organic unity in their poetry. This analysis illuminates the problem of the specific importance of questions of form:
“Mayakovsky’s works have no peak; they are not disciplined internally. The parts refuse to obey the whole. Each part tries to be separate. It develops its own dynamics, without considering the welfare of the whole. That is why it is without entity or dynamics. The Futurists have not yet found a synthetic expression of words and images in their work.” [30]
It was particularly in criticising the work of the great Futurist poets that Trotsky found it necessary to emphasise the distinction between abstraction and scientific cognition, on the one hand, and artistic imagination, on the other. When poets embraced the cause of the October Revolution, and produced poetry in which they sought to express their new- found allegiance and enthusiasm, the results were almost always disappointing, to say the least. In rebelling against the pre-revolutionary world of conformist and conventional art these poets had rebelled also against the establishment to which that art-world was attached. They had found in the practice of their own art, with its invention of new styles of life as well as art, a way of taking strength from their profound conviction of the worn-out and debilitating nature of the old society. They were the latest in a long line of great bohemian rebels against bourgeois society, rebels whose social roots had been indicated by Marx in 1848 [31] and later by Plekhanov. [32] These Russian Futurists, however, were in full spate when they unexpectedly encountered a revolution:
“Futurists became Communists. By this very act they entered the sphere of more profound questions and relationships, which far transcended the limits of their own little world, and which were not quite worked out organically in their soul. That is why Futurists, even including Mayakovsky, are weakest artistically at those points where they finish as Communists. This is more the result of their spiritual past than of their social origin. The Futurist poets have not mastered the elements of the Communist point of view and world-attitude sufficiently to find an organic expression for them in words; they have not entered, so to speak, into their blood. That is why they are frequently subject to artistic and psychologic defeats, to stilted forms and to making much noise about nothing. In its most revolutionary and compelling works, Futurism becomes stylization.” [33]
These ‘stilted forms’, which so often gave the impression of a striving for effect (‘Mayakovsky shouts too often, where he should merely speak’) frustrated by some lack of inner resources, are the result, then, of the separation between the worlds of feeling of the artistic intelligentsia and of the working class, a separation which has profound historical roots and cannot be overcome by an effort of will any more than by decree. On its side the proletariat needs still to assimilate bourgeois culture. The artist, for his part, no matter how much he wishes to change his allegiance completely, cannot jump out of his skin. Again: it is one thing to understand something and express it logically, and quite another thing to assimilate it organically, reconstructing the whole system of one’s feelings. [34] Trotsky gave the example of Boris Pilnyak:
“One cannot approach art as one can politics, not because artistic creation is a religious rite or something mystical ... but because it has its own laws of development, and above all because in artistic creation an enormous role is played by subconscious processes – slower, more idle and less subjected to management and guidance, just because they are subconscious. It has been said that those writings of Pilnyak’s which are closer to Communism are feebler than those which are politically further away from us. What is the explanation? Why, just this, that on the rationalistic plane Pilnyak is ahead of himself as an artist ...” [35]
For the artist who proved capable of ‘reshaping the world of his feelings ... by means of a scientific programme ... the most difficult inner labour ... ‘, [36] there arose in any case the question of frankly recognising that the period after the Revolution was a transitional one, in which it would be sheer idealism to anticipate the later period of communism, in which the relations between art and industry, between mental and manual labour, between artist and audience, would be transformed:
“Art is created on the basis of a continual everyday, cultural, ideological interrelationship between a class and its artists. Between the aristocracy or the bourgeoisie and their artists there was no split in daily life. The artists lived, and still live, in a bourgeois milieu, breathing the air of bourgeois salons, they received and are receiving hypodermic inspirations from their class. Does the proletariat of today offer such a cultural-ideological milieu, in which the new artist may obtain, without leaving it in his day-to-day existence, all the inspiration he needs while at the same time mastering the procedures of his craft? No, the working masses are culturally extremely backward; the illiteracy or low level of literacy of the majority of workers presents in itself a very great obstacle to this. And above all, the proletariat, in so far as it remains a proletariat, is compelled to expend its best forces in political struggle, in restoring the economy, and in meeting elementary cultural needs ...” [37]
*  *  *
The problem of ‘realism’ in literature is not something separate from the question Marx had raised: how to explain the continued appeal of works of art produced by past cultures? At its simplest the unity of the two problems is posed by reformulating both: what reality do men find in works whose historical subject matter is remote from their own experiences? Just as Marx suggested that modern men found in the forms of Greek art the embodiment of attitudes to the world which coincided with the strivings necessitated and the future promised by their own relationship to nature and history, so Trotsky pointed to a real content in works of art which was not exhausted by the effects of the class structure of the society in which the artist lived. If Pushkin’s poetry could still arouse feelings which certainly did not result from any sympathy with the class whose characteristic assumptions and feelings he shared, there must be a reason. Pushkin expressed the standpoint of the nobility: ‘But the expression that Pushkin gave his feelings is so saturated with the artistic, and generally with the psychological, experience of centuries, is so crystallised, that it has lasted down to our time.’ [38]
In another example in the same work Trotsky suggested that there was a reality about such a thing as the fear of death which persisted even though different forms of it succeeded each other, and that poetry on this theme by Dante, Shakespeare, Byron, Goethe, ‘and also by the Psalmist’, moves men deeply today. In such works, characters, situations, feelings and actions are pictured or suggested realistically, to the extent that the poet or dramatist works in such a way as to conceal nothing of the essential forces and pressures which men feel and act upon. Only from this can come the attainment of a particularity which is rich in the wealth of its interconnections, a true individuality rather than a striking singularity. To convey in sensuous form such individuality is the secret of the successful artistic image. The way, for example, that these particular men and women, formed by the artist so that their problems are not oversimplified and abstracted, confront the fear of death, is something which can be a vital source of energy for every future generation. To the common element in the experience (what is common, in this example, is not only the fact of the fear of death but also the unrelenting necessity of confronting and overcoming it whatever the particular historical situation) is added something else: the fact that poets have over the centuries accumulated a specialised lore and craftsmanship which has become more or less perfected in its ability to grasp and express these sensuous aspects of the relation between the general and the particular.
This ‘artistic ... experience of centuries ... crystallised’, is no less real than the ‘historically specific’, which some Marxists make the sole criterion of realism. What is more, it makes room for the central element of practice in human life and cognition; and in this way points to the fundamental flaw in that historical relativism which is so often mistaken for Marxism.
Following the thread suggested by Trotsky’s remarks about the clear light shed on innovation in, for example, law and art in times of revolution, we find a highly suggestive indication of the way in which Marxism may tackle the changing relations between form and content in art. Many others before and after Trotsky have shown the importance of avoiding an abstract separation and opposition between form and content, and demonstrated the way in which the artist works to bring out ‘the form of the content’ rather than manipulating the subject matter in order arbitrarily to fill a given preconceived form. What Trotsky is able to suggest (and it does not go beyond a suggestion) is the way in which such considerations of internal structure of the work will articulate with analysis of the changing social – historical reality which structures the world of thought and feeling of the writer and his audience:
“[Marxism] does not at all ‘incriminate’ a poet with the thoughts and feelings which he expresses, but raises questions of a much more profound significance, namely, to which order of feelings does a given artistic work correspond in all its peculiarities? What are the social conditions of these thoughts and feelings? What place do they occupy in the historical development of a society and of a class? And, further, what literary heritage has entered into the elaboration of the new form? Under the influence of what historic impulse have the new complexes of feelings and thoughts broken through the shell which divides them from the sphere of poetic consciousness?” [39]
Naturally the degree to which the results of historical changes in social consciousness can find expression without major changes in the forms of literature and art is a matter for empirical research in each case. No doubt we can expect that the approach and the immediate aftermath of revolutions will pose most urgently the problem of the obsolescence of artistic forms and the need for innovation, but again care is necessary. How often have revolutionary classes sought inspiration in past historical achievements, and found their way to this inspiration in an appeal to ancient forms against the modernism of the rulers? And in general terms, literary changes are not different from other changes in social consciousness in this aspect: ‘Artistic creation is always a complicated turning inside-out of old forms, under the influence of new stimuli which originate outside the art.’ [40] The old forms are developed and transformed, not created completely anew by the new stimuli. They represent not relics of dead civilisations but acquisitions of mankind in the struggle for life, for men’s mastery of their own fate. Again: ‘Literature, whose methods and processes have their roots far back in the most distant past and represent the accumulated experience of verbal craftsmanship, expresses the thoughts, feelings, points of view and hopes of the new epoch and of its new class.’ [41]
It is because literary forms have this character that ‘verbal form is not a passive reflection of a preconceived artistic idea, but an active element which influences the idea itself. However, when the Formalists wished to go beyond this, Trotsky waxed sarcastic:
“Reasoning ‘formally’ one may produce ‘Eugene Onegin’ in two ways: either by subordinating the selection of words to a preconceived artistic idea (as Pushkin himself did), or by solving the problem algebraically. From the ‘Formal’ point of view, the second method is more correct, because it does not depend upon mood, inspiration or other unsteady things, and has besides the advantage that while leading to ‘Eugene Onegin’ it may bring one to an incalculable number of other great works. All that one needs is infinity in time, called eternity ... But such an active mutual relationship – in which form influences and at times entirely transforms content – is known to us in all fields of social and even biologic life. This is no reason at all for rejecting Darwinism and Marxism and for the creation of a Formalist school either in biology or sociology.” [42]
Formalism, just as much as neglect of form, results in inability to see the actual dialectic of development of art:
“Each new literary school – if it is really a school and not an arbitrary grafting – is the result of a preceding development, of the craftsmanship of word and colour already in existence, and only pulls away from the shores of what has been attained in order to conquer the elements anew.” [43]
What is the relevance of all this to the question of realism, said by Lukacs and his followers to be the central category of a Marxist theory of literature? While giving due importance to literary form and technique, and explaining that these had a ‘content’ in and of themselves, Trotsky certainly did not think that mastery of form and technique would by itself guarantee the production of works which could be called realistic (in the broadest sense). Here all the social and psychological influences which form the consciousness of artist and audience come into play. Trotsky had occasion to take up the ideas of the ‘Lef group in Russia, a group which reacted violently against a realism which it thought too contemplative and acquiescent in the existing reality. Its members proposed an art and architecture which expressed an active, transforming attitude to nature and society. Trotsky saw this as a false distinction, and one which must lead to the throwing away of invaluable artistic and technical acquisitions. If the ‘Lef group wanted art to be ‘not a mirror, but a hammer’, then they should remember that to the man who wields a hammer, knowledge of how hard to strike, exactly where and when, depends on an accurate knowledge of the object and on practice in the arts of gaining such knowledge.
“Of course no one speaks about an exact mirror. No one even thinks of asking the new literature to have a mirrorlike impassivity. The deeper literature is, and the more it is imbued with the desire to shape life, the more significantly and dynamically it will be able to ‘picture’ life.” [44]
This, incidentally, is what Trotsky had in mind when he reminded the Formalists that, whatever the importance of the fact that the ‘laws of art’ have their own ‘peculiarity’, it must not be forgotten that what the art works on is natural and social reality. Eagleton [45] has commended Trotsky’s phrase, ‘Artistic creation is a deflection, a changing and a transformation of reality, in accordance with the peculiar laws of art’, [46] and suggests that it was an idea built upon by Macherey, [47] who argues that ‘the effect of literature is essentially to deform rather than to imitate’. [48] This is another example of the dangers of isolating quotations from their contexts and then fitting them into some imaginary continuity of ideas. Trotsky’s point, in this sentence, was that when art proceeds with its (relatively) independent work, it is reality that it ‘deflects’. And the essential point for Trotsky is that the artistic mode of ‘transforming’ reality, far from deforming it, as Eagleton and Macherey think, is one of the ways in which men come to grasp the unity of opposites constituted by nature and man’s practice of cognition in and of it.
In the most general sense Trotsky’s emphasis here makes a link between Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach, with its emphasis on human practice as objective and at the same time source and criterion of knowledge, and the search of Benjamin and Brecht for a contemporary art which is able to go beyond passive reflection to active transformation of reality. This starting point of necessary practice in the cognition of an independently existing material reality works against any oversimplified and abstract ‘construction’ of reality according to some conclusion about the working class and its ‘revolutionariness’. Rather, the most dynamic and realistic art, that which is able truly to inform human feelings and human practice, is that which works its way through ‘that real, true revolution which is developing obstinately and moving from country to country, and which appears, therefore, to some pseudo-revolutionists as a boresome repetititon’. [49] From this single reality writers who come equally well equipped in terms of artistic training and mastery of technique may well produce very different results and degrees of success as realists. Besides their decision to be realistic, besides their technique, besides the breadth of their experience, there is the matter of the ‘standard’ of their realism. They may be restricted to a naturalistic portrayal of the brute facts of existence (like Pilnyak, for whom ‘the disorder of the Revolution’ was ‘a fundamental fact’). On the other hand, a historical standard can ‘help to take the work beyond ‘episodic and sometimes anecdotal subjects’:
“The invisible axis (the earth’s axis is also invisible) should be the Revolution itself, around which should turn the whole unsettled, chaotic and reconstructing life. But in order that the reader should feel this axis, the author himself must have felt it and at the same time must have thought it through.” [50]

1. See especially G. Plekhanov, Art and Social Life (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1953), for the analysis of French eighteenth-century drama and the nineteenth-century aesthetic movement; and F. Mehring, Die Lessing Legendc (Berlin: Dietz Verlag, 1953) and On Historical Materialism (London: New Park Publications, 1975).
2. L. D. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, I960).
3. Raymond Williams, for example, writes that ‘Marxism, in many fields, and perhaps especially in cultural theory, has experienced at once a significant revival and a related openness and flexibility of theoretical development’ – Marxism and Literature (Oxford University Press, 1977) p. 1.
4. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 14.
5. Ibid., p. 170.
6. Ibid., pp. 218-19.
7. Williams, Marxism and Literature, p. 202.
8. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, pp. 130-1.
9. Ibid., p. 132.
10. Ibid., p. 60.
11. Ibid., p. 61.
12. Ibid., p. 180-1.
13. L. D. Trotsky, Class and Art: Problems of Culture under the Dictatorship of the proletariat (Speech of 1924) (London: New Park Publications, 1974) p. 18.
14. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, pp. 178 – 9.
15. Ibid., p. 180.
16. Ibid., pp. 242-3.
17. Ibid., p. 244.
18. Ibid., p. 225.
19. Letter of 30 December, 1922, in V. I. Lenin, ‘The Question of Nationalities, or of “Autonomisation” ‘ (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, n.d.) pp.22-3.
20. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 225.
21. Ibid., p. 226.
22. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Collected Works, vol. V (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1976) p. 49.
23. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 227.
24. L. D. Trotsky, Culture and Socialism and a Manifesto, Art and Revolution (London: New Park Publications, 1975).
25. Ibid., p. 30.
26. Ibid., p. 33.
27. Ibid., pp. 33-4.
28. Ibid., pp. 32-3.
29. Ibid., p. 33.
30. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 152.
31. K. Marx, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, in Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, vol. II (London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1942).
32. Plekhanov, Art and Social Life.
33. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 146.
34. Trotsky, Class and Art, p. 7.
35. Ibid., p. 18.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid., p. 19.
38. Ibid., p. 9.
39. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 169.
40. Ibid., p. 179.
41. Ibid., p. 180.
42. Ibid., p. 173.
43. Ibid., p. 233.
44. Ibid., p. 137.
45. Terry Eagleton, Marxism and Literary Criticism (London: Methuen,
1976) pp. 50 – 1.
46. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 175.
47. P. Macherey, Pour une Theorie de la Production Litteraire (Paris: Maspero, 1970).
48. Eagleton, Marxism and Literary Criticism, p. 51.
49. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, p. 238.
50. Ibid., p. 79.
 


Cliff Slaughter  Archive |
Literary Criticism Archive



