


THE ALMOST weekly reports of radiation leaks and contamination of
workers at the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant have alarmed
many ordinary families.
Recent medical reports have implicated the nuclear industry in
abnormal incidence of cancers, especially leukaemia.
Now health and safety inspectors are to conduct an inquiry into
Sellafield’s safety.
What is nuclear radiation and what are its effects? Radiation –
in the form of ionising particles and rays – is emitted when a
nuclear reaction occurs as in the production of nuclear energy. They
are virtually impossible to contain.
A chief characteristic of some radiation is its ability to cause
mutation of the cellular structure of the human body. When this
occurs, cancers and leukaemia results. Small children and embryos
carried by pregnant women and particularly vulnerable.
Recent research has revealed that whereas high levels of radiation
often kill the cell, low levels are more dangerous as they injure the
cell, leaving it free to reproduce and carry on the damage.
It is now well documented that levels within the agreed ‘safety
limits’ have produced a disturbingly high incidence of cancers of
the pancreas and leukaemia.
Case studies of American nuclear workers – using figures
obtained under the Freedom of Information Act – leaves the rate of
leukaemia at an incredible 450 per cent higher than the general
population. The incidence of lymph gland cancer was 125 per cent higher.
The same levels of cancers amongst nuclear workers and within the
population in the vicinity of nuclear establishments have now been
conclusively confirmed by four major studies.
A ‘mole’ has revealed that radioactive emissions are often
reported to be a staggering 40 times less than they actually were.
In an attempt to stem these leaks the industry has issued warnings
to its workforce, that they would be in breach of the Official
Secrets Act if they disclosed any information even though it might be
vital in terms of health and safety.
This ruling would be in breach of the Health and Safety at Work
Act 1976.
The Act, hailed as a landmark in trade union legislation,
established for the first time the legal right of trade unionists to
investigate hazardous occurences and company policy in respect to
health and safety. If successful, they could appeal to safety
inspectors who could issue improvement and prohibition notices.
Failure to comply could involve a maximum fine of £1,000.
Employers have consistently exploited every loophole in order to
evade the duties placed on them. Ambiguous terms and definitions such
as “reasonably practicable” which is defined in terms of cost of
improving health, means in the final analysis that only the courts
have the power to authoritatively interpret the phrases.
Finally, there is nothing in the regulation or codes of practice
that commits the employer to divulge information however crucial.
They do not need for instance to act upon reports submitted from
safety reps and committees.
 
Labour inquiry
It is hardly surprising then, that there has been no successful
prosecution of any company despite overwhelming proof of malpractice.
The present situation in relation to compensation of nuclear victims
demonstrates the ineffectiveness of this legislation. Workers have to
prove through the courts that radiation has ‘significantly’
contributed to their cancers. Only a handful of cases have been successful.
It is now vitally important that the labour and trade union
movement conducts its own inquiry into the nuclear industry. It must
mobilise immediately to ensure that health and safety is a key issue
in all nuclear establishments.
As part of this campaign it must insist on the full revelation of
all company records and studies relating to the poisoning of workers
and the community. They must recognise that there is no ‘safe
level’ of radiation exposure.
They must demand stringent medical checks of all workers and the
general population and the results must be made available.
A question mark now hangs over the nuclear industry – its
appalling safety record together with the ever increasing threat of a
major catastrophe, as occurred in Harrisburg in America.
Labour’s spokesman on the nuclear industry John Cunningham, is
also MP for the constituency that includes Sellafield. Questions have
been asked about his commitment to Labour’s nuclear policy. He has
raised the prospect of high unemployment in the industry if other
fuels are developed instead.
Clearly the jobs of every worker must be protected, but this can
only be done with the implementation of a well formulated socialist
energy policy.
This would provide the necessary resources to develop alternative
sources of energy such as wind, solar and geothermal which do not
produce harmful waste products and are present in infinite quantities.
Such a plan will give priority to the development of nuclear
fusion which has the great advantage of producing no nuclear waste.
It uses as a fuel a form of hydrogen found in unlimited quantities in
sea water.
In the mean time the labour movement should oppose the madness of
uncontrolled completely irresponsible expansion of nuclear power
plants and reprocessing facilities.
 




For almost 40 years, Ronnie Sookhdeo was a comrade in Militant and
then the Socialist Party. Unfortunately, ill health in recent years
prevented him from being active. However, he always gave generously
to the Socialist Party and kept abreast of developments through our
paper.
He emigrated from what became Guyana with his family as a young
boy and lived in Islington. Later, he married Viv and they moved to
the same street as us. Our families became good friends, starting
with our children playing together. We soon realised we had common
political ideas. His father had been a trade union organiser involved
with Cheddi Jagan and the People’s Progressive Party (PPP).
 
Anti-racist
After a few discussions he quickly joined Militant. He was
particularly eager to participate in our anti-racist and anti-fascist
work. He played a leading role in the formation of the PNP Youth in
Britain alongside others and later of Panther UK. This group
organised the biggest indoor meeting of black and Asian youth in
Britain, addressed by Bobby Seale, the well-known US Black Panther
leader.
He was also a talented scientist, having been a chemistry lecturer
at Kingsway College for many years, where he was also an active trade
unionist. He read widely and avidly on politics, science and history,
particularly black and Asian history; he also delved into the history
of Ancient Greece and the Far East and was always keen to discuss
what he had read. He also taught himself Russian.
He had a very sunny disposition and his infectious good humour
touched many people. However, this did not prevent him from leaving
the Labour Party in disgust when socialists were expelled. He could
not tolerate the right-wing deserters of socialist principles.
He will be sadly missed, and our heartfelt sympathy goes to Viv,
his wife, his five children, many grandchildren and all his family.
 




THE comments of rescue workers in Bhopal, India, after the world’s
worst-ever industrial disaster tell their own horrific take:
“Every house we entered was crammed with bodies. The
carnage was such that it appeared that a nuclear bomb had dropped
onto the city.”

Government sources tentatively claim that 2,000 people were
killed, 20,000 injured and 200,000 affected by a deadly cocktail of
cyanide and phosgene gases, released after storage tanks at a
pesticide plant exploded and turned much of the city into one vast
gas chamber.
The pesticide company – the giant US-owned Union Carbide –
sought to minimise the hazards by claiming that the gasses can be
neutralised by moisture in the air and that they pose no long-term
effects. But what is the truth? And more specifically, what is the
safety record of Union Carbide?
It has long been known that trace amounts of methyl isocyanate one
of the escaped gasses – causes voluminous emissions from the eyes
and irritation to the skin and internal organs. Long-term exposure to
infinitesimal quantities has been known to cause infertility amongst
women and cancer.
When inhaled in larger amounts it can produce a rapid accumulation
of fluid in the lungs – causing drowning. The gas can also remove
essential iron from the blood stream leading to malfunction of organs
and death.
It is precisely because of the stringent medical tests demanded by
the US Environmental Protection Agency that companies like Union
Carbide decide to operate in other countries. Once known as ‘public
enemy number 1’, by environmental groups, Union Carbide have
established a notorious record of health and safety nationally and
internationally. It once held the dubious distinction in the 1960s of
operating the ‘smokiest factory in the world’ in its ‘Ever
Ready’ battery factory in Virginia.
 
Third World victims
Another factory in Indonesia was found to be emitting huge
concentrations of carbon black, contaminated with poisonous mercury.
Of the 750 workforce a staggering 402 employees were found to be
suffering from some kind of kidney disease.
But it has been their operations in the pesticide industry which
have produced the biggest controversy and also yielded massive
profits. The company, in recent years have exported to developing
countries huge amounts of pesticides and herbicides, which are banned
or severely restricted as a health hazard in the USA.
This is usually done in conjunction with new seed strains and
fertilizers as part of a “Green Revolution” package – thereby
creating a new cycle of dependency and debt. It is estimated that
normally 140 lbs of hazardous pesticides are exported to these
countries each year.
 
Capitalist priorities
In 1980 Union Carbide sold in Latin America alone £645 million
worth of pesticides making an operating profit of $122m. This is just
one of the 19 multinational corporations that dominate the market in
that region. Moreover, if their combined operations in other products
and industries are examined, then the health hazards are enormously magnified.
The callous behaviour of the monopolies can be demonstrated by
recent examples of a West German company dismantling its entire
asbestos textile factory near Hamburg and transferring it to a site
near Cape Town in South Africa. The Swiss Company CIBA-GEIGY was
forced to admit that it sprayed Egyptian children deliberately with
insecticide to test the children for toxic levels and to establish a
link with cancer.
The trade union movement of these countries must be satisfied that
the processes for the manufacture of chemicals are safe for workers,
for the surrounding community and for the environment as a whole.
Catastrophes like the one in Bhopal, environmental pollution and the
wholesale poisoning of communities are inevitable because of the
inherent drive by big business enterprises for maximum profits, where
operations and conditions are governed by the anarchy of the mark and
competition.
 







IN THIS final part of a two-part article on cancer RONNIE
SOOKDHEO looks at how the chemical companies get round the current
legislation and what the response of the labour movement should be.




MANY COMPANIES, notably in asbestos, have already moved onto the
offensive by challenging the research evidence to date and
substituting their own.
The much publicised cases involving the herbicide 245T, asbestos,
lead, and radiation highlights the absurd inadequacy of present
legislation. Regulations and procedures, which are really required to
test and regulate dangerous processes and products, are subordinated
to the narrow commercial interests of the chemical companies.
A company has the right, for instance, to withhold, even from the
government, vital scientific and medical information on the grounds
that it may be of ‘commercial importance’.
This ‘let-out’ clause, is intended to safeguard profitability.
Yet it can always be invoked to avoid revealing information which
would be crucial for assessing the risk a substance poses to the
health of the workforce or the population at large.
 
Chemicals
Chemical companies can also use ambiguous legislation to avoid
paying compensation for injuries caused by toxic chemicals. The
Factories Act requires companies to notify the Health and Safety
Executive about the prevalence of occupational disease amongst their workforce.
Using the criteria demanded from the HSE, companies have so far
only classified 18 diseases as attributable to toxic materials and as
such liable for compensation. Most diseases not known to be caused by
carcinogenic (cancer-causing) substances are simply referred to as
ulceration or poisoning.
The term cancer is never used in respect to any of these
substances. Asbestosis is not even classed as an occupational
disease. Also, if a company manufactures less than one ton of
chemical a year, it is under no obligation to perform the necessary
screening tests for toxicity before manufacturing the product.
 
245T ‘cleared’
On this basis, 245T, used as a defoliant in Vietnam and known to
cause genetic deformation, has been given a clean bill of health!
Although trade unions have called for it to be banned, 245T is still
used as a herbicide in Britain.
Indeed, under the 1976 Health and Safety at Work Act, only new
chemicals need to be tested. And it is not mandatory to carry out all
the toxicological tests, especially the more long and expensive
tests, derived from animal experiments!
The same anomalous situation exists regarding the recognition of
drugs and chemicals by the internationally agreed system of naming
and labelling. This would be an important development as it would
facilitate the early recognition of symptoms and prevention.
Chemicals are still openly sold under a variety of trade names,
codes and even numbers. This makes them unidentifiable even to
scientists and doubly so for a trade union representative seeking
information about it.
 
Threshold
Even more controversial is the use of the so-called threshold on
‘safe’ levels of harmful substances in the workplace. These
levels have been the target of enormous criticism by the trade union
because they are based on an ‘average healthy male, working eight
hours a day under sterile conditions’! The unions claim that in
addition the levels are not standard internationally, are assessed on
very little information, improperly derived and only relate to
certain organs in the body.
All available evidence suggests there is no safe level of
exposure. Since cancer and other diseases tend to develop very
slowly, the effects of a toxic chemical cannot be known until it is
too late.
The only way to avoid long term poisoning is for the labour and
trade union movement to initiate a campaign. Such a campaign must
immediately outlaw asbestos, lead in petrol and 245T.
The campaign must demand the full revelation of all results of all
relevant tests, whether from the government or company sources,
together with a thorough medical examination of all workers who have
worked with hazardous chemicals. Trade unions must insist that
comprehensive medical records are kept and made available to the
public.
 
Essential?
The dangers of toxic substances pose more fundamental questions.
The labour movement must challenge the bug business myth that these
substances are crucial for the continued development of society. They
claim for instance that herbicides and pesticides, known to cause
genetic deformities, are essential to provide the food we need. But
there are potentially many more effective methods that could be used
– with much less harmful results to the environment and the
consumers – such as the planned rotation of crops, growing on
smaller areas and the planned management of insect populations.
 
Safety checks
The horrendous effects now emerging about certain chemicals, make
it imperative that safety checks be introduced long before chemicals
reach the production stage. The trade union movement must be
satisfied on safety before production is started. They should also be
satisfied that the processes for the manufacture of the chemicals are
also safe for the workers immediately involved and the surrounding
community and environment.
 
Contradiction
There will always be a fundamental contradiction in capitalist
society between the development of science and technology, which
demands a rational and rounded out approach, and application of the
results of science by business enterprises. Their primary concern is
to maximise their profits. At every stage their operations are
conditioned by the anarchy of the market and competition with their rivals.
If anyone doubts the attitude of the chemical companies then look
at their record in the Third World. There they continue to use drugs
which have been banned in the West.
 
3rd World
They have dumped anabolic steroids in countries such as Bangladesh
to overcome stunting in children, when “all” that is needed is
proper nutrition. In Paraguay and Tunisia they have distributed
millions of contraceptives banned in the USA.
Even more horrendous is the use of children in Egypt to test the
effect of pesticides. They just assemble the children in fields
whilst an aircraft circles overhead spraying them with chemicals. Can
anyone seriously doubt how imperative it is that science and
technology are taken out of the hands of such capitalist gangsters
and run for the benefit of all.
 







In this, the first part of a two-part article, RONNIE
SOOKDHEO shows how cancer is almost entirely an ‘environmental
disease’. The second part will examine how chemical companies
have tried to brush the issues under the carpet, and what the
attitude of the labour movement should be.




IF FOUR hundred people were killed each day in Britain as a
result of the plague or another infectious disease it would be
considered a major epidemic. The government would immediately declare
an emergency.
Yet, today cancer – an industrial disease – claims as many
lives daily, often in prolonged and agonising pain, and it is claimed
that nothing can be done. But irrefutable evidence now exists, from
Britain and abroad, identifying the principal causes of this dreaded disease.
It is now established that cancer is almost entirely an
occupational disease. Government reports, research findings and trade
union studies all conclude that 80-90% of cancers originate from
cancer causing agents – carcinogens – which are present in the
environment in general and the workplace in particular. Reports have
indicated: the lack of safety precautions, absence of industrial
hygiene, and inadequate legislation to control the testing, use and
emission of toxic chemicals including radioactive substances.
The disease could largely be prevented. Yet cancer is now endemic
– killing and disabling on a never increasing scale. One in four
people can now expect to contract cancer and one in five will die
from it.
It is now the biggest killer in the 5–54 age range and the
second biggest overall after heart disease. Certain types of cancer,
notably bladder, lung and pancreas, have all shown an explosive increase.
Even more disturbing is the incidence of leukaemia, especially the
young. ‘Cancer maps’ now available have identified these cancers
with particular industries.
The most notorious is the nuclear power industry. Leukaemia
amongst children near the Windscale plant is an incredible ten times
the national average. Workers in the dye industry are more
susceptible to bladder cancer than workers in heavy metal industry,
and asbestos workers are a hundred times more prone to cancer than
any other group of workers. Such horrendous statistics represent a
searing indictment of the gross misuse of science and technology in
capitalist society.
 
Serious danger
When profit is the ultimate motive for development, risks of
serious danger to health and damage to the environment are secondary
considerations.
But, for many people today, cancer is an emotive topic because of
pessimism about a cure. Diagnosis can mean a death sentence! As a
subject, cancer has remained shrouded in mystery, with all kinds of
eccentric theories being advanced for its causes.
This has been further compounded by the lack of public debate.
Occasionally it makes headline news when a so-called ‘miracle’
cure is announced. The responsibility for this monstrous situation
must lie at the door of the scientific establishment.
The information is there but remains locked away behind the
corners of medical journals. All the hazards associated with many
chemicals have been known for years.
So what is cancer? How is it caused? And how can it be prevented?
With the industrialisation of society, it has been known that many
dusts, metals and a wide range of petroleum chemicals can enter the
body and interfere with its complex biochemical processes. Chemicals
are more dangerous for they can interact with proteins and essential salts.
Some can completely destroy the body’s defence system and other
modify vital enzymes which control these processes. The net effect
would be a serious malfunction of organs. In cancer, the carcinogenic
substances cause gross deformation of the cellular structure of the body.
The human body is composed of millions of cells, each containing
an nucleus which determines their precise co-ordination. A normal
condition of the cell is that they continually grow and divide, to
produce identical cells to replace those damaged or destroyed.
The nucleus is made up in turn from a complex material called DNA,
which imparts definite characteristics in the individual. Through a
complex code DNA also controls the growth and development of the cell.
Carcinogenic substances can interact with DNA and irreversibly
alter its structure. It makes the cell into a mutant. When this
happens these cells will stop receiving and responding to signals.
They begin to grow and proliferate without reference to the needs
of the body. They will eventually travel to distant sites and grow
into tumours or cancers. The faster the rogue cells grow and divide,
the more primitive they become and the more malignant the tumour.
Asbestos, certain metals and a wide range of solvents, chemicals
used in paints, the dye and rubber industries are all able to induce
cancers through this pathway. Moreover, it is now known that certain
chemicals previously thought of as harmless, can become carcinogenic
through radiation, other chemicals or even the body’s own system.
Some affected cells can stay dormant over a long period and then
become activated by a variety of factors.
The only dissenting voice to these facts are commercial interests.
They want to resist legislation which would enforce the stringent
testing of chemicals now in circulation, and if necessary order their
withdrawal from the market.
 







Ronnie Sookhdeo reviews No fire – no thunder, The
threat of chemical and biological weapon, by Sean Murphy,
Alastair Hay, Seven Rose, Pluto Press £3.95.




“THE RELEASE of mind-bending drugs such as LSD in
the drinking water of enemy forces could facilitate a peaceful US
take-over.
“The spraying of a pacifying gas will reduce opposing
troops into fits of helpless laughter.
“An epidemic that will weaken and debilitate entire populations.”
These are just a few of the more bizarre examples from No fire
– no thunder. The book, which includes reference sources and
tables provides a rare glimpse into the nightmare world of chemical
and biological warfare. The race to perfect the most horrendous
weapons has now taken on fantastic dimensions that border on science fiction.
 
Deadly disease
Bombs filled with deadly disease, the release of millions of
yellow-fever carrying mosquitos, chemicals that can irreversibly
alter the environment, incapacitate, kill and mutilate on a massive
scale, are all being developed and even tested.
The book correctly opposes the grotesque wastage of resources –
$8 billion is predicted over the next 3 years in America alone.
 
New techniques
All the major advances in science, especially new techniques in
genetic engineering that could be used to eradicate hunger, disease
and the terrible misery that afflicts the vast majority of humanity
are instead being used to produce weapons for mass destruction. The
book also accurately maps the history and use of these weapons and
examines their relationship with international law.
It documents all the cases of abuse of such agreements as the 1925
Geneva Protocol and the 1972 Biological Weapons convention. Singled
out for special treatment are the Italian invasion of Ethiopia in
1935–36 and Japan’s attack on China in 1938.
In both cases, vast quantities of deadly phosgene, mustard and
tear gases were sprayed indiscriminately, and resulted in enormous
casualties. In more recent times US forces released some 17 million
tons of deadly weedkillers and an assortment of chemicals over
Vietnam which not only devastated the country’s forests but
inflicted appalling injuries.
These breaches of various agreements and many more are attributed
though, either to imprecise wordings and definitions or to the method
of classification of toxic substances. The book also claims that it
is precisely the strength of international law and specific
conventions which has prevented these weapons being used on a huge
scale and thus preserving the peace.
 
War-free zone
The authors urge all nations to sign a declaration to abstain from
first use of weapons, and call for a war-free zone in Europe. But
experience shows such calls are totally inadequate.
The world has not been thrown into the horrors of all out nuclear,
chemical or biological war but not because of international
agreements. A major reason has been that even the most ruthless
ruling class calculate that a world devastated by plague or
permanently contaminated by chemical poisons would be of no economic advantage.
But how long can we rely on such a fragile “balance of terror”
to keep peace? The 25 million dead in small wars in the peacetime
years since 1945 are a reminder of how tenuous this cynical balancing is.
Socialists will find this book good on the nature and history of
the weapons, but less reliable on the cures.
Join the fight to get rid of capitalism worldwide, as the only way
to end the horrors of war. Use the facts in this book as ammunition.
 




THE RECENT accident which resulted in the sinking of the French
freighter Mont Louis with its lethal cargo of material has
resurrected the fear of a major catastrophe. For it has been revealed
that the cargo consisted of a deadly mixture of enriched uranium and
some 450 tonnes uranium hexafluoride – Hex. Hex, a vital component
of the nuclear power and weapon programme is extremely corrosive.
Even more disturbing, it produces a violent explosion on contact with
water with the release of harmful radiation.
Both substances can poison the sea and air for thousands of years
with disastrous consequences. And the accident itself raises more
serious and important questions. The French authorities refused at
first to comment on the accident and then when forced to only
released partial information. They subsequently admitted that the
ship was also carrying enriched uranium which posed a hazard.
More importantly, however, is the web of secrecy and the absence
of international safeguards surrounding the transportation of these
substances. Their importance is such, it is claimed that absolute
secrecy is necessary.
The ship owners thought it appropriate to list their cargo as
“medical supplies”. The crew were only aware they were carrying
radioactive substances because they were issued with Geiger counters.
The only international safeguards that exists lay in the
specification of “safe containers”.
Moreover, the accident has demonstrated that there are no
designated routes for nuclear carrying vessels. Indeed much atomic
wastes comes over from Holland on roll on/roll off container ships
alongside such shipments as cheese and chocolates. The ships are not
specially constructed to withstand collisions nor do they have
sophisticated navigational equipment, nor do they have their crews
hand picked for their skills as seamen.
The latest accident has once again cast a cloud over the nuclear
industry. The recent revelations of leakages of radiation into the
sea, the irrefutable evidence linking it with various forms of
cancers and the persistent threat of a catastrophe, now make it
imperative that the whole nature of the nuclear industry is questioned.
Where profit is the motive, accidents live. This is inevitable
unless a coherent energy programme is developed, which includes
nuclear fusion (not fission which produces radioactive waste) and
alternative forms of energy which do not produce harmful substances
that can endanger mankind.
 




A government report, headed by Sir Douglas Black, into the
incidence of childhood cancers in West Cumbria admitted that: “there
may be channels of radiation which reach people that we do not know
about.”
But the Black report refuses to link the nuclear plant at
Sellafield with the disease and merely recommends that this
“hypotheses should be investigated”. This is despite the fact
that the report accepts the findings of the Yorkshire TV documentary,
Windscale, the nuclear laundry, which revealed a dramatic
increase in various cancers, especially leukaemia, amongst children
in the area.
 
How big a risk?
The authorities, already under enormous pressure following adverse
publicity concerning the leakage of radioactive wastes have issued
reassurances on the levels of radiation escaping from the plant and
asserting that there was no risk to people living in the area.
But what is the truth? First what is nuclear radiation and what
are its effects?
Radiation – in the form of ionising particles and rays such as
X-rays – are emitted when a nuclear reaction occurs as in the
production of nuclear energy. They are virtually impossible to
contain.
A chief characteristic of some radiation is their ability to cause
mutation of cellular structure of the human body. When this occurs
cancers and leukaemia results. Small children and embryos carried by
pregnant women are particularly vulnerable.
Recent research has revealed that whereas high levels of radiation
often kill cells, low levels are more dangerous as they injure the
cell, leaving them free to reproduce and carry on the damage.
 
American results
Studies of death certificates of workers at the Hansford nuclear
plant in Washington have revealed a disturbingly high incidence of
cancer of the pancreas and leukaemia even though workers were exposed
to levels well within the agreed “safety” limits. This pattern
has now been observed amongst British workers. But the most alarming
results have come from a chance discovery.
The overall cancer death rate among civilian nuclear workers at
the Navy’s Portsmouth shipyard in Kettery, Maine was found to be
more than twice the national average, and well above that of the
yard’s non-nuclear workers. The figures were calculated by a doctor
who filed a law suit under the Freedom of Information Act to get
access to the records.
The Navy had good reason for maintaining an iron hold over these
records. The results were startling. They showed that the rate of
leukaemia was an incredible 450% higher than the general
population’s. The incidence of lymph gland cancer was 125% higher.
As the workers were exposed to the lowest possible dosage of
radiation these studies have conclusively demonstrated that there is
no safe level of radiation exposure. Since cancer is a long agonising
process the full extent of radiation damage and that due to
radioactive substances leaking into the environment are unlikely to
be known for a long time.
 
Unreliable report
The Black Report and its so-called assurances must be
questioned in the light of available evidence. Moreover Black’s
assertion that the risks associated with nuclear power in comparison
with that of coal extraction must also be challenged. It is entirely
erroneous to compare the dangers of coal mining with that of nuclear
power.
The potential dangers in nuclear fission are much greater. Coal
extraction is a danger to the workers in the industry and can be
limited by technology. Yet the inherent dangers in nuclear fission
can result in a catastrophe as shown by the Harrisburg accident.
It is vitally important that the labour and trade union movement
conduct its own through-going enquiry. It must mobilise immediately
to ensure that health and safety become a key issue in all
establishments. As part of the campaign it must insist on the full
revelation of all the company’s records and studies relating to the
poisoning and [? of – ID] workers and the community. They
must demand stringent medical checks of all workers and of the
general population and the results made available.
 




Second part of an article by Ronnie Sookhdeo
The catastrophic accident at the Swiss-owned plant producing
2,4,5, T at Seveso, Northern Italy, sent shockwaves throughout
the industrialised capitalist countries.
The horrifying effects [described in part 1 last week] on the
immediate victims of the poison gas cloud, and the numerous
miscarriages and deformed births experienced by women pregnant at the
time, forced government, chemical companies, and independent
researchers to pay more attention to this highly toxic substance,
used among other things in household herbicides and insecticides.
Medical investigators embarked upon a systematic study of
2,4,5, T. It was soon established that US Vietnam veterans,
farmers in Oregon, and babies in Queensland, Australia, were all
suffering from the same complaints as those in Seveso.
They were all found to have sight problems and nervous maladies.
But the most striking symptom was the partial sterility of the men,
and the almost 100% incidence of deformed births.
In both Oregon and Queensland, farmers has been spraying their
plantations with 245T and the herbicide had seeped into the rivers
and streams and found their way into domestic water supplies.
However, the most damning evidence linking 245T with these various
symptoms comes from Britain: farm workers in Derbyshire, railwaymen
in Yorkshire and forestry workers in Wales and elsewhere, were all
found either to be sterile or to have contracted chloroacne – a
skin disease. British Rail admitted it sprayed herbicides containing
245T on their tracks every year.
Under enormous pressure from the trade unions, the TUC have now
called upon the Ministry of Agriculture to follow the US, Italy,
Sweden, Denmark, and Holland in banning 245T.
They have demanded, moreover, that the Ministry re-open its
enquiry into the pesticide – there have been eight inquiries over
the past years. More importantly, they have asked that the Health and
Safety Executive should be responsible for monitoring the production
and use of 245T.
This follows allegations that the manufacturers of 245T, Coalite
and Chemical Products is withholding two confidential reports on the
health of workers exposed to dioxin at their Derbyshire plant.
A third report, leaked earlier this month, showed that men exposed
to dioxin were at greater risk of contracting heart and liver
disease. Even more disturbing, however, has been the reported
break-in at the home of the medical investigator and the loss of
vital medical records.
This company evidently has very good reasons for keeping silent.
The Sunday Times has revealed as many as four out of five
workers who worked in the same shift have developed heart complaints.
The case of 245T highlights the absurd inadequacy of the present
legislation concerning toxic chemicals. Throughout the regulations,
the procedures which are really required to test and regulate
dangerous processes and products are subordinated to the narrow
commercial interests of the chemical companies.
A company has the right, for instance, to withhold scientific and
medical information which may be “of commercial importance.” This
‘let out’ clause – clearly intended to safeguard profitability
– can always be invoked to avoid revealing information absolutely
vital for assessing the risk a substance poses to the health of the
workforce, and to the population at large.
If, moreover, a company manufactures less than one ton of chemical
a year it is under no obligation to perform screening tests for
toxicity before manufacturing the product. On this basis, 245T has
been given a clean bill of health! The regulations apparently take no
account of the fact that minute quantities of some substances may be
lethal in their effects.
All the available evidence strongly suggests that there is no safe
level of exposure to 245T as the government has tried to maintain in
the past. Since cancer and other diseases tend to develop slowly, the
effects of a toxic chemical like this are unlikely to be known until
it is too late.
The only way to avoid long-term poisoning of the workers involved
and other members of the community is for the labour and trade union
movement to initiate a campaign for the total outlawing of 245T.
Such a campaign must demand the full revelation of all the results
of all the relevant tests, whether from government or company
sources, together with the thorough medical examination of all
workers who may have been exposed to the chemical. The trade unions
must insist that comprehensive medical records are kept and made
available to the public.
The dangers of toxic chemicals like 245T, raise more fundamental
questions. The labour movement, for instance, must challenge the myth
upheld by big business experts that pesticides and insecticides are
essential to provide the food that we need. Of course, according to
the market economy outlook of big business, it is ‘obvious’ that
the solution to the problems of agricultural producers –
increasingly dominated by the big monopolies of the ‘agribusiness’
– is for the chemical industry to produce these highly profitable products.
But there are potentially many more effective methods that could
be used, with much less harmful results to the environment and to
consumers, such as the planned rotation of crops, growing on smaller
areas, and the planned management of insect populations.
The horrendous effects of substances like 245T show that safety
checks must be introduced long before the chemicals reach the
production stage. The trade unions should be satisfied on safety
before production is started. They should also be satisfied that the
process for the manufacture of the chemicals are also safe for the
workers involved and the surrounding community and environment.
There will always be a fundamental contradiction in capitalist
society between the development of sciences and technology, which
demands a rational and rounded-out approach, and the application of
the results of science by big business enterprises, which are
primarily concerned to maximise their profits and whose operations
are at every stage conditioned by the anarchy of the market and
competition with their rivals.
The potentially disastrous results of the one-sided and short
sighted development of new chemicals, new biological agents, and
other enormously powerful physical processes, make it more than
imperative that science and technology is taken out of the hands of
the capitalist class and put into the hands of the working people
through the socialist reorganisation of production.
 




In a two part article Ronnie Sookhdeo shows the chemical
industry under control of the bosses is a danger to workers.
News that the household herbicides and pesticides contain 2,4,5 T,
a highly toxic chemical believed by scientists to be responsible for
a horrifying increase in birth defects, skin diseases and cancer, has
again rightly intensified demands for the tighter screening and
control of potentially dangerous chemicals.
At the moment the major manufacturer of 2,4,5 T is refusing
to release the results of medical studies on their workforce. There
have also been allegations of a Watergate-style break-in at the home
of a doctor who has been investigating the effects of 2,4,5 T.
It has also come out that Mr Dennis Thatcher, the prime minister’s
husband, is a director of a firm producing weed-killer based on 2,4,5 T.
Predictably, there have been the by now almost customary
government claims that the chemical is absolutely safe, and that the
eight unions and six local authorities which have banned it have
acted out of scientific ignorance.
So what is the truth concerning 2,4,5 T? What hazards does it
really pose to the public?
The chemical Tricholorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4,5 T) and it
impurity Dioxin – described as the most lethal man-made poison ever
– have both achieved notoriety in a remarkably short period of time.
Dioxin is produced during the synthesis of the base chemical
Trichlorophenol, which is used in the manufacture of two chemicals,
hexachlorophene and 2,4,5 T, with Dioxin being retained as an
impurity in both substances.
Hexachlorophene, a bactericide, was widely used as a wash for
treating acne, in soaps, surgical swabs and as an antiseptic in
hospital nurseries. But in the late 1960s evidence began to
accumulate linking its use with internal and brain damage. Its use
was supposed to have ceased after a dramatic occurrence of infant
mortalities in England and France.
Talcum powder containing hexachlorophene was daubed on the bottoms
of new-born babies. In the most recent case last month, the
manufacturer and distributor of talcum powder which killed 33 babies
in France received suspended sentences.
The herbicide 2,4,5 T has had a much more chequered history.
It was formulated with another chemical and called “Agent Orange”.
This was used by the US military with devastating and horrendous
effects in Vietnam. Over 90 million pounds of Agent Orange was
sprayed over Vietnam and a staggering 10% of the population was
exposed to it.
The full horror of Dioxin poisoning was revealed to the West when
the Swiss-owned Icmesa plant exploded in Seveso, Italy, in 1976.
Within days of the explosion rashes began to break out on the skin of
babies and young children, followed by acute diarrhoea and severe
vomiting. People began to suffer headaches, excessive violent
sweating and to experience liver and kidney pains.
But the most horrific result was the high incidence of spontaneous
abortions amongst pregnant women and the birth of grotesquely
malformed babies.
Today, four years after the Seveso incident, the region produces
more deformed babies, including mongoloids, than the whole of the
rest of Western Europe!
This calamitous mishap, sounding like a horror story from a
science-fiction book describing the aftermath of a nuclear holocaust,
is a searing indictment of the misuse and perversion of science and
technology in capitalist society. When profit is the ultimate motive
for development, the risks of serious danger to health and damage to
the environment are strictly secondary considerations.
Although big business complains ever more loudly about health and
safety regulations, in most countries, including Britain, the laws
and procedures used for checking new products and controlling the
production and use of dangerous substances are woefully inadequate.
The enormity of the crime committed against the people of Seveso
becomes even clearer when it is realised that the disaster in Italy
was not the first accident for the Swiss manufacturers.
There had already been accidents in the United States, Britain,
West Germany and Holland. In each case, the whole plant had to be
destroyed and buried in deep underground wells.
In the British accident, at the Coalite factory in Bolsover in
April 1968, seventy-nine men were affected by 2,4,5 T fumes!

In part II next week, Ronnie Sookhdeo gives more evidence of
the serious effects in Britain of 2,4,5 T on the health of
workers and their families, and explains the urgent need for stronger
health and safety safeguards under the control on the trade unions.
 




The brutal car-bomb assassination of Dr Walter Rodney earlier
this year gave an indication of the growing crisis in Guyana and the Caribbean.
Dr Rodney, was the leader of the left wing Working People’s
Alliance and a vociferous critic of the Burnham regime.
Within the country, the murder precipitated a wave of industrial
unrest and acts of sabotage which is having serious repercussions on
the economy. That unrest has not died down.
A ‘national disobedience campaign’ brought the country to a
standstill and shook the Burnham regime. More importantly, it united
for the first time all the strands of opposition.
Since Burnham came to power in 1964 in collusion with the CIA he
has used constitutionality in order to mask his corrupt and
repressive policies. He has maintained his government in office by
all manner of electoral frauds – which have included the votes of
children and nationals from other countries in the West Indies.
In the recent period he has cancelled all elections and changed
the constitution to safeguard his position and ensure his rule for
life! He has also had an increasing reliance on thugs, pseudo
religious groups and reactionary forces.
When the crisis of capitalism in the period 1973–75 devastated
the fragile Guyanese economy, Burnham was compelled by the pressure
of the masses to nationalise the foreign-owned sugar and bauxite
monopolies – 80% of the economy is now in the hands of the government.
Declaring his policies as Burnham-Leninist and his party as
Marxist-Christian this former stooge of imperialism resorts to
demagogic slogans in order to hide the mounting chaos of his economic policies.
But only a genuine workers’ state with complete nationalisation
of the remaining big firms together with a plan of production based
on workers’ control and management could have begun to eliminate
the bureaucracy and chaos that is stultifying the economy.
A plan of production, of workers and small farmers’ councils
management of the economy, right of recall with regular rotation and
controlled wage differentials would not only have abolished the
racist divisions but provided the basis for better living standards
in the region.
The present economic crisis highlights the dangers of not
implementing socialist policies. The country’s principal foreign
exchange earners, sugar and bauxite have both declined dramatically
due to a combination of strikes, mismanagement, adverse weather
conditions and the slump on the world market.
For the second year running the government has had to scale down
its sugar targets from 360,000 tons to 300,000 tons. Similarly, the
27% drop in bauxite production has been responsible for the massive
foreign exchange deficit of £50m.
The government desperate for aid for an economy already bankrupted
through paying for the huge oil price increase and foreign goods have
negotiated loans from the world bank, West Germany and the IMF.
The repayments on these loans are now higher than the new loans
being sought. The IMF continues to exert a stranglehold on the
economy.
The government was compelled to carry through savage cuts in
public expenditure and adopt deflationary policies in order to curb
the spiralling inflation. As a consequence unemployment has rocketed
to over 50% with a further 30% underemployment.
Food, fuel costs and other essential commodities have all
increased astronomically whilst wages have been held down to 5%. This
savage cutback in living standards is fuelling an explosion from
below.
The enormous discontent within the country is reflected in the
growth of the Working People’s Alliance. They have managed to form
an alliance against Burnham which has cut across the racial divide.
In the past this racial divide helped to consolidate the unpopular
Burnham regime. Burnham, unable to contain the explosive situation
has now turned back to the USA and has given an assurance to open up
the country to private capital.
The murder of Dr Rodney and subsequent mass imprisonments will not
stop the movement against the Burnham regime. The growth of the WPA
indicates that Guyana is bound to face further and more serious
upheavals in the next period.
 




Controversy has been raging both in scientific circles and the
media on the proposed Â£600 million expansion of the nuclear
reprocessing plant in Windscale. This has dramatically intensified
with the publication of the post mortem results of two men John
Troughton and Harry King, revealing that they both died from cancer
type diseases.
Both men had been working with plutonium, one of the most toxic
poisonous substances ever produced by man. In fact plutonium was
found in Harry King’s brain!
Almost simultaneously has been the announcement by two leading
British medical researchers that, of 3,883 workers of the American
nuclear plant at Hanford who died between 1944 and 1973, 2,288 were
exposed to the lowest permitted dosage of radiation and resulted in
the deaths of 781 workers from cancer. The cancer was officially
classified as myeloid leukaemia, which is known to be induced by
radiation. This represents 20% of the workers!
 
Disaster
If the figures are translated in terms of the British work force
this would represent a total of 1,400 workers who would die of
cancer!
The production of plutonium as a by-product of the nuclear
reaction is not only an enormous threat, for the production of
nuclear bombs but worse, the ultimate destruction of man by its sheer
toxicity.
News now filtering out from the Soviet Union has revealed that a
terrible explosion occurred at a plutonium production plant in 1957.
Hundreds of scientists and workers were killed. This was confirmed by
Dr. Zhores Medvedev, a dissident Russian scientist now living in
exile in Britain.
The population in an area of 183 square miles was immediately
dispersed over the whole of the Soviet Union and forbidden to reveal
anything of the magnitude of the disaster. Since no register was made
and because cancer is a long, slow, agonising disease, the total
number of people whose death was precipitated by this disaster will
never be known. The 183 square miles will remain sealed off for
thousands of years!
 
Bone-seeker
A nuclear reactor uses as its fuel uranium – in its pure form or
an oxide of uranium (any metal that combines with oxygen is called an
oxide). When neutrons strike a uranium atom it splits into two parts
releasing two more neutrons and a huge amount of energy. These two
neutrons go on to strike two more uranium atoms splitting them into
four particles and four neutrons. This process represents the initial
stage in the chain reaction which results in a tremendous amount of
heat energy being liberated. This heat is used to generate steam and
the steam used to drive a turbine which in turn rotates a dynamo
which generate electricity.
The very early nuclear reactors used uranium metal and later a
ceramic oxide of uranium. A product of the chain reaction is
plutonium. In the early 1950’s it was felt that because the world’s
uranium resources were limited, the design and constructions of the
new type of reactor was needed that was not dependent solely on
uranium.
The answer was the Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR). This uses as a fuel
a mixture of uranium and plutonium oxides, the latter being obtained
from the early nuclear power station. A typical FBR consumes 20 tons
of this mixed oxides per annum of which 20% is plutonium. The chain
reaction produces a complex mixture of fission products of which
plutonium predominates. These products interfere with the chain
reaction and once a year must be removed from the reactor core and
must be stored under water for 6 to 8 months.
It has been estimated that as much as one third of the reactor
core must be so removed. These fission products are then transferred
to the reprocessing plant in Windscale where the various short lived
radioactive substances are easily separated.
The major problem involves plutonium. Plutonium has a half life of
24,400 years that is, it take 24,400 years for the amount to decay by
half. In other words if left to become harmless it would take
millions of years. It is extremely toxic and is officially classified
as a “bone seeker”. If ingested, inhaled or absorbed through a
cut or abrasion even in the most minute of quantities, it will
deposit itself in the bone and remain there for millions of years. It
has been demonstrated that a particle as small as 100 millionth of a
gram can cause cancer which would result in death. Workers who come
into contact with plutonium are 20 times more likely to die from
leukaemia.
Official UK projections for the year AD 2000 show that Britain
could have 50 FBR power stations. It has also been calculated that
this would involve 1,700 cross country shipments of upwards of 80
tonnes of plutonium per year. This introduces not only problems of
handling, storage and security, but ultimately disposal. These are by
no means restricted to Western capitalism.
In an extraordinary article in the New Scientist
academician Peter Kapitza, the Director of the Institute of Physical
Problems, Moscow, proposes that the nuclear waste can be disposed of
by simply blasting it into outer space. He goes on to say that in the
interest of safety and security the reactor should be sited on some
small uninhabited oceanic island!
This statement by Kapitiza crystallises the bankruptcy of
available methods for the disposal of plutonium and demonstrates the
extreme measures that are being contemplated in the interests of
capitalism and the irresponsible bureaucratic elites of Russia and
Eastern Europe, to preserve this profitable form of energy.
The Managing Director of Nuclear Fuel, unperturbed by the
revelation of the post mortem results have called upon the Secretary
of the Environment to stop vacillating about the plans for expansion
of Windscale. Any delay he says, might lose them the Japanese
contract worth Â£300 million.
This statement was made on the 22nd of November. On October 16th
excavation of an underground silo revealed a leakage of 100 gallons
of radioactive water per day. This news was suppressed for two
months. Even Energy Minister Tony Benn was not informed until two
workers were contaminated!
It is clear that nuclear energy represents an enormous potential
danger to mankind. In the case of Harry King scientists were faced
with the ghoulish tasks of finding a safe way of disposing of his
body! If Kapitizas advice is followed we will saddle future
generations with enormous problems. In their travels across the
galaxy they could come across the misdemeanours of this generation.
This is really an example of science gone mad. This is only possible
because at the moment it is harnessed to an insane and irrational
system. The labour movement has the most vital interest in
developments which will affect the future. The trade unions in the
nuclear power industry are obviously concerned that their members
jobs will be affected if a halt is put on the extension of Windscale
and other nuclear power stations.
 
Nuclear dustbin
The workers in the industry must be guaranteed against redundancy,
nobody wants to add to the one and a half million already on the
dole. Their jobs can be assured by a socialist fuel and energy plan.
There are more suitable and much less harmful forms of energy. A
socialist planned economy would provide the necessary resources to
develop for instance solar and other forms of energy. In the meantime
the labour movement should oppose the madness of uncontrolled and
completely irresponsible extension of nuclear power plants which will
make Britain the nuclear dustbin of the world.
 




The explosion that occurred at the Swiss-owned Icmesa plant in
Seveso in Northern Italy on Saturday 10th July was no ordinary
explosion. For it released into the atmosphere one of the most toxic
chemicals ever developed by man, the deadly dioxin for which no
antidote exists.
Within days of the explosion rashes begin to appear on the skins
of babies and small children followed by acute diarrhoea and intense
vomiting. People began suffering from headaches, violent sweating and
experiencing pains in the kidneys and liver. Two weeks later two
women died; and the whole area was sealed off and the population
evacuated. When an ultimate check of the bodies, deformed babies and
diseases is made, perhaps someone will ask the question, “why is
dioxin made at all?”
This horrific incident, sounding as if it were taken directly out
of the pages of a science fiction story, is not only indicative of
the blatant disregard of the environment by huge profit-conscious
monopolies but also if left unchecked threatens the ultimate
destruction of man.
The same could be said of science as a whole. Seveso is only
the latest example of the perversion of science and technique by
capitalist society. Where profit is the prime motive catastrophes
like Seveso are inevitable.
Dioxin is produced during the synthesis of tricholorophenol. This
is used in the manufacture of two chemicals. One of the chemicals, a
bactericide, was used as a wash for treating acne, in soaps, surgical
swabs, and as antiseptic in hospital nurseries. But in the late
1960s, evidence began to accumulate linking its use with internal and
brain damage. Its use was immediately phased out throughout the world.
The other chemical is a herbicide of the type used by US
imperialism to defoliate huge areas of Vietnam. According to a recent
scientific survey, growth of vegetation in areas where it was used is
unlikely to occur for several decades. A report by the National
Academy of Sciences has revealed that 6 million pounds of herbicide
was made by the US in 1974. The US Environmental Protection Agency is
now reconsidering its use.
This is not the only accident involving dioxin that this Swiss
company has experienced. There have been accidents in the US,
Britain, W. Germany and Holland, and in all these accidents the whole
plant had to be destroyed and buried in deep underground mines! The
first accident occurred in Hidwigohifer in W. Germany in 1953 and
affected 55 men. In the British accident at the Coalite factory in
Bolsover in April 1968, 79 men were affected.
The calamitous mishap at Seveso has sent shock waves reverberating
throughout these countries. Now eight years after the accident at the
coalite factory the company has decided to investigate what effect
the dumped contaminated plant has on the local population. But they
never revealed publicly, only in confidence to the County Council’s
Planning Committee Chairman, the exact location of the buried plant.
It is thought to be buried in an old mine West of the village of Morton.
The destruction of the environment – which has now reached
calamitous proportions – is inevitable in a society where the blind
forces of the market and the anarchy that goes with it
predominates.
 
In the early decades in the 19th century many children in
industrial cities suffered and died from rickets, a disease
associated with the lack of Vitamin D. This was principally caused by
a thick pall of smoke which hung permanently above industrial areas
obscuring the sun and preventing the ultra violet rays in the
sunlight from reaching the skin where it is able to synthesise the
vitamin D essential to the body. Fifty years on, the situation is
exactly reversed. This can be attributed to the multimillion dollar
fluorocarbon industry. It has been demonstrated that due to the
increased use of chlorofluorocarbon as a propellant in aerosol
sprays, this has a destructive effect on the ozone layer in the
earth’s stratosphere and the subsequent increase in the ultra
violet light. An immediate effect of this is to increase the
incidence of skin cancer. The US National Academy of Sciences
concludes in a report that a 1% decrease of stratospheric ozone will
cause a 2% increase in skin cancer.
Ironically, fluorocarbons started life in the late 1940s as a
refrigerant, possessing qualities of non flammability, non toxicity
and stability. With the development of the low pressure valve in 1947
the way was opened for aerosol preparations and the first was the
hair spray in 1950. In that year 30 million were sold in the US. In
1960, 4,400 million and in 1973, 2.9 thousand million in the US
alone! When these chlorofluorocarbons are released they rise into the
stratosphere where they destroy the protective ozone layer.
Measures have to be demanded by the labour movement to prevent the
occurrence of more Sevesos, to press for the elimination of the
destruction of the ozone layer etc. But as each crime of the
monopolies is discovered and eliminated others will go undetected
until some future calamitous development occurs.
Therefore the only ultimate solution is to take the use of
science and technique out of the hands of a handful of profiteers and
make it accountable to and controlled by a harmonious socialist
society will it be possible to really harness science as a mighty
lever for benefitting man and his environment instead of destroying
him as is the situation now.
 




THE recent Royal Commission report about the damaging effects
of lead heralds a major advance in the struggle to eliminate one of
the most toxic substances from our environment.
The definitive report, the product of a year-long study, makes
twenty-nine recommendations for the immediate removal of lead from
petrol and the phased reduction of lead from paints, water, food and drink:
“The average blood lead concentration in the population
is about a quarter of that at which symptoms of frank chronic lead
poisoning may occasionally occur. We find this disturbing! We do not
know of any other toxic substance which is so widely distributed in
human and animal populations and present at concentrations greater
than one fifth at which frank symptoms may occur.”
Apart from condemning lead the report also dismisses as being of
dubious value, the concept of threshold levels; - these are widely
used by industry as a measure of how much toxic substance someone can
be exposed to, without harmful effects. The report also calls for the
replacement of all lead plumbing and suggests mass publicity of
hazards associated with paint stripping!
Predictably, many industries, more noticeably the motor
manufacturers, have attempted to discredit the major findings. Some
have retaliated by questioning the evidence of harmful effects and
also asserting that the costs of lead removal from petrol would be
prohibitively high. The motor industry has even claimed that an
investment of £2,000 million would be required for new machinery.
What is the present situation regarding lead in petrol? In
Britain, over 50,000 tons of lead are discharged into the atmosphere
each year – 10,000 tons in London alone! The effects of the
colossal damage of urban lead poisoning are well documented but those
who profit from its continued use in petrol are loathe to meet its replacement.
 
Don’t rely on government ‘good intentions’
In 1980, after a series of legal battles, public concern and trade
union pressure forced the government to mount an enquiry. They
subsequently agreed to implement a new limit of 0.15g of lead per
litre by the end of 1985, compared with the old limit of 0.4 grammes.
The Tory government at that time claimed: “Time was needed for
industry to make adjustments to machinery and to keep in line with
Europe.” Not surprisingly industry did not feel threatened by those proposals!
Now government grudgingly says it “accepts” the findings of
the latest Royal Commission report. But it is vital that the labour
movement does not rely on Tory ‘promises of intent’, and bases
its approach on a clear analysis of the dangers lead poses, the
alternatives, and the vested interests arguing against change.
Firstly what are the dangers? A great deal of evidence exists
associating lead with hyper-activity, impaired learning and
behavioural changes in both animals and man. An early study of
children living near a lead smelter in El Paso found that many had
low IQs, poor eye sight, sluggish behaviour and difficulty in reasoning.
A later survey of the same children found that a staggering 19 out
of 20 were educationally sub normal. More recent studies of the shed
milk teeth of urban children in Britain and the US have conclusively
established the link with lead in the air.
These finding have startling implications. Recent random analysis
of the teeth of children in Birmingham have shown a very high lead
content. It has been estimated that as many as 95% of the two million
children in Birmingham are affected!
Russia has outlawed lead in petrol since 1959, and Japan, USA, W.
Germany and Sweden have either followed suit or begun to move in that direction.
Why is lead added to petrol? It was discovered that tetra ethyl
lead (TEL) could be used for increasing the octane rating of petrol
to make it more suitable for use with high-compression car engines
and also prevent ‘knocking’. The higher the octane rating, the
easier the combustion and less the ‘knocking’.
It is also convenient and cheaper to the oil companies because it
can be used to adjust the octane rating to produce various grades of
petrol which requires less refining.
Over the years several non-toxic substitutes for lead were found –
the most satisfactory being methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE). MTBE
has been described as the perfect alternative to lead. It is cheap to
manufacture, non poisonous, causes no engine damage and promotes more
complete combustion of fuel and importantly, does not produce any
harmful products.
But within months of its manufacture, the oil companies and car
companies launched a virulent campaign, firstly to persuade the
government against its use, and secondly to disseminate misleading
information to the population as a whole. The oil companies have also
asserted that to produce lead-free petrol would require maximum
investment in new refinery techniques which would increase the
consumption of oil and the price of petrol.
These claims are absolute nonsense. The oil companies have made
colossal profits as a result of the first wave of oil price rises.
Yet a fraction of these profits could produce petrol free of lead.
Moreover, because of the recession all their refining plants have
been running at below 50% capacity. A recent conference of scientists
has suggested that only slight modification of existing equipment
could produce the required higher octane petrol, free of lead.
Where the health of workers and their families are concerned,
there is no safe lead level at all. The labour and trade union
movement must take up the issue and fight against lead additives in
petrol.
Labour must demand:

Regular monitoring of lead in air and regular examination
of all children for lead poisoning.
 
Abolition of all lead additives in fuels.
 
Outlawing of dumping of lead and other heavy metals by
industry.
 
Grants for lead piping to be removed from all homes.
 
Legislation to forbid the presence of any concentration of
lead in food and drink.
 
Abolition of threshold levels and the recognition that all
doses of lead are harmful.

 




“What threatens mankind Is a lethal and unpredictably
volatile mixture of global warming with associated floods, ozone
layer depletion with attendant cancers and disruption of ocean food
chains ... the acidification of forests, lakes and crops, all
combining to precipitate recurring cycles of famine and drought.”
This was the devastating scenario of the breakdown of our
ecological system by atmospheric pollution produced by the US
National Academy of Science in 1987. The calamitous flooding of
Bangladesh and the severe weather fluctuations which have devastated
major food-growing areas of the world during the past year have
catapulted the issue of global pollution into much greater
prominence. Deforestation and soil erosion, serious stratospheric
depletion of the earth’s protective ozone layer, together with
colossal increases in gaseous emissions – principally carbon
dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) – have underlined the fears
of working people.
Such is the general concern on this issue that even Thatcher has
been forced to make sympathetic noises. In the greatest metamorphosis
since St Paul fell off his horse on the way to Damascus, she has
suddenly discovered that the Tories have been ‘green’ all along.
Phrases about ‘acid rain’ and concern for the ‘Greenhouse
Effect’ tripped from her lips.
This is sheer hypocrisy. Britain is the only major European
country to so far refuse to make a 30 per cent reduction in sulphur
emissions that cause acid rain. At the same time Ridley, the misnamed
Environment Secretary, delayed an international treaty to control
ozone-destructive chemicals. Perhaps this new-found concern is not
unconnected with the fact that 74 ‘green’ motions were originally
tabled even for the tame Tory Party Conference.
Scientists have long argued that dramatic changes in the earth’s
atmosphere through gaseous pollution, mainly carbon dioxide, would
have a disastrous effect on the ecological system, the so-called
‘Greenhouse Effect’. It is now generally accepted that if present
trends in the production of carbon dioxide and deforestation
continue, the resulting global temperature rise will produce enormous
weather variations which will disrupt agriculture and submerge some
presently low-lying land area as the polar ice cap melts.
 
Aral Sea
The planet only supports life because of the delicate and
harmonious relationship between the sun’s rays, oxygen and carbon
dioxide. The small quantity of carbon dioxide is essential directly
or indirectly for all forms of life. Plants absorb carbon dioxide and
convert it into essential foodstuffs and oxygen. These in turn are
consumed by humans and other animals who release more carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere – completing the cycle. But today this fine
balance is being disturbed and on a massive scale. The anarchic
development of capitalism and the rapacious greed of today’s
multi-national corporations now threaten humanity with extinction.
The Stalinist bureaucracy have also displayed a hooligan attitude
to the environment. Lake Baikal, the world’s largest freshwater
lake, is grossly polluted, so also is the inland Aral Sea. This sea
is located in Uzbekistan. The Uzbeki elite used the waters of the
Aral Sea to irrigate the deserts of the area, which is now the major
cotton-producing region of the USSR. But in so doing they have
polluted the Aral Sea and the water table in the surrounding area.
Irrigation canals were built without concrete linings and therefore
the water seeped into the ground. The excess minerals in the land
combined with the naturally saline ground, making the land so salty
it can no longer produce crops unless it is flushed out with even
more water. The high salinity is now affecting the underground
artesian wells. With most of the marine life in the Aral Sea killed,
this area, which was once rich in fish, now has to import fish from
Murmansk for the canning factories situated on the shores of this now
barren sea.
It must not be forgotten that the issue that triggered the
upheavals in Armenia was pollution. It was a demonstration of workers
from Aboyan protesting against the building of a rubber factory which
merged with nationalist demonstrations in Yerevan. The whole of the
Transcaucasus is recognised as a heavily polluted area, as also is
much of Eastern Europe. One third of Poland has been described by the
Polish government as ‘ecologically damaged.’ The Chernobyl
disaster in the Ukraine spread throughout Europe, but was especially
dangerous in Eastern Europe and Scandinavia.
For centuries, man has used coal as the principal source of fuel –
for cooking and heating. But the burning of coal produces many air
borne pollutants including smoke, dust and sulphur dioxide which are
injurious to health and the growth of plants and animals. In England
as early as 1273 attempts were made to prohibit the use of coal in
London. In 1306 a committee of inquiry was appointed to “Inquire of
all such who burnt sea-coal in the city or parts adjoining, and to
punish them for the first offence with great fines and ransoms, and
upon the second offence to demolish their furnaces.” By the
seventeenth century coal burning was so out of control that John
Evelyn submitted a report to Charles II claiming that “London’s
inhabitants breathe nothing but an impure and thick mist accompanied
with a fuliginous and filthy vapour ... corrupting the lungs.” The
rapid industrialisation of England’s major cities during the
industrial revolution was entirely due to the use of coal as a
primary energy source. Combustion of coal was on such a scale that a
permanent pall of smoke hung over many towns obscuring the sunlight
and causing rickets in children. Sunlight contains ultra-violet rays
which can synthesize the essential vitamin D in the skin.
 
Ozone
The large scale combustion of fossil fuels – oil, coal and gas –
for energy in modem times, together with the destruction of much of
the world’s rainforests, has enormously disturbed the carbon
dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. Air monitoring In Hawaii and
the Antarctica since the early 1950s has shown an exponential
increase in carbon dioxide concentration. From an estimated 270 parts
per million (ppm) in the 1850s it has risen to an alarming 335 ppm
today. Unless halted, it is predicted that the concentration could
increase to as much as 600 ppm by the year 2030. Combustion processes
alone release over 6.4 billion tons of carbon dioxide annually whilst
jungle clearances add a further 1.5 billion tons.
The released carbon dioxide creates a dense blanket around the
earth permitting the sun’s rays to enter but trapping the heat that
otherwise would be radiated into outer space. This ‘Greenhouse
Effect’ has already raised global temperatures by over 0.5 degrees
centigrade over the past 100 years.
This condition is made worse by a cocktail of chemicals dumped
into the atmosphere – the most notorious being the
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used as a propellant in aerosols. Around 1
million tons of CFCs escape into the air each year. Every molecule of
CFC released is 10,000 times more effective in trapping the sun’s
heat than carbon dioxide – producing a doubling heat effect. There
is also now irrefutable evidence linking CFCs with the vast holes in
the ozone layer in the stratosphere.
 
Agriculture
The ozone layer acts as a giant filter of the extremely harmful
ultra-violet radiation from the sun. A one per cent depletion,
according to the US National Academy of Science, will cause a two per
cent increase in cancer.
CFCs and carbon dioxide could push up the planet’s temperature
by as much as 4.5 degrees by 2030 and a staggering 8.6 degrees over
the next century. Using the most conservative results, they conclude
that sea levels would rise by as much as 4–5 feet. Yet a rise of
just 18 inches would submerge Asia’s rice growing areas.
The ‘Greenhouse Effect’ will make the climate hotter, wetter
and cloudier. The climatic changes would have a disastrous effect on
agriculture. For example, high carbon dioxide levels could stimulate
plant growth. But this potential benefit would be offset by the
higher temperature which would stimulate plant growth which in turn
would facilitate greater energy consumption. Moreover the thicker
cloud cover could inhibit photosynthesis – the process by which
plants manufacture their food.
But a more serious consequence of global warming could see a
gradual shift of important agricultural regions to much higher
latitudes. The great corn and soya bean belts at middle latitudes in
the USA, for example, would move northwards to areas where the soil
would be unsuitable for intensive farming. The same story would be
repeated for central Europe. A much changed rainfall pattern would
also exist and move north to northern Canada, Siberia and
Scandinavia. These areas with their poorer soils will be unable to
replace the present world’s granaries. The USA and Canada supply 80
per cent of the world’s trade in wheat. Diminishing reserves of
food would create mass starvation and famines that would dwarf those
presently occurring in the Sudan and Ethiopia.
There is mounting evidence that this frightening picture of the
irreversible breakdown of our world is now occurring and at an
alarming rate. Among many tell-tale signs has been the discovery that
the arctic permafrost has warmed up by as much as three degrees over
the past 100 years. Alaskan glaciers have been melting and drifting
has increased. Retreating snowlines on mountains the world over, the
observed movement northwards of the agricultural cropline in the
Canadian Prairies, the changed distribution of plants and animals:
all have added credibility to the argument that the ecological system
is breaking down.
 
Deserts
Marxists have never opposed the tremendous achievements that
science has contributed to society. But under capitalism it has been
used and developed in an irrational and unplanned manner which has
resulted in many catastrophes. On a global scale capitalism has
proved incapable of using the capacity of modern science and
technology to ease the nightmare conditions of the 4.4 billion people
of the ‘Third World’, described in a recent World Bank Report
as “conditions of life so characterised by malnutrition,
illiteracy, disease, squalid surroundings, high infant mortality and
low life expectancy as to be beneath any reasonable definition of
human decency.” While advances In science and technology have made
possible the development of the microchip, computers and robots, the
real ‘energy crisis’ for over 2 billion people is to obtain the
firewood and dung they still depend on as fuel for cooking. For them,
firewood can only be obtained by systematically destroying forests
which, in the ex-colonial world, have been disappearing at an
horrendous rate of one million hectares a month.
Denuded of any vegetation, the top soil quickly becomes washed
away creating deserts and reducing rainfall. In India, the 250,000
sq. mile Rajputana desert was once heavily populated. In Roman times
the granary of the Empire was in North Africa. Now, without
irrigation and water management, this area is afflicted by droughts,
floods, soil erosion and creeping deserts. Today the Sahara consumes
30,000 hectares each year. Throughout the ex-colonial world
capitalist monopolies distort whole economies to produce a single
commodity, cash crops or minerals, with no concern for the
environment or the delicate interrelationships of nature. Thus in
north east Brazil, whereas in 1900 an area known as the Hump was 40
to 50 per cent forest, today it is less than five per cent.
A searing indictment of the short sighted and disastrous policies
of big business has been in relation to the Amazonian rain forests.
The devastation of the mighty forests and its ecological system has
been on such a magnitude and ferocity as that of an atomic explosion.
The greatest ecological disaster in history is now making a decisive
intervention on our weather.
 
Amazon
The rain-forests, covering an area larger than the whole of
Western Europe, have been described as the lungs of the world. The
trees, accounting for over a third of the world’s total, produce
through photosynthesis over a half of the world’s annual production
of oxygen and in turn contribute to the balance of carbon dioxide.
Undisturbed, the forests exist as a result of a delicate and complex
interchange with the limited amounts of nutrients in the biomass
which is recycled within the system. Living almost independently of
the soil, as much as 50 per cent of rainfall is recycled, also
maintaining a constancy of temperature.
Such is the abundance and diversity of plant and animal life that
scientists have as yet been unable to make a comprehensive
classification. There are at least 17,000 insects, 500 to 600 species
of flora and over 2,000 species of birds alone. The brutal
transformation of the rainforests which has now reached inconceivable
proportions, not only threatens the extinction of the ecosystem but
has also done irreversible damage to the environment. This has, in
turn, reverberated upon the competing monopolies and has had serious
repercussions for local farmers.
With the blessing of the Brazilian government the competing
multinational companies launched a ferocious assault on the jungle to
transform it into a vast pasture land for cattle for the world
market. In just over two decades over a quarter of the forests of the
Amazon basin and Mato Grosso were destroyed. In the last decade alone
over 11 million hectares were cleared – corresponding to hundreds
of millions of trees. Seeking spectacular profits for minimum
investments and no controls, the companies ignited the great forests
with napalm bombs and defoliants. The vast jungle fires, consuming
hundreds of millions of trees, lasting many months, were first
observed by a Landsat satellite in 1975.
The fires and smoke in turn killed off the insects and rodents
whose presence was essential for the cultivation of many plants,
especially the nut tree. Thus In the province of Acre, the entire
population of nut trees were lost – resulting in over 10,000 nut
gatherers losing their livelihood. Moreover, once the residual
nutrients were washed away from the exposed soil, it became hard,
brittle and infertile. The cleared jungle was planted with quick
growing guinea grass whose fertility levels were such that after five
years their growth declined. The lasting effects of the defoliant
also killed off the vitally important broad leaf legumes, which
enrich the soil by capturing nitrogen from the air and not from the
soil. Problems of bush invasion, fungus and soil leaching
intensified. The loss of vegetation immediately disrupted the
ecosystem. Rainfall declined by almost five per cent and the
temperature soared to over 30 degrees.
Under a socialist plan for energy all types of energy production
would be considered on the basis of safety, efficiency and
environmental concern. An immediate programme to eliminate waste
through insulation and conservation would be implemented. This could
save energy and create thousands of jobs in the building industry. It
has been calculated that 75% of heating for homes is lost through
walls, roofs and floors and that 60% of total energy in power
stations is lost as heat – through cooling water – into the
environment. With recent advances in technology, combined heat and
power stations can supply hot water to entire communities. These
stations are already in use in Denmark, where they supply over half
the country’s heating requirements.
 
Energy
Such a programme could be linked to re-equipping existing power
stations to make them more efficient. Coal fired stations, presently
only operating at 30% efficiency, could be made far more efficient
with the introduction of the fluidised bed combustion process whereby
air is blown through a moving flow of burning coal. A Department of
Energy paper has estimated that such a programme would create half a
million jobs between now and the year 2000 and, at the same time,
conserve valuable coal and oil reserves.
Priority would also be given to the development of renewable
sources such as wind, solar and geothermal energy which do not
produce harmful pollution and irreversible damage to the environment.
Research in the USA, Japan and Australia has shown that such an
integrated energy programme could provide up to 6 times as many jobs
as the equivalent nuclear programme. The prestigious National Science
Foundation of America recommended as far back as 1972 that an
investment of $3.5 billion in solar energy would provide 35% of the
country’s heating and cooling needs, 40% of fuel and 20% of
electricity. A similar study in Britain in 1974, which has recently
been re-examined, showed that solar power, mainly for domestic and
industrial heating, could provide as much as 14% of energy needs here
with wave power providing over 30%. The recent advances in solar
power technologies, principally a new type of photo-voltaic cell, has
made possible the large scale production of cheap energy.
Future generations may benefit from a near infinite energy source
in nuclear fusion when that process is perfected and made safe.
Fusion uses as its fuel Deuterium (heavy water) which is present in
vast quantities in the oceans of the world – sufficient for
millions of years. In stark contrast to nuclear fission, fusion
would, as far as is presently known, be a safe form of energy without
pollution. But the limited amounts available for research has meant
that there are still technical problems to overcome.
The destruction of the environment has now reached calamitous
proportions. The ‘Greenhouse Effect’, wanton destruction of
rainforests and ozone depletion is inevitable in a society dominated
by blind market forces. The inherent contradictions, antagonisms and
the competition of interests makes capitalism absolutely incapable of
developing the immense natural potential energy sources that exist or
even introduce adequate safeguards against pollution and harmful effects.
 




Over 1,000 villagers in Shipham, Somerset, are said to be at
risk due to abnormally high concentrations of cadmium in the soil.
This has again catapulted the controversial issue of toxic
heavy metal contaminants into national prominence.
Coinciding with the announcement that the incidence of cancer has
risen dramatically and is industrially related; the news has provoked
a public outcry and a call for much more stringent safety monitoring
techniques.
The toxic heavy metals, lead, mercury, and cadmium, constitute one
of the most formidable groups of environmental pollutants. The
dangers from mercury and cadmium have already been tragically
underlined by the poisoning of entire communities.
The most recent studies of lead, by doctors at the University of
Glasgow’s medical department found that it caused mental
retardation in newly born infants.
 
Grotesque
A great deal of evidence already exists associating lead with poor
eyesight, sluggish movement and difficulty in reasoning amongst
children.
A survey of children living near a lead smelter in El Paso found
that eleven out of twenty of the children were educationally
subnormal.
Minamata disease, attributed to mercury poisoning, was first
observed when people were seen walking in a disorientated manner,
some suffering from convulsions, and all with grotesquely dilated
pupils and paralysis of the limbs.
By 1956, seventy-eight people were seriously ill, many with
appalling physical deformities.
The cause was traced to an effluent from the Chisso factory
containing methyl mercuric chloride which flowed into the sea and
accumulated in fish eaten by the villagers.
Another disease, attributed to cadmium, occurred in northern
Japan. The area is rich in cadmium and zinc, and zinc smelting is the
main industry.
The disease was first described by Japanese orthopaedic surgeons:
“The disease takes a long course of increasing
painfulness which, beginning with simple symptoms such as lumbago,
ends with total and agonised immobility as the result of skeletal
collapse.”
The cadmium is absorbed into the bones, leading to the eventual
breakdown of the skeleton. When a Birmingham platemaker, Mr Leslie
Day, died from the disease, the inquest was told that Mr Day shrank
seven inches, lost his sense of smell and became disfigured.
Cadmium has the unique property of accumulating in the kidneys.
Apart from causing kidney damage, it can combine in enzymes in the
body to form highly toxic complexes which have cancer-inducing
properties.
A good deal of evidence (from Sweden and the USA) exists linking
it with heart disease and high blood pressure. In fact, exposure to
the smallest concentration of cadmium can produce any one of
these afflictions.
The World Health Organisation, has attempted to impose standards
in food and drink. Recognising that contamination will increase in
future, it has urged governments to adopt a rational policy of waste
disposal.
Workers should take note of the current situation and be prepared
to protest to the Minister of the Environment on behalf of the
residents of Shipham. The Department of Health claim that it would
take many decades of exposure to the toxic metal even at the levels
reported – (100 times the level recommended by scientists) – to
cause illness.
The question of pollution is of immediate concern because
capitalism is only motivated by one thing – profits.
They are prepared to destroy and disfigure our environment, kill
and maim whole sections of the population to achieve their
objectives, as events have shown.
A planned socialist society controlling the means of production,
distribution and disposal of toxic materials will ensure adequate
safety precautions for the workforce and the population as a whole.
 




The revolution in Grenada has sent reverberations through the
whole of the Caribbean. It is a reflection of the explosive situation
that exists in the area. Many islands, already in the grip of the
vicious cycle of endemic unemployment and rocketing inflation, held
down by repressive regimes, could tread the same path as Grenada.
The last time the West Indies underwent such convulsions was in
the period following the 5-fold oil increases and recession of
1973–74. That had dire consequences for the social and political
policies of capitalist countries but became a nightmare for the
workers in the impoverished islands.
Under pressure from the masses the leaders were compelled to carry
out big reforms in their economies. It is a measure of the changes
which have been wrought that the capitalist powers can now refer to
countries like Guyana and Jamaica as ‘socialist countries’.
Indeed the leaders of these countries have declared themselves as
‘Marxist’. Manley has gone so far as to say that “capitalism is over.”
But at the same time the USA is injecting massive aid into the
region to defuse the gains of the workers’ organisations. This has
led to a renewed call for the islands to abolish landlordism and capitalism.
Thus a recent labour conference, with representatives from 18
islands, have pledged in the most emphatic manner a total eradication
of the “evils of exploitation, hunger, illiteracy and to push for
unity and solidarity on the Cuban model.”
And as if to rub salt in the wounds of British and American
Imperialism the conference was held in Guyana and chaired by Forbes
Burnham the Prime Minister. It was Burnham their former stooge who
presided over the expropriation of their assets – 90% of the
economy having been nationalised.
 
Guyana: facing a capitalist impasse
Burnham came to power with the connivance of the CIA in 1964 and
has since used all manner of electoral frauds to stay in office.
Undoubtedly most of the assets of Imperialism and native capitalism
have been abolished in Guyana. But the racial divisions and the
absence of a clear Marxist leadership capable of cementing unity
amongst the masses, together with the absence of workers’
democracy, has resulted in chaos in the country.
The example of Portugal has shown that even where the bulk of the
economy has been taken over by the state, without democratic control
and a socialist plan of production the establishment of a workers’
state cannot be assured. On the contrary, counter-revolution is
provided with fertile ground on which to grow.
The 20-week strike of sugar workers graphically illustrated the
dangers of not moving towards full-blooded socialism. The strike
began after the government’s rejection of a £50 million profit
sharing scheme which they had earlier approved. The pay of the sugar
workers (mostly of Indian origin) is half that of their counterparts
in the Caribbean.
The Government responded by drafting in 6,000 strike breakers
which in turn led to sympathy strikes by the bauxite workers. In the
end the strikes cost the government upwards of $200m.
In the last year the economy has been further put through the
mill. Thus in a report to the International Monetary Fund in June the
Government admitted that:
“Guyana’s balance of payments had been under severe
pressure since the latter part of 1975. Exports fell by nearly
one-third between 1975 and 1977 but the levels of imports remained
relatively high.”
The IMF has exerted a stranglehold over the economy. The
Government was forced to cut imports and adopt deflationary policies
in order to cut the budget deficit and curb inflation. As a result
the cost of living has risen spectacularly to over 80% in the last 7
years alone.
Unemployment is well over 40%. The price of sugar and rice have
all doubled. Finally the slump of sugar prices on the world market
has brought the regime to its knees.
In the last few months Burnham has paid frantic visits to the USSR
and Germany and North Korea.
American Imperialism is now trying to tempt Burnham to abandon any
moves towards a planned economy and instead open up the country to
capitalism. They have already received such an undertaking from him.
On 30th November last year, the Financial Times acknowledged
that if it were not for the support Burnham was receiving from a
large number of foreign capitalists the situation would be
perilous.
 
Jamaica: first a move to the left, now back to the right?
A similar crisis faces Jamaica. There Michael Manley, the Prime
Minister, was swept into power in the 1972 elections – winning 37
out of the 53 seats.
Manley inherited a rotten and corrupt regime. Inflation was 30%
and unemployment well over 25% despite the agreement the Government
has with the USA and Canada which facilitated huge numbers of
Jamaican citizens emigrating. Wages were a pittance. Plantation
workers only averaged £1.30 for a gruelling 12-hour day.
Manley initiated reforms like the nationalisation of the
electricity and Bus services but this not due to any coherent policy,
rather it was a reaction to the chaos that prevailed. In the same way
land that was left unused by the plantation owners and absentee
landlords were redistributed to Workers Co-operatives, because they
were demanded and seized by the workers.
The Jamaican economy which was also devastated in the recent would
recession is now wholly dependent, like Guyana, upon the IMF.
Sugar production was just 280,000 tons last year – the lowest
for 30 years. Tourism, another pillar of the economy is expected to
bring $120 million compared to $190 million earned last year. The
partial increases in bauxite levy, which the government fought for in
1974 will still only bring in $200 million and that is $40 million
less than the $160 million earned last year. Such is the cost of
remaining tied to the world capitalist market.
Unemployment at 45% and inflation at 47% are rampant. The
Government has devalued the dollar four times in the last 13 months
and is under intense pressure from the IMF to cut back further on
public expenditure.
In this situation the right wing within the People’s National
Party has gone on the offensive against the left.
Many radicals have been expelled and the Jamaican Communist Party
(Workers Liberation League) has picked up some support. This in turn
has provoked the recent attack on Trevor Munroe, a trade unionist and
one of the leaders of the WL. At the same time the right-wing
Jamaican Labour Party has attempted to make a come-back.
 
What future for the small islands?
The Manley Government is at the crossroads. There is no way
forward for Jamaica on the basis of capitalism. Only a planned
economy could eradicate the terrible poverty and misery of the
Jamaican masses. But Manley is hesitant to take this road.
He is desperately manoeuvring between capitalism and the Stalinist
states for aid and assistance to keep afloat. In the last week he has
flown to Moscow requesting aid but such measures are only palliatives
and the PNP will be forced to choose which road to take in the next period.
Without exception all the islands in the Caribbean are faced with
similar problems. Such islands like Antigua, St Lucia, Dominica, St
Vincent which only produce bananas and spices but have as much as 45%
unemployment, will undergo a traumatic time in the coming period. By
themselves they will be condemned to backwardness and impoverishment.
The only sure way out for these islands and for Jamaica and Guyana
is to decisively break with world capitalism and establish a
socialist federation. On that basis the problems facing the peoples
of the Caribbean could be removed through planned and co-ordinated
expansion of economic growth.
 




“I don’t know anything about nuclear power but no power in the
world is worth my baby’s life.” This was the tragic comment of a
pregnant woman in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, the scene of the world’s
worst nuclear accident.
On March 28th, the nuclear reactor at ‘Three Mile Island’
plant went irreversibly out of control. Only a miracle prevented the
annihilation of 160,000 inhabitants within ten miles of the reactor.
The cause of the accident was the failure of one of the
much-heralded failsafe valves on the huge cooling tower. Within
minutes, thousands of gallons of water which normally conducted heat
away from the reactor core became cracked and overheated.
The resulting reaction produced hydrogen gas which exploded and
spewed a deadly mixture of radioactive steam, gases and iodine into
the atmosphere.
So serious was the accident that the US Nuclear Regulatory
Commission warned of the possibility of a melt-down. This was the
worst possible accident a reactor can suffer.
Scientists have calculated that in such an accident over 3,000
people would die immediately; 45,000 suffer appalling injuries and a
further 45,000 die of cancer within ten years, assuming that they
live in a sparsely populated area.
The authorities, already under tremendous pressure following
adverse publicity on the disposal of nuclear waste, and reports
showing that the lowest radiation can cause cancer, have issued
reassurances that the radiation emitted is no more than you would get
at the dentists.
But what is the truth? A mountain of evidence has been recently
published linking extremely low dosages of radiation with increases
in cancer deaths. Horrifying statistics have come from America.
Studies of death certificates of workers at the Hansford Nuclear
plant in Washington have revealed a disturbing high incidence of
cancer of the pancreas and leukaemia, even though workers were
exposed to levels of radiation well within agreed safety limits of 5
rems per year.
But the most alarming results have come from a chance discovery.
The overall cancer death rate among civilian nuclear workers at the
Navy’s Portsmouth Shipyard in Kittery, Maine was more than twice
the national average, and well above that of the yard’s non-nuclear
workers.
These figures were calculated by a doctor who had filed a law suit
under the Freedom of Information Act to get access to records.
The navy had good reason for maintaining an iron hold over these
records. The results were startling. They showed that the rate of
leukaemia was an incredible 450% higher than the general
population’s. The incidence of lymph gland cancer was 125% higher.
And the workers were only exposed to an astonishingly low one rem of
radiation per year.
These studies have conclusively demonstrated that there is no safe
level of radiation exposure. Moreover the iodine which was also
emitted causes even more serious abnormalities.
For iodine is absorbed into the thyroid gland, which control’s
the body’s metabolism. In recent accidents, farmers had to destroy
their milk for many months. The authorities already conscious of this
have issued similar instructions to farmers.
In the light of the Harrisburg incident, the whole nuclear
programme has been questioned.
Can nuclear power be made safe? Are there alternative forms of
energy capable of replacing nuclear fission? One thing is: the
capitalists, who are only interested in profits not safety or life,
cannot be allowed to make these decisions.
I believe that safe, viable alternatives to nuclear fission can be
established. But the labour movement must conduct its own
thoroughgoing enquiry to answer these questions.
In the meantime it is vital that the labour movement mobilises to
ensure that as far as possible health and safety become a key issue
in all nuclear establishments.
 




The Caribbean has become a cauldron of revolt.
The recent revolution in Grenada has sent reverberations
throughout the entire region and detonated social and political
upheavals in the islands of Dominica and Antigua during the summer.
Earlier this year the US Secretary of State was forced to concede
that “There was not a single island in the Caribbean that could not
go the same way as Grenada within five years”. (Financial Times,
25/4/78)
Such is the chronic nature of their economies, the poverty and
wretchedness of the mass of the people that it was impossible to
contain the virus of revolution.
These poverty-stricken islands reeling like punch crazed boxers
from one economic blow after another, have just been dealt a further
cruel blow by nature.
Hurricane David wreaked havoc throughout the islands earlier this
month. In Dominica it killed thousands and made a further 60,000
homeless (out of a population of only 90,000). It also caused
millions of pounds worth of damage destroying the principal foreign
exchange earners – sugar cane and bananas.
The economies on many of the islands are already devastated
through paying for the huge oil increases and manufactured goods and
industrial equipment – it is now so parlous that their only source
of foreign exchange are the remittances from relatives living
abroad.
 
Single crop economies
Unemployment in the Caribbean is estimated at a staggering 60%.
And with over half the population under the age of 25 and
restrictions on emigration to Britain and the US, the islanders are
condemned to a desperate existence.
Many just manage to eke out a living by scouring the countryside
for vegetables or by fishing. Many households are without such basic
amenities as drinking water or sanitation.
The price of sugar which has risen spectacularly in the early
1970s and promised to go some way towards solving their economic
problems has now collapsed. This was due in part to poor weather and
the insane policies of the major capitalist countries.
In particular, the Common Market countries have recently taken
measures which have had an enormously adverse effect on cane sugar
production in the Caribbean and other undeveloped areas of the world.
They subsidised their beet sugar producers to the tune of Â£600m in
the past season to dump their supplies on the world market.
This cuts the share of the market of the cane producers and at the
same time depresses the price of sugar which has had a catastrophic
effect on the cane producing countries.
This policy has resulted in sugar process being well below the
cost of production over the past 3 years! Moreover, cane sugar
imports into Britain have been dramatically cut following entry into
the Common Market.
For many islands the final blow was struck last year when the
banana harvest failed due to a combination of natural disasters and a
glut on the world market.
For example in Dominica, banana production fell just under a third
for each of the last 2 years!
In St Vincent (with a population of 120,000) the volcano which has
been rumbling intermittently and belching hot lava over the island,
completely destroyed the banana crop – estimated at over Â£4m.
The banana industry in both islands was the single largest
employer.
Tourism, another pillar of the economy has only exacerbated their
problems as the industry achieved early successes and then collapsed.
In St Lucia tourism climbed from 50,000 in 1969 to a peak of
200,000 in 1978. In 1977 tourism earned the islands Â£7m. With these
funds the government commissioned new hotels and facilities plus a
planned industrial free zone area.
The increased fuel costs, and the changed situation
internationally have virtually stopped the tourist trade.
In 1977 the government turned for help to multi-national
capitalism. It gave permission for the US-based Amerada-Hess Oil
Corporation to build a $135m oil refinery. The company demanded
conditions of course. Its main demand was a government bill affirming
no interference or possibility of nationalisation.
But last month under enormous pressure from the masses the old
conservative government was thrown out in elections. And the new
radical government has pledged to re-examine this bill.
Antigua and Dominica also highlight the explosive social and
political processes now unfolding.
These two impoverished islands have a history of the government
using the veneer of constitutionality in order to mask widespread
corruption and repression.
Both governments are now desperately attempting to curb the
upsurge of radicalism and defuse the growing social dynamite.
In the last 3 months the islands have been paralysed by waves of
strikes – involving every section of workers – struggling to
improve living standards.
In Antigua, instead of getting to grips with the fundamental
problems of his island, the Prime Minister and his deputy (his son),
have blamed the strikes on his predecessor who had been found guilty
of corruption – and on communists. The regime has been attacked by
workers because of its internal repression and also its gangster
policies of acting as a staging post for arms to the South African
and Rhodesian regimes.
Dominica was the scene of a titanic struggle against the
repressive policies of Prime Minister Patrick John. In attempting to
rush through parliament legislation banning strikes and curtailing
the freedom of the press, he united at a strike the opposition
parties and the trade unions.
A general strike paralysed the island and John was compelled to
resign.
It had come to a head with the shooting of demonstrators and
the revelations in the foreign press of his links with gangsters and
the South African regime. Bizarre plots were also revealed which
contained all the ingredients of a spy plot – the mafia,
assassination attempts, foreign mercenaries – were all implicated.
There is no way that capitalism can solve the problems of the
area. The only way out is a decisive break with world capitalism and
the establishment of a socialist federation.
 




‘Burnham must go’. This was the slogan last month as the
many thousands of Guyanese workers and youth defied the police and
hired thugs to protest at the government’s criminal economic
policies and increased repression.
Strikes, demonstrations, and a national disobedience campaign has
brought this tiny country in South America to a standstill and,
importantly, united for the first time the Indian sugar and bauxite
workers.
In the last two weeks the capital, Georgetown, has been the scene
of bitter and ugly fighting. The offices of the PNC were fire-bombed,
together with several government buildings and the dreaded House of
Israel headquarters.
The House of Israel – a pseudo-religious group led by ‘Rabbi
Washington’ and better known as David Hill, a wanted American
criminal – have already murdered a British Jesuit priest
photographing a demonstration and attacked members of the opposition
with impunity.
Hill has openly boasted of his close links with the government and
of his assistance in crushing the 135-day sugar workers’ strike
last year.
The House of Israel and the infamous Jonestown community have been
deliberately cultivated by the Burnham government to work as scabs
and perform the other obnoxious tasks essential for his survival.
Another, more ominous development has been in the increasing
dissatisfaction of the army over their role and the dismissal of
their commander.
This came to a head when they were asked to swear allegiance to
the ruling PNC and to Birnham personally. The commander – Brigadier
Clarence Price – had earlier warned the government they were not
prepared to work as strike-breakers.
He and his two deputies were immediately replaced with members of
Burnham’s family. A further 33 officers have since submitted their
resignations.
Unconfirmed reports in the last week have claimed that the army
has given Burnham just one month to resign.
The crises were serious enough for Burnham to cancel his planned
attendance at the Commonwealth Conference in Lusaka.
Burnham has since condemned the opposition as
counter-revolutionaries out to destroy his “socialist gains”. He
had even compared the present plight of Guyana as being similar to
revolutionary Russia in 1917 under attack from counter-revolution.
Calling his policies ‘Burnhamist-Leninist’ the former stooge
of US imperialism, Burnham, has described his party at various times
as Marxist-Christian and Co-Operative-Socialist.
He has resorted to demagogic slogans in order to mask his
reactionary policies.
At no time has Burnham attempted to get to grips with the
fundamental problems.
The discontent within the sugar industry – the country’s
largest foreign exchange earner, highlights the dangers of not
implementing socialist policies.
Burnham first granted and then rejected a Â£50 million
profit-sharing scheme which would have brought the sugar workers –
who are mainly of Indian origins to that of their counter-parts in
the Caribbean.
Their dissatisfaction is indicated by the levels of strikes
between 1973–76: there were 416 strikes with the loss of 1,424,000
man days.
The government reacted viciously by drafting in 6,000
strike-breakers, seizing the strike funds and food parcels. The
strike lasted 20 weeks and cost the government $200 million.
The government, desperate for aid for an economy already
bankrupted through paying for the huge oil increases and foreign
goods, negotiated from the IMF, the World Bank, W. Germany and Japan.
The repayment on these loans is now higher than the new loans at
present being sought.
When the crisis of capitalism in the period 1973–75 destroyed
the fragile basis of the economy, Burnham was compelled by the
pressure of the masses to nationalise the foreign owners bauxite and
sugar monopolies: 80% of the economy is now in the hands of the
government.
But the racial divisions and the absence of a clear Marxist
leadership capable of cementing unity amongst the Negro and Indian
masses, together with the absence of workers’ democracy and a plan
of production has resulted in chaos in the country.
 
Economy tied to world prices
The country’s principal foreign exchange earners – sugar and
bauxite have both declined dramatically due to a combination of
strikes, mismanagement, adverse weather conditions and a slump on the
world market.
For the second year running the government has had to scale down
their sugar targets from 360,000 tons to 300,000 tons.
Similarly, bauxite production is expected to decline by 18%
reducing the target from 1.14 million tons to 950,000 tons.
The 27% drop in bauxite production was responsible for the massive
foreign exchange deficit of Â£50m.
The IMF continues to exert a stranglehold over the economy. The
government was compelled to carry through savage cuts to public
expenditure and to adopt deflationary policies in order to curb the
spiralling inflation.
As a consequence, unemployment has rocketed to over 50% with a
further 30% underemployed. In the last year over 4,000 people have been dismissed from the public services whilst a further 15,000 young
school leavers join the job market each year.
Also, serious food shortages and escalating price increases on
basic food stuffs have precipitated a wave of violence throughout the
country.
These events have demonstrated on the one side that capitalism is
incapable of showing a way forward in a backward country like Guyana.
The pressure of the situation compelled Burnham to declare himself a
‘Marxist’.
But without a programme capable of cementing unity between the
masses, turmoil and instability is inevitable.
Only a genuine workers’ state with complete nationalisation of
the remaining big firms can eliminate the wanton bureaucracy and
chaos that is at present stultifying the economy.
A plan of production of workers and small farmers councils,
management of the economy, right of recall with regular rotation and
controlled wage differentials will not only abolish the racial
divisions but provide the basis for better living standards, acting
as a beacon for the establishment of a Socialist Federation of the
West Indies.
 







In the first of two articles, Ronnie Sookhdeo looks at developments in the Caribbean state of Guyana.




“They have lived for these many years by putting on a certain mask, by trying to fool the outside world and even some Guyanese who live right here, with the mask of democratic government, because they have a joke institution called a ‘Parliament’.”
This was the characterisation of Forbes Burnham’s regime in Guyana, a former British colony in South America, made by Doctor Walter Rodney a few months before his brutal murder.
Dr Rodney, a historian of international renown, was the leader of the newly formed radical Working Peoples Alliance (WPA).
The WPA was only formed in 1979 from an amalgam of trade union and oppositional groups but it succeeded in uniting the black and Indian masses against the dictatorial Burnham regime.
It is the fulcrum for all opposition to the Burnham government. The existence of massive corruption, the rigging of the recent December Presidential election and intimidation of all opposition has been confirmed by the British Parliamentary Human Rights Group in a recent report published following a visit to Guyana.
The report points out that some people were declared ineligible to vote “because they were dead”! In previous elections hanged criminals, deceased citizens, children and even horses were counted as valid voters.
This has been accompanied by violence and murder on an unprecedented scale. Burnham has used crazed religious groups like the deceased Jim Jones’ ‘Peoples Temple’ and David Hill’s ‘House of Israel’ to act as strike breakers, to intimidate and to assassinate oppositional figures.
But how is it that Burnham, who declares that his regime is ‘socialist’ and that he is a ‘Marxist-Leninist’, has resorted to such methods to maintain himself in power?
He even describes his position as ‘Burnhamism-Leninism’, and advance on Marxism-Leninism.
Burnham’s People’s National Congress (PNC) was created as a direct result of the aim of imperialism to set the Indian and the black workers and peasants at each others throats as a means of maintaining its hold on Guyana.
Burnham was a leader, together with Cheddi Jagan of the Peoples Progressive Party (PPP) until 1961. He split away from the PP because of his own personal ambitions to be top dog.
He was also tempted to take this path by massive financial inducements from imperialism.
The CIA supplied Burnham with a minimum of 250 thousand dollars in 1966 in order to organise a so-called ‘general strike’. This caused over £10 million worth of damage, left 171 dead and hundreds injured, embittered relations between the black and Asian masses and brought down the PPP government.
 
Capitalist crisis
Burnham, with the help of imperialism and a rigged constitution, was able to ‘win’ subsequent elections and to maintain his position ever since by massive intimidation.
Guyana is a tiny country of no more than ¾ million people, but has huge mineral resources which imperialism relies on. Guyana and Jamaica between them supply 42% of the world’s bauxite, and 90% of the bauxite requirements of the US economy.
Burnham, in the aftermath of his election victory offered imperialism free reign to exploit the resources of Guyana.
However, the crisis of 1973/74, had a devastating effect on the Caribbean and particularly Guyana. Burnham’s reliance on imperialism foundered.
Bauxite companies cut back their production and Burnham imposed higher taxes. The bauxite monopolies countered this by stepping up production in Brazil and Australia in order to undercut the Burnham government’s plans.
The Guyanese government in turn retaliated by nationalising the bauxite companies in August 1974. A year later the sugar industry was nationalised, thus putting 80% of the economy in the hands of the state.
It looked as though Guyana was going to be the first workers’ state on the South American mainland.
However this development was cut across by a number of factors. In the eyes of the Indian masses who form the majority in Guyana, Burnham was associated with discrimination and racial oppression, of corruption, etc. Burnham was therefore incapable of bridging the racial divide.
It is also probable that the Russian bureaucracy; already compelled to pay a heavy price in subsidising Cuba and particularly its sugar industry at a time when sugar prices have collapsed, was none too eager to take on the extra burden of supporting Guyana.
In all probability they were reinforced in their attitude by the Cuban bureaucracy which had traditionally looked towards Cheddi Jagan as a supporter of their policies in Guyana and on the South American mainland.
On the other hand, the PPP of Jagan was incapable of mobilising the black workers who came increasingly into opposition to the Burnham regime.
 
Burnham turns back to imperialism for support
The collapse of the PPP-inspired sugar strikes in 1977, the feeble and mainly parliamentary opposition to the Burnham regime gradually undermined the support of the PPP not only amongst the black population but increasingly amongst the Indian workers and peasants as well.
In this vacuum we have seen the emergence of the WPA. Its support has grown as the increased mass discontent with the Burnham regime has mushroomed. Because Burnham did not complete the process and establish a workers’ state his regime has been in a cul-de-sac.
He stopped three-quarters of the way towards establishing a workers’ state and, as in Portugal, chaos, mismanagement and enormous social strife resulted.
He therefore turned back to imperialism for support. Between 1976 and 1978 US aid increased from a mere £2 million to £24 million.
Faced with a bankrupt economy, Burnham appealed to the IMP, the world bank, the West German government, etc., to bail him out. This aid was given but of course at a big price to the Guyanese workers and peasants.
The repayment of interest on old loans is higher than the total amount of new loans! Moreover, the IMF demanded a ruthless programme of austerity, which has included a savage wage freeze.
And unlike Jamaica, where the Manley government resisted the pressures of the IMF, Burnham completely capitulated to these demands.
This in turn provoked an enormous wave of strikes, which rocked the Burnham regime.
This meanwhile provoked splits in the PNC and even in the government itself which began to divide into different factions. Divisions also began to appear in the army. Thus, when the army was called on to act as strike breakers in the sugar strike in 1977 the chief of the army vetoed this.
Therefore, Burnham was forced to call on the remnants of Jim Jones’ ‘People’s Temple’ and the ‘House of Israel’ zealots to act as strike breakers.
Increasingly desperate, Burnham resorted to a policy of outright terror against all opposition. This laid the basis for the growth in the support of the WPA.
(Continued next week)
 







In last week’s article Ronnie Sookhdeo described the economic impasse of capitalism in Guyana and the vicious nature of Forbes Burnham’s regime.
This week, he looks at the policies and programme of a relatively new party, the radical Working People Alliance [WPA].




The WPA programme is a definite advance compared not only to Burnham’s ruling People’s National Congress (PNC) but also the opposition People’s Progressive Party (PPP) of Cheddi Jagan.
It declares: “The alliance is revolutionary and not reformist.” It calls for “The nationalisation of the commanding heights of the economy, still under private ownership i.e. banks, insurance companies, etc.”
It demands “land for those who work it” and the “elimination by decree of all outstanding indebtedness of small and landless farmers.”
Most significant it also declares that: “The alliance sees the revolution in each country as permanent.”
It is clear from this that the authors of the programme have borrowed some of their ideas from Trotsky’s theory of the permanent revolution.
Trotsky argued that the capitalist democratic revolution in a backwards country – basic questions of land reform, democratic rights, freedom from imperialism – could only be carried out through the working class coming to power in alliance with the peasantry.
One in power it would be forced to go over the to the socialist tasks i.e. nationalisation of the means of production.
But no single country, and particularly a backward country is able to advance towards socialism itself.
The revolution would therefore be forced to spread to other countries, particularly the industrially advanced countries if it was to maintain itself. Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution was borne out of the experience of the Russian revolution.
 
Workers’ and peasants’ councils
The WPA programme calls for:
“... a national assembly based on the following principles: direct representation of organised labour. Representatives will be elected from workers assemblies organised on the basis of the essential transformation of inherited state structure.
“They will include for example assemblies of sugar, bauxite, transport, unemployed and domestic service workers, teachers, peasants, students, youth and housewives; representation from constituencies.
“Election on a constituency basis will serve to strengthen the traditions of community responsibility and ensure accountability; the right to recall; elections to the national assembly and to all representative bodies which will be based on the right of recall.”
If implemented, this would represent the establishment of workers’ and peasants’ councils in Guyana as organs of rule of the masses.
The demand for “the right of recall” is a very important rule for a planned economy. Its implementation is completely incompatible with a Stalinist regime. If coupled with the demand for no official to receive more than the average wage of a skilled worker it would represent a check on the growth of bureaucracy.
At the same time the WPA leaders are not entirely clear as to the national and international perspectives for the revolution in Guyana.
Guyana is potentially immensely rich, it is true. However, it is still a backward country, when compared to the advanced capitalist countries.
The experience of the Russian revolution, and latterly of Cuba shows that a revolution in a backwards country which has a low cultural level and is isolated from a revolution in an advanced industrial country, will inevitably degenerate and will see the emergence of a bureaucratic privileged caste.
This is the case in Cuba where the leaders of the revolution twenty years ago set out with entirely laudable aims of developing Cuba along modern lines.
Therefore, it is paramount that the revolution in Guyana must be seen as a link in the revolution throughout the Caribbean.
 
It is true that the programme “pledges itself to work towards the emergence of a free, integrated and socialist Caribbean.” However, the WPA does not clearly understand that the development of a socialist Guyana must be linked to a socialist federation of the Caribbean.
This in turn would be a bridgehead for a socialist federation of South America and eventually of North America as the precondition for the development of Guyana along the lines of a democratic workers’ state.
Guyana is at the crossroads. Along the ‘Burnham’ road, lies further decline in the Guyanese economy together with enormous social and racial strife.
 
For benefit of the people
The other road leads to a socialist and democratic Guyana. This would represent a giant step forward for the workers and peasants of the country, also for the poverty stricken masses throughout the Caribbean and throughout the whole of Latin America.
It would mean that, for the first time, the rich, abundant natural resources of Guyana would be exploited for the benefits of the majority of the people of the country. It would mean undreamed of plenty and at the same time represent a giant step forward to a socialist Caribbean and a socialist Latin America.
 




The National Conference of the People’s National Party Youth
[UK] which was held over two days in Birmingham at the weekend,
attracted over 100 black youths.
It is a testimony to the success of the movement that in just one
year it could galvanise so many black youths from many parts of the
country.
It was more remarkable since the majority were unemployed.
The PNP Youth policy statement – A Fighting Programme for
Black Youth – was presented and unanimously accepted.
 
Unemployment
The conference noted the continued harassment of young blacks by
sections of the police especially under the infamous ‘sus’
charges. This has been responsible for the arrests of over 3,000
people – more than half of them black – since 1973.
It also deplored the structure of the present education system
which has been consistently placing black children in educationally
subnormal schools from which they emerge almost illiterate.
The conference called for an end to racial discrimination in
schools and colleges, abolition of racist text books, the
introduction of a fully comprehensive education system and maximum
class sizes of 20 so that the 20,000 teachers on the dole can be
given work.
But it was the question of unemployment that really brought the
conference to life. It deplored the present high level of
unemployment in Britain in general and among blacks in particular.
The conference was told by Bob Lee, the National Secretary, that
while unemployment in the last four years rose by a staggering 120%
for the 15–25 age group, it increased by the phenomenal 410% for
black youth.
“Almost half of those unemployed in the London
Borough of Lambeth are young blacks. In some inner city areas like
Handsworth, as many as six out of ten young blacks are jobless.”
The conference recognised that the capitalist system was incapable
of solving the many problems confronting the working class and the
only solution was the implementation of full socialist policies. It
resolved to fight for the following demands in the labour and trade
union movement:

A minimum wage of £70 a week
 
A 35-hour week
 
Work or full pay
 
Nationalisation of any firm that threatens redundancies
 
Nationalisation of the big monopolies to finance a public
works programme to provide jobs, houses and schools.
 

Workers’ unity
The conference unanimously agreed that with rising unemployment,
police harassment, and increased fascist attacks, the black community
must organise to safeguard their rights. We stand for the unity of
all workers, black and white, to fight ruthlessly against any attempt
to divide the working class or to divert from the struggle for
socialism.
Conference linked arms with the Labour Party Young Socialists who
are already waging the fight. Nick Bradley, the LPYS representative
on the Labour Party National Executive, in his fraternal address,
promised every help and called for the establishment of a Labour
Party/trade union defence force to defend the black community against
racist attacks.
Chelsea Morrison, a representative from the Black Women
Association, observed that the conference and the policy document had
omitted the issues of black women, which were of crucial importance
to the black community. A lively discussion ensued and it was agreed
a section on black women will be included in the policy document.
Earlier in the conference a representative from the South African
Congress of Trade Unions gave a very grim account of the terrible
conditions of the Africans under apartheid.
 
Liberation
The conference noted in a most emphatic manner that they were
inspired by the victories of the liberation forces in Southern Africa
and in South East Asia and by the workers and peasants of Jamaica and
the whole Caribbean in their struggle against imperialism.
 




200 people killed! The 180 who survived are so seriously injured
that they must also be added to the list of fatalities!
These are the horrifying details now emerging from the gas tanker
explosion at the camping site at San Carlos de La Rapita, Spain, last
Tuesday.
The accident occurred when a tanker carrying 38 tonnes of
liquefied propylene – a highly inflammable chemical used to make
synthetic fibres collided with a brick wall, and hurtled 100 yards
into a camping site packed with holiday makers from Germany, Holland
and France.
Eye witnesses spoke of a mighty explosion followed by a huge fire
ball and then a rain of ignited liquid which saturated the whole
area.
Within seconds the searing heat reduced people nearest the
blast to smouldering charcoal. Those further away suffered appalling
injuries as the intense heat tore off their skins and were literally
boiled alive as they threw themselves into the sea that adjoined the
site.
The heat was so great that cars and caravans were reduced to mere
shells of metal as everything susceptible to flame vaporised and
produced choking fumes, moreover, the tanks of butane gas, used by
the campers for cooking, added to the casualties as they ignited and
exploded.
Such was the enormity of the holocaust that many workers searching
the camping site for bodies were so overcome with emotion as they
came across bodies burnt beyond recognition, that they were unable to
continue.
Feelings ran high amongst the survivors and relatives when it was
learnt that most of those injured were unlikely to survive because
they were so hideously burnt that plastic surgery was impossible.
They were further incensed when it was revealed that the
disaster could have been averted for a paltry Â£7 if the lorry driver
had used a new toll road rather than the narrow coastal highway.
The local population were angry and bitter but not surprised over
the accident. They have attacked the Governor of the Province for not
responding to the many requests to ban tankers from the highway.
Indeed, even on the day of the catastrophe, there was an accident
involving a tanker carrying vinyl chloride which was released into
the atmosphere. Vinyl chloride is a chemical notorious as a cancer
forming agent.
Belatedly, 48 hours after the accident, the Governor banned all
tankers carrying expensive cargoes from roads in built up areas, and
reduced the tolls on the new A7 road.
That it has taken a disaster of this magnitude to galvanise the
Governor into issuing a simple directive which would have saved the
many lives lost, should be seen as an indictment of the rotten
anarchic capitalist system whose only motivation is to increase
profits.
The ban is too late for the many families who are in their graves,
and those living whose lives have been wrecked, families who were
compelled by the very system and its accompanying economic
contradictions to seek out the cheapest form of holiday-making –
the camping site with its primitive amenities rather than the
expensive and luxurious hotels, only to be incinerated and subjected
to horrors that defy the imagination.
The catastrophe has sent reverberations throughout the
capitalist world, since most corrosive, poisonous, explosive and
inflammable substances are carried by road tankers.
The most recent accident was in Mexico City at the weekend, in
which 10 people died and another 200 seriously injured when a tanker
carrying liquefied natural gas blew up. This has put pressure on the
government to re-examine their policy on the transportation of
hazardous chemicals.
The disaster in Spain has demonstrated that whilst the workers
were moved to tears, the capitalists were moved only by other
considerations of profits. Will other chemical haulage companies now
change their routes and introduce safety precautions? Not on your
life! How long until a similar accident happens somewhere else?
 




“SATELLITE FALLS THROUGH WINDOW OF HOUSE AT SOUTHEND.” This
was front page news in most newspapers a couple of years ago when a
piece of broken-up satellite fell out of the sky.
Imagine the consequences if a nuclear-powered satellite did the
same to a major city. This awful possibility became a reality two
weeks ago when the nuclear-powered Cosmos 954 satellite crashed,
fortunately on the barren wastes of Canada.
Why did this accident, which by all accounts did not even kill a
wolf, arouse so much fear and hostility? Why such prominent
publicity? The accident, apart from providing a glimpse for the first
time of the frightening and horrendous activities of two super powers
in space, underlies the insane and irresponsible policies that are
being perpetuated and which have resulted in over 4,500 satellites
permanently orbiting the planet.
Many of them are nuclear-powered and considered so dangerous that
they are ‘parked’ at orbits of 800 miles when they are considered
of little use. They will remain at this height for several hundred
years until their radiation becomes harmless.
Moreover, in deliberately suppressing the news of the fate of the
satellite until it was about to crash, the super powers demonstrate
the bizarre extent they will go to in keeping their people in total
ignorance. Both powers knew since about November last year that the
satellite was going to crash and release deadly radiation that would
contaminate huge areas and lead to either increased mortalities or
cancer.
Also the satellite posed a double threat. In its decent to earth
the heat generated by friction would vaporise the 110 lbs of
enriched uranium fuel and form a radioactive cloud that would not
only poison the air but take an astonishing 713 million years to
become harmless! More importantly, the intense heat could cause the
fuel to become critical – that is the least quantity of nuclear
material needed to produce an explosion – and explode as a nuclear
bomb! American scientists have now admitted that if the satellite had
failed one phase later in its decaying orbit, it would have plunged
into New York at the height of the morning rush hour!
 
Not the First
This has not been the first accident involving nuclear satellites.
To date three have crashed and released toxic radioactive waste, in
one case increasing the atmospheric radiation – itself present from
earlier weapons testing – by as much as 3%.
The most serious accident, which provides a preview of the
enormity of such a disaster, was when a disabled American nuclear
bomber jettisoned its two hydrogen bombs near the Spanish port of
Palomares. One bomb fell on shore, burst open and spilled radioactive
material over a wide area. Thousands of tons of
plutonium-contaminated soil were dug up. Some was transported to
America for disposal and some packed in drums and dumped in the
Atlantic. The other bomb fell into the sea and took months to locate
and salvage.
Since this accident reports have been received that both powers
are developing ‘killer satellites’; this has been called the
ultimate weapon. Such a vehicle would carry an explosive charge which
would detonate when close enough to another orbiting satellite. If
such a satellite experienced the same difficulties as Cosmos 954, the
nuclear material intended as bombs would detonate at some point in
its passage down. The magnitude of the disaster in terms of people
killed and long-term pollution would be unimaginable.
 
Life Endangered
This is the terrible danger that lies in store for mankind if this
insanity continues. The development of nuclear weapons capable of
annihilating whole populations and the poisoning of the atmosphere
would inevitably lead to the extinction of all life. Every year has
witnessed a new form of fiendish weapon capable of wreaking greater
havoc than the one before, and always its development has been a
closely-guarded secret known only to a handful of bureaucrats or
capitalists.
This was highlighted by the frenzy of activity initially, between
Washington and Moscow and later Washington and NATO countries.
President Carter, in an attempt to allay public fears and soothe the
anti-nuclear campaigners, has called for a revision of the 1967 outer
space treaty which calls for exploration of outer space for peaceful
means only.
But there is only one solution to this madness. Take control of
science and technology out of the hands of the capitalists in the
West and the bureaucrats in the East through the establishment of a
Socialist World Federation.
 




“We knew that a disaster had occurred because of the stench
of oil which hung over the whole area.” This was the comment of
one of the villagers in Brittany, following the sinking of the Amoco
Cadiz, which released 220,000 tons of crude oil – described as
the world’s worst oil spillage – onto 300 miles of beach.
Exactly seven weeks later, this disaster was repeated for the
residents of Corton, a tiny camping site near Great Yarmouth.
They awoke to find their area engulfed in thick black oil. The
cause this time was the 12,000 ton Greek oil tanker, the Eleni V,
which was sliced into by the French merchant vessel, the Roseline.
Accidents like this are not acts of God but arise from the
incompetence, corruption and greed of the oil and shipping barons in
their lust for easy and quick profits.
What is the basis for these charges? Most of the oil discharged
into the sea is the result of deliberate policy on the part of
shipping monopolies. Before the closure of the Suez Canal, oil
tankers returning to the Gulf with oil residues and waste still in
the ballast found that the Canal authorities regarded it as cargo and
it was therefore subject to dues. So the waste was discharged into
the seas.
This is now widely practised and is having frightening
repercussions. In the last few years port authorities have imposed a
ban on empty oil tankers entering the harbours unless their ballasts
are completely free of the combustible gas left behind when the oil
is discharged.
This fear of explosion has led to the port authorities in Valetta,
Malta, for example, banning all oil tankers. In order to use the
harbour facilities the tankers therefore use the most expedient
method, that is flushing out the tanks with sea water.
 
Discharges
At present the release of oily ballast water accounts for 1.5
million out of the 1.8 million tons of oil discharged annually into
the sea. The Mediterranean alone receives 100,000 tons of oil
annually. The Gulf of Muggia near Trieste, which receives effluent
from a complex of refineries, has become a biological desert –
devoid of even the most primitive plant life.
 
Oil Clots
Recent evidence has suggested that the oceans are rapidly
approaching this state. Thor Heyerdahl describes a grim scene of oil
pollution in the Atlantic during his crossing with the papyrus raft
Ra 1. A few days out of the harbour of Safi in Morocco he
and his companions found themselves sailing through a mass of opaque
water containing large quantities of solidified oil clots.
Two days after escaping this polluted area they came across
another, and yet another, in mid-ocean. Some six hundred miles off
Barbados, they sailed in polluted waters for two days.
 
New Regulations?
The increasing concern and growing militancy of trade unions and
environmentalists in both America and Europe, together with the
unprecedented series of thirteen tanker accidents in the US alone,
has caused President Carter to re-examine existing tanker regulations.
He has called for an international conference under the auspices
of the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO),
the United Nations Agency concerned with shipping. Their suggestion
is that all existing tankers of 20,000 deadweight tons or more should
be fitted with segregated ballast tanks (SBTs).
The use of separate tanks removes the need to fill cargo tanks
with sea water to maintain the tanker’s stability after unloading.
This has immediately been attacked by oil monopolies on the grounds
that the cost of converting existing tankers to SBT would be too high
– figures of $300,000 to $3m per vessel have been quoted.
They in turn have advocated a combination of techniques known as
‘crude oil washing’ and ‘load on top’. These two processes
they argue, would “only” discharge 130,000 tons of oil annually
into the sea.
From the point of view of the working class, however, fitting
tankers with SBTs would not only go a long way towards purifying the
seas, and cutting down the risk of further disasters. It would also
provide much needed jobs to thousands of shipyard workers, suffering
from the decline of their industry.
 
Clean Up
The oil and shipping monopolies have grown fat at our expense
and at the expense of the environment. The trade unions must force
them to foot the bill to clean up the environment. If they refuse
they must be cleaned out themselves by full socialist measures.
 




On October 1st the long awaited and much heralded regulations
governing the role of safety representatives and safety committees
took effect.
These regulations are a land mark in the history of the TU
movement. For the first time a trade union can now appoint its own
watchdog who has the legal right to put the place of work under
thorough examination.
Regular inspections can be carried out to root out hazards and
dangerous practices. Reps can visit the scene of an accident and
examine its causes, and demand from management and the Health and
Safety executive a wide range of information necessary for the job.
The safety representative is entitled to time off with pay to perform
these tasks and attend safety courses.
 
Step forward
Undoubtedly, these new regulations represent a tremendous step
forward for the eight million workers now covered and for all those
affected by industrial pollution and hazards, whose health has for so
long been in the hands of lawyers and safety officers appointed by
management. Industrial accidents – estimated to cause 1,400 deaths
and over 300,000 serious injuries each year – and diseases, have
become subjects of increasing concern not only to trade unionist and
environmentalists but to the population as a whole.
But these regulations are being met with stiff opposition from
sections of the TU movement who regard them as a retrograde step. The
major bone of contention centres on section 7 of the Act which
transfers to the worker responsibilities already established under
previous legislation, such as the Factories Act, as solely the
responsibility of the employer.
 
Responsibility
For example, the Act calls upon every employee to take reasonable
care not only of the health and safety of himself but of other
employees. In fact, it is now a criminal offence to put oneself or
others at risk! If the employee fails to comply, improvement
notices and even prohibition notices can be served, which carry a
maximum penalty of £1,000.
In other words they can be sacked on the grounds that they
represent a potential hazard to themselves and to other workers!
Management, it is claimed, could use this section to avoid paying
compensation, and even dismiss workers. Since the passing of the Act,
there have been many reports of employers asking workers to sign
written declarations that they are responsible for their own safety.
It is quite evident that many employers will try and exploit every
loophole to dilute the duties that this legislation imposes on them.
Another contentious issues centres on the definition of the phrase
‘reasonably practicable’ which occurs in every section of the
Act. This is defined in terms of the cost of improving health and
safety as balanced against the risk of injury or ill health. If the
risk is insignificant compared to the cost then it would not be
‘reasonably practicable’ to do anything about it.
The ILEA, London’s largest employer, has just been forced to
issue a statement clarifying the meaning of the phrase but even this
is ambiguous. In their bulletin Health and Safety at work they
note that the phrase ‘reasonably practicable’ occurs a great many
times in the Act and many staff are unclear about its implications.
There can be no general definition; the factors involved (e.g.
cost, risk) vary widely in different circumstances. Only the courts
will have the power to authoritatively interpret this phrase, in
dealing with cases referred to them. It is likely that over the years
a good deal of case law on this point will build up!
Finally, there is nothing in either the regulations or the Code of
Practice that commits the employers to do anything about the reports
from the safety reps or committees. Trade unionists will need to be
vigilant, and ensure that they have a thorough understanding of the
Act and its limitations. We must use the power we have won to the
full, while fighting for day-to-day trade union control of the
workplace to end the bosses’ rule of ‘profit before safety’.
 




The 1978 Notting Hill Carnival, which attracted a quarter of a
million people over the Bank holiday, was a tremendous success. This
was despite the provocations and inflammatory warnings of mass
muggings and widespread pick-pocketing issues by the police in the
days leading up to the event.
But the success of the carnival was mainly due to the black youths
who demonstrated time and again that they were not going to be
intimidated and provoked into a confrontation with the police even
when this included such pointless exercises as the cordoning off of
half of Portobello Road, the main focal point of the celebrations.
The persistent drone of the police helicopter that hovered above,
and the police cine cameras blatantly spying on the crowds from the
overhead Westway motorway, heightened the tension. It was partly
these tactics of an unnecessary show of strength by the police that
were responsible for the outbreaks of violence later on Sunday
evening which led to the arrests of 42 people.
In the aftermath of the carnival there will inevitably be the call
from conservative sections of the community to ban it from the
streets and confine it to enclosures like the White City. But it
would be completely wrong to justify the banning of the carnival on
the grounds of 42 arrests – which, by coincidence, is exactly the
number arrested at the Spurs match last Saturday, which only
attracted a fraction of the people present at the carnival.
The Borough council and the government must recognise that the
black community, who compromise 10% of the population of this area,
face huge social problems which are the direct result of the
capitalist system. Although, ironically, they reside in the
wealthiest borough in London they live in the most appalling
overcrowded, squalid houses. Next to Lewisham they have the highest
proportion of black youth unemployment.
 
Socialism
Black youth need to get organised in a campaign to end their mass
unemployment, to destroy their slums, end police harassment and to
drive out racialism.
At the carnival the local Labour Party Young Socialists and PNP
Youth were out leafleting, selling the ‘Left’ broadsheet against
racialism, PNP Youth Bulletins and Militant, and
recruiting new members. Along with paper selling and a bookstall we
had the best political showing over the two days.
Black youth must fight back against the real criminal in this
society – the landlords, bosses and profiteers! Join us in the
organised labour movement in the fight for a socialist society where
life can be colourful and happy not just at carnival time but all
year round.
 




The news last week that a tanker carrying 38 tons of highly
inflammable propane gas jack-knifed and overturned in a densely
populated area at Loughton, Essex, once again highlights the dangers
of transporting hazardous and highly explosive chemicals by road.
In the Loughton accident, one of the three gas cylinders ruptured
– and it was only sheer chance that a major catastrophe like the
ones in Spain and Mexico two weeks ago was averted.
In both disasters, tankers carrying liquefied gas exploded on
collision and sent fireballs together with a rain of ignited liquid
over a wide area. It only took a matter of seconds to incinerate
hundreds of people and hideously burn thousands.
In the Mexican holocaust, people as far away as ten miles away
suffered burns as the wind diffused the gas which detonated with the
slightest friction.
This latest accident, following a number of serious mishaps in the
last week alone in which many people were treated for formaldehyde,
methanol and chlorine poisoning has provoked widespread indignation –
especially when it was revealed that the local village could have
been wiped out had the gas ignited.
The driver of the tanker, moreover, compounded the fears of the
residents by saying that he knew that the accident would happen some
day. He went on to say that the company has had a number of such
accidents in the past!
It is hardly surprising that there is such a high frequency of
accidents involving chemical containers when 41% of all petroleum
products are sent by road. These are in addition to other highly
toxic and noxious chemicals like ammonia, chlorine and sulphuric
acid.
Even more surprising, there is at present no compulsory system for
identifying the chemical in case of spillage, nor standard methods
for treating and rendering harmless, and above all guidance for
treatment of people exposed and overcome by fumes.
The present signs say nothing of the poisonous nature of the
chemical, that is whether it damages the nervous system or is a
cumulative poison, its antidote, and above all how to neutralise and
dispose in case of spillage.
The labour and trade union movement must take up the fight for
initially a re-routing of dangerous chemicals from densely populated
areas, until a safe method of transportation system can be introduced
and for a more effective labelling system.
 




The news last week that a total of 21 workers at the top secret
atomic weapons research establishment have abnormally high amounts of
plutonium dust in their lungs has catapulted the controversial issues
of the toxicity of plutonium and radiation levels into national prominence.
Apart from providing a glimpse of the activities of the
scientists, the news also shatters the myth that plutonium emission
is tightly controlled, and constitutes no danger to workers.
“Relatively large amounts of plutonium can be eaten without
appreciable harm,” was the claim made by none other than
Justice Parker in his report on the Windscale Inquiry. This is now
being used by the Ministry of Defence in an attempt to ally mounting
public fears with the revelations that nuclear workers contract
cancer at unusually high rates.
When told that he had been exposed to three and a half times the
“safe level of radiation”, a 59-year-old process worker at the
research establishment crystallised the feelings of all the workers.
“It was a terrible shock,” he said, “but what of the future?”
Indeed, what of the future? Many thousands of workers are being
exposed daily to the current safety levels of 5 rems (unit of
radiation) a year. In the last year alone a mountain of evidence has
been published linking extremely low dosages of radiation with the
increase in cancer deaths.
Horrifying statistics have come from America. Studies of the death
certificates and radiation exposure records of workers at the
Hansford nuclear plant in Washington have revealed a disturbingly
high incidence of cancer of the pancreas and leukaemia. All the
workers were exposed to levels of radiation well within the agreed
safety limits.
But the most alarming results have come from a chance discovery.
The overall cancer death rate among civilian nuclear workers at the
navy’s Portsmouth Shipyard in Kittery Maime was more than twice the
national average and well above that of the yard’s non-nuclear workers.
These figures were calculated by a doctor, who asked the navy for
the workers’ records. They flatly refused. He filed a law suit
under the Freedom of Information Act, and they promptly reversed
their position and released the records.
The navy had good reason for maintaining an iron hold over these
records. The results were startling. The Portsmouth study showed
that the rate of leukaemia was an incredible 450% higher than the
general population and the incidence of lymph gland cancer was 125%
higher. And the workers were only exposed to an astonishingly low 1
rem of radiation per year.
These studies have conclusively demonstrated that there is no safe
level of radiation exposure. Cancer can develop in a long agonising
process. So the full extent of radiation damage caused by plutonium
is unlikely to be known until too late.
The only way to avoid this is for the labour and trade union
movement to initiate a campaign for the complete medical examination
of all radiation workers and for comprehensive dossiers, maintained
and made public.
Moreover, in the same way as the trade unions fought to bring
down the safety level from an incredible 73 rems a year in 1931 to
the current 5 rems, we must now call for the complete abolition of
“safety levels”, and the recognition that all levels cause cancer.
 




‘Caricom on the brink of collapse’. This was the comment of
the Financial Times on the crisis that has
rocked the 12-member West Indian Economic Community. But they offered
no explanation as to what or who was responsible for the collapse.
Caricom, and its predecessor Carifta – Caribbean Free Trade Area
– were founded specifically to enable US imperialism to dominate
the Caribbean. Far from benefiting the peoples of the West Indies, it
has become a millstone around their necks. The huge bauxite and oil
monopolies not only extracted wealth from the islands for a mere
pittance, but flooded them with greatly over-priced goods that,
ironically, were made from their own raw produce. Their meagre
foreign exchange reserves were largely swallowed up in paying for
these goods. Oil and gas were purchased from the US owned oil
companies based in Trinidad, and cost a third more than the price
Cuba pays the USSR for oil.
The world-wide economic recession left the bauxite industries of
Jamaica and Guyana in an even more impoverished position. They were
plunged into serious economic crises. The price of sugar – which
had risen spectacularly in 1974 – fell dramatically in 1975. This
followed the action of the US and the Common Market in imposing a 10%
levy on imported sugar. As sugar is the main foreign exchange earner
for Jamaica and Guyana, this had a catastrophic effect on their
economies.
 
CIA
The Jamaican and Guyanese Governments, in attempting to fight back
against the monopolies, were faced with intense CIA
‘de-stabilisation’ activity. In Jamaica, this included the sudden
flooding of the island with guns and gunmen. In 1975 Jamaica earned
121 million dollars from tourism; 1977 saw it drop to 90 million; it
is predicted that this year will see only 55 million dollars earned
from tourism. The figures show how the intense and vicious campaign
by the CIA caused the bottom to fall out of the tourist trade.
These CIA activities intensified the deterioration of the
economies of Jamaica and Guyana. They were both forced to make a
thorough re-appraisal of their economic policies, especially those of
trade within the neo-capitalist Caricom, which was becoming an
intolerable burden. Both countries invoked the trade restriction
clauses in the Caricom treaty and drastically reduced their levels of
imports. They then had to look to other international markets. They
applied for membership to COMECON (Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance), in November 1977 (Comecon is the ‘Common Market’ of
the USSR and Eastern Europe).
 
Socialist Federation
Events in the Caribbean during the last five years, have clearly
demonstrated the impotence of capitalism in getting to grips with the
problems of the region. A coherent and planned policy would harness
the natural reserves and riches of the area, and thus create better
living standards. The creation of a Socialist Federation of the West
Indies would solve the problems of the people of the area, and act as
a beacon for the down-trodden masses in Latin and Central America.
 




“South America’s only socialist state is tearing itself
apart under the strain of severe economic crisis.” This was the
recent comment of The Guardian concerning the tumultuous
events which have surrounded the strike of 20,000 sugar workers in
Guyana.
It is a measure of the changes which have been wrought in this
tiny country of only three quarters of a million population that the
capitalist press can refer to it as the “only socialist state” on
the continent.
Most of industry – approximately 80% of the economy – has been
taken out of the hands of the giant monopolies which once had a
stranglehold on the economy and is now in the hands of the state.
This is bad enough for British and American imperialism, but to rub
salt in the wounds it is Forbes Burnham – their former stooge –
who has presided over the expropriation of their assets! How did this
situation come about?
 
Burnham’s Turn
The CIA-backed ‘People’s National Congress’ (PNC) led by
Burnham, drawing most of its support from the Negro minority, had
come to power in 1964 in a coalition with the reactionary United
Force Party. Farcical proportional representation proposals were
imposed by the British ruling class, specifically to keep the
Moscow-back People’s Progressive Party (PPP) led by Cheddi Jagan
from coming to power. The PPP had been victorious in every general
election since 1953.
The CIA had also been instrumental in toppling Jagan from power by
asserting he was receiving arms from Cuba. They back Burnham to the
hilt and supplied the financial backing for a “general strike”
which led to rioting and the fall of Jagan.
It is a well documented fact that Burnham maintained his minority
government by all manner of electoral frauds – destruction of
votes, the use of a huge number of overseas votes including children
and nationals from other parts of the West Indies, as well as the
“graveyard vote” i.e. individuals who had died but mysteriously
still managed to vote! Burnham opened the country to even greater
imperialist exploitation with the promise of a chain of foreign owned
manufacturing industries and the opening up of the country’s vast
mineral and timber resources. The bauxite and sugar monopolies which
dominated the country and provided between them most of the
government’s revenue promised to embark on a modernisation
programme which of course did not materialise.
But the five fold increase in oil prices in 1973 and the economic
recession of 1974–75 shook the Burnham government to its
foundations. The giant US Reynolds bauxite monopoly reduced
production in its Guyanese mines as the market dwindled. They were
now in a position to dictate to the government the price of bauxite.
Moreover the bauxite industry of Guyana and Jamaica, which accounts
for 42% of total world supplies and 90% of US needs, was undermined
by the attempts of the mining Corporations to undercut Caribbean
prices by buying from Australia and encouraging Brazil to step up production.
Under pressure from the masses and the desperate situation Burnham
imposed higher taxes on the bauxite company which responded by
withdrawing senior personnel and threatened to cease production. A
process similar to the earlier events in Cuba then unfolded. Burnham
countered these threats by nationalising the bauxite monopoly in
November 1974.
Meanwhile the price of sugar, which had risen spectacularly in
1974, fell dramatically in 1975 as the US and the EEC imposed a 10%
sugar levy. Sugar production in Guyana was concentrated in the hands
of Booker McConnel, the country’s largest employer and whose
interests accounted for 40% of the Gross National Product. With the
rocketing of sugar prices Burnham imposed a substantial sugar export
levy which netted £21 million in 1974 out of a total company revenue
of £48 million.
But severe drought and exceptionally heavy rainfall followed,
plunging the country into deeper crisis. Booker’s profits also
dropped and thereby the government’s revenue. Burnham stepped in
and nationalised the company – with generous compensation – in
May 1976. Alarm bells then began to ring in Washington and London not
to say in the neighbouring capitalist regimes, in particular of
Brazil and Venezuela. The panic rose to new heights with the granting
of refuelling rights for Cuban troops on their way to Angola.
CIA “destabilising” methods were then stepped up against
Burnham – their former client! Embassies in Trinidad and Barbados
were bombed and timber mills and rice factories were set ablaze. The
ruthless lengths to which capitalists are prepared to go in order to
defend their profits and privileges – including intimidation and
mass murder – were starkly revealed in all their horror last year
when a Cuban airliner carrying 73 people – 11 of them Guyanese –
was blown up in flight by the CIA. Encouraged by a smear campaign –
that 2,000 Cuban and Chinese troops were running the paramilitary
training camps – Venezuela and Brazil launched a series of
provocative border incidents and were toying with the idea of action
to crush the Guyanese regime.
 
Threat of Reaction
Undoubtedly most of the assets of imperialism and native
capitalism have been nationalised in Guyana. Even the Guardian
reporter comments on the absence of “capitalist forces” within
the country capable of organising a counter-revolution.
But the racial divisions and the absence of a clear Marxist
leadership capable of cementing unity amongst the Negro and Indian
masses, together with the absence of workers’ democracy and a plan
of production has resulted in chaos in the country. The example of
Portugal has shown that even where the bulk of the economy has been
taken over by the State without democratic control and a socialist
plan of production the establishment of a workers’ state cannot be
assured. On the contrary counter-revolution is provided with fertile
ground on which to grow.
The sugar workers’ strike highlights the dangers. The strike,
which is now in its 14th week, began after the government’s
rejection of a £50 million profit sharing scheme which had been
approved earlier. The pay of the sugar workers – mostly of Indian
origin – is only half that of their counterparts in the rest of the
Caribbean. Their discontent is indicated by the figures of strikes
between 1973 and 1976: 416 strikes with the loss of 1,424,000 man days!
The government reacted viciously to the strike drafting in 6,000
strike breakers. This in turn led to sympathy strikes of the bauxite
workers and, more importantly, the powerful and radical Trinidad oil
workers who have imposed a ban on fuel shipments to the country.
These events demonstrate on the one side that capitalism is
incapable of showing a way forward in a backward country like Guyana.
The pressure of the situation compelled Burnham to expropriate
imperialist concerns and declare himself a “Marxist”. But without
a programme capable of uniting the masses turmoil and enormous
instability is inevitable.
American imperialism is trying to tempt Burnham to abandon its
move towards a planned economy and open up the country to capitalism.
Yet concessions to capitalist firms would do nothing to solve the
colossal problems of Guyana. Even if a planned economy is
consolidated, without the check of workers’ democracy the growth of
a bureaucratic elite with power concentrated in its hands is
inevitable. Only a genuine democratic workers’ state with complete
nationalisation of the remaining big firms can eliminate the wanton
bureaucracy and chaos that is presently stultifying the economy.
A plan of production and the introduction of workers’ and
small farmers’ councils, management of the economy with democratic
election of all officials, right of recall with regular rotation and
controlled wage differentials will not only abolish the racial
divisions but set the basis for a driver for better living standards
in the area and give a push to the establishment of a Socialist
Federation of the West Indies.
 




A survey published in Lancet, the medical journal, has
just revealed that up to 2 million homes in Britain put unborn
children at risk of mental retardation through lead poisoning.
Doctors at the University of Glasgow’s medical department
compared the levels of lead in the blood of 41 babies whose mental
retardation could not be attributed to any known cause with that of
36 mentally retarded babies whose cause had been diagnosed. They
found that the 41 babies had a very high concentration of lead in
their blood. The lead present was attributed to pollution of the
drinking water.
A great deal of evidence already exists associating lead with
hyperactivity, impaired learning and behavioural changes in both
animals and man. Children living near a lead smelter in El Paso were
found to have a low IQ, poor eyesight, sluggish movement and
difficulty in reasoning. A later survey revealed that 19 out of 20 of
the children were educationally sub-normal.
Lead, together with mercury, constitutes one of the most
formidable groups of environmental pollutants. Mercury is perhaps
best remembered for the large scale poisoning in 1953 of Minemata and
later Niigata in Japan. The first sign of the impending disaster that
was unleashed on these two communities was when the local cats began
to go berserk and throw themselves into the sea. People were then
seen walking in a disorientated manner, some had collapsed in the
streets suffering from convulsions and all had grotesquely dilated
pupils and paralysis of the limbs. By 1956, 78 people in the village
of Minemata were seriously ill, some had dreadful physical
deformities and 15 children were among those affected. The medical
dictionary added a new name – industrial disease or Minemata disease.
The cause was traced to an effluent from the Chisso factory which
flowed into Minemata bay. The effluent contained methyl mercuric
chloride which accumulated in fish which in turn was eaten by the
villagers. The mercury was used as a catalyst in one of the
industrial processes. Undeterred by the casualties including that
caused by its other factory at Niigata which left 48 dead and 150
seriously injured, the company continued to dump the mercury waste in
the sea.
There is an estimated 600 tons lying at the bottom of the bay.
When the government officially declared Chisso to be the cause of the
disease the company refused liability. Environmentalists then
initiated a campaign of buying large numbers of shares so that they
could change company policy.
In March 1976, after four major trials the company finally agreed
to pay compensation.
The other pollutant, lead, is today threatening to overshadow
mercury both in magnitude and with the same destructive intensity.
In July 1974, the Yugoslav vessel, Cavecat, carrying 910
barrels of tetraethyl lead (TEL) – used as an ‘antiknock’ in
petrol – was in collision with another ship and sank off the
Italian port of Otranto in the Adriatic. Scientists immediately
warned the authorities that leakage of TEL would destroy all life in
the sea. The Adriatic would become dead; since the lead would enter
the delicate ecological life cycle and destroy the minute plankton
and plant life which in turn would destroy the fish that feed upon it
and ultimately man who eat the fish.
 
Warnings Ignored
The authorities, as if following a general unwritten law which
governs disasters of this sort, predictably chose to ignore these
warnings. In fact the Italians and Yugoslav governments together with
the shipping company considered the recovery as being “too
expensive”. The 910 barrels containing 210 tons of TEL were doomed
to remain forever on the bed of the Adriatic sea exposed to the
corrosive action of the salt water.
Today, nearly three years after the accident, the Italian
government is belatedly making frantic efforts to recover the barrels
at an estimated cost of £6½m. Underwater photography has revealed
that many barrels were in an advanced state of corrosion. The chief
engineer in charge of recovery was pessimistic about the state of the
barrels. He feared that some had already burst. Some which were
trapped under the hull were unrecoverable.
These two incidents separated in terms of time and geography
demonstrate conclusively that capitalism has many common features. If
the catastrophes that occurred at Michigan and Seveso are also
considered then the enormity of the crime committed becomes even more
unpalatable. (In Seveso clouds of very toxic dioxin gas were
released. In Michigan polybrominated biphenyl was fed to cattle.)
In all these incidents there was a significant lull in time before
adequate safety precautions were taken. This was criminal, especially
as in the case of Seveso where the management already had experience
in dealing with that type of accident. In all the cases the managing
director, together with the public health officers, publicly
proclaimed that there was no danger involved. They even went to the
extent of producing scientific evidence to show that the people were
not suffering from the symptoms that they complained of. Nine months
after Seveso the incidence of skin cancer has not abated. All the
babies conceived in that period have been aborted.
Four years after Michigan some nine million people have
significant amounts of PBB which is known to cause genetic diseases.
Thousands are already experiencing deformity in their hands and feet.
In Britain today every man, woman and child contains levels of lead
and mercury which is well above that of Europe.
It is no coincidence that the report in Lancet involves
Scotland. Scottish drinking water contains 27% more lead than the
World Health Organisation’s limit. As this report indicates studies
are only now being made on the additive effects of lead and mercury
on the human body. It is already known for example that lead
interferes with all the metabolic processes in the body. This is
precisely why this report should not go unnoticed. Science today
dominates and permeates every aspect of our existence. It dictates
and influences for example the choice of food, clothes, transport and
even our life span.
The question of pollution is of immediate concern because
capitalism is only motivated by one thing – profits. They are
prepared to destroy and disfigure our environment, kill and maim the
whole population to achieve this objective, as we have seen.
A planned socialist society which has control of the means of
production, distribution and disposal of toxic material will ensure
adequate safety precautions of the work force and the population as a
whole. For instance, the quantity of lead added to petrol which in
turn is emitted to the atmosphere will be drastically reduced and
less harmful alternatives sought. We will not be catapulted into
situations in which whole populations contract cancerous and genetic
diseases, where young children and new born babies are intellectually
disadvantaged for the remainder of their lives.
 




The Windscale inquiry which has recently concluded at a cost of
£2 million has generated enormous controversy on the issue of
nuclear energy.
Big business and the nuclear lobby, which stands to profit from
the continued development of the nuclear programme and particularly
the waste disposal plans for Windscale itself, are optimistic that a
decision in their favour is about to be made. By the same token, all
those who stand for a sane energy programme, and in particular the
labour movement, will be alarmed and outraged if the government
ratifies this programme.
World attention, already roused by this issue, is sharply focused
on Britain. The question of nuclear energy will be of crucial
importance not only to workers in the industry but the labour
movement as a whole.
 
Protest
The Windscale inquiry, amid heated controversy, began to consider
British Nuclear Fuel’s application for a £600 million expansion of
Windscale, principally to reprocess Japanese nuclear waste, which
could effectively make Britain the nuclear dustbin of the world.
Moreover, it would introduce fundamental and controversial issues
like proliferation, storage, transport and ultimately the disposal of
plutonium, described as the most toxic substance ever made by man.
These issues have already generated enormous hostility and
precipitated a wave of unrest throughout the industrialised countries
of the world.
In far-off Australia, over 30,000 workers attended rallies in
Sydney and Melbourne to protest against the government’s $2 billion
uranium mining and exporting policies.
In Frankfurt, over 20,000 demonstrated against the building of the
prototype Fast Breeder Reactor. Demonstrations on the same scale have
occurred in Switzerland, Belgium, the USA and Japan.
In the ugliest and bloodiest incident so far, over 30,000
demonstrators at Creys-Malville in France, were attacked by police
and para-military riot police armed with sub-machine guns and
percussion grenades. This resulted in one man being killed and scores
more injured.
The inquiry which began in Whitehaven on the 6th June was the
result of tremendous pressure from trade unionists and
environmentalists following a succession of horrific reports
concerning plutonium.
It began with the alarming disclosure that radio-active water was
leaking at a rate of 100 gallons a day from Windscale!
This coincided with the post mortem results on three workers from
the plant, which revealed that they died from leukaemia. This could
have been induced only by plutonium which is obtained from the
reprocessed nuclear fuel. In fact it was found in the brains of one
of the dead men!
The link between plutonium and the high incidence of cancer was
conclusively established a week later by British researchers at the
American nuclear plant at Hansford and also by scientists here in Britain.
This immediately caused a tremendous furore which intensified with
the publication by Dr. Zhores Medvedev, a dissident Russian scientist
living in Britain, of an account of a catastrophic nuclear accident
involving plutonium. Thousands of scientists and villagers were
killed when a production plant exploded and released a cloud of
plutonium dust which swept across the surrounding countryside. This
occurred in the winter of 1957.
Medvedev’s revelation brought an immediate denunciation by Sir
John Hill the chairman of the Atomic Energy Authority, who described
the accident as “science fiction” and “a figment of the
imagination”. However, for what it is worth, the accident has since
been “confirmed” by such unlikely sources as the CIA.
Hill later conceded that in the early 1950’s “our technology
was pretty rudimentary”; so rudimentary in fact that in 1957 11
tons of uranium caught fire in Windscale. Serious reactor accidents
have occurred at Detroit in 1966, the Swiss heavy water reactor in
1969, and the boiling water reactors near Chicago and Wuergassen,
West Germany, in 1972 and, more recently, at Pickering Canada and
Alabama USA.
The managing director of British Nuclear Fuel, unperturbed by
these revelations, contemptuously called upon the Secretary of the
Environment to stop vacillating about the plans for the expansion.
Any delay, he said, might lose them the Japanese contract worth £300 million.
In the face of mounting pressure and public revulsion against the
use of plutonium, however, Tony Benn, the Energy Minister, called for
a public inquiry into the expansion.
It is important to note that another inquiry is to be called to
examine the development of the fast Breeder Reactor which uses as its
fuel the plutonium waste from the old Magnox reactors but, by a freak
of nature, produces more plutonium.
The question of the reprocessing of nuclear waste to separate
plutonium must by its very nature involve the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and ensure the continued development of the Fast
Breeder Reactor and the subsequent production of more plutonium.
These crucial questions were ignored by the inquiry.
Advocates for expansion conveniently chose to ignore the fact that
the very early nuclear reactors were made with military objectives in
mind, that is, the production of plutonium and the enrichment of
uranium. These were crucial for the development of nuclear weapons,
nuclear-propelled submarines and warships.
The present American Light Water Reactor is based on naval reactor
development. The techniques for separation and reprocessing of
plutonium were originally developed for nuclear warheads. The policy
of nuclear energy for peaceful use – first formulated by Eisenhower
under the banner “Atoms for Peace” – was directly attributable
to advancing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The present US
President, Carter, who inherited this legacy, is today making frantic
attempts to curb the spread of nuclear weapons.
Today the world’s nuclear reactors produce 30,000 kilograms of
plutonium annually and one-third of this is produced in 20 countries.
This figure will increase to 28 nations producing 45,000 kilograms
by 1985. 40% of this plutonium will be owned by the USA, USSR, France
and UK. These countries are continually refining the destructive
capabilities of these weapons, the latest of which is the Neutron
bomb. This is an eight-inch nuclear artillery shell designed to
produce highly penetrating neutrons and gamma rays capable of
annihilating whole populations while leaving building intact.
This industry employs a quarter of America’s half million
scientists alone! The 1977 nuclear expenditure for the US was
$113,000 million.
The Windscale inquiry has revealed that, to date, 7½ tons of
plutonium have been recovered and as much as 45 tons will have
accumulated by the turn of the century.
The pro-nuclear lobby – sometimes in an hysterical and abusive
fashion – have argued that there is no real alternative to
nuclear energy. They have attempted to picture all opponents of
extending the nuclear energy programme as Luddites. Frank Chapple, in
his own inimitable manner, dealt with proposers of an anti-nuclear
resolution at the Labour Party conference, in this crude way.
 
Blackmail
Sir John Hill has also not been averse to a little blackmail. Thus
he stated at the Windscale enquiry: “Unless Windscale is enlarged
and reprocessing begins immediately the spent fuel that will start to
be discharged by the Advanced Gas-cooled Reactor (AGR) next year will
start to corrode with corresponding leakage of radiation in less than
five years.” This Alice-in-Wonderland logic means that only by
increasing the danger of future nuclear radiation contamination by
building a re-processing plant will we be able to avoid being
contaminated now!
Nevertheless, there are many who are unfamiliar with the subject
and confused by the scientific jargon and are taken in by the nuclear
establishment’s argument. They claim: (1) There is no viable
alternative to nuclear power, (2) It will create jobs, (3) The
anti-nuclear advocates are opposed to all technology and progress. Is
there any validity in these arguments?
As to the question of jobs. It has been estimated that for every
£2 million invested in Windscale one job will be created. In other
words, a mere 300 jobs at the cost of incalculable harm to people and
the environment. Of course, the labour movement would be opposed to
any worker losing his job. On the basis of an integrated fuel policy
it would be entirely possible to give all those employed in the fuel
industries , and more, jobs.
As to the alternatives. Studies to date on alternative forms of
energy have been pitifully small, while huge sums are devoted to
nuclear energy. If the cycle from uranium exploitation through mill
construction, fuel fabrication, enrichment and reprocessing of waste
material is taken into consideration, the sum involved would be
astronomical. To appreciate the extent of the money involved, the
proposed enlargement of the reprocessing plant at Windscale is put at
£600 million! This compares with the miserly £100,000 Britain spent
on research into wave energy last year – a drop in the ocean!
At the height of the oil crisis, the US National Science
Foundation rushed out a report recommending that the US commit $3,500
million to solar energy. Solar energy could provide 35% of the
nation’s heating and cooling requirements, 40% of its fuel and 30%
of its electricity.
Similar recommendations were made in Australia, Japan, France and
Britain. The French are already operating a 1 megawatt solar furnace
in the Pyrenees. Sweden and Denmark are so far ahead that they expect
to obtain 40% of their electricity from wind power by 1980!
 
Danger
Britain, however, has just allocated a mere £3.4 million on
research into alternative forms of energy or the next two years. Who
can dispute the fact that, if the same resources were put into
alternative forms of energy that are at present devoted to nuclear
energy, then today we would have a viable alternative?
The thermo-nuclear fusion process (as distinct from
fission) which promises to provide us with all of our
requirements for thousands of years, has been languishing in a state
of malaise as the EEC, which has now just embarked on a joint project
(JET), haggled over a site.
The original estimate for JET of £90 million rose to £120
million because of the delay and inflation until today, nearly two
years after the commitment, it stands at £165 million.
The advantages of nuclear fusion are enormous. There is no nuclear
waste, more particularly deuterium, its fuel, is present in sea water
at a concentration of 34 grammes per ton. It has been calculated that
the oceans represent a reserve of 50 million, million, tons –
enough for thousands of years of fusion.
This is a sharp contrast to the present nuclear fuel policy which
advocates the construction of Fast Breeder Reactors to solve our
energy needs. This policy does not appreciate the fact that a reactor
is dependent on the fuel resources of uranium as its fuel.
The dangers involved with plutonium have never been considered
adequately. The major problem has been its incredibly long life; it
takes millions of years to become harmless and it is impossible to
accelerate this process. It has been officially classed as the
most poisonous man-made substance, the finest particle of which can
induce cancer.
The current method of disposal is in deep underground wells and is
at present costing BNFI £64 million. Its link in the food chain from
marine creatures to man is already posing a health hazard.
An extraordinary suggestion for waste disposal has been to
separate out the plutonium and store it as a precious metal, in the
same way as you would gold and diamonds!
At some stage, however, the plutonium must be transported and the
number of incidents involving mishap is well documented.
There have been 119 transport incidents over 19 years in the USA
alone, and in 35 of them radiation was released. The US Nuclear
Commission is today investigating an accident in which 15,000lb of
uranium was spilled on a highway in Colorado. The number of shipments
of spent fuel was increased from 76 in 1971 to 1,417 in 1974 and well
over 25,000 shipments today.
Of course, coal and oil will continue to play, in the foreseeable
future, an important part in any fuel policy.
The other major problem is possible use in hijacking by
terrorists. Plutonium the size of a golf ball can devastate a city!
This has come into prominence following claims that Israeli agents
penetrated an American nuclear plant and staged four hijackings in
Europe to obtain uranium for nuclear weapons.
It is obvious that man cannot go on vandalising the world’s
reserves of oil, coal and gas which provide a feed stock for our
drugs, clothing and ensure the survival of future generations.
Further, the great quantities of carbon dioxide emitted when these
fuels are burnt has already resulted in climatic changes in all parts
of the world. If we rely solely on coal to satisfy our energy
requirements, as President Carter has just proposed for the US, then
the carbon dioxide concentration in the air could reach 4 to 8 times
its present level. This would cause a ‘greenhouse’ effect with
the climate becoming hotter, wetter and cloudier, with the melting of
the ice cap!
Not only would this weather be catastrophic for crops but would
cause a shift of important agricultural regions to higher latitudes.
Evidence has already been accumulating. The sea which holds about 60
times as much carbon dioxide as there is in the air is already
showing signs that it can no longer absorb any more carbon dioxide.
Moreover, the world’s forests, which have so long been absorbing
the carbon dioxide released by burning of fuels have shrunk as demand
for timber has increased. The sulphur and heavy metal contaminants in
coal would also lead to an increase in respiratory illness and bowel cancer.
The expansion of Windscale and the construction of Fast Breeder
Reactors, far from improving our standard of living, would become a
monster of nightmarish proportions which would scar the lives of
future generations. This is inevitable on a capitalist basis.
A world socialist fuel and energy plan would give top priority
to renewable forms of energy like nuclear fusion, wind, solar and
waves that would save our primary fuel stocks and ensure a harmonious
relationship with our environment. Only such a coherent policy can
abolish the gloom and uncertainty which has been made possible by
insane and irrational policies.
Nuclear power, and particularly Fast Breeder Reactors, on the
other hand, are such a colossal danger to mankind that there is an
overwhelming case for a halt to be called to its development.
At the same time, the present situation shows the inevitable
chaos and anarchy in the energy field which results from an unplanned
and blind economic and social system, which is what capitalism is.
 




Comrade Wylie’s letter on nuclear technology [Militant,
No. 344] raises a number of questions, especially his assertion
that opposition to nuclear technology is indefensible and
incompatible with the aims of socialism. I refute this and would like
to reply to his and Alan Ashworth’s arguments in last week’s
issue of the Militant.
We in the labour movement have never opposed the tremendous
achievements that science has contributed and can give to mankind,
for if we did it would be to turn the clock backwards. What we do
question is the insane and irrational way in which science is being
used under capitalism. This has led for example to disasters like the
mercury poisoning at Minemata in Japan, the creation of dust bowls in
America and latterly the explosion at Seveso that has poisoned
thousands of people and permanently destroyed large areas of land.
Catastrophes like these are inevitable unless a socialist planned
economy is adopted. Under a sane system a fuel policy will be
implemented which may give a priority to nuclear technology, or to be
more precise, a safe form of thermo-nuclear fusion and forms of
energy that are not dependent on the earth’s resources and which
are free from pollution.
 
Fusion Safer
Consider nuclear fusion. In this process deuterium (or “heavy
water”, an isotope of hydrogen) nuclei can be made to fuse together
and in so doing liberate energy. The advantages of this process is
that no nuclear waste is produced and more importantly deuterium is
present in sea water at a concentration of 34gm. per ton.
It has been calculated that the oceans represent a reserve of 50
million million tons of deuterium or in other words enough for many
thousands of millions of years of fusion. If the technical
difficulties could be solved (for example maintaining the very high
temperature needed for fusion) this would represent a viable form of energy.
This is in sharp contrast to the present nuclear fuel policy which
advocates the construction of 50 Fast Breeder reactors by the year
2000. This policy does not appreciate the fact that a reactor is
dependent on the finite quantities of uranium as its fuel. It has
never considered the dangers involved in handling, transport, storage
and ultimately disposal of Plutonium a substance classified as the
most toxic ever synthesised by man. Plutonium will remain toxic for
the next 2,400 years and there are no methods for accelerating the
decay process.
The two methods of disposal have both led to controversies. The
first is burial in deep underground mines and introduces the fear of
damage by future earthquakes and the annihilation of whole cities.
The alternative method of disposal is by rocketing it into outer
space and which will saddle future generations with enormous problems.
Consider the economics of the present policy. A recent OECD report
concludes that the present uranium reserves correspond to only 15
years forward requirement and unless there would be a severe shortage
which would disrupt the nuclear programme.
The situation concerning uranium will be exactly analogous with
that of oil in the year 2000. It has been estimated that upwards of
four million tons of uranium would be needed by that year and
possibly ten million tons of uranium would be needed by that year and
possibly ten million tons by the year 2025. The report neglects to
mention what such an exploration, together with mining and mill
construction would cost.
If the cycle from exploration through enrichment and fuel
fabrication to the reprocessing of the irradiated fuel is taken into
consideration the sum involved would be astronomical. To appreciate
the extent of the sum involved, the proposed enlargement of the
reprocessing plant at Windscale is estimated at £600 million! This
compares with the miserly £100,000 Britain spent last year on
research and development from waves – a drop in the ocean!
The arguments against nuclear fission are not academic but are
based on the harsh realities. It is short sighted to dismiss the
fears about the lasting effect of nuclear waste. Comrade Ashworth
speculates that “it is quite possible that most of the problems of
waste re-cycling can be overcome.” The fact is that in the here and
now those problems have not been solved. Scientists cannot overcome
the problems of obtaining uranium and disposal of its fission product plutonium.
It is entirely erroneous to compare the dangers in coal mining or
the gas or the North Sea oil extraction industry with that in nuclear
fission. The potential dangers from nuclear fission are much greater.
Coal extraction is a danger to the workers in the industry and can be
eliminated by technology. Arthur Scargill envisages the time when the
digging of coal is done by mechanical means and there are no miners
underground. But today the population at large does not face terrible
dangers from coal extraction.
Yet the inherent dangers in the disposal of nuclear waste can
result in catastrophe in the future. There is no safe way that it can
be disposed of. The dangers are highlighted by the concession made to
the nuclear lobby that nuclear plants should be situated away from
large population centres!
Moreover there is conclusive evidence linking all radioactive
materials with cancer. Documented cases of ‘atomic disease’ can
be traced to the miners in Chile in the 19th century. In 1924 the
medical world were astonished when reports reached them of the
terrible story of the radium girls of Ottawa, Jersey. These girls
painted luminous watch dials and in order to achieve a finer point
would gently suck the tips of the brushes. The radioactivity of the
radium ate away their mouths, teeth and jaws. To discuss the
horrifying effects of the bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki would entail an article on its own.
Since cancer is a long agonising process the full extent of
radiation damage caused by plutonium is unlikely to be known in a
couple of years.
Comrade Ashworth argues that because Britain’s nuclear industry
is controlled by the State the dangers which other countries face –
West Germany for instance – don’t exist here. This is
unfortunately not the case. The nationalised industries in Britain
serve the private industries and use the same criteria. It is no
accident that the Financial Times is to the fore in demanding
the building of Fast Breeder Reactors. Moreover many instances can be
given to show that the mandarins at the top of the nationalised
industries behave as irresponsibly as their counterparts in private
industry with regard to safety of the workers in the industry and the
population at large.
Of course the workers in the nuclear power industry will object to
the programme being stopped unless an alternative is given. Lucas
shop stewards have put forward proposals for their industry – and
their jobs – to be switched away from providing weapons to peaceful
purposes. The jobs of the workers in the nuclear industry can be
guaranteed through a sane and safe socialist fuel policy.
It is wrong from a socialist standpoint to seek to justify
nuclear fission and minimise the terrible dangers arising from it.
Far from being a progressive factor, it can, and will, in the hands
of irresponsible profiteers, create extra difficulties for us and
future generations.
 




This year will see the publication of the long-awaited report
on asbestos by the government-created Advisory Committee on Asbestos.
Many of the business and other interests who profit from the use of
asbestos, or who are loath to meet the cost of its replacement, are
already viewing the Committee’s findings more optimistically than
before. They have been encouraged by the interim statement issued in
January and, more recently, by the confusion arising from
controversial evidence presented to the committee and subsequent
legal actions.
 
The January statement reiterated the existing safety limits of
asbestos at work and in the home on the grounds that, as yet, there
is “insufficient data relating the prevalence of asbestos-induced
disease to the doses of asbestos received to revise the 1969 safety standard.”
The standard referred to was based solely on data provided by a
Rochdale asbestos factory on its 290 workforce. The study found in
1968 that only 3% of the men had developed asbestosis. In a smaller
group of 80 men exposed to between 3 and 6 fibres per cubic
centimetre of air only one had asbestosis. On the basis of this
solitary study the government proposed a safety limit of two
fibres per cu. cm. for all workers working with asbestos.
It was later learned, however, that the data from which this limit
was derived was provided by company sources with no outside
confirmation. The method used, moreover, to determine the dust counts
were inexact by scientific standards. Re-evaluation of the data
showed that by 1972, 26 of the 290 had confirmed asbestosis –
almost one in ten!
In addition, there was a sharp increase in lung cancer and a
combination of lung and abdominal cancers amongst workers who were
exposed to this level of asbestos dust. The asbestos worker who
smoked increased his chances of contracting the disease eight-fold.
These findings have now been confirmed by research scientists in
America. In fact, one such scientist has estimated that up to 40% of
one million Americans who have been exposed to asbestos will die of
cancer. This represents the colossal figure of 250,000 deaths! This
has been borne out by a US National Institute of Occupational Safety
and Health report which states that: “Excessive cancer risks have
been demonstrated at all fibre concentrations studies to
date.” (Our emphasis)
If, as this report says, all concentrations of asbestos dust
produce cancer, then it raises serious questions about the
continuing use of asbestos at all and not just, as in the present
debate, what the safety limit should be.
This makes the latest recommendation of the British Advisory
Committee even more extraordinary, upholding, as it does, its
previous stance on safety limits and blatantly disregarding the new
evidence.
Even more controversial is the evidence being submitted to the
Committee by certain scientists which has resulted in a good deal of
in-fighting. A report in the July issue of New Scientist
indicates the intense controversy now going on:
Evidence given at a recent meeting on asbestos could
result in a libel action. Dr. Robert Murray, the ex-medical adviser
to the Trades Union Congress, is “seeking legal advice” about a
statement made at a public meeting of the Advisory Committee on
Asbestos which he believes defamatory. Murray is concerned about
allegations made by Alan Dalton of the British Society for Social
Responsibility in Science [BSSRS], particularly because Murray’s
reputation as an independent consultant is at stake.
The contentious allegation is that Dr Murray was paid
£20,000 to tell an Irish planning inquiry that asbestos should not
be banned, changing previous statements he had made on the issue. The
controversial part of Dalton’s statement to the Advisory Committee
on Asbestos is: “If you look in some of the unpublished evidence to
the committee you’ll find there a safety officer saying that he
heard Dr Robert Murray – then the TUC doctor – say that asbestos
should be banned. A few weeks ago Dr Robert Murray was saying that
asbestos was all right – this was in Cork in Ireland. He was paid
£20,000 by the asbestos industry to say that and that may have
influenced his decision.”
The planning inquiry was seeking a new site for the dumping of
asbestos from a new £4 million plant making brake linings near Cork.
Raybestos, Manhatten, the owners of the plant, had already been
refused permission for one dumping site because of local objections.
Similarly, Dr Richard Dell, Regius Professor of Medicine at
Oxford, has claimed that an unfortunate misprint in the published
proceeding of a conference on asbestos has wrongly given the
impression that he was calling for a complete ban of all asbestos
when in fact he was only referring to blue asbestos. Professor Dell
is head of the DHSS Cancer Epidemiology and Clinical Trials Unit
which was responsible for the survey of workers of Rochdale.
 
Objective?
There have also been claims that attempts were made to exert
pressure on researchers in order to play down their analysis of the
high incidence of cancer amongst workers using asbestos. It was
implied that such findings would prejudice the good relations between
“researchers and the asbestos industry.”
It is for these reasons that workers in the asbestos industry must
take note of the current situation and be prepared to make the
strongest possible representations at these meetings to reinforce the
TUC call for replacement of all asbestos products with safe
alternatives. This is particularly important in the face of what
certainly looks like an attempted “cover up” operation in
relation to this major hazard.
Sweden has already imposed a ban on asbestos. Denmark has followed
suit and outlawed asbestos-insulation. In this country two
nationalised industries, the Post Office and Electricity Board, have
already taken the initiative and banned it.
It is clear that there is no such thing as a “safe limit”. The
trade union movement must now be to the fore in calling for a
complete ban on the use of asbestos. Alternative jobs must be found
for asbestos workers. There should be immediate studies to cost the
introduction of alternatives to asbestos and to make sure that the
possible substitutes are themselves completely safe to use. We must
also demand stringent medical checks and a register of all workers
exposed to this hazard, from the do-it-yourself enthusiast to those
living near asbestos plants.
 




The sugar workers strike which is now in its twelfth week in
Guyana, is having disastrous consequences for the Burnham government
and has aggravated the severe economic crisis which is affecting the
country. This is being viewed optimistically by agents of imperialism
and other interests who are seeking to restore capitalism.
 
Hammer Blows
The strike began after the government’s rejection of a £50
million profit sharing scheme which had been approved earlier. This
would have greatly benefitted the 20,000 miserably paid workers who
were sent reeling under a series of hammer blows induced by external
factors such as the in oil prices, world recession, EEC legislation
and drought, which have all combined to produce record low sugar
yields. This year’s sugar production is estimated to be below last
year’s which was the lowest in recorded history.
This is characterised by the high incidence of the number of
strikes in the industry in this period. Between 1973 and 1976 there
were 462 strikes which resulted in the loss of 1,424,000 man days.
The government’s uncompromising stand against the present strike
and the drafting of 6,000 strike breakers of soldiers and civil
servants has led to sympathy strikes by the bauxite workers and more
importantly the radical Trinidad oil-field workers who have imposed a
ban of fuel shipments to the country which is 90% dependent.
This has opened up and intensified the difference between the
Prime Minister Burnham, who now claims to be a “Maoist” and the
Stalinist opposition leader, Cheddi Jagan, which had appeared to be
healing in the face of mounting foreign intervention, in the wake of
sugar and bauxite nationalisation.
 
Bankrupt
The present conflict has given encouragement to America and
capitalist interests. The bankrupt economy has forced Burnham to rely
increasingly on foreign aid and Washington has dangled the prospect
of economic assistance. The US which has interfered decisively in the
past, has pledged a substantial increase in aid if Guyana, which has
already nationalised 80% of the economy, abandons its move towards a
planned economy and opens up the country to capitalism and private
ownership of the economy. But concessions to capitalist industries
would do nothing to solve the endemic poverty of Guyana.
 
Recall
Only a genuine democratic workers state in Guyana and a complete
nationalisation of the remaining big firms can eliminate the wanton
bureaucracy and chaos that is at present stifling its economic
progress. A plan of production and the introduction of workers and
small farmers councils, management of the economy with democratic
election of all officials, right of recall with regular rotation and
controlled wage differentials will not only abolish the racial
problem but set the basis for a drive for better living standards in
the area and lead to the creation of a socialist federation of the
West Indies.
 

