

Hong Kong, Gibraltar, the Falklands ... Northern Ireland: there is not much left these days of the British Empire, but there is still enough to cause major rows in British politics. It is a short three years since the government fought a war in the South Atlantic which showed how very seriously the British ruling class still regards its overseas interests. In that case it might not have been the actual scrap of land that was really at stake, but the lesson was obvious: despite its economic decay British capitalism still disposed of a powerful military machine.
Other lessons were very obvious too: the impact of the Falklands war on the internal politics of Britain told us a great deal about both the Tories and their opponents. From our point of view, the reaction of the Labour party was the most interesting internal consequence of the war. To see the Tory party waving the Union Jack and singing patriotic songs was revolting but quite unexceptional. To hear the following was another matter:
So far the Falkland Islanders have been betrayed. The responsibility for the betrayal rests with the government. The government must prove by its deeds – they will never be able to do it by words – that they are not responsible for the betrayal and cannot be faced with that charge! [1]
Michael Foot, leader of the left and leader of the Labour Party, actually urging the Tories on to the slaughter came as a surprise even to those of us who expect very little from the Labour Party.
In the case of Michael Foot, there was in fact little cause for surprise. Back in 1940, writing under the penname ‘Cato’, he published a book called Guilty Men. This dealt extensively with the way in which Tory appeasers and Labour pacifists had prepared the way for the military disasters of that year by their policies in the twenties and thirties. They were, for Foot, the ‘guilty men’. By contrast, his heroes were now in power, the people who had always backed militarism and war:
On May 10th the Chamberlain government fell, and Mr Churchill took power. A new determination at once broke through. Already, and at long last, the aeroplanes, the tanks, the arms of every kind are piling up ...
In Mr Churchill as Premier, and in his three service supply chiefs, Ernest Bevin, Herbert Morrison and Lord Beaverbrook (to name only four) we have an assurance that all that is within the range of human achievement will be done to make this island ‘a fortress’ ...
The Nation is united to a man in its desire to prosecute the war in total form ... [2]
Foot, then, has long believed in rallying round the flag and ditching mere party differences (his Mr Churchill was one of the hard liners in the General Strike, Bevin one of the treacherous bureaucrats) in the interests of defending the British Empire.
Foot was not alone. The overwhelming bulk of Labour MPs lined up behind the war. Kinnock was, for him, surprisingly quiet, but he too supported sending the task force, believing that it was ‘necessary and unavoidable’. [3] It is only now, years later, that it has become fashionable for Labour MPs to distance themselves from the slaughter in the South Atlantic.
One of the ways to help understand what went on then, and what might happen again in the future, is to look at the history of the Labour party on the questions of war and the colonial empire. After all, prominently displayed on the front cover of Guilty Men was the following quotation from Churchill: ‘The use of recriminating about the past is to enforce effective action at the present.’ It is sometimes possible to learn from the militants of the enemy class.
In this article I want to show that we were quite wrong to have been surprised: the leadership of the Labour party has always been keen to paint itself red, white and blue at the first hint of a war or the first rumble of unrest in a colony. [4] I do not intend to look at Labour and Ireland: that story is as sordid as the one I have to tell here, but it raises slightly different questions and is best treated separately. Neither do I intend to write about the early history of the Labour party. I have sketched their record elsewhere and there is little to add apart from detail. [5] It is also, I think, true to say that few people active in the Labour movement today have many illusions in the pre-1939 Labour party, so any further excavation would only be of historical, rather than political, interest. [6] Suffice it to say that I can find nothing in the earlier history to modify the analysis I here present.
There are three important claims made about the Labour party and the British Empire. The first concerns its glorious role in the Second World War. The second concerns its behaviour in the period of the Attlee government. The third concerns its alleged opposition to the Suez adventure. I intend to look at the reality of these events in turn.
 
The Second World War
The issue of which position socialists should take towards the Second World War is one which still divides the left. The difficulty for us arises from the fact that while the war was undoubtedly one between rival imperialisms, the Nazis seemed to present a real threat of extinction to all forms of working-class organisation: it therefore is a contentious thing to argue the classic position developed by Lenin over the First World War and to call for the defeat of your own ruling class. One thing, however, is clear to all of us: that the war could not be seen as a simple war for the defence of democracy. As George Orwell pointed out in July 1939, any claim that Britain was in a position to lead any struggle for the defence of democracy always rested on ‘an unspoken clause ... “not counting niggers”.’ [7] The fact was that whatever democratic rights the British working class might have won for itself at home, the British ruling class presided over a vast prison house of torture, murder and exploitation of global extent. Many of the soldiers who would be expected to die in defence of democracy would be Indians and Africans denied even the most elementary democratic rights at home.
Much of this was apparent to the leadership of the Labour party at the outbreak of the war. Attlee, the leader of the party, was after all a man whose reputation was as the representative of the left. However, the immediate response to Chamberlain’s declaration of war, made by Deputy Leader Arthur Greenwood, was completely unequivocal in its support for any and every measure that the government might put forward:
We have given proof in this Chamber in the past few days that we shall give wholehearted support to the measures necessary to equip this state with the powers that are desired. That support, I pledge this House, will continue. In other directions, according to our opportunities, we shall make our full contribution to the national cause. May the war be swift and sure, and may the peace which follows stand proudly for ever on the shattered ruins of an evil name. [8]
In the debate that followed only McGovern and Lansbury, ILP pacifists, spoke against the war, and they without enthusiasm. Much more confident was the intervention of Brigadier-General Sir Henry Croft:
I will only detain the House for a few minutes, but as there has not so far been any right-wing supporter of the government I should like to say that I believe I am speaking on behalf of those old Tories in the country that from the bottom of our hearts we welcome the speeches and the spirit of the Opposition in this House and in the country. We feel that today we are all one brotherhood, fighting for our very existence, and we pray that that great unity ... will persist. [9]
The only people who were sufficiently unsporting as to point out that while defeating the Nazis was only a prospect there were things which could be done right now, were the Indian National Congress, whose leadership argued that if the British meant seriously that they were fighting a war for democracy then national self-determination for India should be a war-aim.
By 3 October, in a debate on the war situation, Attlee for the Labour party had come to accept that qualification:
It is very vital in this struggle that we should make it clear by deeds as well as by words that we are standing for democracy and not for imperialism. We have to consider that fact in dealing with all these people who are standing together with us in this war. We must not think that because there is a war on development under self-government should stop in our Colonial Empire ... In this connection I would refer to the great country of India. The Indian people are with us in our fight for democracy, but they wish to come in not as dependants but as free and equal partners ... I hope we shall get a statement in this House, and I hope it will be one such as will show the Indian people that in this matter they are coming in on a level with us. I say that because it is an outstanding instance of the need for telling the whole world what this country stands for [10]
The Chamberlain government, of course, made no such statement, and Attlee was in no position to force it to. But Attlee, despite the fine talk, had been very careful not to make a declaration of Indian independence a condition of his support for the war. Despite the failure of the government to make any shift at all, the Labour party continued to give absolutely unconditional support to the war.
This turned out well for Attlee and the Labour party. The official position, outlined by Attlee himself in the 1939 pamphlet Labour’s Peace Aims was that:
‘We seek no favoured position. We do not demand from others what we are not prepared to concede ourselves ... It is the recognition of the right of all nations, great or small, of whatever colour or creed, to have the right to live...’ [11]
But again, there was no stipulation of these very reasonable aims as conditions for support. In May 1940 the situation changed radically. The Chamberlain government fell and Attlee and the Labour party were offered the opportunity of entering the coalition government set up to replace him.
It is as well to remember exactly who was at the head of this new government. Winston Churchill was not only an inveterate foe of the British working class but also a vicious opponent of Indian independence. He had previously distinguished himself by describing Gandhi as ‘a half-naked Indian fakir’. This open racist had, together with his crony Amery, opposed the Conservative 1935 India Act, which granted a small measure of progress towards self-government. As a token of his continuing hostility to independence, he immediately appointed Amery as India minister. What is more, his famous first speech as Prime Minister, calling for ‘blood, toil, tears and sweat’ promised victory and its fruits: he made it quite clear that the first of these fruits was: ‘the survival of the British Empire’. [12]
It was quite clear from the very first that, with Churchill as leader, there was no prospect at all of the sort of policy that Attlee had considered ‘very vital’ in 1939. Nevertheless the Labour Conference voted by 2,400,000 to 170,000 to send Attlee into the government whose founding principle was that it demanded ‘from others what it was not prepared to concede ourselves’. The best that Attlee and his friends could get in return for their loyalty to Churchill was that India would be offered self-determination at some unspecified date after the war.
If this was enough to keep the allegedly socialist Attlee on as Deputy Prime Minister, it was not enough to satisfy the openly bourgeois leadership of the Indian National Congress (INC). They had heard rather too many promises of self-determination at some unspecified date in the future, and knew only too well what Churchill and Amery stood for, to believe any such vague promise. They launched a campaign for immediate independence. By 1942 the ‘Quit India Campaign’ had reached such mass proportions that the government of India, directly appointed by these ‘defenders of democracy’ back in London, took action. They proved the moral superiority of British Imperialism by interning the INC leadership without trial, introducing a ‘Whipping Act’ which meant exactly what its title so vividly suggests, and turned the troops who it claimed were defending India against the Japanese loose on the Indian population.
On hearing the news of these savage measures, the Labour Party NEC leapt into action. They passed a resolution:
The Labour Movement is compelled to regard the present attempt to organise civil disobedience movement in India as certain to injure seriously the hope of Indian freedom ... The Labour Movement therefore considers that the action of the government of India in detaining the leaders of Congress was a timely and unavoidable precaution. [13]
This ringing defence of the democratic rights of all peoples irrespective of colour was no mere passing aberration for the Labour party. On 10 September the matter was discussed in the House of Commons. Churchill made a characteristically vile speech justifying the government’s behaviour. He claimed that the INC had no support in India, vilified their leaders, and argued that there had really been very few civilian deaths (500 even by his figures).
Aneurin Bevan, then a left-wing Labour MP, was moved to outrage:
‘I want to know whether the Deputy Prime Minister approved that language. I want to know whether the Lord Privy Seal [the left-winger Cripps] approved that language. I want to know ... whether we are committed to that silly language.’ [14]
What seems to have shocked this reformist saint was not the death of Indian civilians at the hands of British troops, which he did not challenge, but the language Churchill used to describe it. Unfortunately for him, Churchill was able to reply that:
‘... up to a very late hour last night ... the Deputy Prime Minister and I were at work on the actual words of this statement.’ [15]
In fact, the Labour rank and file seem to have been rather more upset than the left MPs, and the party felt obliged to issue an official pamphlet justifying its actions. [16] This argued that there was a firm commitment from the Labour party, as expressed by Cripps in his visit to India, that they would support Indian self-determination after the war was over. There could be no such step taken until then, and there could be no negotiations with the INC until it called off its campaign for independence.
This is one of the classic arguments against progress which is used in all sorts of guises by reformists when they are unable or unwilling to challenge the powers that be. They always plead the exigencies of immediate necessity, say the economic situation, as a reason why they cannot, at this moment, put into practice the policy they have always claimed to stand for. In this case, the argument was transparently weak. If, as Roberts claimed, the main task was to defeat the Japanese invaders of India, then surely free Indians would have been more enthusiastic about fighting and producing than those denied freedom by the British? And surely the troops and other resources used to garrison India and keep it safe for the British Empire could have been better employed shooting at the Japanese rather than the Indian population?
It is, perhaps, just possible to understand how the argument about the need to win the war first might cut ice in 1942, before the overwhelming productive superiority of the US economy had settled the issue beyond doubt. By 1944, however, the war was clearly won and the issue was increasingly one of the nature of the subsequent peace. In Britain, that was a subject of some unanimity, but the process of military liberation placed the British state in the position of installing new governments in a number of countries. In most places, the dirty deals of the big powers made at Yalta and elsewhere were adhered to: any local political force that got out of line was whipped in by its paymasters. Thus, in Italy, Togliatti was sent from Moscow to stop the Communist-led partisans carrying out a thorough purge of the fascists. [17]
Greece was to be the great exception. By November 1944 the Germans were defeated and the British under General Scobie set up a coalition government which began to build a very right-wing state machine. The main resistance to the Nazi occupation had been by EAM, which was dominated by the CP, and the new state launched a campaign against it. On 3 December its police opened fire on some 200 unemployed young people organised by EAM. They killed 15 and wounded 148. EAM responded with a general strike and on 5 December British troops began fighting ELAS, the military wing of EAM.
There was considerable popular opposition in Britain to this use of troops to prop up gangsters in a civil war. [18] By 8 December this had reached sufficient proportions even to stir some Labour MPs. They put down a motion regretting that there was ‘no assurance that His Majesty’s Forces will not be used to disarm the friends of democracy in Greece’. In the vote, out of 167 Labour MPs present, 23 voted with the government, 24 had the guts to vote against, and the rest, 120 heroes, abstained. Armed with this internal mandate, Scobie began to carry out Churchill’s order to treat Athens ‘like a conquered city’: the day after the feeble vote the RAF began bombing it.
Even as events developed into a full-scale civil war, the Labour party stuck to support for the government.
Opening the Labour party case in the next debate on Greece, on 20 December, Greenwood said: ‘This is no occasion for votes of censure. There is no challenge to the government as a government on this issue’. [19] As it happened, Aneurin Bevan for the left took a different view: ‘Where we landed as liberators we look like staying as tyrants.’ [20]
Right up to the end the Labour party was prepared to countenance any atrocity from India to Greece rather than to upset its cosy relations with Churchill. So far as they were concerned, democracy could be ignored if it got in the way of the interests of the British Empire.
 
The 1945 government
Aneurin Bevan’s prophecy about Greece was to come true, and not only in Greece. In country after country, the most corrupt local rulers and the most discredited former colonialists were reinstated by British arms. For most of the time Bevan was a minister in the government that gave the orders.
The first speech by the right-winger Ernest Bevin, the new Labour Foreign Secretary in the 1945 Attlee government, went out of its way to refer to Greece:
I would like to draw the attention of this House to the position in Greece. His Majesty’s government adhere to the policy which they publicly supported when Greece was liberated. We then stated that our object was the establishment of a stable democratic government in Greece ... Unfortunately this process was interrupted by an outbreak of violence. We then supported the policy of restoring law and order. [21]
Aneurin Bevan, the critic of December 1944, was now the silent supporter of butchery, but a new leftist emerged, one Michael Foot:
Events in Greece have moved very fast recently and they have not moved in the direction which any true democrat can applaud. [22]
That was something of an understatement. ELAS was defeated in a long and bloody civil war. The police were rebuilt by Sir Charles Wickham, former Inspector-General of the RUC. It was not until 1949 that the last 3,000 British troops pulled out and even then they left behind police, military, air and naval ‘missions’.
Elsewhere, British troops were used to restore Dutch rule in Indonesia and French rule in Indochina. Britain was a moving spirit behind the founding of NATO, whose original treaty included specific reference to the ‘Algerian Departments of France’. In Malaya the British government launched a military campaign against the Communist Party and, last but not least, sent troops to Korea. The only MPs to oppose that were S.O. Davies and Emrys Hughes. [23]
It proved impossible, of course, to hang on to India any longer: the British economy could no longer support the military effort needed to crush an independence movement which had even led to a naval mutiny. Elsewhere, however, things continued as normal. Even on the narrowest question of ‘industrial relations’ in colonies the new government took no initiative. If one reads the Colonial Office report on the subject, the only innovation of the decade took place under the Churchill government and consisted of sending British trade union officials to set up unions. [24]
That was a better policy than banning unions, but it has to be seen in the context of the way in which workers were handled in the British Empire during the tenure of the Labour government. In 1949, in Enugu in Nigeria for example, the police opened fire on striking miners and killed 18 workers. [25] Workers had the right to be members of unions modelled after the best bureaucratic practices of the TUC, but if they went on strike they could expect police violence that made Orgreave look like a picnic.
The only really unusual thing about Labour party foreign policy during this period was the extent to which they felt they needed to justify it to their members and supporters. For example, in 1946 the Labour party published a pamphlet by Rita Hinden which asked:
What should Labour do about the colonies? Should we blame as hypocrite the socialist who does not demand immediate independence for all colonial peoples? ... These are questions of concern to members of the Labour Party. [26]
These were, and are, good questions, but her answer was a familiar one: in the long run something would be done, but just now circumstances were not favourable. Indeed, her argument against immediate independence dripped with paternalism when it gave as its main reason for supporting the status quo at that time the fact that the natives were not yet advanced enough to run their own affairs. Doing something had to be postponed into the indefinite future:
Ultimately our purpose in the colonies is the same as that which Mr Attlee announced for India. We recognise the rights of all peoples to self- determination ... One cannot immediately apply this principle to every small British Colony, but there is no reason why we should not declare that this is the principle on which we are working, and perhaps to take the first steps in the most advanced of the Colonies, wherever it might be feasible. [27]
This sturdy and resolute imperialism, which proceeded without significant opposition from Labour MPs, was only part of a much more widespread foreign policy of reaction. The government became so identified with the forces of reaction that the Labour party felt obliged to issue a more general argument on foreign policy:
It is clear, however, that a minority of Labour’s own supporters are sincerely disturbed about the government’s activities abroad. Apart from disagreements on particular issues like Palestine, Greece or Spain (which are not discussed in this pamphlet), some loyal members of the party are genuinely concerned about the general line of Labour’s foreign policy – because it is held to take sides with capitalist America against socialist Russia. [28]
In defence of the government, the pamphlet claimed that Labour was in fact pursuing an independent third course moderating the excesses of both sides and seeking to improve world affairs. As the Cold War deepened, even this pathetic claim was dropped. The government lined up more and more closely with the US and, by the time it had to justify military operations in Malaya it was doing so in terms of the most strident anticommunism.
Overall, the policy of the allegedly left-wing government elected in 1945 was to use every effort to defend not just the British Empire but any other empire it could. There was nothing anti-colonialist or progressive about its actions.
 
Suez
The joint Anglo-French invasion of Egypt, in concert with the Israelis, in 1956 was an example of an imperialist military adventure, and as such is often compared with the Falklands War. Members of the Labour party who were disgusted with the role their leaders played over the Falklands often claim Labour opposition to the Suez adventure as an example of what Labour can do. The reality is rather more complex.
On 6 July 1956 President Nasser of Egypt announced that the Suez Canal Company, economically and strategically vital to Egypt but foreign-owned, would be nationalised forthwith. Compensation to stockholders would be paid at the latest closing price on the Paris Bourse. The next day the matter was discussed in the House of Commons and Prime Minister Eden made threatening noises. Instead of congratulating the Egyptians on gaining a further measure of national independence, Lahour leader Gaitskell argued:
On this side of the House, we deeply deplore the high-handed and totally unjustified step by the Egyptian government. Has the Prime Minister in mind to refer this to the Security Council? [29]
No-one on the Labour benches, not even the leftist Foot, congratulated Nasser on a spot of timely nationalisation. One Labour MP, an obscure figure called Paget, was the first to compare Nasser to Hitler.
What the Prime Minister ‘had in mind’ was rather more vigorous than referring things to the club of robbers who make up the UN Security Council. By August troops were being readied for military intervention. In the 2 August debate on these developments Gaitskell continued the same line as before: ‘It is all very familiar. It is exactly the same that we encountered from Mussolini and Hitler in the years before the war.’ [30] He went on to say that force could not be ruled out, provided that it was sanctioned by the UN – which meant the USA. [31]
Herbert Morrison was very concerned to deny that what Labour wanted in Britain bore any resemblance to Nasser’s doings:
One night Colonel Nasser decides to go out and enjoy himself, and makes a speech on the hustings. He makes a speech. Towards the end of that speech he whacks out a decree which he has just signed, or a declaration, that from that point the Suez Canal is to be nationalised and to become Egyptian government property ...
Sir, anybody who says that this has the slightest resemblance to the orthodox beliefs of the British Labour party as to the process of nationalisation – why, if he said it outside, he would be guilty of libel. [32]
I can find no evidence that any of the leaders of the left in the Labour party took a different view. Bevan’s own view was:
‘If the sending of one’s police and soldiers in the darkness of the night to seize somebody else’s property is nationalisation, Ali Baba used the wrong terminology.’ [33]
Five weeks later, the Labour party was changing its tack. The workers they had agreed to let be conscripted were obviously unhappy at the prospect of war. More importantly, the USA disapproved of the adventure and the leaders of the Labour party had become ‘statesmen’ in two governments whose proudest foreign claim was alliance with the USA. It was time to start backing off. On 12 September Gaitskell signalled the retreat: ‘At the beginning of his speech the Prime Minister referred to our debate of 2 August and spoke of the general agreement which then prevailed. I do not deny that over a certain part of that field that agreement certainly existed.’ [34] What was now going to be emphasised was the different assessments of the needs of British capitalism. Even the rhetoric about Nasser had to be changed. R.H.S. Crossman argued, quite correctly, that: ‘It is quite ridiculous to compare Nasser with Hitler or Mussolini’. [35] Having shifted its position, the Labour party was quick to cash in on the popular mood. The demonstration it called on 4 November under the slogan ‘Law not War’ was massive.
It is that demonstration that the Labour left of today would like to remember. The reality is that for two months the Labour party beat the imperialist drum along with the Tories and then spent another month gathering the courage to protest in the streets. What is more, the experience of Suez did nothing to cure the Labour party of its affection for the rest of the British Empire. While they reluctantly had to concede that independence was the immediate order of the day for most colonies, they still scrabbled around to find places to hold on to. In a 1957 pamphlet on The Problem of Small Colonies they were still arguing that independence was not feasible for such places as Pitcairn Island, Cyprus, Malta, Aden, North Borneo, the Falkland Islands. As it happens, Cyprus, Malta, Aden and North Borneo are all now quite big enough to be independent. You already know about the Falklands and I can find nothing about Pitcairn Island’s status in my atlas. The problem, of course, was never the small size of colonies but the large size of the imperialists. [36]
 
Conclusion
The pattern which emerges even from this brief look at the history is too consistent to be explained in terms of the venality, stupidity, or other shortcomings of individual leaders of the Labour party. Its explanation has to lie in the nature of the party and what it tries to do. The pattern of Attlee the leftist of 1939 and Attlee the imperialist of 1942, or Bevan the leftist of 1944 and Bevan the imperialist of 1945 has a superficial charm. The trouble is that, as 1956 or 1982 show, even in opposition the Labour party has been very keen on the military defence of the empire. It is true that we can find many individual members of the Labour party who are much more principled about their opposition to imperialism, but the party as a whole has never played that honourable role.
Part of the explanation lies in the suffocating electoralism that has always been the mark of the Labour party. If what you want to do above all else is to win elections then you gradually become very adept at sensing the popular mood and adapting to it. The un popularity which can arise from sticking to your principles is not something those whose life revolves around the election timetable are keen to foster. In the twentieth century, the nation and the empire have been two of the key ideological weapons of the ruling class and there is no doubt that at times, for example 1914, they have managed to stir up real popular patriotism. Bending to the winds of chauvinism is of course part of the explanation for Labour’s record on empire and war.
But it cannot be the whole explanation. There have been times when the Labour party has been much more jingoistic than its base – in 1939 and in 1982, for example. And there have been times when it has been jingoistic despite the sentiments of its base: the two or three years after 1944 for example, when it felt the need to justify its chauvinism to its supporters.
The other part of the explanation is that all reformists believe that the state is the main instrument they will use to achieve social progress, or even socialism, on behalf of their supporters. For them the state is not an instrument which is by its very nature designed to maintain the rule of the capitalist class but a necessary aspect of organising social life. So, in order best to use this state, it is essential to have it functioning as well as possible. This applies both to the internal functioning of the state and to its external functions. In an advanced capitalist society in the twentieth century it is inevitable that the external functions of the state will involve a greater or lesser degree of imperialism. So to seek to keep the state in trim is of necessity to aid and abet its imperialist role.
Add to all of that the belief that there is a common national interest within the state, standing as it does above classes, and you have the ideological underpinning for all of the capitulations to the state which litter the ugly history of reformism.
We were wrong to be surprised by the extent of some Labour capitulation to the Falklands war. It was entirely in keeping with their record. Jingoism is as much a part of the history of the Labour party as is Clause Four. The only difference is, nobody ever acted on Clause Four.
* * *
Notes
1. Hansard, 3 April 1982.
2. ‘Cato’, Guilty Men (Gollancz, 1940), pp. 124–5. It might be noted that Beaverbrook was then Foot’s employer.
3. Cited in G.M.F. Drower, Neil Kinnock: The Path to Leadership (Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1984), p. 96.
4. Just to show how naive I was, I first wrote a draft of this article at the time of the Falklands war, at the request of the editor of the Bennite magazine New Socialist. He turned it down flat once he saw it.
5. See Labour’s imperialist past, Socialist Review, 1982, p. 5.
6. There is, so far as I can discover, only one scholarly book on the subject, P.S. Gupta’s Imperialism and the British Labour Movement (1975).
7. Not Counting Niggers in The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, vol. i, p. 437.
8. Hansard, vol. 351, cols. 293–4.
9. Hansard, vol. 351, col. 300.
10. Hansard, vol. 351, cols. 1865–6.
11. C. Attlee, Labour’s Peace Aims, 1942.
12. Hansard, vol. 360, col. 1502.
13. Quoted by Greenwood. Hansard, vol. 383, col. 554.
14. Hansard, vol. 383, col. 307.
15. Ibid.
16. G. Ridley, MP, India, 1942.
17. See F. Claudin. The Communist Movement from Comintern to Cominform, pp. 249–351.
18. R. Croucher, Engineers at War, p. 324.
19. Hansard, vol. 406, col. 1860.
20. Hansard, vol. 406, col. 1875.
21. Hansard, vol. 413, col. 289.
22. Hansard, vol. 413, col. 315.
23. Hansard, vol. 413, col. 337.
24. See Colonial Office, Labour Administration in the Colonial Territories, 1951
25. To be fair, there was an official enquiry.
26. R. Hinden, The Labour Party and the Colonies, 1946.
27. Ibid.
28. Labour Party, Cards on the Table, 1947.
29. Hansard, vol. 557, col. 777.  
30. Hansard, vol. 557, col. 1613
31. Hansard, vol. 557, col. 1617
32. Hansard, vol. 557, col. 1657.
33. Not I think in this debate. It is cited by H. Thomas in his The Suez Affair, 1970, p. 37. Foot also cites it in his hagiography.
34. Hansard, vol. 558, cols. 15–16.
35. Hansard, vol. 558, col. 84.
36. The pamphlet was called Labour’s Colonial Policy, vol. iii.
 



Sweden has proved an attractive example to various currents on the left. The Labour Party has for long regarded the achievements of its Swedish fellow thinkers as an ideal towards which any social democratic party shold aspire. Kinnock’s enthusiasm is the continuation of a tradition which goes back at least to the 1950s. More recently opposition groups in Eastern Europe, for good reason bitterly hostile to Stalinism, have put forward Sweden as an alternative to the rabid free market ideology which informs the actions of their post-1989 governments. In this article we will look at just what the nature of this ‘Swedish Model’ is, how it came about and what its future will be.
It is important to begin by recognising that the reformist image of Sweden as an earthly paradise is not simply an illusion based on wishful thinking. The Swedish Social Democrats, in power more or less continuously for more than 50 years now, have carried out real reforms, and the working class has experienced real gains. In particular, the social wage is at a very high level. To anyone familiar with the decay of social policy, health and welfare in the UK, Sweden is indeed very much like an earthly paradise. For example, someone who is ill – not an emergency case – can expect to see a specialist within a couple of hours of their first contact with the health system. Medical care is not free, costing around £6 to visit a doctor and around the same for each day in hospital, but it is of a very high standard and Sweden has good infant mortality and longevity records. In education, although compulsory schooling stops at 16, more than 90 percent of pupils go on for at least two more years of education and 85 percent of them continue for three years. Thirty five percent of young people go on to university level education.
The one million immigrants in Sweden (roughly 12 percent of the 8.5 million population) are entitled to education in their mother tongue and can take Swedish as a foreign language free. The government funds about 30 nationals, and 1,200 local, immigrant organisations. A subsidized newspaper appears in 12 immigrant languages. The Swedish Broadcasting Authority provides programmes in Finnish, Serbo-Croat, Greek, Spanish and Polish and since 1986 there has been an Ombudsman Against Ethnic Discrimination.
Pensioners form around 18 percent of the population and benefits for a retired industrial worker on average wages are just over 70 percent of earlier net income. Just over 90 percent of Sweden’s pensioners live in their own homes and around 20 percent receive some form of home help.
The child care policy, considered by many Swedes to be a major disaster area, provides public child care for 48 percent of children aged between four months and six years. Thirty seven percent are cared for by a parent at home. By the age of six 98 percent of children have places in at least part time public day care and compulsory schooling starts at seven. The government plans to provide public child care for all children between four months and six years whose parents wish to take it up although it is its failure to achieve this objective which is regarded as such a serious disaster.
Under the Act on Equality between Women and Men at Work, not only are employers prohibited from discriminating against a person because of her or his sex but they are legally obliged to take active measures to promote equality at work. If an employer discriminates against a person as part of a conscious effort to promote equality, then the rule against discrimination is waived. Women make up 38 percent of all MPs and 40 percent of those of the ruling Social Democratic Party. In 1987 average female hourly wages in manufacturing were 89.6 percent of male wages.
Sweden was never a member of NATO and has given substantial support to liberation movements. In recognition of government support for the ANC, Sweden was the first European country Nelson Mandela visited after his release. Compared with the Labour Party, the GLC, Liverpool, Lambeth, Sheffield or Haringey Councils, the Swedish Social Democrats are serious social democrats.
They remain, however, social democrats. The economy they have managed is a highly capitalist one: 85 percent of industry is privately owned and only 10 percent is nationalised (the other 5 percent is held by co-operatives). Much of that nationalisation was carried out by the only governments in Sweden since 1932 containing no social democrats: the right wing governments which were in power between 1976 and 1982. Private ownership of industry is very highly concentrated, and control even more so. In 1985 the percentage of shares held by the biggest single owner in each company averaged 29 percent. While 50 percent of adults held some shares, these holdings were mostly very small and control remains in very few hands. The average of the largest single owners’ shares in the voting stock of the 100 top companies was 47 percent Of these big capitalists the very biggest is the Wallenberg family which controls businesses accounting for more than one third of the value of the Swedish Stock Exchange. If the working class has made real gains in Sweden in the last half century, it has certainly not been by means of the expropriation of the ruling class.
The deal between capital and labour in Sweden dates from 1932, but the pervasive social peace of the country disguises the fact that the nature of the deal, and the balance between the two classes, has shifted over time. Social peace has not always been a Swedish characteristic. The first union in Sweden was the Typographical Association founded in 1846, but when the main trade union federation, the Landsorganisationen i Sverige (LO) was founded in 1898, it had less than 40,000 members. Although there had long been some industries, particularly in mining and forestry, large scale development was relatively late and in 1900 48 percent of the population was still engaged in agriculture. The new working class, and its trade union organisations, quickly confronted the question of the franchise. In April 1902 LO led a three day general strike for a universal franchise and by 1907 even the Conservative government was forced to concede an unequal manhood suffrage. By 1919 universal and equal suffrage was won. The employers were also reluctant to concede trade union rights and faced another mouth long general strike in 1909. Despite overwhelming support, even from workers whom the union officials instructed to stay at work and from non-union members, the employers eventually won and were able to impose national wage agreements on the unions. Despite this weakening of the unions which took some years to overcome, and unemployment which reached as high as 30 percent of union members in 1920, the years from 1910 to 1930 were characterised by a series of labour disputes. These struggles culminated in the famous and bitter strike in the Adalen Valley in the spring of 1931, when soldiers shot down five workers.
The political response to this working class militancy followed the general European pattern quite closely. There was a struggle inside the Social Democratic Party after its 1889 foundation which led to the victory of an openly reformist wing under Hjalmar Branting. Unlike most European countries, however, the fact that Sweden did not enter the First World War meant that the sharp division of 1914 was not duplicated immediately in the Social Democrats. There were pro-war tendencies inside the Social Democrats – three members were expelled for writing that Sweden should join with Germany to defend ‘Western civilisation’ against Russian barbarism – but the party as a whole was not confronted with the hard and immediate choices which faced socialists in the belligerent countries. Neutrality, and the ability to trade with both sides, meant a rapid growth in many Swedish industries, but at the same time as the capitalists were enjoying record profits the working class experienced increasing food shortages and low wages.
The 1917 revolutions thus found a warm welcome from large sections of the working class. There were substantial demonstrations in the spring of 1917 in many large cities, and revolutionary propaganda had ensured that large sections of the army rank and file were not prepared to fire on workers. The left of the Social Democrats broke away to form a new ‘centrist’ party, the Social Democratic Left, which later split again. The majority became the Communists. A Swedish version of 1917 did not seem impossible. By the autumn the bourgeois government was unable to hold on to power and was forced to call elections. The official Social Democrats emerged as the largest party, with 31.8 percent of the votes, while the Social Democratic Left gained 8.1 percent of the votes. The Social Democrats played a vital role in stabilising the situation for capitalism: they entered a coalition with the Liberals despite the fact that the electoral system was still rigged in favour of the upper classes. With them in government, the left was isolated and while strikes and demonstrations continued throughout 1918 the Social Democrats were able to play in Sweden the same role as their big brothers in Germany, although with much less blood spilt.
In neither their first government nor in the remainder of the 1920s did the Social Democrats either carry out any of the major social reforms or achieve the kind of class peace for which they were to become famous. These innovations were the product of the government they formed in 1932 in the wake of the Adalen massacre. They had fought the election on what we would now call ‘Keynesian’ policies, developed by the Social Democrat Ernst Wigforss. The centrepiece of this policy involved public works, for which the unemployed were to be paid normal wages. Despite their electoral success the Social Democrats were not a majority and in order to form a government they were forced to make a deal with the extremely right wing, indeed proto-fascist, Agrarian Party (today the Centre Party). In 1933, in return for their votes for social reforms and tax rises, the Social Democrats gave die Agrarians agricultural protection. This was the first, political, plank of the long social peace.
With that parliamentary majority, interrupted only for 100 days in 1936 when the Agrarians tried to govern alone after falling out with their partners over rearmament, the Social Democrats carried out a number of major reforms. In 1934 subsidies for housing construction were introduced and an unemployment insurance system established. In 1935 pensions were raised substantially. In 1936 the working hours of rural labour were shortened by law. In 1937 there were measures to aid mothers and young couples setting up home and in 1938 a mandatory two week paid holiday for all workers was introduced.
The other side of the coin was a deal between LO and the Swedish Employers Federation (SAF) which resulted from talks initiated in 1936. The ‘Saltsjobaden Agreement’ of 1938 set up a permanent Labour Market Council which functioned as a national negotiating body. The employers agreed to police their members over things like sackings, while LO undertook to make sure that workers stuck to national agreements and did not take secondary action or attempt to establish a closed shop.
These measures of class collaboration were attempted in other countries at about the same time. The fact that they worked in Sweden was because the employers were able to make concessions in ways that, for example, the British ruling class could not make to the MacDonald government in 1931. Underpinning the concessions was the boom in Sweden which resulted in large part from the rearmament drive of the late 1930s. The Swedish economy was particularly closely tied to the German military machine, exporting vital raw materials like iron ore and engineering products like ball-bearings. Thus, while Sweden remained neutral in 1939, this neutrality ‘spoke German’ for the first few years. The Social Democratic government placed no barriers on exports to the Nazis and allowed them to move troops from Norway through Sweden to Finland in order to participate in the attack on Russia. After 1943, when it became clear that the allies were winning, neutrality increasingly ‘spoke English’, or perhaps American. Iron ore and ball-bearings were both exports to the Nazis which had to be curtailed, under pressure.
Social reform, resting on rapid industrial expansion and high profits resulting from a war drive was thus the initial shape of the compromise developed by the Swedish government. This policy did not represent an attack on the capitalists: reforms were financed out of the taxation of wages, wealth and inheritance, while taxes on company profits were kept at a very low level. The dominance of the Social Democrats was nowhere near as certain as it might seem with hindsight and certainly the bulk of workers were still prepared to fight for better wages and conditions. In 1945, in common with many other countries, there was very substantial strike action, led by engineering workers, and the future of the Social Democratic government was uncertain for several years. An alliance of the Social Democrats and the LO leadership was able to head off this struggle and to survive a series of economic and political crises in the late 1940s. In large part the survival of the reformists was because Swedish capital was able to take advantage of the post-war reconstruction boom, being one of the few countries in Europe with intact infrastructure and industry: GDP grew by an average of 4.5 percent annually between 1946 and 1950. The political situation was stabilised by 1950 with the formation of| Social Democrat-Agrarian coalition. On the Agrarian side this rested upon agricultural protection and the support for a shift towards large scale mechanised capitalist farming. On the Social Democratic side it meant a continuation of social reforms, within the framework of limited state direction for the economy. The most important element in this was the ‘solidaristic wage policy’. This idea – put forward by two Social Democratic economists, Rehn and Meidner, and first adopted in 1951 – is a key example of how, in an expanding world economy, the Swedish Social Democrats were able to deliver social advances to the working class which were also beneficial to the capitalists.
The Rehn-Meidner model was first of all a wages plan. It was based on the notion of the central determination of wage levels. The reasoning ran that a small industrial economy like Sweden could only survive and expand if it was competitive on the world market. Thus the basic determinant of wage levels was the international competitiveness of those sectors of the Swedish economy which traded on the world market. These industries in the ‘exposed sector’ – steel, motor vehicles, electrical engineering and so on – set the level of wages for the whole of the Swedish working class. The aim of the ‘solidaristic wage policy’ was, in its initial stages, to set national wage levels for particular kinds of work. These were applied irrespective of the ability of a particular employer to pay. So, in pursuit of ‘solidarity’, all fitters and all carpenters would be paid the same whatever the state of the companies they happened to work for. For workers, this had the obvious advantage of limiting the ability of capitalists to set up sweat shops with low pay and lousy conditions. For the capitalists, however, it had the effect of driving the backward out of business and making sure that wages in the most profitable companies were kept under control. Combined with a taxation policy which penalised distributed profits very heavily but left reinvested profit strictly alone, this policy meant that Swedish capitalism was under a very strong collective pressure to invest and to substitute machines for labour. Productivity might be expected to grow sharply, and it did. For the economy as a whole, including the expanding service sector in which productivity gains are very difficult to achieve, the average annual growth for productivity in the 1960s was 4.9 percent per annum. In other words, the Social Democrats obliged the capitalists to behave like proper capitalists.
The obvious problem with this policy was that those capitalists who were less efficient would be under pressure from wage levels and from better equipped competitors and would regularly close down. In an expanding economy – growing at an average of 3.5 percent per annum in the 1950s and 4.4 percent in the 1960s – this problem was a relatively small one and could be handled by retraining and mobility policies designed to help workers shift from one industry and region to another.
So successful was this overall policy, and so rapid was the expansion of Swedish capitalism during the 1950s and 1960s, that the real problem was shortage of labour. In order to sustain the rapid growth, the Swedish economy needed more and more workers. These they found firstly through the reduction in the agricultural workforce, secondly through immigration (largely from Finland but increasingly from the Mediterranean countries) and thirdly by drawing women into the workforce. Many of the policies which seem so progressive at first sight can be understood in terms of this need to expand the labour force. This is particularly true of the childcare provisions. Taken on their own, these make it much more simple for women to enter and re-enter the labour market, but in most economies this has simply meant that women become a low paid ‘reserve army’. Combined with training opportunities, uniform wage levels and anti-discrimination policies, they have been intended to ensure that low paid and low skilled reservoirs of women workers in service industries and so on do not develop and impede the overall drive to productivity and growth. The very high participation rates of women in the Swedish economy have been achieved in large part by means of removing as many obstacles as possible to female participation particularly in the areas of childcare, training and on the job discrimination.
In the years after 1951, then, the Swedish Social Democrats were able to achieve what looked in reformist eyes something very much like a miracle. They had done a deal with the capitalist class in which the latter made good profits while the working class got some very substantial crumbs from the table. In particular, since many of the social reforms which benefited the working class were in the form of the social wage rather than simple take-home pay, the benefit for all workers was relatively much greater than other countries which enjoyed high living standards: the provision of services through social labour is much more efficient than doing the same thing on a piecemeal basis and, what is more, it is readily assimilable into a rhetoric of social progress.
As in all social life, however, the very success of Swedish reformism produced the factors which have led to its current crisis. The first of these was the fact that Swedish prosperity was very heavily dependent on the growth of the world economy, and this was and is something quite outside the control of Swedish Social Democrats. One could say that they had been ‘lucky’ with the dates of their parliamentary victories in a way that the British Labour Party has not been. Labour bore the burden of modernising British capitalism in 1945 and were then ‘cheated’ by the electoral system of a majority in the years of boom which resulted. The first faltering steps of their Swedish cousins had been underwritten by a rearmament drive, and their period of greatest advance coincided with the longest world boom in the history of capitalism. When that boom ran out, in the aftermath of the oil crisis of 1974, the problems of the Swedish economy were very sharply illuminated.
The development of very large and capital intensive, export-oriented industries in Sweden, which was the aim of Social Democratic industrial policy from 1951 onwards, has meant that almost all of the major sectors of the economy are very vulnerable to the trade cycle. The motor industry is a case in point: in 1988, 76.4 percent of the products of car production were exported and no less than 91.7 percent of the products of the truck and bus sector went abroad. Admittedly this is an extreme case, but in 1987 exports accounted for 61 percent of the products of the mining industry, 46 percent of the chemical industry, 51 percent of the steel industry, 46 percent of wood products, 66 percent of pulp and paper, 65 percent of engineering overall (including automotive products), and 70 percent of the total product of electrical engineering and electronics. The three largest export markets are Germany, the UK and the USA.
This vulnerability to the state of the world market can be seen in the sharp swings in trade balance. In 1978 there was a positive balanced Skr 5m. The next year, with the start of the world slump particularly in the UK, there was a negative balance of Skr 5m. The balance worsened and remained negative until the start of the recovery in 1983 and remained positive up to 1987. This fall in demand led to a crisis in many sectors of Swedish industry, followed by closures and layoffs. We should be cautious in assessing the depth of this crisis, particularly as compared with the UK, since at its worst, in 1981, GDP fell by only 0.3 percent and grew in every other year, and the unemployment peak in, 1983 was 2.9 percent. Nevertheless, the effect of this mini-slump was to illustrate that full employment, one of the jewels in the reformist crown, depended not upon Swedish government policy but upon the vagaries of the world economy. Once again the luck of the Social Democrats held: a right wing government came into power in 1976 and had to manage the slump, losing office again in 1982 to the reformists.
The second major consequence of success is the internationalisation of the decisive sectors of the Swedish economy. This has three aspects. The first is that the Swedish ruling class is extremely worried about the possibility of the development of trade blocs which will exclude it from its major markets. It is therefore extremely keen to enter the EC as soon as possible in order to benefit fully from the single market which contains its two biggest export markets. The Social Democrats, on the other hand, were opposed to entry since, while the Delors plan may look like rank Communism to the average British Tory, it looks like a return to the 1920s to the average Swedish worker. More substantially, they argue that entry to the EC will remove their ability to control social policy and thus undermine their ability to win working class support. Recently they have reluctantly come to accept the inevitability of EC membership, but they are keen to negotiate special terms.
The second major problem is the extent to which the centre of operations of large sections of Swedish capital is no longer located in Sweden. Swedish owned companies employ some 450,000 workers abroad, while the total Swedish labour force is only 4.5 million and the domestic industrial labour force around 1.5 million. The most extreme example of this internationalisation is perhaps Electrolux, the well known manufacturer of electrical goods. Of its total of 140,500 employees, 111,000 work abroad. Ericsson, the telecommunications manufacturer, employs 70,900 people, of whom 50 percent are abroad. The effect of this is to change the relationship between Swedish capital and the Swedish state. These giant companies are no longer tied to Sweden and they are therefore no longer completely subordinated to decisions taken by the Swedish state. They can bargain much more keenly for concessions since they can, as a counter, make the convincing threat that they will move all their operations abroad: in 1990 Ericsson made precisely that threat.
The third aspect of the internationalisation of Swedish capital is the extent to which it is fusing with capital elsewhere. This is in part a more general case of the second aspect and takes the form of the export of capital. In 1985 this totalled Skr 14,000 million but by 1988 it had reached Skr 44,500 million. In the same year domestic gross fixed capital formation was Skr 40,000 million and capital inflows amounted to Skr 7,900 million. The other part is merger with, or takeover by, a foreign company. Thus in 1988 the Swedish company ASEA merged with Brown Boverei of Switzerland to form ABB, one of the largest electrical engineering companies in the world. In 1990 General Motors took over the automotive division of Saab and only government action prevented Renault taking over Volvo.
To an increasing extent then, Swedish capitalism has outgrown its own state. It has less material interest in its deal with the Social Democrats and less need to pay the high taxes and wages or accept the other restrictions which are the price it was forced to pay for a docile workforce.
The third major consequence of the success is the changing structure of the labour market. The provision of health care, nurseries and education, social services and all the rest of the paraphernalia of social reform meant the creation of huge numbers of jobs. It was the expansion of this sector which partly accounted both for the low level of unemployment and the high female participation rate. These, however, are all classic service industries in which, at current levels of technology at least, it is much more difficult to raise productivity than in the manufacturing sector. Although you can replace a welder by a robot, it is not yet quite possible to do the same with a nursery school teacher. The first consequence of this is that, while increasing investment can continue to raise the productivity level in manufacturing, the overall rise in productivity of the economy as a whole slows down sharply as the service sector grows in importance. While in the 1960s the average annual increase in productivity for the economy as a whole was 4.9 percent, in the 1980s it was 1.2 percent and seems to be continuing on average to fall. This would not matter too much if it was not for another, unintended, effect of the ‘solidaristic wage policy’. In theory, this meant equal pay for equal work and said nothing about equal pay for unequal work: there was nothing in the original plan which said that there should be any link between the pay of welders and the pay of nursery school teachers. The idea was that wages should be set with reference to the competitivity of the ‘open’ internationally exposed sector. In practice, while centralised wage determination did have the effect it was intended to, it also had the effect of compressing wage differentials between different types of workers.
This is because in a situation of long term full employment and very high trade union membership, both trade union pressure and the need to recruit and retain workers mean that employers in the sheltered sector have to pay wages which more or less shadow those in the open-sector. Thus in 1989 hourly earnings of industrial workers rose by 10 percent, while those of all employees rose by 9,5 percent This is desirable from the point of view of the working class, in that it reduces the material base for exploitable divisions within the proletariat and goes some way towards meeting deep seated egalitarian ideas, but it is extremely undesirable from the point of view of the capitalist class, since it reduces the financial incentive to job mobility between sectors. Thus, while the solidaristic wage policy continues to push labour towards the more efficient firms within a given sector, the fact that employment in public services is both relatively secure and relatively well paid means that it is difficult to attract workers to move across sectors.
A further consequence is that levels of both internal prices, which are related to wage pressures both in the open and the protected sectors, and of taxation, which covers the costs of the wages in the public sector, will be higher than they would otherwise be. Quite apart from any personal discomfort this may cause capitalists in their embodied, consuming aspect, it adversely affects them in their disembodied, accumulating aspect too. In the long term, these pressures lead to inflation, plus either a diversion of products from exports or an increase in imports.
Most interesting of all from the revolutionary point of view is the effect this has on the bargaining system itself. The working class in Sweden is very well organised. Eighty five percent of all eligible employees are trade union members. Ninety percent of blue collar workers and 75 percent of white collar workers belong to genuine unions. At the same time there is effectively full employment – indeed in the last couple of years, with unemployment under 2 percent there has been ‘overfull’ employment. These are, of course, the classic conditions in which workers gain self confidence. Equally obviously, it is in periods like this that LO and the Social Democrats are supposed to pay back the employing class for the concessions made earlier. It is their job to make sure that self confidence does not produce any serious change in the balance of class forces. The national negotiations, and the control of the central fulltime officials over the union apparatus, remain a very powerful force, but there are signs that they are starting to break down. If we look rather more closely at the 10 percent increase in the hourly earnings of industrial workers in 1989, we find that only 4.6 percent of that rise was accounted for by official negotiations. The remaining 5.4 percent was ‘wage drift’. Some of this will be the result of employers offering local incentives to overcome particular labour shortages, but in part at least it is evidence of the ability of groups of workers to make gains independently of the national officials.
We must be very wary of how we interpret this: there has been no massive strike wave in Sweden in the last few years and there is little evidence of industrial action independent of the bureaucracy. There is, however, some evidence. In 1990 the government announced a two year wage freeze and this was welcomed by the leaders of LO as a necessary measure to save the Swedish economy. There was, however, widespread rank and file discontent with this position and in the Stockholm transport system a group of ex-revolutionaries were able to organise a short but very effective unofficial stoppage in protest. So widespread was the discontent that in the end the government was unable to carry through its plan.
All of these factors together seem to point to the fact that the Swedish model of class harmony, social reform and profitable capitalism is coming to an end. The re-emergence of the spectre of world slump in the course of 1990 has accelerated the approach of the crisis. Although the Swedish stock exchange fell by more than 40 percent in 1990, representing a much sharper fall even than in 1931, it is not true that Swedish capitalism is about to collapse. It does, however, want to move into a much stronger position. One sign of this is that the main bourgeois parties, the Conservatives and the Liberals, finally, after years of ineffectual squabbling, managed in October 1990 to stitch together a convincing alliance for the forthcoming election. Big business is certainly taking these parties much more seriously as a potential alternative to the Social Democrats. The employers want wage and tax differentials widened to provide ‘incentives’ for job mobility and to reward their lackeys. They want the strict employment laws which protect workers, particularly part time workers, modified to strengthen their own powers. They want an ‘open borders’ policy in order to allow them to suck in labour during periods of expansion. Although they dare not yet say it, the direction of their thinking on ‘mobility’ suggests that they also want the right to expel labour in periods of contraction: the guest worker system lurks at the back of their minds. They want unemployment compensation reduced from 90 percent of the regular wage to 75 percent in order to force workers to take any job offered them. They want to ‘reduce absenteeism’: by taking control of the sick pay scheme they hope to intimidate workers into coming to work even when they are not fully fit. They want employment in the public sector cut back sharply. And they badly want to join the EC.
The Social Democrats have responded to the threat that their former lovers might desert them by trying to prove just how difficult it would be to live without them. They have tried to show that they are the ones who can deliver everything the bosses want with the minimum of fuss. The 1990 attempt at a wage freeze was a first round. More recently, they have begun to try to dismantle aspects of the welfare state. Total Swedish tax revenue was 56 percent of GDP in 1990, while the OECD average was 39.4 percent. Sixty one percent of GDP goes into public expenditure and rather more than half of that is in social benefits. One part of the programme, cuts in jobs and benefits in the state sector, is as yet only a threat which the Social Democrats have not been able to carry through. They have, however, managed to ‘reform’ the tax laws. The minister in charge of tax changes, Eric Asbrink, openly boasts that he takes his inspiration from Reagan’s US policies. Income tax in Sweden is split between local and national government. From the start of 1991 only the top 15 percent of wage earners will pay any national income tax at all, although the 30 percent local income tax will continue. In order to keep up revenues, the government will extend VAT to almost everything apart from education, welfare and banking. The result is predicted to be a net rise of 3 percent in the annual inflation rate. Corporations will continue to pay hardly any tax at all on reinvested capital.
The fact is that even to carry through these tax reforms the Social Democrats were forced by the unions to make concessions to shield those who would suffer most. The capitalist class is clearly looking round for a Swedish Thatcher. If the bourgeois parties win the next election, it might well find one. The scale of the assault would be very large and its effects very serious. Swedish unions organise a high proportion of the working class, but they are very heavily bureaucratised – making the EETPU look like Athenian democracy without the franchise restrictions. These bureaucrats have spent their whole lives in cahoots with the bosses and the government: they are not even former strike leaders who have gone rotten. The official movement will find it very difficult indeed to mount any serious opposition to a determined ruling class offensive.
That is not to argue that all is doom and gloom. It is simply that the days of the Swedish model as a beacon for Social Democrats everywhere are fast passing into history. They did a temporary deal with capitalism; they did not change the beast and they certainly did not kill it. In the emerging period of sharp conflicts the working class is not entirely disarmed. We argued above that there were signs of self-confidence at the local level. There are also signs of political opposition to the left of the Social Democrats. 1990 saw a significant left split from the official party’ which formed a centrist organisation called ‘The Workers’ List’. It campaigns under the slogan of ‘For a Workers’ Party Worthy of the Name’ and its leadership advocates left reformist solutions to the crisis. It initially attracted considerable support from workers, both in terms of membership and potential votes. There is no way of telling how well it will do in a real election, but the betting must be that at best it will become a small left irritant which provides no real solution for Swedish workers. The fact of its existence, however, demonstrates that there is an audience for socialist ideas to the left of the Social Democrats.
Unfortunately, there is no substantial revolutionary left organisation which can take full advantage of the opportunities which are likely to arise. 1968 produced a large radical left in Sweden, but it was dominated by various brands of Maoists. As their illusions in China and Albania went down the road to ruin, the vast majority of these militants either moved to the right or dropped out of political life. The other tradition which flourished in Sweden, the followers of the Mandelite Fourth International, succeeded in building a more enduring organisation with some working class base. However, as that political current has degenerated, they have moved quite sharply to the right. They will not be able to respond to the opportunities of the developing crisis.
Our own ideas are represented in Sweden only by a tiny handful of people. There is no doubt that they will have the opportunity to grow in the next period, but their immediate perspective must be the establishment of a stable national organisation rather than dreams of leading the struggle for power. For the first time in more than half a century there is a real opportunity for revolutionary ideas to gain a foothold in the Swedish working class.
 



Open any Labour left publication these days and you will find an article about the powers of the police. In part this is a correct and justified response to the policing of the miners’ strike, which has been very heavy indeed. The New Statesman, for instance, has taken to running a regular column about the extent of the police operation, in which we learn that, up to the time of writing (17 August) there had been 5,503 arrests and that out of 750 cases already heard in court a grand total of 65 persons (nine per cent) had been acquitted. [1]
But there is something more substantial in these articles. They are not just lists of facts: even the New Statesman column which is mostly facts is linked into various campaigning bodies like the GLC Police Committee Support Unit. The articles have behind them theories and organisations.
At its most general, the argument of the Labour left is that a fundamental change is going on in the nature of the British state, which is taking more and more executive powers on itself and rendering the processes of democratic control more and more irrelevant. The Labour Party itself has launched an official campaign called the ‘Civil Rights Appeal’, which, while in reality is nothing more than a piece of recruiting and fundraising, makes the claim that ‘not a lot’ has changed since 1834. It is only being partly humorous when it draws the comparison with the Tolpuddle Martyrs.
Within this more general agreement, there are differences of emphasis. Three different strands of interpretation stand out: claims that Britain is going fascist, claims that it is becoming a ‘police’ or ‘strong’ state, and claims that we are witnessing the first signs of Bonapartism.
The evidence which is called up to support these claims tends to be very similar, and we can summarise it more or less thus: behind the heavy policing of the miners’ strike there is a continual expansion of police powers of which the creation of a nationally directed police force independent of local control and armed with new powers under the forthcoming Police Bill is the summation. We will soon be faced with a centralised armed police force outside of democratic control or investigation, possessed of wide and more or less arbitrary powers and controlled by a group of highly politicised and extremely reactionary senior police officers of which the Manchester Chief Constable Anderton is the most notorious example. These people view the control of internal political opposition rather than common or garden crime policing as their main role. [2]
At the same time there are new emergency measures, increasing use of the Official Secrets Act to gag public servants, anti-trade union laws, the abolition of local democracy via the destruction of the Metropolitan Counties and the imposition of rate capping. The tendency is for a greater and greater authoritarianism on the part of the central state apparatus and for greater and greater powers to be concentrated in the hands of the Prime Minister, who becomes a virtual dictator.
This state is further equipped with increasingly sophisticated devices for the surveillance of the population and with better weapons to attack and destroy opposition. Much of this technology has been developed and tested in Northern Ireland and is now being brought back home.
Much of the evidence is true, if sometimes overstated. There is a problem for the Labour Party in arguing that all of these developments are part of some nasty Tory plot to establish some form of dictatorship. As many critics have pointed out, almost all of these developments can be traced back to the Labour governments of the past. [3] An obvious example is the Official Secrets Act, used to howls of Labour outrage against leakers like Sarah Tisdale; the Act was also used liberally, against Aubrey, Berry and Campbell for example, in the notorious ABC trial. Like so many of these inconvenient little facts, Labour leftists have now learnt to cope with this charge, admitting their party’s past sins and promising to do better in the future.
Beyond that, however, there is the much more fundamental question of what these developments, whether of Labour or Tory inspiration, really amounts to. Are they a fundamental change in the nature of the state and the way that Britain is governed? Or are they evidence of something different? Let us look at the theories used to make sense of these changes.
 
A ‘Fascist’ Britain?
The idea that Thatcher is introducing fascism to Britain is the most dramatic of the explanations. Its most famous, if least theoretical, exponent is Neil Kinnock, who claims that Thatcher represents ‘stocking-footed fascism’. In general, the proponents of this view do not bother to spell out their theoretical position too clearly, relying on the black magic of the working class folk-memory of fascism to cover up any possible objections.
There are numerous historical examples of fascism, all of which display different national characteristics but we can certainly generalise from these instances to the essential features of that political form. Fascism depends upon the mobilisation of a mass extra-parliamentary movement, led by the middle class but sometimes towing parts of the working class behind it. This mass base is what makes fascism a particularly deadly enemy of the working class movement. The fascist party builds its mass base out of opposition to the organised labour movement; it mobilises those who believe that the origins of social evils can be traced to the activities of ‘Marxists’ or other working class activists.
Although racism was an important element in the German version of fascism, it is not an essential ingredient (as the example of Mussolini’s fascisti in Italy makes clear). But it is fair to say that any serious contender for a mass fascist party in Britain would almost certainly be a racist organisation since racism is so deeply bedded in British society and is such a convenient mechanism for mobilising reactionary opinion.
The fascist mass movement is steeled and tested in physical confrontations with the left, and to the extent that it is able to win these contests – to control the streets, in Goebbel’s phrase – it comes to be an important political factor. It may or may not win votes and seats in parliament but its political importance lies in its military prowess, for this can be used to provide scabs, to break pickets, to root out militants.
In those cases in which fascism comes to power the mass base, or at least part of it, is incorporated into the fascist state machine, providing both the official personnel of the fascist mass organisations and the spies in every factory and housing estate. It is this ability to provide an organisation which penetrates every aspect of the life of the working class and thus to snuff out any stirrings of working class opposition before it takes off, that makes fascism a particularly stable form of rule.
The German example is the one nearest to our own experience since, despite important differences, Germany in 1933 was much more like modern Britain in terms of being a developed industrial state than any other example of successful fascist movements. The Nazis did come to power by means of building a mass movement dedicated to smashing all forms of working class organisation: it was their mass following rather than their voting strength which allowed the Nazis to take over the state machine. Once having done that they strengthened it and used it to smash all political and social organisations, starting with working class organisations but going on to take over all areas of social life. But they did not just sweep away the trade unions, they also replaced them with the Nazi-run ‘Labour Front’, which bound workers to the dictates of the employers. The hundreds of thousands of active Nazis meant that the Labour Front, and the dozens of organisations set up in other areas of social life, could be tightly controlled. [4]
If we look at modern Britain it is difficult to find any serious evidence of fascism. Certainly there are fascist organisations, like the National Front and many others. These however are small and marginal organisations which have still not recovered from the defeat inflicted upon them by the Anti Nazi League in 1979. It is certainly not the case that they count their followers in the hundreds of thousands and they are not on the brink of power. No one has suggested that Thatcher or McGregor have had secret talks with Martin Webster about the ways in which his organisation can play a key role in smashing the miners’ strike. The fascists could, indeed almost certainly will, pick up support in the future as the class struggle ebbs and flows, but at the moment they are marginal.
Proponents of the ‘fascist Britain’ thesis, however, believe that the real menace is the Tory Party, which is changing into a fascist organisation, or secretly introducing fascism. The Tory party is certainly an extremely nasty and very right wing organisation. By European standards it is so right wing that the other EEC Conservative parties refuse to let its members in the European Parliament join their group. No doubt there are many in the Tory Party who would like to ban everything from the Labour Party to the SWP, lock up all trade union leaders including Bill Sirs and Frank Chapple in concentration camps, and generally stomp on all opposition. But they are constrained by the social forces at their disposal: they do not have a million stormtroopers to carry out their dreams. The Tory Party has a million members. Many of them are much nastier even than the MPs who they select and whose campaigns they finance through their activities. But these million members are organised for right-wing parliamentary activities, not for smashing up meetings of dockers or murdering sellers of Labour Weekly and Socialist Worker.
The Tory Party is what it has always been: a right wing parliamentary party. This gives it considerable strengths – it can posture as the defender of freedom and democracy, for example. But it does not have the strength that a fascist organisation derives from its mass base and therefore has to behave accordingly.
At the moment of writing the miners’ strike is in its sixth month. One of the key points of confrontation throughout the strike has been the struggle to stop the steel works. Just now, there is a ship laden with coal for the Ravenscraig plant lying off the Hunterston terminal. It is important to the ruling class and the Tories that this ship is unloaded. It is important to the miners that it is not unloaded. It is one of those moments in which the stakes in the class war can be seen very clearly through the lens of a single instance.
I do not know what the Tories are planning to do. By the time this is published they will have made their move. A fascist government would smash union organisation and send black-shirted scabs to move the coal. The Tories will not do that. They will rely upon Bill Sirs, a trade union leader, to swing strike-breaking with his ISTC members. The Tories will do this because that is how their actual organisation constrains them to act. However much they might privately despise Bill Sirs and however much they may have wanted to smash him and his organisation back in the steel strike, they need him now. That is why they are not a fascist government.
The claim that Britain is, or will immediately become, a fascist state is thus at best the result of an honest confusion as to the nature of fascism and at worst an example of cheap demagogy. It shares with all of these positions a danger, expressed here in extreme form: the abuse of a term makes it that much more difficult to discern the genuine development when and if it does arise and thus makes fighting it that much more difficult.
 
The ‘strong’ state
The claim that Britain is becoming a ‘police’ or ‘strong’ state needs to be taken rather more seriously. It is certainly very much the most prevalent current charge and is the particular property of that section of the Labour Party which can be termed without too much inaccuracy the ‘Bennite left’. A recent example is the book by Peter Hain Political Trials in Britain [5] which concludes by arguing that:
Looking back at the industrial revolution in the early nineteenth century, we can see that it produced a requirement for new laws and new state agencies, notably the police, to manage its socially disruptive results. It would appear that as the economic system is restructured in the 1980s – this time partly by a technological revolution – the agencies responsible for law enforcement and administration will be required to perform an even more powerful political function. If that occurs – and the development of the law and order state suggests that it has already begun – then there is every prospect of political trials becoming the norm rather than the exception. [6]
The thrust of Hain’s arguments, and it is fairly typical of this strand of thinking, is that the state machine is increasingly sophisticated, that it pursues its own ends independently of democratic control, that it has more and more resources, and that it has managed to win ‘popular consent for its increasingly repressive policies. Each of these is a discrete claim, and rests on other more extensive theoretical foundations.
The notion that the state machine disposes of more and more resources is in general true. Although the Tories are making a substantial effort to limit the overall powers of the state and the areas in which it functions, there seems to be a long term tendency this century for the state to intervene more and more in social life. In one form this is well-known as the development of state capitalism, but even where the pressure of the world market seems to push in the opposite direction, the state retains important functions in providing the human and material infrastructure which is needed as the basis for profitable exploitation.
More narrowly, in Britain it is certainly the case that the law-enforcing aspects of the state have shown a considerable growth over the last few decades. For instance, in 1961 there was only one police officer for every 602 inhabitants of the United Kingdom; by 1982 it was one to 394. [7] Expenditure on ‘law and order’ has doubled under the Tories, and they have been very careful to make sure that police pay grows very quickly indeed: no question of productivity dealing here since reported crime has increased while the clear-up rate has fallen ever more sharply. The same picture of growth is repeated in the more narrowly focussed area of directly political policing between 1958 and 1978 the Special Branch grew from 200 to 1,259. [8]
This increase in police strength is certainly worrying, and it is something to which revolutionary socialists are firmly opposed. We do not believe for one moment that the police force in a capitalist society can ever be anything other than a brutal instrument for the maintenance of class rule, but we do believe that the fewer number of cops, and the more restricted their powers and equipment, the better for us. So we join with Hain and others in opposing things like the new Police Bill.
That, however, is not the central question. That remains: does this increase in police powers mean a change in the nature of the state? The first step towards answering that depends upon a sense of proportion: despite the recent increases, it remains true that Mitterrand’s France has roughly twice as many cops per head as Thatcher’s Britain. Indeed, many of the things which seem so much the most odious examples of the creeping police state are really only horrifying from a parochial British perspective. The most obvious is the question of a centralised police force. It is certainly true that Britain used to have a patchwork of local police forces, reflecting the relative strength of the local ruling class in the nineteenth century and its suspicion of the land-owner dominated central state’s willingness to do what industrial capitalists wanted. It is also true that since the 1960s there has been a tendency towards amalgamation and the reduction in the number, and increase of the size, of police forces. It is further true that since the 1972 miners’ victory there has been the construction of a sophisticated national command centre for the police. We have seen, in the current miners’ strike, what is in fact, if not in title, an integrated national police force at work.
This is dangerous and we are against it because it makes it is more difficult for us to win, but it does not represent an example of the way in which Britain is becoming a police state. Sweden, for example, acquired a national police force a couple of decades ago and, whatever fictional accounts may say, it is not a police state.
More generally, the increasing size and activity of the state machine, even of its repressive arm, is not evidence of the nature of the state. In order to answer that question we need to know something about the social and political relations which surround the state.
The same problem confronts us when we consider the implications of the increasingly sophisticated means at the disposal of the state. In its popular form, this takes the form of the belief that the equipping of the police force with computers makes them all-powerful in ‘the struggle against subversion’. In a more sophisticated form, this has been used as the basis for a theorisation of the notion that there is a global dynamic towards a ‘strong state’. Its most prominent British representatives wrote:
... a Strong State need not come about through one sudden catastrophe. The repressive capacity of the state can increase gradually over a long period in ways which may not be apparent to its citizens. The changes can be made in small steps ...
‘Small steps’ are most easily taken when hidden from public view, so as they increasingly become the province of the state bureaucracy, rather than the legislature, they become easier to execute. [9]
The technology of repression is not what decides the class character of a state: the difference between the Inquisition and the Gestapo was not determined by the respective technologies of thumb screws and electric generators. Our attitude to these developments is similar to the previous issue: we are very much against the development and deployment of these new techniques of repression, but we do not imagine that they are decisive. In this case, however, the argument carries with it greater dangers: if the technology available to a state is what makes it strong and if the technology of repression is getting better all the time, then the enemy is getting harder and harder to beat and we might as well pack up because we have no hope of victory.
The notion that a state is ’strong’ because of the technology at its disposal is clearly nonsense: compare the fates of the Shah, the Polish Communist Party and Mrs Thatcher. The Shah fell, despite the very advanced technology of repression he both owned and used. The Polish CP was shaken despite its massive (and probably rather less advanced) technology of repression, but was able to survive. Thatcher rules relatively untroubled despite not having used repression on anything like the scale of the other two cases. The difference lies in the sets of social relations and the balance of class forces operating in the three situations: the strength of a state is decided by the social forces which support it, not by the number of computers and machine-guns it has.
The point can be best illustrated by thinking about a state which had all sorts of very unpleasant repressive devices at its disposal: Tsarist Russia. Technically, no doubt, this was by the standards of its day a ‘strong state’. But socially it was weak: the working class could lead the mass of the peasantry in successful opposition to the state. The deciding factors were economic, social and political.
Because the working class succeeded in overthrowing this monstrous tyranny, they were able to explore the workings of the Tsar’s secret police, the Okhrana, in rather more detail than that possible to the investigative journalist of contemporary Britain. What they discovered is the subject of an interesting little book by Victor Serge. The Okhrana did not have computers, but they seem to have had a fairly good substitute for most of the techniques that the modern proponents of the police state argue are making it stronger. Near the end of his study Serge points to the obvious fact that the secret police failed to protect Tsarism. He wrote:
The Okhrana was unable to prevent the fall of the autocracy ...
The Russian autocracy in fact fell rather than being overthrown. A shaking was all that it took. The old, dilapidated building whose demolition was wished for by the great majority of the population came tumbling down. The economic development of Russia meant the revolution was required. What could the secret police do about it? Was it up to them to solve the conflict of interests of the opposing camps of deadly enemies, desperate to escape from a situation with no way out other than the class war – the industrial and financial bourgeoisie, big landlords, the nobility, the intellectuals, the declassés, the proletariat, the peasant masses? Their actions could only gain the ancien regime a limited reprieve, and that on condition that it agreed to certain appropriate measures of general policy. How absurd was this thin line of policemen and agents provocateurs, working blindly to turn back the beating of the waves against the old, cracked, shaking cliff, ready to crumble and engulf them! [10]
The next argument put forward is that the state machine is independent of democratic control, pursuing interests of its own. There is a very large element of truth in this claim, and it is not one that surprises Marxists. Hain in particular devotes a large part of his book to showing how the police are a closed professional force with their own internal structure of command pursuing ends defined by their senior officers; how the judiciary is a highly selected and unrepresentative body quite immune from any control other than their own whims: it even took the judiciary itself years to remove the obviously gaga Lord Denning; how the courts are class biased; how the state bureaucracy is designed to take major decisions on its own. The list goes on and on: it defines the state machine as a body which is quite untouched by changes of government. This, of course, is what we have always argued and is one of the major reasons why there is no possibility of a parliamentary road to socialism. Changing the government does not mean changing the state.
But this is not the conclusion that Hain and others on the Labour left wish to draw from their own analysis. Their view, of course, is that all that is needed is a little more determination on the part of the next Labour government, a little more will to extend democracy, and the whole monstrous machine can be brought under democratic control. This view they share with those reformist thinkers who reject the notion that Britain is a police state. For example, Colin Leys wrote in a recent issue of New Socialist that:
... a substantial democratisation of the state is also essential, which means some major political reforms. The permanent threat to civil liberties comes from secret, centralised bureaucracy, sheltered by effectively non- accountable cabinets and from equally non-account able and secretly selected judges, commissioners of police and prison governors ... [11]
It is important for us to welcome statements of this order: they represent an important advance on some of the cruder forms of state-worship that have been an important part of the Labour Party at least since Sidney Webb. The extent to which these criticisms of the fundamentally undemocratic nature of the British state machine is subject to public criticism is an important political question. We have to welcome any left-wing critics of the state, even when we are not convinced that they fully appreciate the logic of their own position, or where what they have to say about how to change things is patently silly.
The vice which tends to beset such people is that they see the democratisation of the state as possible without any fundamental restructuring of society. Leys, for example, explicitly argues that ‘serious anti-authoritarian socialism’ has to come to terms with the fact that people do not want to run their own lives, that there will always be a police force. For him: ‘…the state is complex and democratisation is not a one-dimensional matter. There are many options, many possible ways of recruiting, training, promoting, organising, circulating, advising, monitoring, publicising, reviewing, checking, disciplining and replacing public officials. Elections are only one device, and not necessarily the most useful or desirable.’ [12]
This rather pathetic set of proposals is the key to the thinking of the Labour left on these questions. On the one hand there is an admirable analysis of the role of the state machine, on the other what amounts to a set of petty-fogging little tinkerings. That, essentially, is the trap of reformism: they see the role of the state, but believe that it can be turned round and used for their own ends. What they do not see is that the state has to be an instrument of class dictatorship: that is its nature. It exists to maintain the rule of one class over another. We want to smash this state because it is the instrument of the dictatorship of the capitalist class. The state we want to replace it with will be much more democratic than the current set up, but it will also be a dictatorship: the working class will dictate to the capitalists.
The final prop in the argument that Britain is becoming a ‘strong state’ is the belief that there is massive popular support for ‘law and order’. This view is best theorised by Stuart Hall in the book Policing the Crisis, and in numerous subsequent articles. [13] Again, the point from which Hall begins has much to recommend it. He argues that the development of capitalism means that the state is called upon to perform more functions in society. Besides its role of maintaining class rule, it also has to make sure that the conditions for profitable exploitation exist. This means providing education, social services, etc. It therefore follows that the state has to intervene in more and more areas of social life. The ultimate sanction of the state is that it is the vehicle of law, and therefore the extension of the role of the state means that law becomes ever more a political issue.
However, Hall argues, no state rules for very long by means of terror alone; there is always an element of consent involved in class rule. One of the things the state always tries to do is to win this consent: borrowing a term from Gramsci it attempts to secure a hegemonic domination over the working class. This hegemonic domination is never complete and static; as the circumstances of class rule shift so there is a need for shifts in the nature of the hegemonic order. There occurs what Hall calls ‘hegemonic thrusts.’
Hall locates one such key element back in 1972 with the popularisation of the term ‘mugging’ and its use to justify a massive range of aggressive developments of police power. Subsequently, he has widened this analysis into an account of how the Thatcher governments have been able to mobilise right-wing popular support for their tough policies.
There is obviously much to commend in this analysis, and unlike the other strong state theorists it at least has the merit of starting from a consideration of the class forces at play. It is, however, some distance from revolutionary Marxism.
We can see how far by asking why it is that 1972 is selected as a key date. For Hall this was the date upon which a new term, ‘mugging’, was widely popularised in Britain. For us, 1972 is above all significant for the massive struggles culminating in Saltley and Pentonville. It is good to be reminded that there were other, extremely reactionary currents at work at that time since we too easily slip into a romanticism about the period, but the divergence is important. Hall acknowledges the working class as one force among several, he does not start from it. We acknowledge the importance of ‘mugging’ as a banner for all manner of official and unofficial reactionaries and racists, but we do not start from this term.
The fact is that consent and hegemony are, for Marxists, ultimately exercised in control over the social surplus: they are about the exploitation which is the corollary of wage labour and the ways in which it is made to seem natural and eternal. For Hall, all of this is secondary and so he argues that there was a shift in the nature of ruling class power. A Marxist account, indeed almost any account, would be puzzled by this: after all 1974 to 1979 was the period in which class collaboration in the form of the Social Contract was the major instrument of state policy.
Failure to observe this very large fact is not just staggering in itself; it leads to mistakes about the present as well. If we ignore the rhetorical claims of the Tories, of the capitalist press, of the left and not so left leaders of the movement, and most of the left press, what is the reality of the way in which Thatcher rules? There can be no doubt that while there is no Social Contract, there are deals with the trade union leaders. The miners’ strike has proved a perfect example, trade union leader after trade union leader has used the possibility of generalising the struggle to extract a bit more by way of a pay deal for his or her members.
Certainly, Thatcher rules through harsher deals than did the preceding Labour government. In a number of areas, notably excepting wages where the Tories have been much softer, there has been heavy pressure on the trade union bureaucrats, but there have also been settlements. The major exception, of course, is the banning of trade unions at GCHQ, where there was no deal. But the point must be repeated: this was an exception, not the norm. The deals may have been made with gritted teeth elsewhere, but they have been made.
The second major problem with the Hall position is that it assumes a monolithic and systematic notion of ideology. Essentially, this notion of the nature of ideology is derived from that of Althusser. As has been pointed out in the pages of this journal before, that tradition of thinking derives from the linguistic theories of Saussure, which turn upon the recognition of the systematic character of language. Ideology, structured in the same way, is thus seen as a coherent whole, and if you buy one part of it, then you must buy the lot. Now, it is of course true that there are systematic attempts to construct ideologies as coherent and logical systems – religion, sociology and economics are three very obvious examples. But it does not at all follow from that that the consciousness of anyone, even the professional ideologists themselves, is entirely exhausted by such systems. Rather people carry around with them different ideological systems, or different fragments of ideological systems, which are brought into play when they are doing different things (engaged in discrete practices, in the jargon).
This means that consciousness is necessarily split. That workers have, and act on, different sets of ideas, is the consequence. So that we can find at one and the same time the most backward and the most advanced ideas co-existing not only in the same class but even in the same person.
What Hall has got hold of is one side of working class consciousness. It is true that there is a ‘popular authoritarianism’ and it is true that this can be mobilised around questions of individual crimes, by all sorts of reactionaries. But it does not follow that just because that particular example of an alien and reactionary ideology takes hold that it drives out all possibility of other, more progressive, ideologies also operating. It is quite possible for the Guardian reader to hold the impeccably progressive view that capital punishment should be finally abolished and to hold the impeccably reactionary view that miners mass pickets should be stopped: certainly, Guardian leader writers hold those views. And it is also possible for Sun readers to have strong and backward views on hanging while at the same time happily chucking rocks at policemen and scabs outside an NCB facility.
The belief that ideologies are complete and systematic and that any acceptance of an aspect of ideology means that the whole of the system has been accepted too, allows Hall and his co-thinkers to claim that since there is undoubtedly support for some aspects of ‘law and order’ ideology then it follows that the ruling class has won the acceptance of workers to the whole of their package. This allows support for some, admittedly very nasty, bits of the Tory programme to be interpreted as a new mechanism of hegemony.
The reality, even six years later, under Thatcher is clearly quite different. If we look at the struggle which has gone on around the interpretation of ‘law’, ‘violence’ etc, during the miners’ strike we can see that the ruling class attempt to put all sorts of violent activity into one box labelled ‘criminal’ and thus to legitimise a high level of repression against it has clearly failed. Certainly, the violence argument has been an important one; but it has been an argument. The possibility of winning the argument, and winning support for the miners, has fluctuated depending upon who has been winning the overall political arguments about the strike as a whole.
Overall, the flaw in the Policing the Crisis argument lies in its failure to recognise the terrain upon which the decisive ideological battle has to be fought out. In order to continue, the ruling class needs to naturalise and universalise its rule: that is certainly true. But it needs to do this much more in certain social locations than in others. Above all it needs to make sure that its ability to continue to expropriate the social surplus, to make profits from the labour of others, is widely accepted. The ruling class may or may not control the streets of Derry or of Brixton all the time; that is not vital to it. But it must control the sale of labour power and the use to which labour is put and the product of that labour.
Essentially it can control that process by terror, as it did in the early days of the industrial revolution and still does to some extent today in less well-organised plants. Or it can control that process by consent. That, overwhelmingly, is what the British ruling class does. It does it by means of a series of deals and compromises with the trade union bureaucracy. So long as it does that, there is no decisive shift in the nature of the British state, no development of a ‘strong state’ or ‘exceptional state’.
There are certainly shifts in the degree of force employed to maintain capitalist rule in Britain, but force remains a back-up, plays a supporting role, in the decisive business of ruling. That starring role is played by consent.
 
‘Bonapartism’
The third major strand or argument is that Britain is developing towards ‘Bonapartism’. This term is derived from the Marxist tradition and those who use the term usually claim at least some relationship to that line of thought. For the last decade the term has been widely used by one of the more theatrical trends of British Trotskyism, but recently the supporters of the newspaper Militant have begun to flirt with the idea, and they deserve rather more serious attention.
In two recent major articles in the Militant [14], Lynn Walsh, one of the major theoreticians of the tendency, has argued that:
Thatcher’s methods indicate a tendency towards parliamentary Bonapartism where behind the forms of parliamentary democracy the premier, using her control of the state apparatus, exercises increasingly autocratic control. (Militant, 6 July 1984, original emphasis)
Having made this claim in both of the articles, Walsh then retreats and claims that the full establishment of Bonapartism is not possible in Britain for the time being. This is because, in order for such a regime to flourish, there must be a major defeat of the working class organisations. Since, according to Militant the present period is characterised by the reverse trend, it follows that Bonapartism is not possible.
This account uses the language of Marxism, but a closer examination reveals it as having many of the same fatal flaws as the Bennite theory we have been examining. The term ‘Bonapartism’ has a long and complex history, but none of the uses to which it has been put in the past bear any relationship to that proposed by Walsh. [15]
Marx first developed the theory of Bonapartism in response to the victory of Napoleon III in France in the years following the 1848 revolution. He argued that the development of the revolution had resulted in the defeat of the working class, but that the ruling class itself was deeply split between different political factions. In these circumstances, the ‘ordinary bourgeois’ was quite prepared to see the bourgeois politicians swept from the stage, provided that the person who did so could offer a guarantee that the working class would be kept firmly in check. Bonaparte ‘the Little’, nephew of the great Bonaparte who had stabilised the gains of the French revolution for the bourgeoisie and guaranteed the land settlement won by the peasants, filled that role. He and his entourage of semi-criminal elements, what Marx called the ‘lumpen-proletariat’ provided the focus for the peasants, unable to organise themselves but firmly on the side of order. The rule of Bonapartism was marked by repression of the working class, and indeed often of bourgeois politicians, and the use of the state machine as an independent instrument of policy. [16]
As the term was subsequently developed in the Marxist tradition it did indeed tend to be used to characterise political regimes and movements which relied very heavily on the state machine and which utilised a large measure of repression against the working class: in general independent working class activity was illegal or only semi- legal in such regimes. These factors were not, however, the essential features of Bonapartism: the Marxist tradition, as one would expect, tended to locate these in the balance of class forces.
For a Marxist, of course, the personal role of one woman cannot be a serious factor in determining the nature of a regime. Indeed, Trotsky specifically argues that this was not a central element of the form: ‘The role of the all-powerful arbiter can be filled by a clique instead of a person.’ [17] What was important for Trotsky, and what emerges from all of the Marxist accounts of Bonapartism, is the conditions which allow the state to assume such a big role. These were found in the fact that Bonapartism arose in those circumstances in which there was a balance between the working class organisations and the fighting organisations of the bourgeoisie – the fascists. It was for this reason that Trotsky used the term to describe Germany immediately before the Hitler seizure of power, Austria in 1934 and France in the same year. In all of these cases there were periods during which the forces of the working class and those of the reactionary petty bourgeoisie were mutually balanced and temporarily exhausted, and it was the resulting paralysis of the ‘normal’ political processes of bourgeois democracy that led to the unusual freedom of the state machine. As Trotsky put it, Bonapartism was a:
... regime of military-police dictatorship. As soon as the straggle of the two social strata – the haves and the have-nots – reaches its highest tension, the conditions are established for the domination of the bureaucracy, police, soldiery. The government becomes ‘independent’ of society. Let us once more recall: if two forks are stuck symmetrically into a cork, the latter can stand even on the head of a pin. That is precisely the scheme of Bonapartism. To be sure, such a government does not cease being the clerk of the property owners, yet the clerk sits on the back of the boss, rubs his neck raw, and does not hesitate at times to dig his boots into his face. [18]
It is clear that there is a distance of some miles between Trotsky and Walsh on the nature of Bonapartism. Much more importantly, there is also a great distance between Bonapartism as a scientific term and the current reality of the class struggle.
There is no evidence of there being a deadlock between the working class and a mass fascist movement, or any substitute for it, resulting in a paralysis of the political process and an elevation of the state machine. There is no evidence of the Thatcher government being particularly independent of the bourgeoisie, or ‘rubbing its neck raw’. Quite the contrary, although there are at times strains and tensions over matters of policy, the miners’ strike is clearly not one of them. The CBI and the Institute of Directors are united with the Tory government in standing against the miners. There is a unanimous chorus of support for Thatcher from the ruling class press. Nothing in the present situation resembles any Marxist account of Bonapartism.
Now if it were just a matter of terminology, then it would not matter too much: Walsh is at liberty to use whatever rhetorical terms he chooses. But once again we have to look to the political consequences. One feature of Bonapartism, which arises from the fact that it can only exist in situations of class balance, is its extreme instability. As Trotsky put it:
... we are obliged to repeat what the Bolshevik-Leninists said at one time about Germany: the political chances of present French Bonapartism are not great: its stability is determined by the temporary and, at bottom, unsteady equilibrium between the camps of the proletariat and fascism. The relation of forces of these two camps must change rapidly, in part under the influence of the economic conjuncture, principally in dependence upon the quality of the proletarian vanguard’s policy. A collision between these two camps is inevitable ... A stable regime could be established only after the collision, depending on the results. [19]
In other words, if the term Bonapartism is to have any serious content it is to describe an extremely transitory regime which is rapidly about to be transformed into something else. The very situation which leads to the rise of Bonapartism demands a confrontation and conclusion: one of the tasks of Bonapartism is to help to make sure that it is not the working class that determines the nature of the new stable political form. It follows, then, if revolutionaries are serious in terming a regime Bonapartist then they are also claiming that a class confrontation of decisive proportions is on the immediate agenda.
This brings us back to Walsh. He claims that this is not the immediate situation. In order for such a situation to arise he claims that there would have to be major defeat of the working class. Since this has not happened, he says, we do not need to worry. As we have seen, the exact opposite is true of Bonapartism: it does not depend upon the defeat of the working class but upon its relative strength. In the instance to which Trotsky referred in the quote above, the French working class was able to defeat the fascists and make substantial gains: it was brought up short not by Bonapartism but by the actions of reformism.
The outcome of Walsh’s rather confused account is not only to mis-educate people but to stop any serious discussion of what is actually going on in the movement. Walsh is like the man who says that if the lion comes we will all get eaten, but never mind, the lion is not coming. Meanwhile, he does not notice the rather hungry-looking wolf ...
 
Consent and the trade union bureaucracy
What, then is going on? If none of the more alarmist accounts of the reformist and centrist left hold much water, it is still important for us to have something better to say.
The starting point we need to take is to distinguish between the state machine and the political set-up prevailing at any one time. The state machine in capitalism is a professionalised and bureaucratised machine which operates to a great extent independently of temporary political arrangements. Even in an advanced bourgeois democracy like the USA, where all sorts of people like judges and police chiefs get elected and there is a developed ‘spoils system’ of appointing your political friends to government jobs, the core of the state machine and in particular the armed forces, have their own internal structure of command and discipline.
It is precisely this feature, of course, which makes the reformist project so unrealistic: the state is designed to have an existence independent of any governmental form. It is an organisation which can exist in various different political regimes, since it is designed to maintain a set of social relations. An example is the fascist state constructed by Franco. This highly repressive machine was constructed and staffed with loyal fascists. It has, however, survived more or less intact the transition from Francoism to bourgeois democracy.
The state machine is authoritarian both in terms of its own internal structure, which is one of a rigid hierarchy, and in its relationship to ‘its’ population. This massive chunk of anti-democracy accompanies even the most through-going bourgeois democracy. Changes to the way in which this state is organised, equipped or run are not essential to deciding what the nature of a given capitalist society is.
When we use the terms ‘bourgeois democracy’ or ’fascism’, or police state’, we are taking as read the existence of this state machine, and referring to the political relations within which such a state operates.
Bourgeois democracy is not necessarily the normal, or preferred, method of capitalist rule: it is one among several. But it does have its own distinctive features which make it, from our point of view, the best terrain upon which to wage the class war. The problem facing the ruling class is that they need to find some sort of social support for their rule: they are numerically so few in a developed capitalist state, and the working class is so large, that sheer terror is inadequate as a means of class rule over any protracted period. In bourgeois democracy, the capitalist class makes a series of deals with the working class organisations, over the terms on which they are to be exploited. It agrees to negotiate over wages and conditions, etc, and allows the appropriate organisations to exist to allow such a bargaining process to take place. It also allows political discussions and organisation, and at least some sense that the majority have a say in how society is run.
This is a very advantageous form of rule for the capitalists. It allows them to use fraud, the belief that the existing society is a freely chosen one, to a much greater extent than force. It allows for different factions to debate and argue about how best to run capitalism: although the bourgeoisie allows political freedoms, it tries very hard to make sure that it dominates and leads all of the major political organisations. The USA is a good example, where despite a long tradition of free political organisation the capitalist class completely dominates the main parties in the electoral machine. Elsewhere, as in Britain, they have to make do with slavish reformists like Neil Kinnock. It is because of this room for the capitalists to change course without having to have some major political upset that in advanced capitalist countries in periods of relative social peace, bourgeois democracy is such an attractive form of rule to the capitalists.
But from our point of view also bourgeois democracy is a very advantageous situation. While the ruling class will make every effort to ensure that all political and economic organisations are kept under their direct or indirect domination, the very forms of bourgeois democracy allow for the possibility of independent working class organisation. This provides the possibility both for the working class to gain experience, organisation and self-confidence by means of regular negotiations with the capitalists, sometimes spilling over into open class conflict, and it allows the revolutionary movement to engage in open propaganda and organisation for the overthrow of capitalism. It is for this reason that we are both the most determined defenders of bourgeois democracy and those who wish to extend it as far as possible.
Nothing in this, however, shows that bourgeois democracy is not capable of using force against its opponents. Externally, that is obvious, but it is also true internally as well. Many of those who claim that Thatcher is moving away from bourgeois democracy have an idyllic picture of what bourgeois democracy is actually like. In reality, bourgeois democracy can be very nasty indeed. As Jeffrey and Taylor in their book States of Emergency have recently shown, the construction of emergency forces designed to smash strikes has a long tradition in Britain, and one shared by both Conservative and Labour governments. [20]
Bourgeois democracies can be very nasty indeed. There is nothing incompatible in the existence of a bourgeois democracy and the existence of a political police (Britain all this century), use of troops to break strikes (Labour 1945–51), shooting on workers (Britain 1910–14, most notably Tonypandy), the mass arrest of political opponents (the bulk of the central committee of the British Communist Party were arrested and imprisoned for from 6 to 12 months in the run up to the 1926 General Strike). The list can be protracted for Britain and many other bourgeois democracies.
What is essential to bourgeois democracy is that because it allows the freedom of association, it makes deals with the working class and thus receives social support from the trade union bureaucracy. That is the core of bourgeois democracy, and because that continues to be the central characteristic of the British state it remains a bourgeois democracy.
It is quite true that there have been changes and shifts inside the framework set by bourgeois democracy. There is a long term tendency for the state to become more and more involved in all areas of social life as the scale of capitalist production, whether private or state in form, increases. That is a development which has been going on for at least this century. There is also a tendency of rather shorter span, concentrated in the last twenty years or so, much of it initiated by the first and second Wilson governments, which involves ‘modernising’ and centralising the British state. Much of this is a direct response to the shift from boom to slump, but part at least, like the centralisation of the police force, is really an attempt to ‘bring things up to date’. Finally, there is the relatively short term response of the Thatcher government, which is to rely more upon force than did the immediately preceding Labour government, but still force within the framework of consent. To repeat: the decisive factor in the current miners’ strike is the attitude of other workers and their leaders rather than the role of the police, who have a secondary role to play.
It is important to keep these distinctions clearly in mind because we are here discussing developments which have different origins, and thus do not provide any ammunition for those who want to see some vile capitalist conspiracy to destroy British liberty or whatever. There is no such plan: there is a crisis and the ruling class and their state are groping for an answer to the generalised class struggle that comes in its wake.
 
In conclusion
Three dangerous consequences follow from the argument that Britain is becoming a police state. The struggles against such encroachments on liberty is often diverted into what may be termed a ‘popular front’ type campaign. [21] This is the clear intention of the current Labour official campaign: at the same time as the party is shifted to the right and the miners are denounced for violence, all right thinking people will be called upon to defend civil liberties. And in order not to harm that alliance against the developing tyranny of Thatcher, it will become more and more important to win as many votes as possible. And in order to win votes it will be necessary to distance the Labour Party from ‘totalitarianism of the left’: mass picketing, violent picketing should be stopped, and if it cannot be stopped, then it must be roundly denounced in order not to frighten off the respectable middle class.
The second danger is that while cries of ‘police state’, ‘1984’, ‘Bonapartism’ or whatever, might give the faithful a catchword to hang on to, they are so obviously out of step with reality that they are no good for winning the support of the uncommitted. And because they are out of touch with reality, sooner or later the faithful see through them and become demoralised. Alarmist talk either breeds passivity or it breeds paranoia: neither are any use for combatting the real developments.
Lastly, and most seriously, the arguments can be used as an alibi for inaction. If we can blame any setback on the omnipotent state, then that lets everybody else off the hook.
Take the example of the current miners’ strike. If is clear that the police operation has been massive and very repressive. But if we take every key instance in the strike we can see that it was only a contributory factor to the outcome of the struggle, not the decisive one.
Stopping the Notts coalfield was a problem from early on, and there is no doubt that the police mobilisation made it more difficult to picket the pits out. But the central problem was the scabbing of the Notts miners and the failure of their area union leadership (some of them Broad Left) to win them to strike action. The police state argument lets the scabs and the reformist leaders off the hook.
Stopping the steelworks was undoubtedly made more difficult by the action of the police and the law. But the central problem has been that ISTC and TGWU workers were prepared to handle scab coal and that ISTC officials have been prepared to orchestrate that scabbing. And the central failures on the miners’ side have been the reluctance of the area officials to organise genuinely mass pickets to stop the steel works. Concentrating on the cops lets all of those people off the hook.
Lastly, there is no doubt that the police have been very effective in forcing a pathway through for the scabs, but the centre of the problem is the scabs themselves. And the relative lack of success so far in scabbing operations means not that the cops are backing off but that there have been larger than normal pickets involved in these battles. Again concentrating on the cops misses the central political lesson of this phase of the dispute.
Against these misconceptions, we have to repeat the basic elements of Marxism: that Britain remains a bourgeois democracy, albeit one in which the balance between force and fraud is changing in the direction of force. And while we warn against the alarmists and the manufacturers of excuses, we also have to be in the forefront of resisting attempts to infringe the gains of the working class.
Against those who argue that in the face of the strong state, we must move to the right, we have to say that the best, indeed the only, defence against the erosion of liberties is the strength of the working class. If the miners win, we can gain more liberties; if they lose then the cops and the Tories will go forward with renewed confidence.
Against those who scream against Bonapartism and the like we have to say that there are real and present dangers that need opposing, but the state is not all powerful: we need to stress the ways in which it can and has been fought and beaten both in the past and today.
Against those who manufacture excuses out of the violence of the state, we have to argue that the real problems of the class war in Britain today are the weaknesses of working class solidarity and the treachery of the bureaucracy and we have to argue for the ways in which those problems can be overcome. And we also have to point out that the violence of today is not an exceptional aspect of the bourgeois state, but a normal and central part of it. The consequence of that is that we can’t wish away the state. To win the class war we have to fight and beat the state; we have to smash it.
* * *
Notes
1. See New Statesman, 17 August 1984. Other popular accounts are to be found in most of the left press. See for example Bob Clay MP in Labour Briefing National Supplement, No. 10, August 1984 and London Labour Briefing, No. 42, August 1984. Issue 41 contains more in the same vein.
2. See for instance, P. Hain, Political Trials in Britain (London 1984), Chapter 2.
3. For example M. Kettle, The Drift to Law and Order, Marxism Today, October 1980.
4. Anyone interested in following my views on fascism further are referred to the widely-remaindered Never Again (London 1980).
5. This is a remarkable book in that half of it is attributed in the acknowledgements to one Phil Kelly. The other half contains much about the trials of Peter Hain. Since his name is on the cover, I have labelled the book as his.
6. Ibid., pp. 289–290.
7. See R. Reiner, Is Britain turning into a police state?, New Society, 2 August 1984. This article is a good example of how the use of wild arguments can provide right-wingers like the author an easy target. Reiner’s answer is: No.
8. See State Research, No. 6, June/July 1978. This publication was an early product of the state-obsession industry.
9. C. Ackroyd and others, The Technology of Political Control (Harmondsworth 1977), pp. 70–74.
10. V. Serge, What Everyone Should Know About State Repression, trans. J. White (New Park 1979). The title of the original French edition, is properly translated as What every revolutionary ... Can it be that the popular front has gripped the WRP?
11. C. Leys, Watching the State, New Socialist, No. 18, July/August 1984.
12. Ibid.
13. S. Hall and others, Policing the Crisis (London 1978). Hall has developed the theme in many articles, for example in New Socialist. Recently Hall has had a change of heart, and in the August/September 1984 issue of that magazine has discovered Ken Livingstone as a countervailing force.
14. 6 July and 13 July centre spreads.
15. Bonapartism is a very complicated term indeed. The standard account of Marx and Engels on the issue, marred only slightly by the author’s Bureaucratic Collectivism is Hal Draper’s Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, vol. i (New York, 1977), chaps. 15–18. It is convenient to divide Bonapartism into that of the early phase of capitalism and that of its decline. That of the early phase was much more a stable formation than that of the decline; my remarks about the instability of the formation refer to the latter form.
16. The classic account of course is in The Eighteenth Brumaire, in Collected Works, vol. xi. Marx’s account is very much more complicated than my little summary.
17. L. Trotsky, The German Puzzle in The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (Harmondsworth 1975), p. 255.
18. L. Trotsky, The Only Road in ibid., p. 263.
19. L. Trotsky, Bonapartism and Fascism in Writings of Leon Trotsky 1934–35, (New York 1971), p. 54.
20. See Jeffery and Hennessy, States of Emergency (London 1983). On secret policemen etc., see T. Bunyan, The Political Police in Britain (London 1976).
21. The same train of thought can lead to even worse things, for example the struggle to strengthen the police as in Lea and Young, What is to be done about Law and Order (Harmondsworth 1984).
 



Raymond Williams is Professor of Drama at the University of Cambridge. Surprisingly, for one holding such a position, he claims to stand within the tradition of Marxism. He is a frequent contributor to New Left Review and the editors of that journal have recently published a 400-page book of interviews with him. [1] Part of the publishers’ blurb says that he is ‘the most productive and most influential socialist writer in England today’. There is no way of knowing if that statement is true, but Williams is certainly widely read: his book Culture and Society, first published in 1958, still sells an average of 5–6,000 copies a year.
A large part of his audience is, of course, amongst the intellectual and academic left and that alone may be enough to produce a certain scepticism amongst readers of this journal. There is no doubt that the concerns of those circles are very different from what International Socialism understands by Marxism, but it does not necessarily follow that everything they laud must be revisionist dross. In the case of Williams, I want to argue, some of the questions he has asked have been ones upon which our own answers have been very shaky. Of course, there certainly are grounds for suspicion both about his overall positions and some of the answers that he has given, but it would, I think, be a mistake to reject his work out of hand.
Williams is a difficult writer. This is partly because he often writes in an impenetrable style and partly because his work deals with contemporary problems through the filter of a number of debates within academic thinking. He is, in addition, particularly difficult for readers of this journal because the problems he deals with – culture, art, etc. – are not our central concerns and, consequently, the concepts and issues at stake are not as familiar as those we use in, for example, politics and economics. But the fact that they are not central for us does not mean that they are unimportant, nor does it stop them being useful to other, hostile traditions which we seek to challenge. I will therefore try to explain what the arguments are about as well as criticizing them.
To begin with that part or Williams’ work which I think is most valuable. If we look at the classic Marxist discussions of art, literature culture, etc., we get the following picture: the major task facing a Marxist critic is to show how particular great works of art were related to the society that produced them. This is a concern which begins with Holy Writ itself: Marx, for example, was steeped in the great literature of the past. Lenin wrote about Tolstoy and liked Beethoven. Trotsky defended the continued reading of Dante. That tradition is continued by lesser figures; Lukacs, for example, devoted a lot of his energies to the study of classic texts from Goethe and a host of others. It still continues today, as this journal and Socialist Review demonstrate.
Now, I do not want to argue that this is not an important activity or that all the energy devoted to it was wasted. It is rather that this sort of inquiry is a very limited one. It narrows the scope of culture to a few works. It is usually accompanied by the belief that already-existing forms of culture are superior to newly emerging ones and it is often accompanied by the belief that the best culture was produced in the past. In addition, because it takes as its model culture generated in the bourgeois epoch, it takes over many bourgeois assumptions; for example that great art is the work of great individuals (usually men). As a result, even the best Marxist discussions tend to get involved in arguing about things like ‘creative genius’ and ‘poetic vision’. One set of unintended consequences flows from this intellectual framework: that the masses have produced very little great art apart from marginal areas like folk-song and that cultural production, and even consumption, are very difficult indeed, and are thus the province of a special sort of people. Whether its proponents like it or not, the consequences of this view are profoundly anti-democratic, anti-socialist, and thus disabling.
It was against this limiting conception of culture that Williams developed some of his best ideas. He put his objections in the following form in the course of discussing the study of literature:
‘... the natural area of interest of this kind of person – an interest in all discourse in writing or speech – had been specialised and even restricted to printed imaginative compositions of a certain quality. Of course, when people looked around, most of these had been written in the past. Today – it was said – there was only television and all that rubbish, so that literature, in some places, came to resemble that proverbial bird which flew in ever-decreasing circles until it finally and fundamentally disappeared.’ [2]
Williams arrived at his position not by means of a critique of the limits of the orthodox Marxist tradition but through a study of the ways in concepts like culture had been used within English literature and his early formulations are spelt out in Culture and Society. In some ways, the key thinkers in that literary tradition, and in particular Matthew Arnold (a nineteenth century civil servant, poet and critic), parallel the way in which culture has been thought of by the sort of Marxists I described above. Arnold’s most famous account runs thus:
‘The whole scope of this essay is to recommend culture as the great help in our present difficulties; culture being a pursuit of our total perfection by means of getting to know, on all matters which most concern us, the best that has been thought and said in the world’ [3]
Now, in the case of Arnold, there was no doubt at all about the reactionary consequences of this view. Culture and Anarchy was written as a response to a riot in Hyde Park organised by workers demanding the vote. Arnold thought that this was a very bad thing indeed, and he quoted his father with approval on the subject of rioting: ‘flog the rank and file and fling the ring-leaders from the Tarpeian Rock!’ [4] Arnold’s idea was that this timeless, classless culture could be used as a balm to prevent unpleasant things like class conflict. It is a view which is embedded in the teaching of ‘culture’ in schools, where generations of working-class children have been exposed to Shakespeare et. al. as part of a process designed to turn them into seekers after ‘sweetness and light’ (another of Arnold’s formulations) and obedient wage slaves.
Against this, Williams first argued that culture cannot be reduced to a set of things: ‘A culture can never be reduced to its artifacts while it is being lived.’ [5] When we look at a culture in the past, we tend to think of it in terms of the particular works that it produced. For all sorts of reasons we cannot recover the full range of activities which went to make up any particular culture. In addition, those things which we do look at have often already been filtered by various processes from accident to previous critical judgement which already prejudice our ideas of their place in their own time. Now, while a lot of this may be unavoidable simply because the culture of the past is now dead, it is still a mistake to make a virtue of necessity and to think that all we can do is to look at particular artifacts. And it is even more of a mistake to then judge our own, living, cultural experience by the methods and standards we have used for past cultures. Thus, Williams argued, if we look at working-class culture simply in terms of the cultural artifacts that it has produced we get a very distorted picture which will tend to flatter the greater productivity of the ruling class. In order to get out of this unattractive corner Williams proposed a shift of emphasis:
‘... a culture is not only a body of intellectual and imaginative work; it is also and essentially a whole way of life. The basis of a distinction between bourgeois and working class culture is only secondarily in the field of intellectual and imaginative work, and even here it is complicated... by the common elements resting on a common language. The primary distinction is to be sought in the whole way of life, and here, again, we must not confine ourselves to such evidence as housing, dress and modes of leisure. Industrial production tends to produce a uniformity in such matters, but the vital distinction lies at a different level. The crucial distinguishing element in English life since the Industrial Revolution is not language, not dress, not leisure – for these indeed will tend towards uniformity. The crucial distinction is between alternative ideas of the nature of social relationships.’ [6]
Culture now became the whole gamut of ways in which people thought, felt and acted.
This new position had three important consequences. One was largely conjunctural: at that time it was argued by some that the working class was fast disappearing and being replaced by a new amorphous middle-class population. As evidence, things like changes in leisure patterns etc. were cited. Williams provided a powerful argument against that reactionary view: for him class still remained a central issue which was embodied in different views of the world. The second was that, with a whole new range of things from football to brass bands admitted as culture every bit as much as painting and poetry it is no longer the case that the ruling class or its intellectual mercenaries are the overwhelming source of culture. Thirdly, since these activities were, and are, widespread the study of culture is no longer obsessed with great figures and their products.
All of these seem to me to be valuable and progressive positions. They attack some of the most cherished myths of the bourgeoisie. There is no longer any basis for thinking that there is one privileged area of life which is the sole preserve of the bourgeois individual. There is no longer any basis for the belief that ‘culture’ is the property of an elite who happen to own the means of production and that those who do not happen to share a liking for Monteverdi or Titian or or Ben Jonson are rough untutored louts who lack some valuable human quality – and are thus unfit to rule. There is no longer an area of life in which the working class can be shown to be inferior. Culture is no longer something which flourished in the past, and the present and the future are not deserts barren of human achievement.
But, even if we accept this argument, there remain very substantial problems with Williams’ work. In developing his argument about the reality of working class culture, Williams argued that:
‘We may now see what is properly meant by ‘working-class culture’. It is not proletarian art, or council houses, or a particular use of language; it is, rather, the basic collective idea, and the institutions, manners, habits of thought, and intentions which proceed from this ... Working-class culture, in the stage through which it has been passing, is primarily social (in that it has created institutions) rather than individual (in particular intellectual or imaginative works). When it is considered in context, it can be seen as a very remarkable creative achievement.’ [7]
This raises two difficulties. In the first place, we will want to ask what is the relationship between a ‘social’ culture and an ‘individual’ culture. In the way that it is argued by Williams, this is something of a false debate, since it is clearly the case that, in a classless society, the conditions would exist for the extension of the conditions necessary for the production of ‘intellectual and imaginative works’. But beyond that lies a real problem: why is it that, even if we adopt this ‘anthropological’ version of culture, we still seem to need ideas which allow us to talk about the specificity of intellectual and imaginative works? We could go even further, and argue not only that while angling and novel-writing might both be cultural activities, they are different sorts of activity and in addition, some novels are better than others. In other words, unless we adopt a really radical populism, then it seems inevitable that we require an ‘aesthetic’ in addition to our anthropology. The difficulty does not seem to me insuperable: we can quite easily argue that while the ‘basic collective idea’ may be the bed-rock of working class culture it is capable of a great deal of development and that we can find some cultural activities, and even artifacts, which embody that basic idea but in very complex and subtle ways. Just as there is a distance between trade union membership and activity in a revolutionary party so there is a distance between the basic collective idea and the plays of Brecht. It involves no rejection of Williams’ basic insight to develop ways of looking at the latter. [8]
A much more substantial problem is that of deciding where the boundaries of culture lie in Williams’ account. One of the great advantages of having a conception of culture as painting, music, etc. is that we know what we are talking about. With the definition proposed by Williams everything is, or can be, culture and thus the term is so full that it is empty. This is particularly clear in his argument that working-class culture is, up to now, embodied in institutions, by which he means unions, the Labour Party, etc. Now, since we already have a very well-developed set of concepts for talking about those sorts of things, it is difficult to see what we could add by introducing new terms drawn from the study of culture. This is a very real difficulty, at least at the level of theory. While we can easily agree that, in practice, writing novels is ‘culture’ while winning strikes is not, there are a number of things – street theatre groups, for example – which are not so easy to classify. And even if we can work out a theoretical border line between culture and non-culture we still have to try to solve the problem of the relationship between the two. Williams himself tries to propose a solution to these problems but, for the moment, I would like to leave them hanging on the page as questions and move to wider considerations of Williams’ position as a whole.
For many years, Williams had a problematic relationship to Marxism. In Culture and Society, for example, his discussion of English Marxist theories of culture was, while friendly, distinctly that of a detached observer. In the sixties, with his discovery of Lukacs and Goldmann, he began to publicly announce his convergence with Marxism and his work in the last ten years has been explicitly within a Marxist framework.
But, of course, in this naughty world, Marxism means all things to all people and we need to inquire a little further into what Williams actually has to say. Marxist critics have argued that his early work has a ‘residual populism’ and exhibits a ‘classically centrist stance’ [9] or that his position lacks a full understanding of class struggle and class domination. [10] In some ways the problems with these criticisms is that they do not go far enough in that, at least in Culture and Society, many of Williams’ formulations come very close to abstract reformist propagandism. [11] On the other hand, because they are directed at only the explicit political positions, they stop short of the real problem: can we find in Williams an underlying and continuous position and, if so, how are we to assess it?
One of the key terms in Williams’ vocabulary is ‘structure of feeling’. He defines it thus:
‘The term is difficult, but “feeling” is chosen to emphasize a distinction from more formal concepts of “world view” or “ideology”. It is not only that we must go beyond formally held and systematic beliefs, though of course we have always to include them. It is that we are concerned with meanings and values as they are actively lived and felt, and the relations between these and formal or systematic beliefs are in practice variable ... An alternative definition would be structures of experience: in one sense the better and wider word, but with the difficulty that one of its senses has that past tense which is the most important obstacle to recognition of the area of social experience which is being defined. We are talking about characteristic elements of impulse, restraint, and tone; specifically affective elements of consciousness and relationships: not feeling against thought, but thought as felt and feeling as thought: practical consciousness of a present kind, in a living and interrelating continuity. We are then defining these elements as a “structure”: as a set, with specific, internal relations, at once interlocking and in tension.’ [12]
This idea of structure of feeling is obviously very close to that conception of culture taking its class-definition from the basic idea about social relations. Such a structure is clearly conceived of as prior to formal ideologies or political positions and might survive the changes which these undergo. It seems sensible to enquire as to what is Williams’ own structure of feeling.
A full study of this question would be very long, involving a number of novels as well as his critical work so I will restrict myself to looking at one key book. This is The Country and the City, which was written between 1968 and 1971. It is an appropriate choice for a number of reasons. In the first place, it is roughly co-incident with Williams’ public announcement of his resumption of Marxism. In the second place, it is, by the standards of his critical works, a remarkably personal document. Thirdly, and this is a matter of judgement, it seems to me to be an exemplary book for my purposes.
Williams’ concern in this book is to examine the various ways in which the conceptions of rural and urban life have focussed ideas about social relations as a whole. Early in the book, writing about Cambridge and Cambridgeshire, he remarks that:
‘... whenever I consider the relations between country and city, and between birth and learning, I find this history active and continuous: the relations are not only of ideas and experiences, but of rent and interest, of situation and power; a wider system.’ [13]
In the subsequent discussion, he disposes of various mythical renderings of the opposition between town and country, including the classic Marxist attitude towards ‘rural idiots’. He argues from the experience of Cuba and China that ‘these people, whom orthodoxy has consigned to the role of supporting players in history, have been, for the last forty years, the main revolutionary force in the world’. [14] His main object is to argue that the logic of historical development has been to render the opposition between capital and labour a common feature of both city and country. He argues that the development of modern imperialism has reproduced the tension between city and country on a world scale:
‘The “metropolitan” states, through a system of trade, but also through a complex of economic and political controls, draw food and, more critically, raw materials from these areas of supply, this effective hinterland, that is also the greater part of the earth’s surface and that contains the majority of its peoples. Thus a model of city and country, in economic and political relationships, has gone beyond the boundaries of the nation-state, and, is seen but also challenged as a model of the world.’ [15]
While this may be a limited and one-sided view of imperialism, it retains enough truth to establish that the opposition of country and city remains an important one.
However, it is one thing to argue that the question of the peasantry and its implications for the global struggle for socialism is an important one. It is quite another to then argue that the experience of rural labour has some sort of special virtue. This, I think, is what Williams does; he writes, for example, that:
‘I have had the luck to thin a wood and watch the cowslips and bluebells and foxgloves come back; to repair and rebuild old drystone walls; to hedge and ditch, after long neglect, and to see from skilled men how the jobs should be done.’ [16]
Behind this passage there are two distinct currents of thought. One is the very healthy rejection of the division of labour, and in particular the division between mental and manual labour, which is a central aspect of Marx’s own critique of capitalism. But the other quite unmistakable, current is the privileging of certain kinds of non-mechanised, and in practice incompletely socialised, labour as having some special ability to overcome the opposition between labour and nature. This is not, in my opinion, compatible with Marxist socialism since that theory rests upon the possibility of human freedom through the superior productivity of socialised labour aided by the use of machinery. The source of this conception of labour is not at all Marxist. It lies in that literary tradition, of which Ruskin (a nineteenth century art critic) was the best exponent, and which was on his own account, very important in Williams’ intellectual formation. The attempt to synthesise these two currents has always been problematic and is, for example, the source of a number of the problems in William Morris. One of the central elements of Williams’ structure of feeling is thus, to say the least, heavily nuanced in the direction of a non-marxist current of thought.
Again, if we take the question of class as a primary definer of social experience, there is no doubt whatsoever that this is a central aspect of Williams’ thought. Class-struggle, however, is a different question. There is no doubt that criticisms of his earlier positions have been accepted by Williams and, at the level of formal ‘ideology’ he now accepts the centrality of the notion. What there is much more doubt about is the extent to which this is now an integral part of his structure of feeling. The Country and the City provides a litmus test of that in his discussion of Thomas Hardy, who is obviously central to his concerns.
Williams begins his chapter by reminding us that: ‘Thomas Hardy was born a few miles from Tolpuddle, a few years after the deportation of the farm labourers who had come together to form a trade union.’ [17] He quite rightly reminds us that Hardy is using as his starting point a society characterised by rapid change and intense class struggle. But, in discussing the transmutation from real Dorset to literary Wessex, Williams focuses on Hardy’s concerns with education, agrarian change and social mobility; in other words, the concrete experience of class. Now, so far as this goes, it is undoubtedly correct and Williams is right to argue that Jude the Obscure is the culmination of the earlier novels rather than a fresh departure. But there is another aspect of the transition from Dorset to Wessex: so far as I know, Hardy’s fictional world succeeds in, as it were, boiling off the volatile elements of class struggle present in the Tolpuddle martyrs and other agrarian movements, leaving us with individual struggle which, while they might be important, interesting, even representative, are not what Lukacs would have called ‘typical’.
My purpose in drawing attention to this is not to provide an opening for a boring orthodox polemic about the centrality of the class struggle to all good literature. Rather it is to draw attention to two points about Hardy and his novels as they stand. Hardy’s work is rightly famous for the attention it gives to the practical experience of rural labour and it is therefore an interesting and properly literary question to ask why it is that one important aspect of this experience should suddenly become invisible in Hardy’s fictional account. Secondly, we know that Hardy was aware of attempts at rural trade unionism and wrote about them in what Williams calls his ‘fine essay’ on The Dorsetshire Labourer. [18] Even if Hardy was sceptical about the utility of these attempts, it is again an interesting and properly literary question to ask why something which is present in his non-fictional writing should be absent from his fictional writing. And it is also very important to ask why, in the course of a serious discussion of Hardy, Williams himself never asks these painfully obvious questions.
I think that the answer is that Williams’ structure of feeling does not really incorporate class-struggle as such. Class, as an experience of domination and consequent crippling, is quite central to Williams, but class struggle is something to which there is, at best, a formal and gestural acknowledgement.
We might then say that an approximation to Williams’ real structure of feeling is one in which the passage between country and town and between classes are the central features. In fact, these correspond closely to his own biography as a movement from the son of a railwayman in a Welsh village to the mature professor of drama at Cambridge University. Such a structure of feeling is neither ridiculously eccentric nor unimportant. It is probably true that a number of the readers of this journal have, in a rather less extreme form, a similar experience of upward mobility. And it is certainly true that, in a society whose central image of bourgeois national unity is the figure of a country lady who likes horses and corgis, the question of the images of rural society is of considerable ideological importance. But neither of these major poles are central to Marxist structure of feeling; that would centre upon the permanence and necessity of class-stratification under capitalism and upon the immense possibilities present even in the bourgeois form of socialised labour.
The consequences of all of this are of some importance. While I would argue strongly for the importance of Williams’ initial broadening of the scope of cultural activity and enquiry beyond the rigid bounds within which some prominent Marxist intellectuals wish to confine it, it nevertheless remains the case that Williams’ overall work has had some serious consequences. For example, the problem of combining Williams catholic conception of culture with any sense of the qualitative differences between different types of cultural activity has often led to the rankest forms of populism. A large number of the studies of working class culture hitherto emanating from the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies at the University of Birmingham have been guilty of this.
But, by and large, such problems have been confined to the academic study of culture and have had very little direct political impact. Much more important is the way in which the relationship between culture and non-culture, or between culture and politics, which we looked at earlier has been analysed. Williams’ own solution is to argue that while class definitions of reality may be important, there remains a further area of the ‘human’ which is not exhausted by class:
‘... there is always other social being and consciousness which is neglected and excluded: alternative perceptions of others, in immediate relationships; new perceptions and practices of the material world. In practice these are different in quality from the developing and articulated interests of a rising class.’ [19]
What Williams seems to be arguing here is that there is an area of cultural activity which is not reducible to formal political practice, although he immediately goes on to remark that much of political practice depends upon the relationship between the two.
Now, at one level, this statement is undoubtedly correct. We can find formulations in Holy Writ, for example Trotsky, which point to the evident fact that class consciousness and cultural production develop at an uneven pace. We might find the theoretical underpinning of this objectionable in that it seems to rest upon some notion of an abstract human essence which permeates all human life quite independent of the mode of production but the dislocation that it points to is quite obviously a real one. The problem arises when we insert this insight into its actual political context.
Over the years, Williams has been used by many different political currents and today is no exception. Some of the reviews of politics and letters have been positively gushing. One begins: ‘This is, quite simply, one of the most magnificent books I have read in a lifetime of many texts’ and ends: ‘Magnificent is almost too weak a word for work that has wondered about that.’ [20] I wonder about that sort of praise. And one of the things that I wonder about is why should such a book command such extravagance from left intellectuals in Britain today.
Quite apart from the specific motives of that reviewer or the people who decided to produce the book, the answer seems to me to lie in two related phenomena. In the first place, Williams’ argument, in Politics and Letters as well as Marxism and Literature, has the effect of privileging the extent to which radical cultural practice is important as a pre-figuration of a possible socialist society. That is a thread that has been present from at least Culture and Society but it is quite clear that it fits with the current mood of a wide range of people for whom revolutionary politics in its Leninist form is quite unacceptable.
Secondly, and much more generally, the attraction lies in the congruence between Williams’ argument and a reformist reading of Gramsci. Williams is, in fact, quite specific about the extent to which Gramsci has influenced his later writing although it seems to me that, once again, we can detect the origins of his line of thinking in much earlier works. The reading of Gramsci which the reformists wish to foreground is drawn exclusively but selectively from the Prison Notebooks. It is one which stresses the importance of cultural struggle as separate from the ‘narrow economic struggle’. Thus Williams’ formulations can, without too much difficulty, be assimilated into a general position which neglects or refuses the articulation between economic and cultural struggles in aid of an effectively reformist practice. Williams’ own writings suggest that he would wish to be distanced from these reformist conclusions – at least in Politics and Letters – but the weaknesses of his own position mean that, willy-nilly, he becomes grist for the mill of the Broad Academic Alliance.
In particular, the absence of class-struggle and consequently the absence of the party as the central instrument of the class struggle, mean that the link between the cultural and the narrowly political can never be properly posed, let alone resolved.
We can, in fact, offer an alternative reading of the Prison Notebooks to develop a better solution. The key term in Gramsci’s discussion of the struggle for hegemony is not the specificity of cultural struggles but the role of the revolutionary party – which Gramsci refers to obliquely as the Modern Prince – as the organiser and unifier of those various developments. Thus, he writes:
‘Can there be cultural reform, and can the position of the depressed strata of society be improved culturally, without a previous economic reform and a change in their position in the social and economic fields? Intellectual and moral reform has to be linked with a programme of economic reform – indeed the programme of economic reform is precisely the concrete form in which every intellectual and moral reform presents itself. The modern Prince, as it develops, revolutionises the whole system of intellectual and moral relations, in that its development means precisely that any given act is seen as useful or harmful, as virtuous or wicked, only in so far as it has as its point of reference the modern Prince itself, and helps to strengthen or to oppose it.’ [21]
Thus, in this account, the often-drawn conclusion that there is a unique specificity to cultural struggles is rejected. Here ‘economic reform’ is identified as the essential determinant of cultural activity. In addition, it is argued not only that it is the project of the party to organise these different types of human activity but also that it is the animator of them.
Elsewhere, Gramsci goes much further arguing that it is the aim of a revolutionary party to ensure that: ‘the members of a particular party find in that party all the satisfactions that they formerly found in a multiplicity of organisations’ and ‘at destroying all other organisations or ... incorporating them into a system of which the party is the sole regulator’. [22] Thus, while it may be the aim of the party to provide for the cultural life of its membership and to organise that culture it does so by means of waging a struggle against the organisation of culture by other classes. The primary object of cultural struggle is not to wage cultural struggles within the existing forms of cultural organisation but to provide alternative forms of cultural organisation. It is for this reason, among a host of others, that attempts at a reformist reading of the later Gramsci are quite dishonest: the policy he argues for has nothing at all to do with permeating the existing society. And it also reveals the key to the relationship between politics and culture. In the first place, the difference between working class and other culture is not primarily the ideas embedded in it, nor even the types of activity which are labelled culture, but in the way these are organised. And, consequently, that political organisation in the narrow sense is a prerequisite for the organisation of working-class culture. To the extent that cultural activities undertaken by workers remain under the organisational leadership of the ruling class they remain ‘corporate’; to the extent that they take place under the aegis of the revolutionary party they can become properly proletarian. It is the failure to make these distinctions which opens the fundamentally progressive ideas contained in Williams’ work to the current vogue of reformist interpretation.
For the tiny British revolutionary left most of these points are necessarily abstract, but we may at least examine them as a matter of perspective. It is obviously true that no, or very few, human beings are totally absorbed by the struggle for political power. Any mass revolutionary organisation will be bound to attract towards it as members or active supporters, a large number of people who have interests in everything from football to painting. These may not be the central interests of the people involved, and they certainly will not be the central interests of the party, but they will have to co-exist within the same organisation. Now, they can either be repressed and denied by the party itself, in the interests of some more immediate goal, or they can be organised and directed as part of the collective work of the party. If they are denied, the interests will not go away, although the people holding them might. In that case, these cultural activities will be organised, and thus dominated, by forces hostile to the working class and its party. The alternative is to look for ways in which the party itself might begin to build the sort of ‘cultural apparatus’ which could organise these activities.
There are examples of this in the history of the workers’ movement. The most developed of these are from Germany, where first the SPD and then the KPD developed precisely such organisations covering a wide range of activities. In both of these cases, there are political problems in addition to the fact that most of the studies of them are in German and thus not widely available. The cultural apparatus of the KPD was organised largely round the International Workers’ Aid (IAH) organisation and dominated by Willi Munzenberg. On the evidence which I have, this seems to have been prone to ‘rightist’ deviations and thus perhaps does not provide quite the model that I suggested in an earlier essay. [23] In particular, it does not seem to have solved the problem of the relationship between radicalised bourgeois intellectuals and militant workers. The two do not need to be contradictory, but there is obviously a difference between winning established bourgeois cultural figures to Marxism and organising the cultural self-activity of militants. [24]
But the evidence is not entirely ‘foreign’. Even during its degeneration in the 1930s, the British CP seems to have had a similar if more modest conception. The Left Book Club is a well-known example but there is evidence of other activities. [25] There is, in fact, an urgent need to ransack these forgotten records of the workers’ movement with the same sort of critical enthusiasms which we have long applied to the Theses of the Communist International. As the revolutionary left in Britain develops in size and maturity we will eventually have to provide better answers than those of Williams.

Notes
1. Politics and Letters (NLB, 1979).
2. Communications as Cultural Science, in C.W.E. Bigsby (ed.), Approaches to Popular Culture (Arnold, 1976), p. 33.
3. Culture and Anarchy (CUP, 1969), p. 6.
4. Ibid., p. 203.
5. Culture and Society (Penguin, 1968), p. 310.
6. Ibid., p. 312.
7. Ibid., pp. 313–4.
8. Although I do not find Williams’ own solution satisfactory, largely because of the political questions touched on later, it would be too much of a digression to develop this further here.
9. Terry Eagleton in Criticism and Ideology (Verso, 1978), p. 27.
10. By E.P. Thompson in a famous review of The Long Revolution and by A. Swingewood in The Myth of Mass Culture (Macmillan, 1977), p. 43.
11. See, for example, Culture and Society, pp. 322–3 which has a passage about culture.
12. Marxism and Literature (OUP, 1977), p. 132.
13. The Country and the City (Paladin, 1975), p. 17.
14. Ibid., p. 365.
15. Ibid., p. 334.
16. Ibid., p. 362.
17. Ibid., p. 239.
18. I am told, but have never bothered to check, that Hardy was a personal friend of H.M. Hyndman.
19. Marxism and Literature, p. 126.
20. Phillip Corrigan in Media Culture and Society, vol. 11, no. 1.
21. Selections from Prison Notebooks (L&W, 1971), p. 133.
22. Ibid., p. 265.
23. The debate on Art and Revolution, International Socialism 2 : 5, Summer 1979. See B. Gross, W. Munzenberg (Michigan State, 1974). Thus, Munzenberg, while organising a large number of ventures as a ‘quasi-independent’ figure in the KPD also organised a number of ‘popular front’ type conferences even before 1935.
24. One interesting but brief discussion of some of the problems is Brecht’s account in J. Willett’s Brecht on Theatre (Methuen, 1978), pp. 110–11.
25. Joe Jacobs, in Out of the Ghetto (J. Simon, 1978), gives an account ‘from the inside’ of some of these things. There is a lot of interesting material in Photography/Politics: 1 (Photography Workshop, 1979).
 



Classical Marxist literary theory sought to demonstrate the relationship between the real material life of social classes and the form and content of literary works. In this, it was a special part of the Marxist concern with ‘base and superstructure’ and, like this more general question, it proved quite difficult to produce an agreed solution to the problems encountered. These difficulties, along with other social and intellectual developments, led some writers who would undoubtedly claim to be Marxists, like Terry Eagleton, to abandon, in practice, the attempt to either theorise or to demonstrate the relationship between the literary texts they were analysing and the world within which they were produced. [1]
This article cannot claim to present a fully-finished modern defence of the classical tradition. What I have tried to do here is to show how, in the most unfavourable circumstances, we cannot even begin to understand the nature of literary productions and of changes in literature without investigating the struggles between classes in the world in which those works were produced. I make no claims to have solved all of the problems involved in this enquiry. In particular, I have avoided one whole class of questions which are of very considerable importance to Marxism. Literary theory has at least two major components: the analysis of literary texts and their evaluation. I have only here considered the former of those two areas of enquiry. The latter, ‘aesthetic’, task is of considerable importance but I have consciously separated it out in order to sharpen the focus upon the ‘sociological’ problems I want to look at.
This distinction is particularly important since I have chosen to write about some of Shakespeare’s plays. There is no writer in the English language whose work is surrounded with more mysticism than Shakespeare. Much of that mysticism concerns the various claims for his ‘greatness’, ‘universal validity’, or whatever. Marx himself helped to import this ‘Shakespearean cult’ into our tradition [2], and Prawer [3] cites in scholarly detail the record of his use of Shakespeare’s works. I have strong views on the question of ‘greatness’ and, in particularly, ‘universal validity’, but I have tried to keep them out of this article. What I have tried to do is to show how this writer, who is often credited with quite remarkable and supra-historical abilities, can only be properly understood in terms of the class forces of his age.
Obviously, in a short article, I cannot do that exhaustively and I have here concentrated on two plays which exemplify a central problem of Shakespearean analysis: King Lear and The Tempest. [4] These plays present quite different views of the world. In the earlier play, as in general with the tragedies, great conflicts are represented which culminate in ruin, destruction and death: as the song That’s Entertainment has it of Hamlet: ‘A Prince and a Ghost meet/And everybody ends up mincemeat’. In the later play, the conflicts are resolved at least temporarily. The problem is to explain why this fundamental change should have taken place.
One of the key resources of bourgeois criticism in these sorts of circumstances is to try to explain change in terms of the personal development of the writer under study. Thus critics of a psychoanalytic persuasion argue that the tragedies were the product of some great mental crisis experienced by Shakespeare in the first years of the seventeenth century and the later plays represent the work of a man who has reached a new stability. Religious critics, on the other hand, argue that the tragedies are the product of a spiritual crisis and the later plays are the result of a conversion to Christian faith. [5] In most cases, critics of the various persuasions would adduce biographical evidence to support their positions and the Marxist would then have to engage in a tortuous, if thoroughly correct, argument derived from Plekhanov to demonstrate that individual biographical events and qualities are only of major significance in certain concrete historical circumstances. In this instance we are spared that task since nearly 300 years of intense scholarship have revealed virtually nothing about the life of William Shakespeare. [6] We simply do not know whether he experienced any psychic or religious crises, either at the appropriate time or at any other times. This has not deterred the bourgeois critics: they have fabricated convenient crises out of their own imaginations and read them back into the texts. If we can explain the problem to which these fabrications are addressed from the actually existing evidence about the epoch, then we have not disproved the existence of any crises any more than the theory of natural selection disproved the existence of a creator, but we have rendered them ‘redundant hypotheses’. We will have shown that Marxism can do something with the historical evidence which bourgeois scholarship cannot do.
The fact is that despite the lack of evidence about Shakespeare’s life we can say with certainty that he was a bourgeois playwright. This is true in two senses. The theatre in which he worked was a capitalist enterprise and the sort of plays that he wrote are of a kind that, historically, are specific to the bourgeois epoch. The Elizabethan theatre was the mass popular entertainment of its day and Shakespeare was one of the most popular creators: he was the Julia Smith of 1600. The public commercial theatre in London dates from 1576 and was something radically new in British cultural life. The drama itself had slowly evolved out of its religious prototypes and by about 1500, in for example Fulgens and Lucres, there was already a secular comedy. This drama, however, was performed in ad hoc settings like noble houses and, increasingly, the Universities and Inns of Court. It was thus only partially free of the older relationship of clientage towards the rich and noble that characterises pre- and early capitalist artistic productions. The establishment of a permanent Theatre (that was the name of the first purpose-built establishment) by Francis Burbage in 1576 represented a different sort of relationship to society. This building and its immediate successors were very large constructions by the standards of the day and required a considerable capital investment. They produced regular performances for a paying public and thus depended not upon the whim of some powerful individual or corporate body but upon the existence of large numbers of people with at least some money income. They also needed to employ a fairly large number of professional players (all male) in order to be able to present a regular and varied programme. They were thus not ‘showcases’ for the talents, or otherwise, of individuals whose main economic or social functions were located in other spheres. In a society in which the distinction between capital and labour was only just emerging, and in which production for the market was hardly the universal form of social labour, the new theatres were at the extreme of economic and social innovation.
The fact that the theatre was part of the most capitalist sector of the economy did not, however, endear it to most capitalists. As is well known, the theatres were carefully built outside the jurisdiction of the Corporation of the City of London and depended for their operation on the protection of powerful aristocrats. The City, the collective voice of merchant and small manufacturing capital, frequently addressed complaints to the Crown about the theatres and when, in 1642, the bourgeoisie broke free of royal control they immediately closed them all down. One of the reasons for this hostility was undoubtedly religious. The theatre was a form of ‘ungodly’ popular entertainment to which the Protestant sects were uniformly hostile. On the other hand, there were other and less otherworldly reasons for the hostilities: the theatres provided meeting places for apprentices and others where they made a noise, stopped out late and behaved in a generally unruly fashion. To read some of the petitions of the time is rather like reading the Daily Telegraph on the question of ‘football hooligans’ today. The merchants and manufacturers objected to large gatherings of their employees as some sort of threat to their control of the city streets and thus to their social power. The crown and the great aristocrats, whatever their literary inclinations, were quite happy to encourage and protect the theatres just because they constituted a point of popular opposition to the City and thus aided in the bargaining between these different sources of power.
Shakespeare, who made a lot of money out of the theatre, was thus a very successful participant in an advanced capitalist enterprise which, paradoxically, depended for its continuing functioning upon the support of the pre-capitalist elements in British society. For a literary figure, as indeed for intellectuals generally, the only exceptional element of this combination was the extent of his involvement in capitalist enterprises. Writers, like priests and other ‘brain workers’ of this period, tended to come not from the ‘feudal aristocracy’ but from the ranks of the middling merchants and, to a lesser extent, the minor gentry. What they all had in common was a degree of dependence upon the Tudor state machine for their employment and status. Thus, to take two obvious examples: Spenser, son of a journeyman Merchant Taylor, was successively Clerk to the Council of Munster and Sheriff of Cork, narrowly escaping the insurrection of 1598; Donne, son of a prominent member of the Company of Ironmongers, was Secretary to Sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and later a clergyman. These two stood at the opposite pole to Shakespeare: they were much more the products of the traditional system of clientage and their work is clearly directed to an educated and ‘aristocratic’ audience whereas his is ‘popular’, both in its initial form of propagation and in its concerns and references. Between these extremes lay the bulk of the intellectuals of the day and as such they can be understood as part of a wider class that had grown up in the course of the sixteenth century. [7]
By 1600 it is no longer at all possible to describe England as ’feudal’, although there were clearly large elements of pre- capitalist production and life remaining. Capitalist farming and capitalist trading were already quite advanced and the political structure of Tudor England represented an attempt to construct an ‘absolute’ state. This form of rule involved the breaking of the power of the independent feudal lords with their private armies, the establishment of a permanent state machine with both the effective monopoly of force and control over the economic and social life of the national territory. Old ‘international’ structures like the Catholic Church were subjected to royal control and direction as an important ideological mechanism in controlling the minds of the population. In short, the modern national state was in the process of construction. This process went much further in Europe, and particularly in France, than it did in England where it was cut short in 1642, but during Shakespeare’s lifetime it flourished here too.
The attitude of different classes to this type of development is particularly interesting. The growth of royal power at the expense of the old landed magnates was bitterly resisted, leading on occasions to outbreaks of ‘reactionary’ civil wars. The royal power, on the other hand, attempted to concentrate aristocratic life around the court and to promote ‘new men’, often recruited from outside the old aristocracy, to positions of power and influence in the state. In France, these people were known as the ‘nobility of the robe’ and were sharply distinguished from the older ’nobility of the sword’. In Britain the distinction also existed, though it was less complete, particularly since the dissolution of the monastic order had led to the effective ennoblement of a large number of people.
For financial and merchant capital, the strengthening of royal power was welcome. On the one hand monarchs and states provided one of the largest and most secure homes for money loans and, on the other hand, their establishment of a uniform law and a single national state greatly facilitated trade. Added to this, by the sixteenth century, imperial conquest and ‘commercial military ventures’ like the slave trade had become increasingly important parts of economic life. Consequently, these groups of capitalists had an interest in continuing a close relationship with the state, particularly if there were limited but real prospects of social advancement and influence as well as money in the deal.
On the other hand there were also increasing disadvantages to the arrangement. Royal power was expensive and difficult to control. It tried to raise money by means of arbitrary taxation or the sale of lucrative monopolies to particular favourites. It could not be relied upon to pursue a foreign policy based on the needs of trade but was the prisoner of dynastic considerations. Its dealings with the old aristocracy meant that filling senior posts and policy making were often based on favouritism or heredity rather than competence, and so on. One of the consequences of these strains was that the capitalist class increasingly divided into two sections: those who were closely and irrevocably allied with the court, and those who were increasingly distanced from it. So long as the major sections of capital were purely or largely financial or mercantile, there was no new form of production growing. Both of these forms of capital could and did happily co-exist with older forms of production, from which they extorted surpluses produced elsewhere and which they only slowly and unevenly dissolved ‘from within’. By the start of the seventeenth century, however, capitalist production proper was beginning to emerge and with it a new and independent source of economic and social power. [8] The strains between the old forms of life and the new were growing all the time and, in the long run, their implications were revolutionary.
The intellectuals, mainly the products of the new classes but almost completely dependent upon the good will of the older classes and the state, naturally had to live with these growing contradictions. Those intellectuals who gained their living from the most capitalist form of entertainment but who were still dependent upon the state for patronage, felt the strains more acutely than most. Lucien Goldmann argued, in a neglected Marxist classic The Hidden God (1964), that in France it was precisely the ‘nobility of the robe’ who produced a tragic ‘world vision’ during the late seventeenth century. According to him:
A world vision is, in fact, the conceptual extrapolation in the most coherent possible manner of the real, emotional, intellectual and even motor tendencies of the members of a group. It is a coherent pattern of problems and replies which is expressed, on the literary plane, by the creation through words of a concrete universe of beings and things ... if my hypothesis is correct, all valid literary works have an inner coherence and express a world vision. [9]
He argued that the particular form this world vision took for the ‘nobility of the robe’ in the early capitalist epoch was a tragic one organised around the ‘silent god’. This vision, in its dramatic form ‘tells the story of a man who is alone from the very beginning’. [10] In this world vision the protagonists live in a state of supplication to the god they believe exists but who refuses to intercede in the doings of the social and material world:
Tragic man is absent and present in the world at one and the same time, exactly as God is simultaneously absent and present to man. Even if the smallest and most imperceptible ray of light – or real truth or real justice – were to become visible, tragedy would disappear, and man would be linked with God in a world made humanly habitable. [11]
Goldmann develops this proposition in some detail around the writings of Pascal and Racine but we can make this into a more general proposition about one of the major forms of consciousness available in the period when the capitalist class is beginning to think of standing on its own two feet and breaking with the absolute state.
The development of the absolute state also involved the subordination of the church to the needs of the national ideology and the proposition of divine sanction for the acts of the royal power, the ‘Divine Right of Kings’. In other words the major form of ideological control was identified as both the ultimate sanction of human action and the immediate justification for state power. Any class wishing to challenge the political power thus also needed to challenge its theological pretensions. Later in the seventeenth century the revolutionary wing of the bourgeoisie was to do precisely this. Its self-conscious ideologist, John Milton, in for example The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates, was to provide a political and a theological justification for the execution of the king and for the general programme of the Independents. [12] Half a century earlier, however, for a much less developed and class-conscious bourgeoisie, the problem presented itself as a tension between its social nature as a class dependent upon a new form of social life and its political dependence upon a compromise with the absolute state. In its intellectual and literary representatives there was always the possibility that this social crisis would find expression in a spiritual and moral crisis involving a questioning of the basis for human action and the possibility of divine sanctions.
Not all literary works would be expected to confront the issue directly: as we have seen there were a range of differently nuanced social positions open to writers in the period. Neither should we expect all writers to give the same attention to the dilemmas of their class: not all literary works express the ‘maximum potential consciousness’ of a class. Nor would the same writer necessarily give the same attention to the problem, or the same answer to the questions it raised, at different stages of their career. In some periods it might seem possible to resolve the problems without any fundamental upheaval, or at least to postpone their impact, while at others they might present themselves in an extremely acute form. What we would expect a larger and more detailed study of the period to show, however, is that all the writers of this class and period in one way or another reflected upon the general dilemma of their class.
We have already seen how Shakespeare was someone particularly likely to confront the general problems of his class in an acute form. We stated fairly flatly above that not only was Shakespeare engaged in a theatre that was clearly capitalist but that his plays themselves had a bourgeois form, too. It was one of the heroic achievements of the bourgeoisie that it gave rise to the modern concept of the individual, freeing humanity from the restrictions imposed by earlier modes of production and patterns of thought. But the price paid for this advance was that the human individual emerged as the bourgeois individual. The ideal of the ‘Renaissance Man’ was a limited and one-sided projection of what the bourgeoisie hoped humanity could be like, but if you did not happen to be Cosimo de Medici even that one-sided perfection was problematic. [13] The alienated social relations which are characteristic of capitalism began to show themselves very early on, particularly in literary forms. The bourgeoisie created individuals, but created them in opposition to society. The bourgeoisie created civil society, but created it in opposition to the state. The bourgeoisie created the individual and subjective consciousness but created it in opposition to the objective world. The literary forms that it created reproduced these antinomies exactly. On the one hand, and from very early on, the newly liberated consciousness found expression in the short lyric poem, most obviously the sonnet. This is the form of subjective perception, in which the whole of the literary effort is expended in describing how something is experienced. On the other hand, and much later, the distance between consciousness and the world that it confronted found expression in the classic novel, in which the resources of narrative viewpoint permit the articulation both of subjective feelings and the objective world in which it is forced to struggle. Drama, in the bourgeois epoch, has always had a difficult time of it since it is a form particularly adapted to the representation of public action, of what people say and do, and can only with difficulty show the interior life of its characters. Shakespeare’s plays are very obviously a case in point: they are full of formal devices, most obviously the soliloquy, designed to cope with this problem. Hamlet is the most extreme case of a ‘bourgeois’ drama, in which the exterior action and speech is really only a minor part of the total development of the play which depends very heavily on its use of ‘non-dramatic’ elements to achieve its effect: the bits that people remember are precisely the least ‘dramatic’ bits.
In the two senses we have argued above, we can say that being does indeed determine consciousness: the plays under consideration are indeed the products of very precise historical circumstances. But that is not the end of the matter since the social circumstances within which King Lear and The Tempest were written did not differ fundamentally: there is a relationship of direct determination only in the ‘epochal’ sense of the general formal features a writer displays. In order to go any further we have to recall that for Marxists consciousness is essentially a practical category: while it starts from the world as given it is fundamentally concerned with transforming that world. [14] While the relationship is fairly direct and obvious when I look out of my window, see weeds growing in the garden and resolve to remove them, the same thing applies in principle to the highly developed mental structures realised in philosophy or drama. The relationship between developed ideologies and the practical life of the classes that generate them may be a highly mediated and indirect one but it is nevertheless present. Consequently we would expect to find that Shakespeare’s plays do not ‘reflect’ the world of his day but ‘project’ it: they explore its logic and its consequences. If we look at King Lear in this light, we can see this very clearly. We will consider three factors which are very closely linked together: the questions of god, authority and humanity.
The most immediate fact that strikes anyone seeing or reading the play is the amount of swearing that goes on in it. Almost all the major characters utter oaths of one form or another but these are completely and directly contradictory pronouncements upon the gods and their nature. Lear and Kent even have a semi-comic interlude (II: iv: 15–22) in which they attempt to outs wear each other. Some of the pronouncements upon the nature of god have the appearance of being major insights, for example the blind Gloucester says:



As flies to wanton boys, are we to th’ Gods;
They kill us for their sport. (IV: i: 36–7)



This would have the weight of an important summation of divine malefience from someone who has suffered a great deal, but his son, who has also suffered a great deal, makes a similar unqualified statement as to the beneficence of the gods:



The Gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us. (V: iii: 170–71)



God may be just or unjust, judgemental or capricious, the play does not provide an answer.
Nor does it have any answer as to the ability of god to intervene in and change human affairs. Cordelia, who is the nearest thing to a god in the play, being spoken of in divine terms (e.g. at IV: viii: 46 and V: iii: 10–11), is the victim of very clearly human actions. She is not parted from Lear by ‘a brand from heaven’ (V: iii: 22) but is murdered by an ambitious and worldly soldier. Appeals for divine intervention are made as regularly as oaths throughout the play and yet the only apparent intervention of any superhuman agency is the incoherent, unintelligible voice of storm and thunder which is seen as divine only by the mad Lear (III: ii: 49–51).
The play has a similar confusion of opinions upon the basis of authority, power and worldly actions. In trying to prevent Cordelia’s banishment, Kent distinguishes between power and authority, and proclaims his right to act against the King when ‘majesty stoops to folly’ (I: i: 149), but he is prepared to humble himself, disguise his person, and return to the service of Lear in a menial capacity, for he finds in Lear ‘that ... which I would fain call master ... Authority’ (I: iv: 29–32). The Fool, on the other hand, makes no such distinction and all his criticisms of Lear at their first meeting are directed at Lear’s renunciation of plain power, with an acute perception that it is upon this that his ‘authority’ actually rests (I: iv: 100–331). Lear himself, after his fall, makes two speeches upon power and authority which equates the two as identical and equally corrupt (III: ii: 49–60 and IV: vi: 159–74). The only reason for even the most savage actions is the whim of the powerful. Oswald is dispatched on an errand with the instructions to murder Gloucester if he meets him and resolves that he ‘should show/What party I do follow’ for he knows that ’preferment falls on him that cuts him of (IV: v: 38–41).
King Lear shows the most extreme confusion about the motives and sanctions for human action. The three characters who act according to traditional norms of loyalty and right conduct, Cordelia, Edgar and Kent receive neither rewards nor the knowledge that their actions have prospered. By the end of the play they are dead or spiritually ruined and the only remaining motive is the burden of duty to ‘the gor’d state sustain’ (V: iii: 320).
So far, King Lear approximates to Goldmann’s notion of tragedy as the ‘silence of god’ in that there is no evidence of divine intervention despite the constant pleas of the characters. Indeed, in some ways it represents a more desolate moral and spiritual universe in that it does not even seem to sustain the notion that there might be a god at all. If this were the case, the play would hardly be a tragedy but a bloody spectacle like some of the ‘revenge tragedies’ of the period, which are clearly nihilistic in their morality. In order to be moved to ‘pity and terror’ we need to find within the play some sort of index of right action to judge the actions of the characters. In King Lear that index is a belief in common humanity as the keynote of justice and morality. In the course of his madness Lear comes to reject the call for indulgent luxury he makes early in the play (‘O! reason not the need ...’ at II: iv: 266–88) and to see social justice as an index of divine justice:



Poor naked wretches, whereso ’er you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your loop’d and window’d raggedness, defend you
From seasons such as these? ...
... Take physic, Pomp;
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them
And show the Heavens more just’. (III: IV: 28–36)



Lear’s identification of ‘unaccommodated man ... a poor bare forked animal’ (III: iv: 109–110) as the measure of value is not simply the insight of a mad king but is woven into the whole of the play. The Fool, who is the touchstone of Lear’s behaviour, speaks continually in the riddling verse of folk-wisdom, particularly in his ‘Merlin’ prophecy (III: ii: 79–96). Kent disguises himself as a poor man and his assumed accent (I: iv: 1–2) is a dramatic contrast to his equally-assumed flattery (II: ii: 106–109). Gloucester is aided by a poor old man and by his son disguised as a beggar. It is a servant who tries to prevent his blinding, provoking Regan to cry in amazement ‘A peasant stand up thus!’ (III: vi: 69). Gloucester calls on the gods, who do not answer him, but a common man does. The appeal to the common man as the source of right action is as insistent as it is impotent: The Fool dies; Gloucester and Kent are destroyed; the servants cannot prevent Gloucester’s blinding and no-one can save Lear from his final mental and physical destruction. But it is the presence of this strand of value which renders the play a tragedy when counter-posed to the collapse of all other measures of human conduct and divine sanction. It is a play of contradictory imperatives and absolutes whose clash brings ruin. Even the language of the play, with its rapid alternation between the lofty naming of the gods and the monosyllabic precision of its naming of immediate human endeavour articulates these clashes. In order to understand why this should be the case we need to return to our analysis of social reality.
As with all of Shakespeare’s plays, there is a problem with dating King Lear exactly: it seems to have been written at some time between 1604 and 1606, perhaps in the winter of 1604–05. I would prefer the earlier date to be correct since it fits my argument rather nicely, but anywhere within that timescale will do well enough. The tragic period of Shakespeare follows immediately after the death of Elizabeth and the accession of James I. Elizabeth, both by the length of her reign and her personal qualities, as much as by the policies she had pursued, had been able to ‘freeze’ the political situation into one of a balance between classes inside the country. She was the physical representative of a social, political and religious stability at home and of military and commercial successes abroad: the sonneteers really meant it when they praised her extravagantly for she assured them of the world’s continuity. The accession of James threw this settlement into some confusion. His accession itself, the importation of a foreign (and incomprehensible) king for purely dynastic reasons underlined the fragility of bourgeois influence over the absolute state: they were reminded that while they might be partners they were very much junior partners. At the same time, he altered the terms of the bargain by ennobling a large number of people. Elizabeth had been very sparing with the dispensation of such rewards and James’s ‘inflation of honours’ was part of a more general shift in the alignment of the different elements within the ruling class and the state machine. [15] At the same time, economic historians usually identify the first years of the new century as the period in which small scale capitalist producers became for the first time a significant and influential element of the capitalist class. [16] James, on the other hand, interfered increasingly with the economic life of the nation and tended to grant particular groups of capitalists privileges at the expense of their class as a whole. In other words, we see in the shift of dynasties a re-negotiation of the relationship between state, nobility and capitalist class just at the moment when the basis of a genuinely independent capitalist class was coming to prominence. In the long term, this shift led to a decomposition of the alliances and thus to the revolution. In the short term, it was a considerable shake up of established social boundaries inside and around the state machine and the dilemma of choice for those dependent upon the state machine for their social positions but whose origins and social activity was embedded in another and different class.
Shakespeare, as we have seen, was in a position to register that crisis particularly clearly.
It is this immediate crisis which lies behind the tragedies and the plays are an exploration of the problems posed for intellectuals by that social turbulence. The collapse of religious and moral authority which we have traced in King Lear is a projection of the consequences of real material events and the barbarous whims of the powerful are contrasted with a stress upon the value and loyalty of the ‘popular’. The crisis provoked by James’s new policies was emphatically not a social cataclysm and there was no reason why it should be reflected as tragedy but it is a characteristic of its projection in a dramatic world vision that its tragic consequences should be recognised. King Lear may anticipate the genuine conflicts of the revolution by 40 years but it manifestly arises out of the same irreconcilable social contradictions.
The Tempest was written some time before its first performance in 1611, and thus dates from between five and seven years later than King Lear. Strikingly, both plays begin from a very similar abdication of responsibility on the part of a monarch, but the consequences in the later play are radically different. Lear’s division of his kingdom is the occasion of the tragic action of the play, but Prospero’s coup is in the past when The Tempest opens and the play is concerned with the healing of such breaches rather than their catastrophic consequences.
If we look at the same elements in The Tempest as we did in King Lear, we find the differences are very considerable. The Tempest is suffused with supernatural interventions and, what is more, this divine power is present, visible, effective and evident throughout the play in the person of Prospero himself. In the opening storm Gonzalo prays to ‘the wills above’ (I: i: 66) but the controlling agency of the storm is Prospero. His divine control of the elements is immediately emphasised by Miranda:



If by your Art, my dearest father, you have
Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them ...
Had I been any god of power, I would
Have sunk the sea within the earth ... (I: ii: 1–11)



Prospero reassures her that:



I have with such provision in mine Art
So safely ordered, that there is no soul –
No, not so much perdition as an hair
Betid to any creature in the vessel (I: ii: 28–31)



The theme is constantly repeated. Ferdinand is sure that the music he hears ‘waits upon/Some god o’ th’ island’ (I: ii: 391–2) and Ariel later refers to Prospero as ‘Destiny’ and ‘Fate’ (III: iii: 53–61). What Ariel says is:



You are three men of sin, whom Destiny, –
That hath to instrument this lower world
And what is in’t, – the never-surfeited sea
Hath caus’d to belch up you; and on this island,
Where man doth not inhabit ... (III: iii: 53–7)



The island, of course, does now contain men, but if we look at those who ‘inhabit’ it they are: the ‘spirit’ Ariel; the ‘monster’ Caliban; the ‘maid’ Miranda; and ... Prospero. Prospero gives Ferdinand ‘a second life’ (V: i: 195) and he is the ‘heavenly power’ whom Gonzalo hopes will lead them from the island (V: i: 105).
Prospero himself is the exception in this general attempt to attribute him with divinity. According to him, he came to the island by ‘Providence divine’ (I:ii: 159) and his present advantages are enjoyed thanks to ‘bountiful Fortune’ which will not remain with him permanently (I: ii: 178–84). Neither is he quite omniscient, for he briefly forgets the drunken conspirators (IV: i: 139–42). He is emphatic about his own mortality, not only in his assurance to Alonso (V: 1: 106–66), but in his forecast that in Milan ‘Every third thought shall be my grave’ (V: i: 311). Above all, there is his great speech:



And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,
The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,
And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,
Leave not a wrack behind. We are such stuff
As dreams are made on; and our little life
Is bounded with a sleep. (IV: i: 151–8)



Inside the play, Prospero actually is, or represents, the divine power but he is also a divinity who is limited and transitory. For the duration of his Art, and thus of the play, there is no ‘silent god’, but outside of that is more uncertain.
As the divine order personified, Prospero is the controlling and validating power for all of the actions in the play. He can prevent any abuse of power, thwarting the drunken conspirators (IV: i: 165–62) and as we have seen he controls the storm exactly to his ends. He can enforce his will on anyone he chooses. He sends his daughter to sleep at will (I: ii: 184–6) and he forces his enemies to repent. It is by no means clear that Ferdinand and Miranda fall in love at their own volition since during their wooing, he thanks Ariel three times (I: ii: 423–4, 444–5 and 497–8) and certainly the romance ‘goes on, I see,/As my soul prompts it’ (I: ii: 422–3).
His absolute power, however, is coercive and does not depend upon the consent of those governed. The two characters most obviously subjected to his will are Ariel and Caliban. They have oddly similar aspirations. Ariel takes the first opportunity to claim ‘my liberty’ (I: ii: 243–) and he returns to this theme time and again despite Prospero’s irritation. Ariel at least has some debt to Prospero, who released him from the power of Sycorax. Caliban has no such debt. He has been enslaved (I: ii: 332–44) a–d he does not relish the ‘human care’ (I: ii: 348) that Prospero has lavished on him. In his view he has merely learned the vices of mankind and how to curse (I: ii: 365–7). He, too, wants his freedom, to such an extent that he is prepared to serve another ‘god’, Stephano in order to utter his cry:



Freedom, high-day! high-day, freedom! Freedom,
high-day, freedom! (II: ii: 186–7)



Freedom, in the world of Prospero, is either the reward for complete and utter loyalty or the cry of the monster and the drunken common man.
The tenuous core of value formed by the link of common humanity is no longer present. There are no Fools or Old Men or rebelliously humane servants in The Tempest. Labour, the life of the common man, is only given any value when it is associated with service to Prospero (III: i: 1–67). The common people do not respond to humane treatment (IV: i: 188–93). Left to themselves they behave as Trinculo, Stephano and Caliban: their instinct is towards drunkenness, anarchy and destruction. They are no longer the instinctively good but the subversive enemies of the noble.
The world of The Tempest is thus quite different from that of the tragedies. It is one where right and wrong, master and servant, good and evil, are fixed and clear. It is a world in which divine power is manifest on earth and in which godly sanction is identical with the actions of the powerful. It is a world in which all must obey and in which obedience leads to a resolution of conflicts, to reconciliation and to marriage. It is a world in which the common people need close supervision if they are to give satisfaction and not to vent their natural anarchic instincts. Again, the smoother and more controlled language of the play matches the shift in vision. On the other hand, it is not quite a permanent and stable world. The concerns of the tragedies are present as an undertone. Prospero’s powers are limited. He discards his Art and he faces his death. The drives of power and ambition, the desires for freedom, are all still present and are held barely in check. The conflicts are resolved at least on the surface of this ‘comedy’, but they are so deep that the usual term of ‘tragi-comedy’ is quite appropriate.
This, I want to argue, is a different world-vision from the one we examined earlier. It is true that it is still the thinking through of the same sorts of dilemmas, but it articulates within a sense of confidence that they can, at least for the time being, be resolved. According to the theoretical model I have been developing, this new vision should be a projection based upon altered social circumstances. Fortunately for me and for Marxism, it was. By the time this play was written the Stuart innovations were an established part of social life and were no longer the shocking and disturbing novelties they had been a few years earlier. Different groups and classes had adjusted to the new arrangements and made their choices between court and city. The theatre, or at least that part of it to which Shakespeare belonged, certainly had made its choice. By 1610 it had aligned itself very firmly with the court and with the state machine against the city. The Tempest was produced not for the popular audiences of the commercial theatre but for a Court festivity.
The key to the shift in the world vision articulated in these two phases of Shakespeare’s life is thus to be discovered not in biographical factors but in the social circumstances of the class of which he was a member. At the end of the reign of Elizabeth this group was faced with a reappraisal of its relationship to the state and to its own class origins. Out of the choice arising from that conflict came the tragic vision in which all authority is questioned and in which the common humanity of some nobles and the common people is the only possible, if ineffective, measure of virtue. By the time of the late plays a new alignment of forces had stabilised. The wing of the intellectuals represented by Shakespeare had thrown in their lot with the Court and cut their ties with their own class origins. The new world he portrayed still rested on shaky foundations, but at least for the time being there was a power and a principle of authority which all had to obey. Those, like the common people, who found it unpalatable, could always be whipped into line. King Lear is the drama of the bourgeois choice between subordination to the absolute state and the revolutionary implications of its own class nature. The Tempest is a celebration of absolutism by a bourgeois playwright who has made his choice.

Notes
All references to the plays are from the Arden Shakespeare paperbacks, which just goes to show how long ago it was that I studied literature:
King Lear, ed. K. Muir (Methuen, 1964).
The Tempest, ed. F. Kermode (Methuen, 1964).
1. Eagleton’s own book, Shakespeare and Society (Chatto and Windus, 1967) was an early work (allegedly his undergraduate essays) and it is ‘a consideration of individual and society in the plays’ (p. 10). It is therefore understandable and excusable to find that it deals only with the texts of the plays.
2. F. Mehring, in his Karl Marx (George Allen and Unwin, 1936), gives an account of this (p. 504).
3. S.S. Prawer, Karl Marx and World Literature (Oxford, 1978).
4. I believe that what I have argued here can be extended to account for the other plays, but that will have to wait.
5. R.S. Danby claimed King Lear as at least as Christian as the Divine Comedy in Shakespeare’s Doctrine of Nature (Faber, 1948), p. 205. To be fair, the religious critics, of whom G. Wilson Knight was the most famous, have mostly long received their reward. Recent schools of thought tend to eschew this sort of thing and be much more technical.
6. More or less everything that is known about the man’s life is summarised in the first 66 pages of C. Williams’s abridgement of Chambers’s A Short Life of Shakespeare (Oxford, 1965).
7.There is An Analysis of the Social Status of 200 Renaissance Poets, in P. Sheavyn, The Literary Profession in the Elizabethan Age (Manchester University Press, Second revised edition 1969), pp. 211–238.
8. Since Marxists are famously accused of thinking that the ‘rising middle classes’ are the key to all history, it is as well to point out that even in The Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels were careful to distinguish precisely between different stages of the economic and political development of the bourgeoisie.
9. L. Goldmann, The Hidden God, trans. P. Thody (RKP, 1964), pp. 314–15.
10. Ibid., p. 306.
11. Ibid., p. 60.
12. A. Milner, John Milton and the English Revolution (MacMillan, 1981).
13. See G. Lukacs’s essay The Bourgeois Ideal of the Harmonious Man, in his Writer and Critic, trans. A. Khan (Merlin, 1970).
14. See G. Lukács, Labour as a model of social practice, in New Hungarian Quarterly, vol. xiii, No. 47, Autumn 1972.
15. L. Stone, The Crisis of the Aristocracy (Oxford, 1967), pp. 37–61.
16. M. Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism (RKP, 1963), p. 134.
 



Reading the debate between Ian Birchall and Andrew Collier in the first two issues of this journal left me feeling depressed. It is not so much that the question of realism in art is not important, and I would have added my little portion to the heap of words had the editors found them interesting. Rather, it is questionable both whether the question of realism should form the starting point for contemporary Marxist discussions and whether the type of debates to which both authors seem addicted are the most profitable ones.
On both counts, it seems to me that both Birchall and Collier are making undue concessions to bourgeois ideology, and very dated bourgeois ideology at that. Much of what they wrote could just as well have been written in 1878 as 1978. Perhaps a few novels and poems have been written since then, perhaps a few more canvasses have been covered with oil-paint, but the theoretical tools and concerns inherited from the Masters still serve our authors.
There have, however, been a few little changes since the Grand Old Men wrote their fragments on Art. Indeed, even before Marx sat down to write the Communist Manifesto, a certain M. Daguerre had set out to make money from someone else’s invention. There have been a number of other developments since.
None of this is of much interest to the comrades: the lyric poet and the easel painter served as models of artistic activity for the Grand Masters and they can serve as models for us too.
But the insistence upon literature as the main area for discussion is perhaps the least impediment that they carry with them. Together with it goes the greater burden of Great Art. In every other area of human activity, Marxism is permitted to demolish the myths of bourgeois ideology, to drag down the lofty imaginings of idealist thinkers into the mire of historical materialism, but here is a portal which no grubby materialist may enter, for it is the home of Romanticism.
The truth is that a great deal of gibberish has been written about art, even by Marxists. For example:
The charm of (Greek) art for us is not in contradiction to the undeveloped stage of society from which it grew. It is the result, rather, and is inextricably bound up, rather, with the fact that the unripe social conditions under which it arose, and could alone arise, can never return.
There are some fairly obvious objections to taking this well-known passage seriously. For example, ‘art’ was one of those things for which the Greeks did not have a word. The word which we translate as ‘art’ we write as ‘techne’. This category included various activities, for example carpentry, which we do not qualify as being of the same order in our own conceptual system.
We could further ask just what ‘undeveloped stage of society’ we are talking about when we discuss ‘Greek art’. If we consider the epics, for example, we are discussing the products of a pre-literate culture. If we consider the dramas, we are discussing the products of a literate urban culture.
The same is true of the activities involved in constructing these artefacts. According to the internal evidence of the epics themselves they were continually composed and re-composed by generations of oral poets. It is probable, but not so far as I know proven, that they were written down when this evolving Greek culture encountered a more developed, literate, culture from the East. The dramas, on the other hand, were specifically produced for competitive performance at quasi-religious festivals within a fully-developed city-state.
Consider also the question of the relationship between ‘art’ and ‘politics’ which so greatly concerns our comrades. They display a quite unreasonable concern about the precise nature of these relations. If we examine the actual historical relationships between the two, both in terms of the lives of particular artists and in terms of the extent to which this has been evident in their work, we find a profusion of different relationships. To cite some obvious examples: the case of Shelley is well known. Dante was a member of the elected government of Florence and was forced to flee into exile and poetry by a reactionary coup. Milton was a member of the bourgeois revolutionary government established by Cromwell and, after the Restoration, narrowly escaped death for his part in the execution of Charles I. Brecht, aged 16, welcomed the First Imperialist War. Four years later, he claimed to have been a delegate to a Soldiers’ Council. In 1953, he expressed his support for Walther Ulbricht after the suppression of the Berlin Rising. Even the Big One, William Shakespeare himself, was a paid propagandist for Absolutism, as witness The Tempest.
I think, in this at least, we are forced to agree with Plekhanov that what matters is not the task of discovering the ‘correct’ relationship between art and politics but of examining those conditions which make a close relationship between the two a concrete possibility.
From this point of view of the development of a revolutionary socialist culture, this seems to me to be a fairly fundamental question. The immediate response of Marxists at this point is to become fixated with Russia after 1917 and to start muttering about the Proletcult. Now, there is obviously much which can be learnt from this experience, particularly by comrade Collier, who seems to labour under the delusion that an organisation with rather more members than the Bolshevik Party was a ‘millenarian sect’, but there are grounds for doubting whether it is the best available example.
I suggest that we might consider the example of Germany between 1919 and 1933. Here we have a relatively developed capitalist country with a cultured working class struggling for power. Obviously, here too there are major differences, for example: the traditions of the German working class, the existence of a mass Communist Party, the rise of Stalinism and Fascism. However, even if we make allowances for these differences, we can still draw some very important lessons.
Some of these lessons concern debates between such radicalised representatives of high bourgeois culture as Lukács and Brecht. (Not that they ever seem to have actually debated but, for example, Lukács considered Thomas Mann the greatest living German writer and Brecht considered that he should be shot and his works suppressed.) Much more important for us, however, were the attempts to organise a culture which embodied the revolutionary aspirations of the working class.
Now, I am not an expert on this, and the following example is only indicative of what I believe to be a profitable area for further investigation. During the course of the 1920’s, various technical developments in cameras, lenses and printing made new types of photography a possibility. One of the ways in which this developed was amongst a number of bourgeois intellectuals who effectively established a tradition of photo-journalism. Another of the developments was the birth of a ‘workers’ photography’ organisation. This attempted to organise workers who were interested in photography and, by mutual assistance, to help solve the financial and technical problems which were the first obstacle to their activity. Founded in 1926, the movement had, by 1931, some 2,412 members organised in 96 branches. On the basis of this sort of organisation and this sort of activity, it was possible to argue concretely about the nature of a revolutionary aesthetic. One of the members of the movement wrote, in 1930:
One needs the professional eye to pick up at once certain details of landscape or machinery, the clothing or habits of other people; and you need the eye of a certain class in order to perceive the signs of prevailing social conditions in the internal and external life of our fellow beings, in the structure and appearance of homes and factories, their internal organisation and the general picture of life in the streets, or even the shape and size of fields and the crops grown on them.
Whatever we make of this particular contribution, or of the pictures published in the movement’s journal Der Arbeiter-Fotograf, this seems to me to represent a step forward towards revolutionary art. Certainly, it represents a step forward compared with Collier’s Surrealists snapping their friends ‘in the act of insulting a priest’.
Such a movement, proletarian in its aims and composition need not be totally divorced from the work of the radicalised bourgeois artist. In fact, the organisational apparatus contained, as it were at the apex, the weekly Arbeiter Illustrierte Zeitung. This magazine, the second largest-selling illustrated magazine in Germany, carried the work both of worker-photographers and of others. In theory, it depended for its reportage upon worker-photographers, but in practice seems to have included much reportage from other sources. It also employed the talents of John Heartfield, and other revolutionaries of indubitably bourgeois origin.
What is true of photography was also the case for a number of other areas of artistic practice. The key question at stake was not so much the nature of the artefacts or the aesthetics debates which surrounded them but the fact that they were grounded in a different form of activity – the organised, collective efforts of workers rather than the individualised efforts of the professional bourgeois artist.
None of this is particularly new or original – the reformist writer Raymond Williams had similar things to say more than twenty years ago in Culture and Society – but it is a discussion which does not seem to interest our comrades. They remain firmly within the reified, abstracted debate about Art and Culture which they have inherited from the class enemy.
The matter would be of little importance if it were simply a question of the concerns of a handful of professional intellectuals, but the matter is rather more serious than that. The areas of debate which our comrades define are in fact very widespread both in society and in the working class movement.
I recall, not so long ago, standing in the freezing cold outside of the Tate Gallery in London and collecting placards from low-pay demonstrators. As it happened, I was also arguing about art with a member of the Central Committee of the SWP – the very vanguard of the vanguard. In the course of this debate I expressed the opinion that it would matter little to the working class if the place was razed to the ground, its paintings along with it. At this, horror was expressed. Although the comrade in question is not noted for his deference to Members of parliament, police officers, managers, trade union officials, or any other dog in office, he was scandalised by the suggestion of an attack on Art. He was, of course, right but, in the course of the discussion, admitted that he himself had never been into the place. This attitude of reverential awe for the name of Art and practical disregard for some of its more interesting products is, of course, widespread.
Its roots do not lie in philistinism, ignorance, or anything pejorative but rather in the rooted belief that art, while valuable, is not really a living activity which is available to workers. Its products are dead fetishes hanging in aesthetic mausoleums and approached, if at all, in attitude of religious deference.
At the same time, millions of workers look every day at other artefacts which are every bit as interesting as those quaint survivals of pre-industrial artisanal artistic production which hang in the Tate Gallery – they are called Television Programmes. It is only the vulgarest of prejudices which denies them the status of art.
Of course, the artefacts are the products of highly rewarded servants of capital distant in their lives and concerns from the working class. Certainly, their very evisceration is the mark of their subservience to capital. Of course, the rare programmes which have a revolutionary intent are buried under a mountain of counter-revolutionary filth, and are greeted with howls of outrage from William Deedes and the like. But, nevertheless, they are living proof that complex artefacts can be a matter of passionate interest to workers.
And if their consumption can be of interest, then so can their production. If the first concession to bourgeois ideology is to admit that the commonplace definition of art, which can be shown to be very exactly a product of the bourgeoisie, is both right and natural, then the second is that the consumption of artefacts is the proper concern for ordinary mortals, while their production is a matter for special people.
The bourgeois definition of what art is, and the bourgeois definition of how it is made, are two of the lesser chains upon our mind. They are obstacles to the self-activity of the working class, they are designed to make the mass of people think that they are ignorant, inferior, stupid, incapable, and generally fit only to be ruled by somebody else. They are chains which must be broken.
How to break the chains? Certainly not by selling the pass in the manner of Birchall and Collier. It is not that the questions that they wish to discuss are not important. It is not that people should stop reading John Donne or John Dos Passos. It is not that we should outlaw easel painting. Rather, it is a question of finding out what can actually be organised in the way of working class people producing their own artefacts. The debate about the formal properties of such artefacts, about their aesthetic excellence, even about their revolutionary efficacy, only really has any meaning if it is embedded in the practice of their production.
Of course, for a tiny party with slim resources, the possibilities are few and limited. Any beginning has to be a modest one. Any experience is worth examining closely. No matter how distant it may be to radicalised bourgeois intellectuals like me, Birchall and Collier, Rock Against Racism is a much more fruitful subject than Proust.
 



A row over racist abuse on the January 2007 edition of Celebrity
Big Brother focused public attention in the UK on ‘reality
TV’. This round of public outrage is merely the latest in a long
series of disputes that have dogged Big Brother since the
first version was broadcast in the Netherlands in 1999.
Controversy over the show is not confined to racism. Figures from
across the spectrum of opinion have debated the morals of the
contestants, and the morality of watching them in situations usually
regarded as private and personal. [1] In
fact, the very idea of the show initially struck its eventual British
promoter, Peter Bazalgette, as too shocking. Writing to the
programme’s Dutch inventor, John de Mol, he rejected the idea, arguing:
The rats-in-a-cage-who’ll-do-anything-for-money is
something that I doubt we could sell on to commercial television ...
as currently constituted, we feel the show has a narrow market in the
UK. [2]
The storms over the show and the free publicity they generate in
the media are a big factor in its success or failure. The format of
locking people into a confined space together for several weeks is
more or less bound to generate conflict of one kind or another. There
are, however, much wider issues about the nature of cultural
experience in contemporary capitalism that are involved in this kind
of broadcasting. The various manifestations of Big Brother
are one version of the broader category of ‘reality TV’ that has
a central place in contemporary television.
 
What is ‘reality TV’ and why is there so much of it around?
The kinds of programmes known as ‘reality TV’ form a very
mixed bag. They include what are essentially game shows, such as Big
Brother, ‘docusoaps’ such as Airport and ‘true
crime’ shows such as Crimewatch UK. The popularity of such
programmes is located in the shifting economics of broadcasting,
which involves increasing competition and a move from the search for
a mass audience to a niche audience. Television began as a technology
that could only sustain a small number of channels. The imperative
was to try to attract the largest possible number of people to a
channel, and programme types such as the soap opera, the situation
comedy and the variety show were developed precisely to generate this
‘mass’ audience.
Few channels meant little competition for revenue. In the UK the
main commercial broadcasters, the consortium of companies making up
ITV, enjoyed a monopoly of the sale of television advertising on
terrestrial TV from its inception in 1955 right up to 1993. To the
extent that ITV faced competition from the BBC, it was for audiences,
not revenues. [3] In the course of the
1970s and 1980s a combination of technical changes and shifts of
government policy started to undermine the mass audience. The
increasing penetration of cable and satellite delivery systems meant
that multichannel television became a reality, first in the US and
later in Europe. At the same time, particularly in Europe, neoliberal
ideology increasingly favoured competition and markets as against the
combination of political and cultural paternalism that had dominated
the main national broadcasting organisations.







Established broadcasters found themselves faced with a new
situation (see figure 1). On the one hand, they were, and are, still
the only people who can deliver anything approaching a mass audience:
ITV’s drop from 44 percent audience share in 1981 to 20 percent in
2006 may be a drastic decline on the past, but it is still ten times
as great as the most successful of the niche channels. On the other
hand, they no longer enjoyed a more or less captive audience – some
viewers spent more of their time watching channels that provided a
diet of programmes more exactly suited to their narrow range of
tastes. The mainstream broadcasters thus needed to develop programmes
that could both attract as much of the mass audience as possible and
find ways of holding on to hard to reach groups such as young people.
The traditional terrestrial channels responded to the new
challenges with a range of strategies. The first was very traditional
– they launched an attack on the conditions of the workers who
produce television programmes. One major mechanism for this was to
move from predominantly in-house production to subcontracting
production to independent companies. For many workers, this meant a
shift from permanent, full-time, and highly organised, employment to
a succession of short-term contracts under much worse conditions. [4]
Another was to try to find new programme types that could still
gather a mass audience but which were much less expensive than the
traditional formats. A third was to try to minimise the risks of
investing heavily in failure, for instance by making new programmes
that are quite like old programmes that were a hit or by reusing a
format that has succeeded in another broadcasting market. [5]
The fourth important mechanism was to try to commercialise programmes
more fully, for example by pushing associated merchandise such as
books and DVDs, and using the same material across different
platforms. A fifth was to try to develop programme types that
appealed to particularly desirable audience segments.
It was this combination of factors that led to the rise of the
wide variety of reality TV shows. Such shows are relatively cheap,
and some are very cheap indeed. There is no need to pay writers or
actors, no endless rehearsals, no need for elaborate sets, no need
for rights clearance for music, and so on. Using ‘ordinary’
people, and later minor and declining celebrities, is a cheap way to
make television:
Reality programming provides a cheap alternative to
drama. Typically, an hour-long drama can cost approximately $1.5m
(Â£875,000) per hour, whereas reality programmes can cost as little
as $200,000 (Â£114,000) per hour. [6]
The flood of ‘documentary’ films about passing a driving test,
working in the air transport industry, looking after animals, and the
flood of makeover programmes about houses, clothes and body shape,
all fit this economic dynamic exactly. Big Brother and
Survivor, which has fulfilled the same function in the US,
evolve out of these conditions. In many respects they displayed all
of the characteristics of the type, but they differ slightly from the
bog-standard reality show in some important respects. In neither the
UK nor the US were the broadcasters taking big risks. Both of the
programmes are based on formats that had been tested in other markets
but then modified to take account of the particularities of different
national audiences. Big Brother was originally shown in the
Netherlands and, despite Bazalgette’s worries, it proved a
successful formula. [7] It was taken up
widely as a proven crowd puller by broadcasters around the globe. [8]
These programmes also originated with independent production
companies, which meant the broadcasters did not have to bear the
development costs. This independent origin is, however, something of
a double-edged sword. The great success of the format has meant that
Endemol, the Netherlands company that originated Big Brother,
has been able to strike hard bargains with broadcasters wishing to
buy it.
This leads to one of the major differences between these shows and
the standard reality television product – they are relatively
expensive. Quite apart from the cost of purchasing the rights to such
a successful show, Big Brother has other large expenses.
Continuous surveillance of contestants requires a production team of
about ‘200 people ... including 50 cameramen [sic] and 13
producers’. [9] Celebrity Big
Brother has the additional cost that, while the celebrities are
not exactly A-list, they still expect substantial fees. Shilpa Shetty
was allegedly paid somewhere between Â£200,000 and Â£300,000 simply
for appearing in the show. [10]
Survivor, which uses exotic locations and is produced up to
the standards of primetime US network TV, is also extremely costly
for a reality programme. The justification for this expense is that
these programmes deliver extremely valuable audiences, which in turn
earns broadcasters very large advertising fees. Hill writes of Big Brother:
Big Brother gave Channel 4 its most popular
ratings in the history of the UK channel, attracting nearly 10
million viewers in 2000; the second series of Big Brother
averaged 4.5 million viewers, giving Channel 4 more than a 70 per
cent increase on their average broadcast share. Big Brother 3
generated over 10 million text messages, and attracted 10 million
viewers for its finale. A 30 second advertising spot during Big
Brother 3 cost Â£40,000, over three times more than for any
other show on Channel 4 in 2003 (for example, Frasier’s
cash value was Â£14,000 for a 30 second spot). [11]
 
Really real?
The label ‘reality TV’ begs the question, ‘How real is what
we see?’ The answer, of course, is, ‘Not at all.’ These
programmes make a strong claim to some form of ‘realism’. This is
sustained by the style in which such programmes are usually shot,
which clearly originated in the genre of observational documentary,
which does make strong claims to reveal reality. A further dimension
of ‘realism’ is added by the fact that the contestants are
usually not professional actors and they are usually seen in
unscripted and mundane situations. In fact, these are rhetorical
rather than substantial features of such programmes; what we see is a
highly-constructed artefact rather than a slice of ‘real life’.
The process of manipulation begins long before the shooting
starts. The selection of contestants is the first hurdle. In
Celebrity Big Brother, and similar shows, there is no
pretence that the people are anything other than extraordinary.
Unlike their more plebeian fellows, they are well paifd for their
time. ‘Ordinary’ contestants get a fee to cover expenses – for
these contestants, a major motive often seems to be a desire to
become a celebrity and to work in television. Certainly some people,
Jade Goody for example, have seen their lives transformed by success.
From the first UK series, winner Craig Phillips, runner-up Anna
Nolan, and villain ‘Nasty’ Nick Bateman have all had reasonably
successful careers in the media. This is not an invariable outcome,
however. Nichola Holt, also from the first series, had some initial
media success but eventually landed in much less glamorous circumstances.
The participants in the non-celebrity shows are presented to us as
a cross-section of ‘ordinary’ people reflecting contemporary
British society, or at least its younger, European members. [12]
In fact, the people we get to see are the product of an elaborate
process of selection in which the producers choose a group that they
hope will produce good television. As Bazalgette puts it, ‘There
are three crucial factors in the production of Big Brother:
casting, casting and casting.’ [13]
For the earlier series, the process began with a flood (usually
more than 100,000 each time) of expressions of interest, and the
filling in of an elaborate form. Motivated individuals who survived
that sent in two-minute videotapes. There were about 5,000 for the
second series, 9,166 for the third, and 10,012 for the fourth. [14]
The process of selection for the 2007 show, which closed in February,
was rather simpler, which may reflect reduced public interest. [15]
As the selection proceeds, candidates are interviewed, by a
psychotherapist among other people. Eventually, a small number of
participants and reserves are chosen. [16]
At least for the earlier series, the producers denied casting for
open conflict, and specifically they denied they cast for explicit
racial or sexual conflict. The psychotherapist for the first series
argued that it would be counter-productive to ‘throw in people who
would obviously disagree, like putting a racist and black guy
together ... we know opposites like that would have a big fight and
then stop communicating, and in the house they had to keep
communicating for a long time’. [17]
What they are certainly looking for are characters who can be
expected to develop complex relationships and thus ongoing dramas.
The producers are also prepared to manipulate the contestants to
achieve this, rather than simply relying on events to take their
natural course. The contrived nature of the environment, with many of
the determinants (e.g. work) and distractions (e.g. television) that
characterise our everyday lives removed, acts strongly to prioritise
personal interactions based upon taste and interest. This probability
is intensified through the interventions of the disembodied Big
Brother himself and the tasks set for the participants.
In order to achieve dramatic narratives, the producers ruthlessly
edit the raw footage. For example, in the first Australian series
182,750 hours of material were edited down to 70 hours of television.
[18] An extreme ‘observational’
documentarist like Roger Graef might have a shooting ratio of 30 to
one, and a drama perhaps three to one; the Australian Big Brother
figures work out at 1,565 to one. Even the ‘live’ show broadcast
continuously (first on the web and then on E4 in the UK) is not an
unmediated account of reality but an edited selection of shots (there
are no ‘action’ shots from the camera in the toilet, thankfully).
More importantly, it is not live: there is a built-in delay of ten
minutes to allow for editorial intervention in the case of unsuitable
material, for example, brand advertising, swearing, defamatory
material and ‘inappropriate behaviour’. This resource is used.
Bazalgette records an incident involving Jade Goody from her first
appearance which provoked a long debate among the production team and
heavy censorship in the great British tradition of prudery. [19]
More recently, police investigations into charges of racism have
focused on tapes allegedly containing more offensive material that
were not broadcast.
Just as much as anything else on television, Big Brother
is constructed to attract and hold an audience which will, in a
commercial context, be sold to the highest bidder. It uses ‘real’
people in certain kinds of ‘real’ situations, but it chooses and
manipulates them in order to produce narrative, drama and conflict.
 
The evolution of the form
Not all series of Big Brother have been equally
successful. The indications are that the first three series played to
average audiences that increased from 4.6 million to 5.9 million.
[20] Between versions three and four,
however, Channel 4 issued advice on ‘how not to get into Big
Brother’, the prospective contestants’ tapes contained less
extreme behaviour, and the casting appears to have been designed to
provoke less dramatic conflicts. [21]
The series was rewarded with a slump in ratings to 4.9 million and
the producers thought again. What they thought was that they needed
to make the show more sensational in order to recover the audience,
and both casting and editorial interventions became more extreme.
This reversed the decline in ratings, but in order to maintain
interest there has been an obligation to ratchet up the eccentricity
of the cast of characters and the unpleasantness of the tasks they
must perform. As the Creative Director of Big Brother
argued, ‘The levels of intervention from us increase as the show
progresses – we have to find creative ways of making the experience
different’. [22] In pursuit of this
objective, the ‘character’ of Big Brother has changed
over the years, becoming crueller and more demanding. The BBC
reported at the start of the 2006 series, ‘Big Brother
will be “more twisted than ever” this year, according to the
Channel 4 reality show’s producers’. [23]
The British production team continue to reject the frequent charge
that they are casting specifically for sexual encounters, although
they recognise that there is likely to be at least some of the
latter. [24] As Bazalgette put it:
Put twelve young people in a confined space for a length
of time and there will be both sexual tensions and releases. But to
succeed Big Brother needs relationships to develop. Sex is
incidental – Big Brother remained popular in the US,
Australia and the UK for several series without any instances of
sexual intercourse. [25]
Some conflict, and some crises, and some romances are valuable
elements in developing the kind of narrative that ‘good television’
requires in order to attract a large audience, but these elements
must appear to us to arise out of the dynamics of the household.
The development of the form, however, has changed those dynamics.
In reality, the show has moved away from its always tenuous claims on
‘reality’ and more towards performance. The casting and the
situations are more and more contrived to allow the participants to
display themselves in situations ranging from the undignified to the
grotesque. In this, the standard Big Brother has converged
more and more closely with Celebrity Big Brother, where the
casting of entertainment professionals always meant that a high
degree of performance would be central to the show. Jade Goody, who
was the star, if not the winner, of the standard series she
participated in (Big Brother 3 back in
2002) exemplifies this shift towards the self-conscious performance
for the cameras.
The producers of the recent series of Celebrity Big Brother
might not have known and agreed in advance that the mix of
personalities they chose was going to result in racist bullying and
abuse, but they certainly knew that it contained all of the elements
of a first rate row and this would be very good for ratings. Good for
ratings is good for business: Endemol’s share price rose sharply
after the recent row. [26]
 
Who watches this stuff, and what sense do they make of it?
All of the series of Big Brother, even the ‘boring’
fourth series, and all of the celebrity versions as well, have played
to audiences that are quite substantial for contemporary British
television. They are not the highest rated programmes: as figure 2
demonstrates, those spots are held, week in week out, by the
primetime soaps. To compare the Big Brother audience with
that of the soaps, however, is slightly misleading. While the soaps
air early in the evening, Big Brother is broadcast much
later, when the available audience is smaller. In its late evening
slot, Big Brother often has the largest audience share. As
is also clear from figure 2, the audience builds through the week and
peaks around the weekend evictions. Usually it rises over the run of
the series, too, but this standard pattern was interrupted in the
case of the most recent Celebrity Big Brother. The racist
abuse, and the furore surrounding it, more or less rescued an ailing
show. Its audience leapt, peaked with the eviction of Jade Goody on
19 January, and continued at a somewhat higher level for the final
week of the show. The calculation of conflict that had inspired the
casting produced the expected rewards in terms of audiences.







The crude figures, substantial though they are for Channel 4,
conceal a very important distinguishing feature of the audience.
Reality TV in general attracts audiences from across the social
spectrum, and Big Brother’s numbers, at around 25 percent
of the total audience, are less impressive than those of
‘observational’ shows such as Airport (67 percent), but
it attracts a unique and valuable audience. [27]
The hardest audiences to get watching television are younger people.
They have so many other things in their life, in contrast with those
with families or living in retirement, that they spend much less time
in front of the TV. On the other hand, they are a particularly
attractive audience to advertisers because they have larger
disposable incomes. Young men, in particular, have advertisers
queuing up for their attention. As figure 3 demonstrates, Big
Brother is very good at attracting a young audience. It is true
that the audience is disproportionately female, but it still contains
a large number of those attractive and elusive young male viewers.
Big Brother also captures a relatively affluent audience.
[28] What is more, the people who watch
the programme tend to be highly educated: 51 percent of students
claimed to be regular watchers, for example. [29]



Figure 3: Social composition of the audience
for Big Brother



Audience group


Percentages of total




  8–16


11.5




16–34


49.3




35–54


29.2




55+


10.0




Male


42.4




Female


57.7




Source: Janet Megan Jones, New Media and
Society, vol. 5, no. 3


This audience has few illusions about what it is watching. When
asked to comment on the ‘reality’ of different television
programmes, regular viewers rated Big Brother as much less
likely to be giving an honest picture of the world than other
‘factual’ forms such as news and wildlife documentaries. [30]
Audience responses demonstrate a sophisticated approach to what they
are seeing that has been honed over long periods:
The fact that audiences apply a sliding scale of
factuality to reality programmes suggests one of the ways they have
learned to live with this genre over the past decade. Audiences watch
popular factual television with a critical eye, judging the degree of
factuality in each reality format based on their experience of other
types of factual programming. In this sense, viewers are evaluators
of the reality genre, and of factual programming as a whole. [31]
When asked, viewers respond that they think that the situation has
elements of reality in that it uses non-actors and has no script, but
they are well aware that they are watching something that has been
contrived by the producers to make entertaining television. [32]
Far from confusing the behaviour on the screen with the ways in which
people ‘really’ behave, they are very conscious of the extent to
which they are watching performances and this is in fact one of the
main elements in what they think about the programmes. Like soap
operas, which make their own, rather different, claims to be pictures
of reality, one of the appeals of this kind of programme is that it
provides topics for conversation and reflection in which people
speculate about the dilemmas facing the characters, relate them to
their own experiences and values, and use them to reach moral
judgements about human behaviour. [33]
In this case, though, there is a specific element that is not present
in the soap opera. Audiences put great stress on trying to
discriminate between the ‘performance’ that the participants give
and what they are ‘really like’:
Reality gameshows have capitalised on this tension
between appearance and reality by ensuring that viewers have to judge
for themselves which of the contestants are being genuine. In fact,
audiences enjoy debating the appearance and reality of ordinary
people in reality gameshows. The potential for gossip, opinion and
conjecture is far greater when watching reality gameshows because
this hybrid format openly asks viewers to decide not just who wins or
loses, but who is true or false in the documentary/game environment.
[34]
The tendency, at least in the earlier Big Brother shows,
was for the winners to be drawn from the participants who were seen
to be most genuine and most honest. The specifically unpleasant
characters tended to be despised, marginalised, and voted out.
The evolution of the reality gameshow that we traced above in the
case of Big Brother has produced a shift in the nature of
the kinds of talk and judgement that audiences make. The triumph of
nice people hardly made for the sort of compelling television that
the producers were trying to provide and as the characters have
become much more eccentric so the ways in which they are judged have
changed. There is now a much clearer sense that the people who take
part in what is sometimes called by audiences ‘humiliation TV’
are willing participants in their own exploitation and degradation.
They are thought to be decreasingly ‘real’ and driven much more
by an unbridled, and unbalanced, ambition. As one respondent, a 30
year old male gardener, told Hill:
When I saw a bit of Big Brother recently, I
didn’t realise they were so, kind of, they are wannabes. I thought
they were genuinely just people plucked out of nowhere. They all,
like, wanted to be a presenter ... Reality TV is, they’re more like
sort of caged animals. And they’re agreeing to be degraded. Whereas
in documentaries, I think, there is a tradition of respect and
humanism in documentary making. There should be. People who want to
make documentaries are different types of persons to people who’d
get involved in reality TV. [35]
The participants in the ‘ordinary’ versions of Big Brother
are today seen in much the same light as the minor celebrities of the
celebrity version. They are treated as people who are ‘extraordinary’
in a negative sense and regarded as not deserving of the kinds of
care, respect and fairness that television should extend to the
really ordinary people who are seen in the news and in social
documentaries. People still watch Big Brother, but today
they are slightly ashamed of the pleasures they derive from it.
 
Critical responses
Reality TV in general, and Big Brother in particular, has
generated an enormous amount of critical commentary. Much of this
material is frankly moralistic, seeking to condemn everyone involved
– producers, broadcasters, participants and audiences – as
engaged in a debased form of discourse in the ‘bread and circuses’
mode of public distraction. Alongside this there is a small library
of more substantial analysis from academics, some of which address
important issues like surveillance. The installation of video cameras
capturing every moment of life in the Big Brother house has
obvious parallels with the spread of CCTV through the public spaces
of the contemporary world. [36] Another
major issue of concern for academic analysis is the political
implications of the fact that Big Brother commands a large,
enthusiastic and largely young audience who pay to vote in
considerable numbers. There are serious analyses claiming that shows
like this can provide a model for the regeneration of bourgeois
politics. [37]
From a Marxist perspective these issues, while interesting, miss
the point about what kind of social relations are embodied in the
show and what that helps us understand about the nature of
contemporary capitalism. Producers and broadcasters are engaged in
producing a marketable commodity, but to get the attention of the
audience (and so sell it to the advertisers) they have to produce
something that resonates with their intended audience and they have
to recruit suitable participants. The central question then is, what
kinds of motivations does the show offer to participants to take part
and to audiences to tune in and to vote in such numbers?
In its origins, reality television contained a strong current that
celebrated the labour of workers – at Angel tube station and the
London Zoo, for example – and other examples of virulent class
hatred directed at the rich (The Fishing Party). Even much
more entertainment driven programmes such as Airport
consisted in large measure of following working class people as they
solved difficult and unusual problems. Work, in these programmes, is
seen as a central part of human experience, and one that constantly
challenges the capacity of workers, although there was seldom any
explicit reference to the capacity of workers to challenge their
conditions of labour. Programmes such as Big Brother
represent a radical departure from that model in that they are
designed to cut the participants off precisely from the exigencies of
the world of work, and in that they represent a different account of
life under capitalism. They inhabit the world of leisure, consumption
and reproduction rather than that of labour, and one major attraction
of the show is that it takes us into that world. [38]
It is the way in which it shifts of the boundary of what can be made
public to include many things that are normally thought of as private
that has provoked most of the outrage about the programme.
The explanation for the attraction of this move is to be found in
the central features of human experience in developed capitalism. For
most people, most of the time, work constitutes a realm of unfreedom.
Not only can hours be long and wages low, but work involves following
orders that are imposed from outside, and producing commodities over
which one has no control. All of one’s creativity and individuality
is subordinated to the commands of the employer and devoted not to
the satisfaction of human needs but to the generation of surplus
value. The analysis of this reality is an important part of Marx’s
critique of capitalist production from the Economic and
Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 through to the pages of Capital,
and the basic ideas were generalised to society as a whole in the
first part of a famous essay by George LukÃ¡cs: Reification and
the Consciousness of the Proletariat. [39]
The human being entering the workplace not only surrenders the fruits
of their labour, but also their control over their labour itself.
[40] As contemporary capitalism has
developed, and productive labour has come less and less to rely on
‘hands’ and more and more on ‘brains’, so the demands of
alienated labour have become ever more onerous. The conformity
demanded by the contemporary labour process includes much more than
simply clocking in on time and doing what the foreman says – today
you must abandon your individuality as well as your overcoat at the door.
There are two possible strategies in response to these realities.
One is the confrontation with alienated labour, whose highest form is
revolutionary struggle. As we all know, this is not an everyday
activity for the mass of the population. The other is to try to
discover some area of life which is not thoroughly permeated with the
logic of alienation. In contemporary society that takes the form of a
stress upon personal life and consumption. As Marx put it, ‘The
worker therefore only feels himself outside his work, and in his work
feels outside himself. He feels at home when he is not working, and
when he is working he does not feel at home’. [41]
It is only here – in what we wear, the car we drive, the music we
like, the relationships we form – that we can try to believe that
we are truly and fully individuals pursuing ends determined by our
own needs and desires.
There are, however, in capitalist society a tiny layer of people
who for a variety of reasons are not anonymous and interchangeable.
and whose personality counts for something. Some of them, such as
footballers and film stars, are richly rewarded for their special
attributes. Others have less tangible claims to distinction. But
however they come to hold this status they are clearly visible in all
their individuality, relationships and conspicuous consumption in the
pages of Hello! and OK. The realm of celebrity is the
realm of legitimised personality. One of the key characteristics of
celebrities is that their private lives and doings are taken to be
interesting and treated as public property. This is often denounced
as an intolerable intrusion, but in fact it is the highest reward
that can be bestowed under capitalism. Unlike the mass of the
population, the celebrity is someone whose individuality is taken
seriously. The idea of an individual magical escape into the world of
celebrity is an attractive one if the alternative of collective
action to achieve radical social change seems remote.
The evidence is that the people who participated in the first
series of Big Brother did not anticipate how this could be a
life-changing experience, but the potential was clear to those who
tried to enter later. [42] The would-be
contestants knew that for some at least success in the house could
lead to a different life, richer for sure but, just as important, a
life as a celebrity. [43] This is very
clear in accounts of the selection process. By the time the British
third series was recruiting, it was reported that a definite theme
emerged in the tapes sent in for audition:
There was a great deal of nudity:
people on the sofa nude, playing football nude, running down the
street nude, one man naked except for an accordion in field full of
cows, a naked girl smearing mud on her body, lots of women with
tassels on their breasts doing stripping routines, a man jumping
about on a pogo stick without his clothes. [44]
By taking their clothes off in front of a camera, potential
participants were doing more than just signifying that they were
ready to go along with what they imagined the producers might be
planning. They were signifying their willingness to undertake the
role of celebrity and make their most private attributes public. As
the series has veered towards more eccentric participants, so
contestants’ willingness to be public becomes clearer and clearer.
[45] Being on the show guarantees at
least a short period of time when one can be a celebrity, and for
some such as Jade Goody it actually provides the path to a longer
stint in that role.
The intense desire to be recognised, to be a celebrity, to become
a Big Brother contestant, is not primarily about the money
that comes with success, although that is surely something that is in
the front of people’s minds. Rather it is the desire to escape the
drudgery of anonymous, alienated toil in which one counts for
nothing. It is the desire to be recognised as somebody unique and
distinctive by a wider circle than one’s immediate family and
friends. The dream of celebrity is more than a magical escape from
the constraints of relative poverty and the drudgery of routine
labour. It is also, and most importantly, a magical attempt to
transcend alienated labour, not by expropriating the expropriators
but by evading the reality of being only the repository of
labour power.
For the audience, too, the attraction of Big Brother is
that it provides a site on which it is possible to discuss openly and
without social discomfort the fascinations of the personal. The fact
that what is normally private and guarded is displayed, indeed
flaunted, in front of millions of us, not with the distancing
conventions of drama but with the rhetoric of authenticity, provides
a powerful stimulus to discussion and reflection about personal life
in the modern age. It also provides an arena in which moral
judgements about behaviour can be explored. The audience, as one of
the production team put it, are ‘very moral. They reward good
behaviour and punish bad behaviour’. [46]
One of the fascinations of the process is that it allows us to make
celebrities out of people we believe have acted well and to punish
those, like Jade Goody, who transgress what we believe should be the
boundaries of proper behaviour. The people who win in Big Brother
are the people the audience think deserve to become celebrities.
As we saw, these judgements depend on a balance between the ‘real
person’ and their performance. The instability of the form, what is
often called its ‘feral’ character, threatens this moral economy
even as the producers are driven to extremes in order to sustain
ratings. The shift towards more eccentric performers is not in itself
a threat: after all an eccentric is merely a personality who does not
fit into recognised social patterns and thus is very often a
challenge to the smooth running of capitalism. However, the
combination of eccentricity and humiliation detaches the performers
from any universe with which the audience can identify, and this is a
threat. It can still give pleasure to millions, but it is a different
pleasure. As the audience recognises, it is shifting from an arena of
moral exploration to a gladiatorial contest. Like the latter, it is a
compelling spectacle, but it gives a guilty pleasure.
 
In conclusion
Reality TV in all its versions, but particularly in its reality
gameshow format, represents, from the producers’ and broadcasters’
side, an attempt to respond to the changing economics of contemporary
television. It is relatively cheap to make and it reliably garners an
audience in the right numbers and with the right composition to sell
to advertisers. Big Brother and some other similar game
shows are firmly within this category, although they have additional
elements that make them distinct both in their audience and in their appeal.
The fact that Big Brother gains such a large and
enthusiastic audience of young people tells us something about life
in modern capitalism. We cannot assume, as do so many populist
commentators in media and cultural studies, that just because lots of
working class people enjoy a particular artefact it is therefore in
some sense progressive or oppositional. The reality is much more
complex. A show such as Big Brother offers no challenge at
all to capitalism, and indeed its structure reproduces some of the
most pernicious effects of capitalism – human energy and initiative
are ruthlessly exploited in order to make money. On the other hand,
it does represent, in a weird and utterly unrealistic way, a dream of
escaping from capitalism, of transcending alienated labour, escaping
from conformity and flowering as an individual. Being a contestant
makes you a celebrity for the duration, and you have a fighting
chance of continuing in the role afterwards.
The fact that this dream of a better and fuller life is embodied
in a game show rather than a political organisation is a sad but
characteristic reflection of contemporary reality. When there is no
obvious alternative that can provide a focus for mass discontent, all
sorts of more or less magical solutions to the anger and frustration
that mar millions of lives are seized almost in despair. The chances
of winning on the National Lottery are tiny, but millions still buy
tickets. The chances of becoming a Big Brother contestant
are much bigger. Of those who become contestants, a celebrity career
is a small possibility, but thousands are still prepared to try to
make it.

Notes
1. Christians, for example can find
their answers in Di Archer, Caroline Putnis and Tony Watkins, What
does the Bible say about TV Game Shows? (Bletchley 2001).
2. Peter Bazalgette, Billion Dollar
Game: How Three Men Risked It All and Changed the Face of Television
(London 2005), p. 101.
3. Even the coming of Channel 4 did
not alter this immediately. For the first decade from 1982 the ITV
companies sold advertising on both their own channel and Channel 4,
paying a levy on their total revenue to support the minority
broadcaster. This changed only in the 1990 Broadcasting Act, which
gave Channel 4 the duty of selling its own advertising from 1993
onwards, and thus introduced real economic competition into UK
terrestrial television for the first time.
4. Colin Sparks, Independent
Production: Unions and Casualisastion, in Stuart Hood (ed.),
Behind the Screens: The Structure of British Television in the
Nineties (London 1994), pp. 133–154. This model of
production was pioneered by Channel 4, which produces virtually none
of its own programmes.
5. A format is the key component of a
show and, unlike an idea, can be copyrighted and thus sold.
6. Annette Hill, Reality TV
(London 2005), p. 6.
7. Survivor had originally
been developed in the UK, but had first been shown to work in Sweden.
It was that success that convinced CBS it was worth developing –
Chris Jordan, Marketing “Reality” to the World: Survivor,
Post-Fordism, and Reality Television, in David Escoffery (ed.),
How Real is Reality TV? Essays on Representation and Truth
(Jefferson, NC 2006), pp. 78–96.
8. Johnathan Bignell, Big
Brother: Reality TV in the 21st Century (London 2005),
pp. 53–58.
9. Jean Ritchie, Big Brother:
The Official Unseen Story (London 2000), p. 9.
10. Hasan Suroor, Shilpa Wins
Big Brother Contest’, The Hindu, 30
January 2006.
11. Annette Hill, as above, p. 4.
12. Around 90 percent of applicants
are described as white or European – Jean Ritchie, Big
Brother 4: Up Close and Personal (London 2003).
13. Peter Bazalgette, as above, p. 152.
14. Jean Ritchie, Inside Big
Brother: Getting in and Staying in (London 2002),
p. 32; and Jean Ritchie, Big Brother 4, as above, p. 11.
15. Details online (accessed 16
February 2007) www.channel4.com/bigbrother/auditions/openauditions.html.
16. There are guides as to how to
succeed at this process, for example Jack Benza, So you Wannabe on
Reality TV (New York 2005), p. 68. He remarks, ‘There is
nothing real about reality TV. Why? Producers ... Producers will
always manipulate people in a certain direction for the betterment of
the show. They will lie, create non-existing stories, and stir up
feelings among competitors all to create drama, which producers
believe is better TV.’
17. Quoted in Jean Ritchie, Big
Brother, as above, p. 26.
18. Toni Johnson-Woods, Big
Brother (St Lucia, Queensland 2002) pp. 130–131.
19. The programme makers ‘had to
watch a drunken encounter between two house-mates, the controversial
Jade and a trainee solicitor, PJ ... In fact, in tabloidese, whether
PJ had had a BJ was by no means clear, the couple having been under
the bed covers. But when the covers fell away briefly, what was clear
was PJ’s proud erection being vigorously manipulated by Jade. This
much was edited out right away’ – Peter Bazalgette, as above,
p. 231. You can buy DVDs of the ‘bits they couldn’t show on
TV’ for many of the series at the fan sites, for example: www.bigbrotheronline.co.uk/shop.htm.
20. Annette Hill, as above, p. 32,
provides the rating figures for series 1/#8211;4.
21. Jean Ritchie, Big Brother 4,
as above, p. 11.
22. Phil Edgar-Jones, quoted in Paul
Flynn, Big Brother: Access All Areas (London
2005), p. 96.
23. Big Brother 7 gets ‘more twisted’.
24. Some commentators question these
claims. Hill and Palmer write, ‘A sensitivity to the sort of
coverage that excites the media became a determining factor in
contestant selection. Producers soon learned that an exhibitionist
streak was a useful factor in retaining viewers. Thus worldwide a
series of strippers, dancers, and other flamboyant figures were
installed in the houses with the hoped-for on-screen action. And so
it proved with many European contestants doing away with the
subtleties of flirting to engage in sexual congress at the soonest
opportunity’ – Annette Hill and Gareth Palmer, editorial in
Television and New Media, volume 3, number 3 (2002), p. 252.
25. Peter Bazalgette, as above, p. 245.
26. Ian Bickerton, Big Brother Row Could Help Endemol, Financial Times, 23 January 2007.
27. Annette Hill, Big Brother:
The Real Audience, in Television and New Media, volume 3,
number 3 (2002), p. 327.
28. Janet Megan Jones, Show Your
Real Face: A Fan Study of the UK Big Brother
Transmissions (2000, 2001, 2002). Investigating the Boundaries
Between Notions of Consumers and Producers of Factual Television,
in New Media and Society, volume 5, number 3 (2002), p. 406.
29. Annette Hill, Big Brother,
as above, p. 331.
30. Annette Hill, Reality TV,
as above, p. 62.
31. As above, p. 173.
32. Writing of the audience in the
US, Crew states, ‘Members of the sample group know that Survivor
producers control what they see through the manipulation of
activities, editing, and casting decisions. Viewers accepted the
manipulation of the narrative as necessary to make Survivor
an entertaining one-hour programme’ – Richard Crew, Viewer
Interpretations of Reality Television: How Real is Survivor
for its Viewers?, in David Escoffery (ed.), as above, pp. 68–69.
33. Janet Megan Jones, as above, p. 408.
34. Annette Hill, Reality TV,
as above, p. 70.
35. Annette Hill, Factual TV,
forthcoming (2007), from chapter 7 of the manuscript.
36. One line of thought is that the
Big Brother version of surveillance differs radically from
the classical Benthamite model prison, in which the few guards
observe the many prisoners, because the television version reverses
those proportions and the audience of many watch the few
participants. This, it is suggested, leads to a rudimentary form of
subversion of, or even resistance to, the pervasiveness of
surveillance in the outside world – John McGrath, Loving Big
Brother (London 2004), p. 206. A more orthodox line of
reasoning is that a show like Big Brother ‘validates the
pervasive surveillance of the rhythm of day to day life as a
contemporary commonplace – a form of convenience and entertainment’
– Mark Andrejevic, The Kinder, Gentler Gaze of Big
Brother, in New Media and Society, volume 4, number 2
(2002), p. 267.
37. Stephen Coleman, How the
Other Half Votes: Big Brother Viewers and the
2005 General Election (London 2006). It turns out that regular
viewers are just as likely to vote in general elections as anyone
else, but they believe that an electoral system modelled on the kind
of detailed exposure participants in the house experience would give
a better insight into political choices than do current forms of
publicity. More extreme claims are made for the impact of audience
participation in non-democratic societies. The voting in the Chinese
Supergirl contest (modelled on Thames TV’s Pop Idol)
provoked a long debate about whether it constituted the first step
towards Chinese democracy. See the articles collected at www.zonaeuropa.com/20050829_1.htm.
38. This is the reason why Nick Couldry’s 2006 denunciation of Big Brother as embedding the success criteria of neoliberal labour is slightly mistaken. Reality TV, or the Secret Theatre of Neo-liberalism.
39. For the more developed versions of Karl Marx’s account, see the Chapter on Capital in Grundrisse (London 1973), and also chapter
one, section 4 of Capital, volume one (Moscow, 1965). LukÃ¡cs’s essay is in his History and Class Consciousness (London 1971), pp. 83–222.
40. As the young Marx put it, ‘This
relation [of labour to the act of production within the labour
process] is the relation of the worker to his own activity as an
alien activity not belonging to him; it is activity as suffering,
strength as weakness, begetting as emasculating, the worker’s own
physical and mental energy, his personal life ... as an activity
turned against him, independent of him and not belonging to him’ –
Karl Marx, Collected Works, volume 3 (Moscow, 1975), p. 275,
available online.
41. As above, p. 274.
42. For the ‘innocence’ of those
who volunteered for a first series, see the interviews with the
participants in the first Finnish production cited in Ninna Aslama,
Twelve Truths About Big Brother Finland.
Researching Participants’ Experiences of Reality Television,
unpublished paper.
43. Dean O’Loughlin, who was a
runner up in the second series, wrote a thoughtful book in part
reflecting on the experience of becoming a (minor) celebrity –
Living in the Box: An Adventure in Reality TV (Birmingham, 2004).
44. Jean Ritchie, Inside Big
Brother, as above, p. 29.
45. Perhaps the man with the pogo
stick ought to try auditioning again.
46. Quoted in Paul Flynn, as above, p. 96.
 

