   Galvanized by the Blackshirt successes in Ethiopia, British moral indignation is running high. At the League Council, Anthony Eden virtuously denouncing the bombings and use of poison gas, called for the application of fresh sanctions. But if we refrain from boiling over in sympathy, it is because our memory has not failed us. It is fairly modern history that British bombers, and under a “Labor” Government, persuaded Irak villagers to pay their back taxes more promptly. Less than a year ago, British planes rained bombs on the restless natives of India’s North-Western Frontier ... Lulled for a time by the habitual miscalculations of the military experts who dwelt soothingly on impossible terrain and coming rains, the British moral sense received and gave full bay with the Italian capture of Dessye. But when it met, the dearly beloved League did little else than cluck its tongue and register its own failure. What sanctions have been imposed doubtless created economic difficulties tor the Fascist regime, and depleted its gold reserves. But they have not brought about its collapse. On the contrary, Mussolini lias been able to turn the sanctions policy of the League (read English) to his own advantage. This he has done by picturing Italy as a poor “proletarian’’ state whose road to a place in the sun was being barred by the fat imperialist powers. Incidentally statistics of the value of Italian imports and exports for the first four months after sanctions “went into effect” reveal that the USSR of Stalin actually increased its trade with Italy. We should be interested to have an explanation of this phenomenon from the Daily Worker or the League Against War and Fascism.  British Cabinet Quandary The British Cabinet is in a quandary. The gorged Empire is caught between the pincers of more dynamic imperialisms in the East and West. The Italian conquest of Ethiopia would spell more than merely a diplomatic defeat of Eden. Mussolini would bestride the Mediterranean and challenge the British pickings in Egypt, Palestine and the Near East generally. It is this realization that shifts British attention swiftly from the banks of the Rhine to the headwaters of the Nile. An Anglo-French alliance would bring the Italian upstart’s threat to the Empire and its communications to a halt. But the price that Baldwin-Eden would have to pay – sanctions and military action against Germany – is so high and the consequences so perilous, that British policy is momentarily in a state of confusion. The ideal and traditional British course is to hold the scales of the balance of power, to act as conciliator. This policy is harder to apply when the Channel has ceased to be the effective barrier to an attack from the continent. This is what Baldwin meant when he talked of the British frontier now being on the Rhine.  The Pro-German Orientation The Cabinet is prepared to give the French General Staff the required guarantees against a German invasion of either Belgium or France. But the section of the Cabinet which is hostile to Eden’s pro-French orientation, and sympathetic to Hitler’s offer of a twenty-five year truce, points out that France is tied up with pacts in the East, (USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia). They ask why Great Britain should be involved in a war or the defence of France in the West, which would be precipitated by French commitments to her Allies in the East. The politicians of this viewpoint reason that Hitler is no longer  as isolated as he was a couple of years ago, and that Germany must be afforded a safety-valve for expansion, which is not at the expense of the British Empire or of the status quo in the West. The British desire to reduce the specific gravity of French supremacy on the continent facilitated German rearmament. That altered the whole political landscape and the impending fortification of the Rhineland further enhances Nazi power. The smaller states now within the orbit of French protection will have to reconsider their position when French forces will likely find themselves immobilized by German rearmament on the Rhine. Rumania and Yugoslavia have already given clear indications of dissatisfaction; others may follow ... The great political risk of giving Germany a free hand in the East is, however, that a challenge to British interests would follow at a later stage. These preoccupations of British Imperialism, the most vocal recent supporter of the League, strikingly manifest the humbug of the sanctions policy as a means of struggle against imperialism. The usefulness of the sanctions argument so far has been limited to lining up the liberals, social-democrats and Stalinists to fight for the interests of British or French imperialism against German or Italian imperialism, under the somewhat tarnished banner of the struggle to preserve democracy.  “Power Politics” The Nations and New Republics are all engaged intoning that “if collective security goes, power politics return ... if international law is to be effective, agreements must be uniformly respected.” These liberal formulas are among the great contemporary “democratic” lies. Power politics, the politics of imperialism, of the struggle for markets, have never ceased to rule since the peace of Versailles. Or are we to be treated to a fresh dose of Wilsonian diplomacy? When did this “collective security” come in? The liberal twaddle about warring “political ideals” and “international law” only serves to obscure the basic causes of the imperialist struggle. The greatest of all crimes is that committed by the leaders of the Second and Third Internationals who have turned their organizations into official supporters of the aims and slogans of such “democratic” imperialism as the British or French. But their struggle against Fascism and War was always shadow-boxing. Neither war nor fascism can be overthrown without a revolutionary struggle against the capitalist-imperialist order that breeds them. The most powerful force for the destruction of both Hitler and Mussolini, and for the creation of the Soviet United States of Europe, would be the French Revolution. That, and not the Popular Front of class peace.   
          “... Look at the Paris Commune ... That was the Dictatorship of the Proletariat” – Frederick Engels    SINCE the end of the Franco-Prussian War, the proletariat has experienced great victories and great defeats, in widely-separated fields of parliamentary activity and of civil war. But so far from reducing it, our epoch has actually enhanced the significance of the Paris Commune. The Paris Commune was the first attempt of the modern working class to seize political power. Like the great Russian Revolution, the French Commune arose on the ruins of the military defeat and social collapse of an Empire. Louis Bonaparte pretended to rule as an arbiter of conflicting class interests, to defend the workers from the rapacious capitalists and the bourgeoisie from the “exorbitant” demands of the workers. In reality, the State was a tool of financial buccaneers and its hallmarks were corruption and exploitation. When Bonaparte realized that he could no longer alleviate the social contradictions, he unleashed chauvinism. But the newly-unified Germany of Bismark broke Napoleon's neck and the Empire crashed. On September 4, 1870 the workers of Paris proclaimed the Republic. It soon became manifest that there were two governments, a dual power. The Government of National Defense headed by Thiers was the government of the propertied classes. Its principal objective became to disarm the Parisian proletariat, who were the majority of the National Guard and who had heroically carried out the defense of the starving city against the Prussian armies. Realizing the national treachery and class aims of the bourgeoisie, the workers resisted. On the eighteenth of March, 1871 the Central Committee of the Paris Commune proclaimed the “absolute right of the proletarians of Paris amidst the failures and treasons of the ruling classes to render themselves masters of their own destinies, by seizing the governmental power.” The proclamation of the Commune was the negation of bourgeois authority and the bourgeois state. All the Labor governments since the war have not the slightest shred of reality compared to the fact that the Commune, short-lived though it was, realized the necessity of shattering the state machine of the bourgeoisie as the prerequisite of social reconstruction. The Commune was the anticipation of the Soviet. If the social legislation of the Commune seems to us very modest, it was due to the theoretical shortcomings of the leadership and the exigencies of the military struggle. The city was beleaguered by the Versailles troops of Thiers and his virtual allies, the Prussian junkers. But what the Commune did was nevertheless significant. The column of Victory on the Place Vendôme, the symbol of chauvinism, was demolished. Plans were worked out to take over factories shut down by the manufacturers and have them run by the workers on a cooperative basis. The Commune decreed the separation of Church and state and nationalized church property. Foreigners were declared eligible for election to the Commune – “the flag of the Commune is the flag of the world-republic.” That the Bank of France could escape nationalization reveals the state of confusion, the lack of a scientific program, and the dire lack of a far-seeing revolutionary leadership in the Commune. The economic ideas of the Commune were provided by the Proudhonists, socialists and the small craftsmen and peasants as their social ideal, and theories of “equitable exchange” as their panacea. The result was that the resources of the bourgeoisie, which was making war on the Commune, were left intact. The immaturity of the Commune was further exhibited in the half measures characterizing the conduct of armed struggle against Versailles, which was permitted to consolidate its forces and take the offensive. The proletariat paid a bitter toll for its indecision. After the victory of the possessing classes came the White Terror and thousands of workers were cold-bloodedly butchered at the “Wall of the Federal” at the Père Lachaise Cemetery. The study of the lessons of the Commune enabled Marx to work out in more concrete fashion his theory of the State and it is not wrong to say that the Bolsheviks’ insight into the Commune decisively influenced the struggle for the Soviets in 1917. Commune and Soviet are equally the antithesis of parliamentarism. Lenin considered it the fatal error of the French Socialists that they combined the contradictory tasks of patriotism and socialism. “Let the bourgeoisie bear the responsibility of national humiliation – it is the business of the proletariat to fight for the socialist liberation of labor from the yoke of the bourgeoisie.” The Commune was defeated both by objective and subjective factors. European capitalism was on the eve of a period of expansion. The workers of Paris lacked an understanding of capitalist economics, they lacked a Marxist program, and above all they lacked the conception of the disciplined revolutionary party, that indispensable lever of power. Lest we feel too superior to those workers of 1871, let us remember our vast advantages. We live in the epoch of imperialism, of the world crisis, of all the requisite conditions for the struggle for socialism. We have witnessed the debacle of the Second International, and have had the tragic experiences of the degeneration of the Third International – and our task in America still remains the supreme one of building the powerful revolutionary party of the working class! Towards that goal we shall march forward undaunted and the memory of that gallant generation of proletarian fighters of 1871 will remain an abiding inspiration.   
ople’s Front to French Front 1936



Maurice Spector: From People’s Front to French Front (1936)
   Spector Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Maurice Spector
From People’s Front to French Front
 From Socialist Alternative, October 1936, Volume 2 No. 9, Page 10-14 Transcribed, Edited and Formatted by Damon Maxwell and David Walters in 2008 for the Encyclopedia of Trotskyism On-Line.
THE EYES of the world are focused on the civil war in Spain, but recent developments indicate that France too, is speeding towards a denouement no less fateful. A new strike wave of elemental force has registered the bankruptcy of the Matignon Agreements of last July. The Popular Front and the Blum government have entered the stage of crisis and inevitable collapse. Reaching fresh heights of nationalist frenzy, the Communist party proposes to transform the Popular Front into a “Front Francaise,” a National Union of all classes.
That the Matignon settlements would settle nothing was evident to anyone with the slightest understanding of Marxism. The occupation of the factories, startling the collective party and trade union bureaucracies, was an unmistakable expression of a revolutionary situation, and a no less unmistakable, even if implied, demand for workers’ control. Realizing that this potentially revolutionary movement threatened the reformist perspectives of the Popular Front, Blum, aided by Jouhaux and Thorez, hastily improvized the terms of the Matignon agreements as a means of effecting the evacuation of the factories. Even then hundreds of shop delegates vigorously protested the action of their communist representatives in the negotiations. But if the Stalinist leaders were able to stifle the strike movement of June, they are unable to prevent the resurgence of its causes. Strikes again follow in rapid succession, strikes for wage increases, strikes of solidarity, sit-in strikes. First the metal workers of Grenoble, then the lead miners of Savoy, the seamen of the Havre, the textile workers of Lille, the automobile workers of the Renault plant who sing the “Internationale” and hoist the red flag.
Nor could it be otherwise. The economic crisis that holds French capitalism in its deadly grip can neither be solved by patchwork reforms nor conjured away by exhuming the slogans of 1789. Only heroic measures which challenge the very foundations of capitalist society can solve this crisis.  But the Popular Front is self-confessedly not the kind of government to take such measures. Finance Minister Auriol declares: “We are pursuing our common effort within the framework of the capitalist system ... The Popular Front has never considered and so long as it exists as a government of liberty and democracy, it will never consider seizing property, sequestrating goods, overturning the social regime, or attacking liberty.” Then what indeed, will the Blum government be pleased to consider? It will strive to operate as a glorified board of arbitration and conciliation between the forces of revolution and counter-revolution.  But the fate of Kerensky in Russia, the tragic experiences of the German and Austrian proletariat, and the civil war in Spain all point the inescapable fact that nowhere and at no time has such a course for long been possible. 
Reforms Ineffective
Floundering around to placate both capital and labor, the government only succeeds in augmenting chaos. Even the social reforms that Blum enacts cannot be realized in the framework of present-day French capitalism without sharpening the crisis. The wage increases of July have been more than cancelled by the rise in the cost of living. Wholesale prices have increased 7 per cent and retail prices 3 1/2 per cent. The manufacturers claim that labor costs have increased from 8 to 22 per cent. The small capitalist who voted for the People’s Front complains that he cannot compete with the Trusts. The peasant owner fears that the crisis of the franc will be solved at his expense by means of inflation. The budgetary deficit for 1936 amounts to 23 billion francs. There is an increasingly adverse trade balance.
As a result, the masses are again on the march. Once more the workers are occupying the factories, a revolutionary phenomenon that strikes at the heart of capitalist law and order. How does the Blum government react?   In his recent speech Daladier said the following:
“We will not permit excesses caused by men who follow not the wise counsels of labor leaders but agents provocateurs .... it is therefore necessary to put an end to these endlessly renewed occupational conflicts which would end by disorganizing production and trade and also by gravely compromising national defense.” This matter of “national defense” was particularly calculated to reach the Communist party, which is prepared to sacrifice every class interest of the proletariat to the exigencies of the Franco-Soviet Pact. The Minister of the Interior, Salengro, knew this, when turning to Duclos, communist Vice-President of the Chamber, he demanded, “Yes or no! If I am obliged to use public force to compel the evacuation of the factories, will you support me?” To which the Stalinist Duclos humbly responded with “Yes.”
Stalinists Draw “Lesson” from Spain
It is the characteristic dream of every social-reformist coalition government that when it takes the reins of office, the class struggle will obligingly suspend itself. Unfortunately for the Popular Front, no period of history was ever in more bitter conflict with the routine of constitutionalism. While the Stalinists were still pointing to the Popular Front majority in Spain as the means of peacefully liquidating Fascism, Franco was preparing the Fascist coup d’Ã©tat that brought the armies of bloody counter-revolution to the very gates of Madrid. The subordination of the program of social revolution to the interests of the bourgeois democracy has decidedly failed to stop Fascism or prevent civil war. It has perhaps mortally jeopardized the Spanish revolution. But that is not the lesson the French Stalinists draw from the Spanish events.  Speaking to a mass meeting at the Renault plant, Maurice Thorez, leader of the CP declares: “We refuse, especially in the light of the horror of the Spanish events, to accept the perspective of two camps irreconcilably ranged against each other and leading to a civil war which for our country would be more fatal than for Spain, if only because of the threat of Hitler.” (L’HUMANITE, Sept. 4).
The logic of the Franco-Soviet military pact and of its prime sponsors, the Soviet bureaucracy, unfolds remorselessly. The Popular Front has not proved an effective enough means to curb the class struggle in the interests of national unity. The French proletariat must be delivered over yet more firmly to the orders of the General Staff. It is no accident that at the very time that Stalin was ordering the execution of survivors of the Bolshevik Old Guard, and monstrously framing of a connection between Trotsky and the Gestapo, Stalin’ agency in France was promoting the idea of a new alignment, the “French Front.” Every fresh Stalinist betrayal of the principles of Bolshevism has been accompanied by a like attack on the Leninist revolutionaries, in order to create a diversion and to strangle all criticism.
“National Union” Slogan of C.P.
What is to be the program of the C.P’s projected National Front? The answer is suggested by Jaques Duclos in L’HUMANITE. “What,” he writes, “are the problems which demand the attention of all Frenchmen anxious for the future of our country, if it is not the maintenance of order, defense of the national economy, and national security.” The language is bitterly familiar.  It was the language of Ebert, Scheidemann and Noske, executioners of the German revolution. It does not vary greatly from the language of Hitler or Mussolini. The “maintenance of order” means the Stalinist sabotage of the class struggle, keeping the workers fettered to the wage system for fear of disturbing “national unity.” “One must understand how to end strikes” said Thorez in July. Certainly the workers’ occupation of the factories or any attempt at workers' control does not conduce to the “maintenance of order” under capitalism, and Duclos has reference to no other social order. What “national security” means is equally clear from Thorez’ article in the same organ: “Peace must be defended at all costs. We must welcome the collaboration of all who are in favor of peace. We must come to an understanding with Poland despite the fact that its constitution is not truly democratic, with Italy despite Mussolini and even with Hitler’s Germany ...” It is well known that last summer for the first time in its history, the parliamentary representation of the French Communist party merely abstained on the vote for military credits whereas in the past it always opposed them. But now Duclos is actually urging the Army Committee of the Chamber to convene more quickly in order to take measures in reply to Hitler's introduction of the three-year term. “The fascist officers sow division in the army. However they are your superiors. You must obey them. Be disciplined even under their orders,” so advises LE CONSCRIT, (Aug. 29) Stalinist organ, the young conscripts who might otherwise be anti-militarist.
Socialists Reject French Front
The project of the Front Francaise has been received with mixed feelings by the Radical and rejected by the Socialist party (SFIO). It is an embarrassing turn of events for the Radicals. They used to be in a real National Front in former days, and broke with their nationalist allies. Now they are invited to join this neo-nationalist creature. The Socialists used to be in a Left Bloc (or Cartel) and broke with it under the pressure of the crisis and radicalization of the masses. Now they are invited not merely to rejoin the Left Cartel (they did that in the form of the Popular Front under the pressure of the Stalinists) but to become part of a National Front, which is to include even the most reactionary and imperialist section of the big bourgeoisie, the Clericals, and the Fascist Croix de Feu, if it is willing. The POPULAIRE of September 4 reports that at its recent session the Executive Committee of the Socialist party turned thumbs down on the communists’ project on the ground that it was nothing but an attempt to resurrect the National Union.
The action of the Socialists has been received with rage by the Stalinists, even though they dissemble it. The rift in the Popular Front must lead to a complete cleavage. The ultra-nationalist Communist party, motivated principally by the needs of Stalin’s foreign policy, is not satisfied with the semi-pacifism of its socialist allies. Meanwhile in the Socialist party voices are raised in favor of a return to a united front (of working class parties and organizations) which would resume the struggle for political power. As they meet with opposition to their nationalist plans, the Stalinists will attack the Socialists with the same fury that PRAVDA attacked Bauer and other leaders of the Second International, for failing to endorse the frame-up of the Moscow trials. Fantastically enough PRAVDA interprets the intervention of the leaders of the Second International as an attempt “to sabotage the united front of the working class. in order to create a united front with the bourgeoisie.” Shameless is perhaps a better description of PRAVDA than fantastic.
United Front Versus Popular Front
The course of the French C.P. has not escaped challenge from its own ranks, as the expulsion of Andre Ferrat from the Central Committee proves. Ferrat has come to a realization that the CP has abandoned the position of the class struggle in favor of class collaboration. But his conclusions with regard to the Popular Front show a lack of realization of its real significance. Ferrat said he was not hostile to the Popular Front but only to those of its tactics which spelled the “sacred union.” He is for the Popular Front of the June strike wave and the alliance of the workers and lower middle classes. But what he fails to see is that the June strikes (like the present strikes) are in irreconcilable contradiction with the aims and conditions of the Popular Front. There is no other Popular Front than this coalition on the basis of the capitalist system and bourgeois democracy. The Popular Front is not the United Front. The latter is the joint action for concrete class objectives in the struggle of working class parties and organizations. We oppose the Popular Front because we are for the United Front of the working class against the capitalist class. There can be no other means of organizing the struggle against either Fascism or war, than in the struggle against the capitalist state.
The Popular Front has failed to effect the “reconciliation of all Frenchmen” or bring a “strong, free and happy France.” It has not stopped Fascism in Spain and is not stopping Fascism in France. On the contrary, the French bourgeoisie is taking advantage of the helplessness of the Blum government to regain the initiative. They bent before the storm in June, but only because they knew their Popular Front government. The bourgeois leaders knew they had nothing to lose. If the Blum Government acted like every conventional bourgeois ministry, it was immaterial whether Blum was Prime Minister or Daladier or Herriot. They knew that the decisive role in the government would be played by the Radicals, Daladier and the others. Should the Blum government be unable to curb the restive proletariat, a state of disorder would follow (“anarchy”), the state that preceded the advent of Mussolini in Italy, seizure of factories. They would then urge Fascism as the salvation of the country from disorder and production from “anarchy.” Besides Fascism still lacks a wide enough mass basis. La Rocque has not quite satisfied the requirements of a supple Fascist demagogue. A candidate for this role has come forward in the person of Jacques Doriot, former Stalinist leader.
A Possible Savior
Doriot preaches the national revolution, against social conservatism and alien interference. He declares that he is prepared to use all means, even parliamentary, to gain power. Here is a demagogue with a communist past and some roots in the masses, who has already taken away thousands of aristocratic La Rocque’s following, and whose party, the French Popular party, with its organ “EMANCIPATION NATIONALE,” has already received the widest publicity in the country. Not the least significant feature of Doriot’s propaganda is based on what he well knows of the nationalist degeneration of the Stalinist bureaucracy both in Moscow and in Paris. He too is confidently counting on the inevitable failure of the Blum government to cope with the fundamental problems of the crisis. And no less astutely is he taking advantage of the social-patriotic agitation of the CP, to accuse it of attempting to drive France into a war with Hitler in the interests of the Soviet bureaucracy.
No, the Front Populaire has not stopped Fascism. It has only retarded the working class. It has fed them with parliamentary illusions. It has brought no alleviation in the economic situation.  It has not armed the French working class against such an eventuality as the Spanish events. But if the Popular Front in France can not fight Fascism, neither can the Popular Front prevent the working class, as the crisis gets more acute, from resorting to revolutionary action. Whether or not the French proletariat will defeat Fascism and triumph over the capitalist, state, depends on the degree to which the French proletariat emancipates itself from the illusions of the Popular Front, and in its elemental surging mass action, crystallizes a revolutionary party, a party of Marx and Lenin.



(Continued from last issue)
II.
The doctrine of Criminal Conspiracy was accepted in the early colonies of British North America. The historical details are of no great importance here. The arrest of twenty-four striking printers in Toronto in the seventies of the last century, on a charge of conspiracy, brought home to the workers that there was no law in the Dominion corresponding to the English Trade Union Act of 1871. In 1867 the British North America Act assigned the subject of criminal law to the Dominion and property and civil rights to provincial jurisdiction. Consequently, Parliament in 1872 passed a Trade Union Act identical in most respects with the English legislation of the previous year. It was laid down that the purposes of a trade union shall not by reason merely that they are in restraint of trade be deemed to be unlawful so as to render any member of such a union liable to criminal prosecution for conspiracy or otherwise. This is some sort of recognition of freedom of association.
 
Conspiracy and the Right to Strike
Section 590 of the Criminal Code deals with the right to strike in these terms:
“No prosecution shall be maintainable against any person for conspiracy in refusing to work with or for any employer or workman or for doing any act or causing any act to be done for the purpose of a combination unless such act is punishable by statute.”
Thus the trade unions in Canada are relieved of the incidence of conspiracy to a very limited extent. For, unfortunately for the trade unionist, nearly every important act “done for the purpose of a combination” in the course of a strike is “punishable by statute.” The definition of a “trade combination” in the Code restricts it to the workers in the direct employment of the employer involved in the dispute. Picketing is punishable by statute as “watching and besetting.” The strike of workers in “public utilities” before invoking the conciliatory provisions of the “Industrial Disputes Investigation Act” is an indictable offence. A sympathetic strike may therefore become a wholesale violation of statutory prohibitions, and on top of that, a seditious conspiracy.
 
Sympathetic Strike Illegal
The case of the King versus Russell grew out of the Winnipeg General Strike of May 1919. The leaders were arrested and charged with seditious conspiracy. In their defence it was urged that the strike was the lawful act of a trade combination under Section 590. But the Manitoba Court of Appeal ruled that:
“The immunity provided by Section 590 of the (Criminal) Code does not extend to a general ‘sympathetic’ strike. A conspiracy to bring about a strike involving no trade dispute between the strikers and their employers is illegal. The law in Canada applying thereto is the same as it was in England before the Trades Dispute Act of 1906, to which there is no similar enactment in Canada ...”
Following the Winnipeg strike, the Trades and Labor Congress proposed that the government amend the definition of a “trade combination” by adding the words of the English Act (1906) “workmen means all persons employed in any trade or industry whether or not in the employment of the employer directly or involved in a trade agreement”. The memorandum of the Department of Justice was an illuminating reply wherein it was solemnly stated
“... as a principle of the common law ... that a combination of persons to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful act by unlawful means, is criminal, and it is moreover actionable civilly, if there be special damage. Compatible with this rule a sympathetic strike cannot practically be worked.”
In other words, trade unions, which, finding the craft form utterly inadequate in the struggle with capitalist consolidations would parallel the latter by industrial unions, federations and alliances, are liable to be charged with conspiracy, if they engage in militant action in support of their members working in a given shop for a given employer. But that is not all. Only a strike growing out of a trade dispute within these narrow limits is “legal”. A strike for any political purpose, for the release of class-war prisoners, against the transport of munitions, against intervention in the affairs of the Soviet Union, for social insurance, etc., would all be held illegal conspiracies. As to whether they can be “practically worked”, if the Department of Justice lives long enough it will yet learn many things contrary to statutory provision.
The vulnerability of the trade unions to prosecution for illegal conspiracy has become more acute by virtue of the operation of Section 98 of the Criminal Code (its starting point was an order-in-council issued under the War-measures Act).
The section in question reads as follows:
“98. Unlawful associations. Any association, organization, society or corporation, whose professed purpose or one of whose purposes is to bring about any governmental, industrial or economic change within Canada by use of force, violence, or physical injury to person or property, or by threats of such injury or which teaches, advocates, advises or defends the use of force, violence, terrorism, or physical injury to person or property, or threats of such injury, in order to accomplish such change, or for any other purpose or which shall by any means prosecute or pursue such purpose or professed purpose, or shall so teach, advocate, or defend, shall be an unlawful association.”
Observe the neighborly conjunction of the words “force” and “terrorism” with “industrial or economic change”. Does it require an undue stretch of imagination to conceive that in the electric atmosphere of any considerable “trade dispute” the word “force” may be construed to embrace forms even of slight moral pressure? Thus in his charge to the jury Judge Metcalf in The King versus Russell declared that “sometime it has a deterring effect upon peoples’ minds by exposing them to have their motions watched and to encounter black looks”. The same judge, commenting on Section 132 of the Criminal Code which defines “seditious words” as “words expressing a seditious intention”, added that “sedition is a comprehensive term embracing all those practices whether, by word, deed, or writing which are likely to disturb the tranquility of the State, and to lead ignorant persons to endeavor to subvert the government and the laws of the Empire”. The statement of objects not only of a union which subscribes to a socialist aim which as the abolition of the wage-system, but even of an organization which adheres to the conservative slogan “a fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work” may in the course of any dispute of consequence become “words, deeds, or writings, likely to disturb the tranquility” of the employing class, their police and their courts.
 
Picketing Is a Crime and a Tort
The right to strike, if at all effectual, must carry with it the corollary right to organize the unorganized and persuade them to join the strike. In this connection, Section 501 of the Code makes it an indictable offence for anyone who “wrongfully and without lawful authority, with a view to compel any other person to abstain from doing anything which he has a lawful right to do, or to do anything from which he has a lawful right to abstain ... (f) besets or watches the house or other place where such other person resides or works or carries on business or happens to be”. If, moreover, the “watching and besetting” amounts to a common-law nuisance, it is within the prohibition of the statute (Section 221) as “an unlawful act or omission to discharge a legal duty, which act or omission endangers the lives, health, property or comfort of the public, or by which the public are obstructed in the exercise or enjoyment of any right common to all his Majesty’s subjects’”. Rennes versus The King, a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada practically decided that “peaceful picketing was without legal sanction, there being no legislation in Canada corresponding to Section 2, subsection of the British Trades Dispute Act of 1906.”
As a “common-law nuisance”, picketing is subject to be restricted by injunction. In Canada Paper vs. Brown, the court declared that “our Criminal Code fully reorganizes the right of a man to carry on his business without interference, let, or hindrance.” Occasionally a court has said “Government by injunction is a thing abhorrent to the law of England and of this province.” But abhorrent or not, the number of injunctions that issue to break strikes is on the increase.
 
“Incitement to Breach of Contract”
In the Dominion, the unions are subject to the doctrine of the courts that “for a number of persons to combine together to procure others to break contracts is unlawful, and if such others are induced to break and do break, their contracts, this constitutes an actionable wrong” and “the unions will be mulcted in heavy damages”. It is cold comfort for the trade union militant that the law on this subject is in a state of “chaotic uncertainty” and that many of the noble and learned law lords have confessed themselves baffled to draw a definite line between “acts whose real purpose is to advance the defendants’ interests and acts whose real purpose is to injure the plaintiff in his trade.” The British Act of 1906, as an aftermath of the famous Taff-Vale Judgment, and as a result of political pressure, provided that “an act done by a person in contemplation of a trade dispute shall not be actionable on the ground only that it induces some other person to break a contract of employment, or that it is an interference with the trade, business, or employment of some other person ...” A further provision at that time relieved the unions of liability under the doctrine of “civil conspiracy.”
The Criminal Code further makes certain statutory breaches of contract indictable offences. The worker connected with the supply of power, light, gas, water, or railroads who “wilfully breaks any contract made by him” etc., that is who may desire to strike without the preliminaries of notice, negotiation, or “conciliation” is subject to fine or imprisonment.
 
III.
This bare outline of the legal vulnerability of the trade unions in the Dominion, should indicate how fatal on their part would be a policy of “neutrality”, of indifferently passing by, like the Biblical Levite, on the other side of the road, while the Government is throttling the revolutionary vanguard. The Trades Congress officialdom has on several occasions, under rank and file pressure, made “representations” to the government, for the repeal or “amendment” of the obnoxious sections of the Code. But something more is required than a legal brief, read to a cabinet minister by a bureaucrat deputation. Whatever concessions have been wrung from the capitalist class in the past have been along the way of mass struggle and political action. Unions which abandon their militant functions for defensive or offensive purposes, invite legal and governmental strangulation at the hands of a capitalist class which in the epoch of imperialism can less than ever afford to yield concessions from sheer “liberalism”.
The deep-going economic crisis moist work a molecular radicalization in the ranks of “organized labor”. The Communists should throw overboard the self-stultifying Stalinist approach to the old unions as “social Fascist”. That policy has only succeeded in wreaking the havoc of isolation, at a time when every point of militant support in the mass organizations was necessary in defence of party legality. At that, despite the defeatist attitude to work in the reactionary unions, dozens of the most conservative locals and Trade Councils adopted the resolution circulated for the repeal of Section 98. The past has showed, proved, that where the charters of the A.F. of L. run up against the iron exigencies which impel the masses to action, such charters have the worth of a treaty guaranteeing Belgian neutrality.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



TORONTO, ONT. In his final address to the jury at the historical trial that outlawed the Communist Party in Ontario, the Crown Prosecutor declared that “the trade unions were not being attacked ... every institution throughout the country protected the trade union movement”. (Mail and Empire, Nov. 13, 1931) It is the purpose of this article to show that on the contrary, the legal status of the Canadian trade union movement, precarious enough before the repression of the Communist party, is more completely at the mercy of the capitalist state than ever. For the trade unions (we do not mean the officialdom) to accept the suave assurances of the Crown at their face value would lull them into a state of false security.
I.
Hostility to freedom of association in general is an early juridical phase of the capitalist reconstruction of society. The the last decades of the eighteenth century industrial and agrarian revolutions released business enterprise from the fetters of feudalism and mercantilism in favor of freedom of competition and contract. The French Declaration of Rights and the American Declaration of Independence breathe the same spirit of optimistic (and “rugged”) individualism as Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations: The democratic state is conceived as a mass of free citizens, each of whom is an ultimate source of sovereign authority, which would be impeded by “artificial” groups. The end of law was to secure the absolute and universal natural rights of individuals, a conception very congenial to the English courts where for a century and a half the doctrine of laissez-faire masquerade in the guise of “public policy”.
In the eyes of the law, the wage-laborer was on a footing of formal equality with all other citizens. But whatever the philosophical speculation of Rousseau, the device of universal suffrage merely ignores economic classes; it does not destroy them. Sovereignty in reality passed from the landed interest to the money power. The “new freedom” brought glittering prizes to the capitalist entrepreneur: to the proletarian it brought the factory system, low wages, long hours, slums and unemployment. Divorced from the ownership of the means of production, the wage-worker had only a Hobson’s choice. From the very outset the employer was a combination in himself. To speak of the freedom of the labor contract under these circumstances was a mockery. In the later stage of capitalist consolidation and monopoly, the unorganized worker is more than ever a helpless figure in his own fate.
Trade unionism was the organized refusal of the workers to submit passively to the rigors of the sacred “wage fund” and the “inexorable laws of supply and demand.” The trade unions, in Marx’s phrase, were centers of resistance to the encroachments of capital. Neither the value of the workers’ commodity labor power, nor his standard of living in general are fixed automatically out by way of struggle. The first attempts, however, to combine in trade unions encounters the savage repression by the State. A series of combination acts in Great Britain declare a trade union an unlawful society and the strike a crime The penal codes of other countries likewise deem “collective bargaining inconsistent with “liberty”. Nevertheless, the workers organize secretly and strikes break out despite long terms of imprisonment for the leaders.
Against the right to combine, the capitalist courts invoked two doctrines (a) the doctrine of conspiracy and (b) the common-law rule holding as unlawful all combinations in restraint of trade. Originally limited to specific offences, the judges, when faced with the problem of association, extended the conspiracy doctrine to combinations of workers. Conspiracy was the agreement “to commit any unlawful act or any lawful act by unlawful means.” The attempt of “Old Toryism” to enforce customary wage rates fixed by Justice of the Peace, long after the craft guilds had lost their power, was doomed. The Combination Laws, passed in additional fear of the French Revolution were repealed in 1824–25. The judges, however, gave form to the doctrine that a conspiracy in restraint of trade is indictable independently of statute.
The growing resistance of the workers and the strength of their political agitation, combining with the circumstances of an expanding capitalism, resulted though with considerable unevenness in a stage of concessions. The Trade Union Acts of 1871 and 1906 gave the unions in Great Britain particularly, immunity from liability under the doctrine of conspiracy in both its criminal and civil aspects. That was a period when “democratic” reformism appeared to have achieved great triumphs. Combination was no longer unlawful. The right to strike and to picket were freed from the fear of the injunction (we are not here speaking of the United States). Domestic and inter-union affairs were more or less safeguarded from the jurisdiction of the courts. Their funds were protected against embezzlement.
But a reactionary counter-current was at work even then. Already in 1902 the impeccably Fabian Webbs had to record in their Industrial Democracy that “the public opinion of the propertied and professional classes is in fact even more hostile to trade unionism than it was a generation ago ... Under this adverse bias the courts of law have for the last ten years been gradually limiting what were supposed to be the legal rights of trade unions.” At the present day, the capitalist class is once again engaged in sharp restriction of trade union activities. The Emergency Powers Act and Trade Union Act of 1927 are scarcely to be regarded as landmarks of greater class harmony in England, which experienced the great General Strike.
In the United States, Canada, and Australia, in addition to the former merely permissive, there is now coercive legislation regarding strikes and lockouts. Australia and New Zealand, the stamping fields of “Labor Governments”, have made compulsory both arbitration through administrative tribunals and compliance with the award. Statutes forbid the boycott, peaceful picketing and even the simple strike. Use of the injunction to enforce compliance with these prohibitions is sanctioned and violation of the statutes made punishable by criminal proceedings. The high-water mark of the capitalist control, or rather dissolution, of the trade unions was reached by the Fascist government in Italy which declared its policy to be “the break with laissez-faire liberalism and the socialism of class-welfare”. The independent unions have been outlawed. Strikes are repressed like sedition. The Fascist “unions” are incorporated in the state-machine, under the supervision of a “Minister of Corporations.”
(Continued in Next Issue)
 



A generation of Communists standing on the shoulders of Lenin needs little originality to detect the theoretical shortcomings of “Luxemburgism”. But history is something more than a factional football. Memorable in dialectic and intensity, the struggle of Rosa Luxemburg against the opportunism of the most powerful party machine in pre-war Social Democracy has indisputably entered the life-stream of the Communist International.
Rosa Luxemburg never ceased to collaborate with the Polish movement from which she sprang, returning to her native Warsaw during the revolution of 1905. But as well as formative influence, her main sphere of activity was the German Social Democracy in whose problems she first intervened on the occasion of the revisionist offensive on Marxism.
 
Imperialism and Social Democracy
Its state unification achieved Germany in common with Western capitalism after 1870 experienced a phase of expansion due to the opening of the world market and colonial exploitation. As a result the bourgeoisie could profitably pursue the strategy of concessions to the upper crust of the working class. The Social Democracy had never been altogether free of an element of petty-bourgeois illusion; at the union of the Eisenach and Lassalle factions in 1875 Marx’s criticism of the Gotha program fell on deaf ears. Later the Erfurt Congress (1891) did adopt a program which though defective especially in its political demands, was generally speaking a recognition of scientific socialism. Once the repressive anti-Socialist law of Bismark collapsed, a Right wing, confounding the interests of the proletariat as a class with, the favored position of the labor aristocracy, began to maneuver for “practical politics”. The pioneer of this tendency was Vollmar, whose pamphlet The Isolated Socialist State (1878) unmistakably anticipated the Stalin theory of socialism-in-one-country. Vollmar combined nationalism with reformism, his agrarian proposals stirring Engels’s deepest indignation. In Vollmar’s wake, the Schippels and the Heines advocated the voting of military budgets, protective tariffs and the like.
 
Bernstein’s Revisionism
The classic exponent of revisionism was Edward Bernstein, whose Socialist Fundamentals (1899) was a complete rupture with Marxism and a confession of the faith of the Fabians. Within the Marxian breast dwelt two souls, he contended, the one evolutionary-reformist, the other revolutionary-utopian. Bernstein undertook to purge Marx of the unscientific entanglements of Hegel and the political romanticism of Blanqui. For dialectical materialism he substitutes the categorical imperative of Kant, the labor theory of value he supplements with the marginal utility of Boehm-Bawerk. The contradictions of capitalism do not lead to economic catastrophe and social revolution. The growing middle class, the democratization of capital and diffusion of ownership by the joint stock corporation are tendered to disprove the prognosis that the concentration of industry is accompanied by the centralization of wealth. The beautiful credit system, the efficient trusts and modern communication facilities eliminate the cyclical crisis. In a word, here is an idyll of an organic capitalism painlessly evolving towards socialism, over an unending road of reforms, under the spell of a social-democratic majority in the Reichstag. The dictatorship of the proletariat is an apocalyptic vision. The movement is everything – the goal is nothing.
Bernstein’s sources are obvious, a reactionary hash of Louis Blanc, Proudhon, Lassalle and the miserable “Katheder-sozialisten”. While Kautsky, the official guardian of orthodoxy still maintained an ambiguous silence, Rosa Luxemburg forcefully insisted that theory and practise could not be divorced without fateful consequences and that revisionism would replace class struggle by class collaboration. If goal without movement is utopian, movement without goal is surrender to bourgeois liberalism. The everyday demands have significance only as they are linked up with the conquest of political power. Reforms are by-products of class struggle; they cannot basically change the character of the relations of production. So far from being the political lever of socialism, parliamentarism is the historical form of the class rule of the bourgeoisie in its struggle with feudalism, and is already decadent. The workers must rely on their own mass action. The whole economic lore of Bernstein is the generalized viewpoint of the individual capitalist. The new developments in capitalism – credit, combination, etc., – do not cure but intensify the basic contradictions of anarchic capitalist production.
In pitiless judgment on revisionism, theory has been reinforced by Time, the greatest revolutionary of all. On the very heels of Bernstein’s smug evangel burst the crisis of 1900, to be followed by another in 1907 and still another in 1914. As we write, the world is staggering under one of the gravest industrial and commercial crises in capitalist history, with the United States, the model country of trusts and efficiency, as deeply involved up to the hilt. During the late” lamented “new economic era”, bourgeois economists, journalists, engineers attempted to revive Bernstein’s illusions in substance, if without their philosophical garnish, on American soil. “The most fundamental stabilization”, wrote Professor Commons, “has been that of credit and prices through the cooperation of the banks organized in the Federal Reserve System.” The American working class would derive its salvation from increased savings, life insurance and employee stock ownership. “The labor banks”, declared the economic wizard Carver, “constitute the only revolutionary movement in the world”. The Baltimore and Ohio Plan of union-management cooperation was tantamount to “industrial democracy”.
 
The Struggle Against Opportunism
There is no doubt that theoretically revisionism was bankrupt from the outset. It completely failed to estimate the real qualitative changes that were taking place in capitalist society with the advent of imperialism. Parliamentary cretinism and the inevitability of gradualness have been dealt shattering blows by the epoch of wars of revolutions. Between economics and politics there is no automatic reflex action. Ideology is only one of the elements of the superstructure. When she wrote “Opportunism has been knocked on the head”, Rosa Luxemburg was unduly sanguine. The huge bureaucracy of the party, trade unions, cooperatives proved decisive. At every important turn, the Centrists reigned but the Right ruled. At successive Congresses, the Right wing receded formally but in fact retained their positions. Marx and Engels had predicted that a split between the middle class and proletarian elements was inevitable but it was in Russia under Lenin, and not at the Dresden Congress that this operation was executed. Waging her battles against such an apparatus, Rosa tended to identify centralization with opportunism, and to depend on the elemental mass movement spontaneously to correct the course of the party. “The only part to be played in the Social Democracy by the so-called leaders is that of the explanation to the masses of their function in history.” Lenin too emphasized that the masses must gain their own political experience, that for victory the vanguard must muster millions but the role of the revolutionary social-democrat was that of a modern Jacobin bound up with the organized proletariat. Rosa relied too much on process, and tended to underrate the importance of organization. It cannot be doubted that the conditions of the development of the Russian Revolution necessarily contributed to give Lenin his unparalleled insight into the problems of Marxism, itself the product of a revolutionary period. It must be accounted a defect, for example, of Rosa Luxemburg’s polemics with the revisionists that she did not, in reply to Bernstein, take up the problem of state-power. Plechanov raised the question of the dictatorship of the proletariat at Brussels and again at the Amsterdam Congress (1904) but the Second International as a whole, and Kautsky its principal theoretician, completely failed to realize the significance of the problem. The reconstruction of the doctrine of Marx, based on the experiences of the Paris Commune, as to the destruction of the bourgeois state machine, was the work of Lenin.
 
The Russian Revolution
The Russian revolution of 1905, for the first time since the Commune, shocked the West out of its parliamentary routine. The Russian proletariat marshalled every form of mass action, from the economic strike to armed insurrection. The mass political strike became a central subject of discussion. At first Kautsky welcomed the methods of the Russian revolution and took up a seemingly radical position towards the strike as a weapon in the immediate struggle for power. But when it became a question of applying the lessons of the Russian revolution to the struggle over the Prussian franchise he changed his tune. He was now for the old tested tactic of parliamentarism. “The elemental mass movement would produce unpleasant as well as pleasant surprises and development would again assume the catastrophic character of 1789 to 1871”. The correct strategy was “attrition”, to exhaust the bourgeoisie by trench-warfare.
Rosa Luxemburg ‘s point of departure in these debates was the totality of the class struggle. She refused to recognize the legitimacy of any water-tight compartments between the party and the trade unions. She strenuously resisted the demands of the trade union bureaucracy for the “independence” of the trade unions from the party and their “neutrality” in the political struggle. At the Jena Congress of the Social Democracy it was decided to resort to the general strike if the government sabotaged the issue of the franchise. The reply of the Cologne trade union congress was to prohibit the “propagation and discussion of the general strike”. A year later at Mannheim, the Cologne resolution was substantially ratified by the party Congress and the bureaucracy had gained a signal victory.
In the view of Rosa Luxemburg, the centre of gravity of the proletarian struggle lay in mass action, not in parliamentarism. She did not share the reformist conception of Bernstein and Hilferding who approved of the Belgian general strike of 1903 merely because it was an auxiliary action to a parliamentary objective. But once again she could not define the whole problem of the organization of the revolution at the time, and would likely have been regarded as mad or hounded out as anarchist and Blanquist if she had. In the words of Trotsky “a revolutionary general strike that inundates all the banks of bourgeois society became for Rosa Luxemburg a synonym for the proletarian revolution ... A general strike does not yet decide the question of power but only raises it. For the seizure of power it; is necessary to organize the armed uprising on the basis of the general strike.” The danger of revolutionary fatalism, of the “temporizing attitude towards the fundamental tasks of the revolution” was exemplified by the Zinoviev-Kamenev-Stalin attitude in the Russian October and the Stalin-Brandler-Thalheimer capitulation to the line of least resistance in the German crisis of 1923. It should be mentioned that Trotsky adds that Rosa left the stage without having said her last word.
It was these discussions of the role of mass action that brought about the definite cleavage between the “Left Radicals” under the leadership of Rosa and the Kautskian Centre at the Madgeburg Congress in 1909. Kautsky openly proclaimed that the main danger in the party was no longer the revisionists, but “the rebellious impatience of the extreme Left”.
(To be concluded)
 



(Continued from last issue)
The differences between Centrists and Left crystallized another stage in the ensuing debates on the significance of imperialism. The Right wing openly demanded “equal rights for our industries in the colonies” (Quessel at Chemnitz Congress 1912). To oppose colonialism was utopian, Luddites smashing machinery. Kautsky defined the Centrist position in the Neue Zeit (1912). Imperialism is the endeavor of an industrial capitalist nation to annex agrarian territory. As such it is only one form of capitalist expansion. From the “economic viewpoint” there were tendencies towards the formation of an all-embracing world trust, a super-imperialism that would eliminate competition and struggle. He urged rapprochement with the sections of the bourgeoisie who were in his opinion not interested in imperialism, to be achieved by the advocacy of the policy of disarmament and the United States of Europe under capitalism.
For Rosa Luxemburg, imperialism was not merely a policy preferred by a narrow clique, but the last phase of capitalism, pregnant with revolutionary consequences. The limitations of this article preclude the detailed discussion her views merit as set out in her vigorous Accumulation of Capital (1912). It must suffice here to state that she conceived the problem of imperialism to be a problem of the realization of surplus value and not of monopolist extra-profit under finance-capital, as Lenin sees it in his well-known brochure. She takes as her point of departure the criticism of the diagrams in Marx’s second volume of Capital. Dealing with the reproduction of social capital as a whole, she indicates the manner by which capitalism achieves a certain equilibrium between the two great sectors of economic activity (a) production of means of production (b) production of articles of consumption, and is enabled to absorb the ever-growing mass of commodities.
These diagrams, Rosa proceeds, are a theoretical fiction and misleading to boot. If capitalism could profitably realize its surplus value within its own framework, how account for the fact that production outstrips consumption, and explain the fact of the struggle for markets and colonies. There would be no objective impediments to capitalist accumulation nor any immanent necessity of the social revolution.
Marx’s analysis is based on the assumption of an all-inclusive capitalist world with but two classes, where in reality it functions in a non-capitalist environment. It is to this latter “third person” that capitalism must turn to market its surplus. Imperialism is the political expression of the process of capital-accumulation in its struggle for the vest of the still unoccupied non-capitalist territory and is thereby a new lease of life for capitalism and its grave-digger at the same time.
The theory of Rosa is open to serious objection, on both theoretical and empirical grounds. Undeniably, as a matter of historical fact, capitalist development does proceed by the systematic extension of its base. To extricate itself from its internal contradictions every national capitalism turns to the reserves of the world market. Lenin had occasion to advert to the problem of the external market in his polemics against the Narodniki (populists) and the legal “Marxists” The conditions that give rise to the foreign market are not the impossibility of realizing a profit, abstractly considered, but extended circulation of commodities and the tendency of capitalist production to the growth of the productive forces break down the old regional and state barriers. Production is anarchically carried on for au unknown market, resulting in the disproportional development of the various branches of industry and recurrent crises of over-production. The higher organic composition of capital, technical progress, leads to a fall in the rate of profits. The fusion of banking and industrial capital known as finance-capital, which arise under conditions of the concentration of production, seeks to counter-act this tendency by means of monopoly, in the home market by protective tariffs, abroad in the struggle for markets and colonies for the export of capital (raw materials, cheap labor, cheap land). War is not merely the armed conflict for the annexation of agrarian territory but the struggle of monopolist finance-capital for the repartition of the world market, in other words the contradiction between the productive forces matured for a socialized world economy and the nationally limited, capitalist methods of appropriation.
Rosa Luxemburg’s theory has certain points in common with Kautsky’s as Lenin’s has with that of Hilferding. She could explain the seizure of a backward agrarian region but how would she explain the lust for Lorraine or Belgium? She seeks to establish absolutely objective barriers to capitalist development by her conception of “third persons” but the fact is that the contradictions of capitalism lead to proletarian and colonial revolutions while the greater part of the world is still composed of “third persons”. Her theory does not throw into necessary relief either the national or colonial problem.
The clouds of the coming war were rolling up ominously. There is no lack; of documents of the pre-war socialist opposition to imperialism. The best known resolutions emanated from the Stuttgart (1907) and the Basle (1912) Congresses of the Second International. At Stuttgart, Rosa Luxemburg introduced the amendment on behalf of the Russian and Polish delegations. There was never a word breathed in these resolutions of “national defense” as a justification for socialist truce with the capitalist state in the event of war, which did not prevent the traitors later from covering up their enlistment on the side of God and Kaiser with quotations from Marx, Engels and Lassalle, referring to 1830, 1848. Officially the International pledged itself to utilize the war crisis which was characterized as a product of the imperialist struggle for markets, to the overthrow of the capitalist system. The outbreak of the war confirmed beyond a doubt that opportunism was the forerunner of social patriotism. The virus of adaptation to the legal and constitutional conditions of the bourgeois state had rotted the very foundation of the International. Rosa Luxemburg had entertained more than a premonition when she uttered the warning note at the party Congress of 1910, “we thunder against militarism in time of peace but when war really breaks out ...” The reference was to the seizure of Chinese territory by German imperialism. And later when she attacked the official leadership for its passivity in the Morocco crisis (1911). In the acid test of 1914, Kautsky hastened to lend additional “justification” to the socialist rogues with his inimitable thesis that the International was an instrument of peace, not war.
The Left wing stood by its guns. Together with Karl Liebknecht who had roused the chauvinist fury of the social democratic Reichstag faction by his refusal to vote the war credits, Rosa Luxemburg began the work of the underground and illegal organization that led to Spartacus and the split in the social democracy. When she was released from prison, together with Karl Liebknecht, she organized and participated in the never-to-be-forgotten heroic war demonstrations in Berlin in 1916, for which they were immediately imprisoned.
It was at that time that Rosa produced her brochure The Crisis in the German Social Democracy under the pseudonym Junius. Lenin in Switzerland greeted it cordially as by and large an excellent work of Marxism. But in the interests of the ideology of the future Third International which in his mind was already clearly projected, he submits certain of its views to keen though comradely criticism. He considers it a defect that social opportunism as a distinct current is not directly enough related to the current social patriotism as an explanation of the betrayal and collapse, thus leaving the problem of the split in the International dangerously open. He also takes exception to the thesis that in the era of unbridled imperialism no more national wars were possible. In this imperialist war it was true that Russian imperialism stood behind Serbian nationalism. But it was wrong to dogmatize. The wars of the French Revolution were national in their inception and became imperialist under Napoleon. The imperialist Seven Years War between France and England led to national wars later (imperialist war is of course possible on the basis of serfdom or primitive capitalism). If all wars are to be branded as reactionary it would afford an objective basis for pacifist and disarmament illusions and militate against the struggle of the workers and the colonial peoples. Finally he criticises Junius’ selection of the 1848 slogan that the best means of national defense was the united German Republic to be achieved by class struggle. This was in place as a watch-word of the bourgeois democratic-revolution against feudalism. But the slogan now must be the conversion of the imperialist war into civil war for the realization of socialism.
The response of Rosa Luxemburg to the October revolution could never be in doubt. She was no stranger to its problems. When the character of the future Russian revolution was debated at the London (1907) Congress of the Russian social democracy and Kautsky [1] defended the position of the Mensheviks, Rosa Luxemburg along with Lenin represented the viewpoint of the Bolsheviks. Her formula for the bourgeois democratic revolution in Russia coincided with Trotsky’s the dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasantry. The Mensheviks attempted to build up a difference of conception between that formulation and Lenin’s. But the latter himself in 1909 wrote “the formula ‘proletariat supported by the peasantry’ remains entirely within the bounds of the very dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry.” Of the November revolution Rosa wrote: “Whatever a party could muster in a historical moment of courage, energy, capacity of action has been completely accomplished by Lenin, Trotsky and their comrades. Their October insurrection was not only the actual salvation of the Russian revolution but also rescued the honor of international socialism.” In the posthumous work on the Russian revolution published by Paul Levi, she submits certain policies of the Bolsheviks to sober criticism. Her friends Warski and Clara Zetkin say that she had revised these views and had not intended the document, written in prison, for publication. That is very likely but in any case history has proved that her criticism was substantially incorrect. Thus she failed to distinguish between the strategic aspects of the agrarian problem and the problem of a collectivized rural economy. She took a position on the national problem that resembled Bucharin’s later: that self-determination under capitalism was unreal. Only socialism could realize the self-determination of peoples. Similarly her views on the red terror the monopoly of legality by the Communist party, the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly. She would in all likelihood have been compelled to modify these views in the light of a more intimate study of the problems of the dictatorship. Some of her criticism of Lenin’s policies however which completely missed the mark might be applicable to the seamy sides of the policy of the Stalin epigones.
In 1918 came the revolt of the Kiel sailors and soldiers of Berlin. It opened the prison doors. The socialist traitors attempted to persuade Wilhelm to stay to the last. Failing to guide German capitalism into the channels, of a constitutional monarchy they yielded to the idea of bourgeois republic. Their hatred of Bolshevism outmeasured everything else. They particularly feared Spartacus which had constituted itself as a separate party with the slogan of All Power to the Soviets. Noske, surrounded by the Hohenzollern generals, unleashed the white terror. The Spartacists were shot down by the thousands in bloody civil war. Rosa and Karl were murdered in the most bestial fashion. Her body in a disfigured condition was dragged up months later from the Spree river.
German menshevism and the bourgeoisie has triumphed. Vae Victis! But the spirit of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht marches on in the millions of German workers who today are again confronted with the problem of power. The day of the reckoning with the social democracy approaches.

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version “Lenin”.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



ALL who resisted have been shot, some have committed suicide. Without the ceremony even of a drumhead court martial, the souls of Roehm and his staff were dispatched to Valhalla amid farewell accusations of sodomy. Partisans of due process of law protest that there was no evidence of overt conspiracy, that Hitler’s Reichstag oration was “an accounting without vouchers” by one who was prosecuting attorney, witness, judge and executioner. But conspiracies, like convenient “assassinations”, can always be invented. What Hitler-Goering-Goebbels faced was the much more deadly fact of a condition. In the historic social crisis of a falling rate of profit and mounting class antagonisms, Capital had decided that the only alternative to socialization was the forcible degradation of wages to the barest level of subsistence. The end entailed the complete destruction of all the barriers of proletarian organization; its instrumentality was the “anti-Marxist” mobilization of the petty-bourgeoisie, a victim itself of monopolist expropriation. The working class, criminally divided and betrayed, virtually capitulated without a struggle; the trade unions, the social democracy, and the communists were crushed. Intoxicated by its easy triumph, the middle class mistakes the illusion of power for its substance; it attempts to function as an independent social force. At this point, the reality of Fascism clashes with its demagogic form. The Jacobin petty-bourgeoisie, which saved a great revolution from feudal reaction, had finally to cede command of the state to Big Business. The Brownshirt creatures of the capitalist twilight could not succeed where the Red Bonnets of the capitalist dawn had failed. The plebeian phase of German Fascism is liquidated.
The blood-purge of the Storm Troops was a preventive coup d’etat against the elements of the “second revolution”. Stripped of its nebulous flights into ethics and metaphysics, von Papen’s Marburg address was the unmistakeable handwriting on the wall. This hero of the Herrenklub, by the side of whom Judas Iscariot was positively a saint, knew first-hand as intermediary between embezzling Junkers and Ruhr industrialists, that Hitler was a product of capitalist subsidy no less than of middle class misery. Had Marxism been suppressed, he now asked, so that national Bolshevism would be instituted in its place? It was plainly necessary that the Fighting League of the Trading Middle Classes and its military counterpart, the SA be taught the limits of the totalitarian state. Hitler preferred to be the agent rather than the victim of this necessity.
When in 1926 he declared the Nazi program “unalterable”, Hitler intended by that no more than his Italian prototype who at a similar stage favored the abolition of the monarchy, the dissolution of joint stock corporations, and transfer of large estates to the peasants’ cooperatives. Once the March on Rome was accomplished (a single regiment of regulars could have dispersed it) and the Facta government had by secret agreement delivered over the power, Mussolini set about trampling down all in his own party who had taken his demagogy at its face value. Except for the brutal reality of the Fascist syndicates, the “corporate state” remains a petty-bourgeois fantasy on paper. So, too, Hitler came not to destroy German capitalism but to fulfill neo-German imperialism. The program of nationalization of the trusts, confiscation of the land, and abolition of “interest-servitude” was like the whole propaganda of anti-Semitism designed as bait for the lower middle class. The Aryan capital of the Krupps, Thyssen and Siemens was pronounced “creative” and sacrosanct. The autarchy which Hitler advocated is to be understood in the context of his published view that the “mere restoration of the German frontiers of 1914 is a political lunacy and a crime”. The Alfred Rosenbergs are no less aware than any Marxist that the productive forces have outgrown the boundaries of the national state, that Ruhr coal cannot be permanently divorced from Lorraine iron-ore without dire consequences for German economy. A scientific anthropologist like Boas misses the point that the Nordic racial ideology is the Nazi pseudonym for the new imperialism.
In this light, those who have profited from the Hitler regime are easily distinguished. There are first the Junkers whose estates despite the “unalterable program” remain intact and who have been accorded higher tariffs. The industrialists who invested so heavily in Hitler have received about one billion dollars worth of returns in the form of tax reductions, subsidies and wage cuts. The upper middle class, the social base of the black-shirted Schutz Staffel, has profited from openings created by the ostracism of Jews and liberal office-holders of the Weimar regime. But the lower middle classes, dazzled with the heralded prosperity of the Third Reich; have been given a stone, the processes of rationalization and centralization continue their grind. The economic crisis grows acute. An increasingly unfavorable trade balance with shrinking reserves of gold and foreign exchange foster projects for the devaluation of the mark and a moratorium of foreign payments. Except for the heavily subsidized armament industries, unemployment has not decreased; it is merely concealed. Real wages have sunk to their lowest level in half a century. Expenditures on the social services have been cut by nearly half a billion marks. Such soil could not but nourish hopes of a “second revolution” to bring the Nazi masses into their own. Man does not live by bread alone but the most immaculately conceived Aryan and lineal descendant of Hermann the Cheruscan cannot live on glory alone.
Captain Roehm and his circle of military desperadoes had but small interest in the National-Bolshevist ideas of a Strasser, but they were prepared to utilize the disaffection of the petty bourgeois masses as their base of operations for the control of the Reichswehr. The command of the Reichswehr, on the other hand, was quite as resolved as had been the Royal Italian Army to allow no parvenu weakening of its monopoly or plebeian dilution of the ranks by fusion with the SA. The military question involved the whole complex of political and economic orientation. Hitler always viewed the Storm Troops with distrust as a menace to his exclusive control of the party. He had been dangerously embroiled with them at the time of the Berlin mutiny of Captain Stennes, which only the treacherous services of Goebbels helped him put down. The proposed reduction of the Storm Troop numbers aimed a direct and telling blow at the plans and ambitions of Roehm. In killing him, Hitler disposed of one of the most influential of Nazi originals and its ablest military organizer. The simultaneous killing of von Schleicher bears the familiar earmarks of the “amalgam”. Any contact the “social” General may have had with Roehm would have been quite casual; their respective points of support and perspectives were fundamentally dissimilar. But the murder of von Schleicher, removed as it were, a “Bonapartist” pretender, and cushioned the shock of annihilating so many Nazis. The death of von Hindenburg and Hitler’s assumption of the added presidential powers, completes the concentration of all sovereignty, of every organ of legislative and executive authority in the hands of finance capital. Having settled accounts with the turbulent petty bourgeoisie, its pawn against the proletariat, Fascism now assumes the form of a bureaucratic military and police dictatorship.
The working class did not intervene. Wedding, formerly the reddest district of Berlin, was deserted. That is the tragic measure of the catastrophe of 1933. Only that department of the Stalin press dedicated to sowing apocalyptic illusions represented Germany as on the verge of a proletarian revolution. A truer index of Stalin’s appraisal of the situation is Litvinov’s Realpolitik, his adoption of the French imperialist thesis of “security before disarmament” and endless regional pacts. A direct transition from Fascist dictatorship to Soviet power is theoretically not inconceivable. But the pre-requisite for that would have to be the lever of a powerful communist party. None such is available. The Stalinist party, which, planless and headless, capitulated without struggle when Hitler ascended to the Chancellery, is scarcely recognizable in the panegyrics and embellishments of the official and semi-official Comintern propagandists. A party which cannot distinguish victory from defeat, is of no greater actual service to the proletariat than a party which directly betrays it. But while in the circumstances there could be no revolutionary intervention of the working class, conditions have been created for its infusion with fresh confidence. The change in the relations of the petty bourgeoisie to monopoly capital as the lessons of the blood-purge seep in, must inevitably draw the middle classes closer to the proletariat. If only the latter displays the necessary revolutionary clearsightedness a change in the balance of forces will follow. It was the inability of the proletariat to solve the social crisis, and the failure of its parties to give decisive leadership that alienated the petty bourgeoisie, sending it into the camp of capital. The greatest step forward that the German proletariat could take today and the guarantee so far as that is possible of its victory tomorrow would be to digest the lessons of its own defeat of 1933 and from that to form the cadres of the party of the Fourth International.



It was common ground that the trial at the Toronto assizes was not of the accused as individuals only but of the Communist Party of Canada. That circumstance placed a great responsibility on the comrades to conduct their defence in accord with revolutionary traditions and in a manner promoting the political education of the masses. The accused could not resort to a merely legalistic defence without grave sacrifice of positions of principle. It was patently in the nature of the case that the rules of court procedure and the exclusionary technicalities of evidence were no less weighted in favor of the prosecution than the section of the Criminal Code which was the basis of the indictment. The presiding Judge would not, for example, permit explanatory statements where, in his view, the question could be answered categorically. The evidence of an interested witness was not as “safe” as of a witness absolutely disinterested in the outcome. In the light of the emphasis it received in the Judge’s charge to the jury, the oral evidence of the police spy Leopold was presumably counted as “disinterested”. The court ruled out as inadmissible all evidence of the activity of the party in the labor movement that it conceived as not bearing on the particular issue of “force and violence”. With due regard to these limitations, which operate in other jurisdictions, it was still necessary and possible to develop a revolutionary defence. To what extent did the accused succeed?
 
The Prosecution’s Material
Following the testimony of Leopold, the Crown read an enormous number of exhibits, the booty of the police raids, into the evidence. The prosecution quoted profusely from tine organ of the underground days of the party, The Communist, from the Worker, the Communist Manifesto of Marx and Engels, the Theses and Statutes of the Comintern, the 21 points of admission adopted at the Second Congress, the reports of proceedings of successive Congresses of the C.I. and conventions of the party, the program of the Sixth Congress, the minutes of the Political Bureau, cablegrams that passed between the Comintern and the party committee, etc. All this painstaking accumulation was intended to bring home to the jury that the Communist Party of Canada was admittedly a section of the Comintern, that it was subordinated to the “instructions” of Moscow, and accordingly the agent was responsible for the plans and acts of the principal. Mr. Norman Somerville, the Crown prosecutor, was not satisfied with eloquent quotations from fundamental documents. The police had also seized what purported to be a pamphlet of Vassiliev of the Organization Department of the Comintern, in which the author undertakes to discuss more efficient methods of workers’ self-defence for protection of open air demonstrations against any ensuing police attacks. The Crown attempted to link this pamphlet up with a demonstration in Toronto in which certain policemen were alleged to have suffered injuries.
But of course the crux of the Crown’s case was that the whole program and strategy of the party were based on the advocacy and defence of “force and violence”, or as the Judge charged, “I must instruct you that if you think force and violence a logical, natural result of their teachings, it is a matter of law that they are advocating, advising and defending force and violence for the overthrow of governmental and industrial institutions. It is not a question of time, but a question of the intent and meaning of their teachings and documents.”
 
Party History
The first of the accused who went into the box was Tim Buck, the party secretary. He described the formation of the Communist Party of Canada from the various groups of the Communist and United Communist Parties of America, which had branches in this country, and from other elements of the former socialist and trade union movements. The period was overshadowed by the Palmer raids in the States with their mass deportation and the War Measures Act and Orders in Council in the Dominion which had outlawed a whole series of socialist organizations. Here lay the reason for the underground character of the party in the early days. But in December 1921 the Workers Party was organized from a preliminary Conference, and in 1924 the underground party was wound up and the Workers Party became the sole Communist Party in the country, frankly associated with the Communist International. There had never been any real difference in the objects of “Z” and “A”. It was the lapse of the War Measures Act, the widening of democratic rights which had made an open party possible, which could participate in municipal campaigns and parliamentary activity.
 
Trade Union Policy
Dealing with the trade Union Policy of the Party, comrade Buck denied that the Workers Unity League was the “industrial department” of the party. In the first stage of the career of the party, the emphasis had been on an amalgamation campaign inside the old craft unions in favor of industrial unionism, a campaign which had received wide support until the A.F. of L. bureaucracy countered it with expulsion of the militants and closer collaboration with the employers. Neither the Workers Unity League nor the Farmers Unity League had any “organic connection” with the party. There had been no language sections of the party since the re-organization in 1925, and the Finnish Society and Ukrainian Farmer Labor Temple were independent organizations. The minority active in these organizations naturally sought to influence and direct their policies by the same methods of persuasion open to others.
To the question if the purpose of the Communist Party was to bring about a change of government by force and violence the witness replied:
“We teach the inevitability of the collapse of capitalism. The present system was essentially a system of government which had grown out of private property relationships and so could not be expected to function for socialism. When the workers obtained political power they would create their own state.”
Tom Ewan, secretary of the Workers League, testified that this organization had a mombers.hip of 25,000 of which only 5 or 6% were Communists. He denied that the Communist Party advocated or taught the use of force or violence for industrial change. It was the capitalist class which resorted to violence in the class struggle. A clash in the distant future was inevitable. The Communist Party speaks against force and violence. The day to day struggle concerned wage reductions, unemployment, etc. There was no suggestion of a present overthrow of the system but an eventual overthrow is what the party was organized for.
There was no organic connection between the Comintern and the R.I.L.U. He suggested that there was little essential difference between the work and aims of the Workers Unity League and an ordinary trade union organization.
Tom Hill was examined on the relations obtaining between the party and the Finnish society.
 
Bruce’s Testimony
Malcolm Bruce denied knowledge of any workers self defense corps in Canada. Violence had come from the police.
“We don’t create or foment strife or discontent or discord,” declared comrade Bruce in the course of examination by defence counsel. “We merely recognize this discontent and discord and regard the consequent class conflict as ultimately inevitable. We do not seek to bring about an armed revolution in Canada. It is merely our hope that the workers’ opportunity to seize power will come when the revolution breaks out ... our ultimate aim is a farmer-labor government in Canada and a system of Soviets or councils but not necessarily by overthrow. We feel that the system will decay and collapse of its own accord ... The present system of government will not be in existence by the time the inevitable struggle arrives ... all we seek is the amelioration of the lot of the workers, under this or any other system ... The tendency of capitalism was to supercede democracy by Fascism ... armed revolution lies in the lap of history. We recognize an evolutionary process going with two currents in society leading towards a conflict. A revolutionary crisis would arise from gradual worsening of the conditions of the workers whether there was a Communist party or not ... The program of the Communist International was a question not of application but of interpretation. Some parts applied in Canada and were carried out and some did not.”
He agreed however that the Comintern program contained the underlying principles of the party operations so far as they could be applied. In reply to questions of the Crown, Bruce denied knowledge of any Workers Defense Corps in Canada or that he had voted or advocated them. He agreed that he believed in the proletarian dictatorship.
 
Buck’s Arguments
On the seventh day of the trial, Tim Buck, who conducted his own defence delivered his address to the jury. The fact, he declared, that the party had been in existence and operated publicly for ten years went to the root of the situation. The Judge however refused him the privilege of referring to the activities of the party in the working class movement “outside the evidence”. The Communist movement, he proceeded, was worldwide. The present general program was the historical continuance of the Communist Manifesto of 65 years ago, based on the principle that all history was the history of class struggle. The program of the Comintern was also an analysis of society and the present crisis.
“Revolutions don’t come because parties make them, but because history proceeds forward from one epoch to another. In each system is the germ of the next one.”
Capitalism must eventually fall under the weight of its own contradictions. The world war was an expression due to the fact that the producing powers of the capitalist world had come into insoluble contradiction with state boundaries. Imperialism has developed the prerequisites for socialism. Communism is the only alternative to fascism. The class struggle grows whether the Communist Party was in existence or not, for it came out of the struggle, not the reverse. But the Communist Party was increasing the resistance of the working class by organization in capitalist countries.
“We are placed on trial as having advocated something we haven’t advocated or taught.
“Force and violence was not something which grew up by being advocated.
“I don’t believe in violence nor does any Communist ... While there has been violence in historical changes, it has been the result of the fight by the privileged classes to retain their privileged position.”
Violence is coming and is bound to increase but “if the people are to learn force and violence it is not from us.” He concluded with an expression of the hope that the outcome of the trial would be an increased realization of the need for working class organization.
 
Prosecution and Judge in Joint Attack
The Crown Prosecutor addressed the Jury last. It was a savage recapitulation. He disclaimed that this trial was an attack on socialism or communism “if it could be advocated in a legitimate fashion” nor was it an attack on trade unionism which was “protected” by the institutions of the country. “Nowhere was there more freedom of speech than in Canada”. The men in the box constituted the general staff for civil war. He again quoted from the Statutes of the Second Congress and alleged that the role of the Communist Party had been clearly set forth there. The time to put out a fire was before the conflagration. “To convict is to declare that revolution shall not prevail in Canada, that Moscow shall not dictate to Canada ...” He wound up by invoking the “shadow of Remembrance Day” and the sacrifices in the war.
Aim to Attack All Communist Groups
After the Judge’s charge to the Jury, the verdict was a foregone conclusion. “The documents and testimony at this trial”, he said, “have drawn a distinction between two classes – the proletariat, covering all wage workers, and the bourgeoisie comprising all others with the petty bourgeoisie in between. In a democratic country like this, where the proletarian of today may be the bourgeois of tomorrow, is it just and proper to set one of these classes against the other ... The law is the collective wisdom of our representatives in Parliament and must be obeyed ...”
The verdict is already known to the readers of The Militant. The Attorney-General of Ontario, has graciously offered to make the mass of evidence available to any provincial attorney-general who may undertake prosecutions against other members of the Communist Party or against organizations with similar policies and principles. In a statement to the press, the Crown prosecutor, Mr. Somerville, thought it best to add his own pleasant note. Not only were the 4,000 members of the party liable to prosecution, but any who have dropped membership or been expelled. “Under this last class,” he believed, “would some such former leading members of the party as Jack MacDonald, one time party secretary, and Maurice Spector, former editor of the Worker.”
Since this statement, the party headquarters in Winnipeg have been raided and the District Organizer there, C. Marriot, has been placed under arrest.
 
Evaluation of the Defence
We have acknowledged the technical circumstances that embarassed the defence. We add that we do not impugn the personal courage of the accused. That indispensable attribute is not, however, exclusively Bolshevik. Our criterion of the merits of the defence must be political. To the Communist, the courtroom is another forum for the program of class struggle. To dilute it before the jury is no more permissible than on the floor of the House of Commons. “Ideas have their own logic and explosive force”. The principal defect of the defence was the lapse (at times amounting to a negation) from the Leninist conception of the vanguard role of the Communist Party in the struggle for the proletarian dictatorship. The defendants’ keynote was that “parties do not make a revolution ... we teach the inevitability of the collapse of capitalism, that is all ...” Though never guilty of the caricature of it sometimes drawn, it is for this very theory of “spontaneity” that Rosa Luxemburg has been subjected to countless post-mortems. In effect there was a retreat to Kautsky’s apologetic theory of “the level of the forces of production”.
To explain the material and objective pre-requisites of the revolution was entirely correct. What was wrong was to obscure and minimize the function of the revolutionary party. Our positions on this head have been incontrovertibly established by Marx and Lenin. Granted that no social order disappears which has not developed its maximum productive forces and that if there were the possibility of a fresh organic development of capitalism today, the proletarian revolution would be impossible. What has that in common with “economic determinism” or fatalism? It certainly does not mean that the old order collapses of its own weight when it becomes economically reactionary. Determined by the concrete situation, the will of the class and its crystallization in the party constitute an integral element of the historic process. The bourgeoisie will not abdicate: it must be conquered. Neither bourgeois decline nor proletarian dictatorship are automatic. The epoch of imperialism has created the worldwide conditions for the proletarian revolution. In this epoch it is assuredly not true that “parties don’t make revolutions”. Contemporary history alone affords a dozen examples in Germany, Bulgaria, China, Spain and elsewhere, of revolutionary crises which the ruling class “surmounted” in the absence of a competent revolutionary party.
Lenin’s classic opposition to this theory of the “elemental development” of the workers’ movement is well known.
“Without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary movement ... the workers do not automatically develop a socialist consciousness ... without a party of our own, it is impossible to wage such a struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat ... the revolutionary social-democrat is a Jacobin bound up with the organization of the class-conscious proletariat …”
He fought tooth and nail against the Menshevik proposals to liberalize the party by the admission of the pre-October counterparts of some “Friends of the Soviet Union”. The Communist Party of Canada is yet a propaganda organization. Nobody pretends that there is an immediate struggle for power. For the final struggle the Communist party must count its supporters in the millions, not thousands. All the more necessary is it to emphasize the role of the revolutionary party. The workers have paid dearly for their illusory hopes of the Labor Party and the Social Democracy. The Comintern has paid for its entente cordiale with the British trade union bureaucracy and the Chinese Kuo Min Tang and its reliance on “workers and peasants’ parties”.
 
Other Shortcomings of the Defense
Another marked shortcoming in the defense was the obscure stand on the fundamental problem of the revolution – the conquest of power, in other words the dictatorship of the proletariat. In their natural desire to prove that “force and violence” were not the product of mere advocacy or propaganda but of existing property relations, the defendants leaned over backwards and involuntarily drew a picture of an increasingly violent capitalism and a social-pacifist communism. It was stated and repeated that no communist “believes” in force or violence. Of course no Communist believes in “force and violence” for its own sake. But we Marxists do something more than deplore the violence of the possessing classes. We give no direct or indirect aid or comfort to the constitutional illusions fostered by the reformists of a democratic transition to socialism. Capitalism, in the words of Marx, comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt. The capitalist state has never yet been guided by faith, hope and charity and it will not meet the revolutionary challenge of the working class with the Sermon on the Mount. It will avail itself of the fraud of parliamentarism while it is still an effective opiate of the masses; it will resort to the unmasked terror of fascism when “democracy” fails it. Against this State, with its panoply of police, militarism, bureaucracy, judges and jailers, and its basis of finance-capital and monopoly, the Communists cannot advocate the policy of the struggle for power with folded arms. Lenin and Marx were in complete accord that the proletarian revolution could not be realized “without the forcible destruction of the ready-made bourgeois state machine and its replacement by a new machine”.
The standpoint of the Crown was the continuity of the legal system before, during and after a revolutionary crisis. But law is the handmaiden of social forces. The common law crime of Seditions conspiracy failed to overawe the American Revolution; the Constitution failed to deflect the American Civil war. Codes and injunctions have notoriously failed to solve the fundamental contradictions of social systems in decay. The proscription of the Communist Party is the vindication of its necessity. The repeal of section 98 of the Criminal Code should be immediately inscribed in letters of fire in the program of demands of every working class organization in the country.
 



Toronto, November 9, 1931
Central Executive Committee,
Communist Party of Canada
Dear Comrades:
In the issue of the Worker of November 7th under the heading The Spotlight on the Trial there appears the following reference to the undersigned: “... During the trial he (Maurice Spector) was in court but not in the prisoners dock ...” The implication is drawn tending to prejudice readers of our party organ, that I somehow voluntarily retired from the revolutionary party to escape the prisoners’ dock. This is no time for recrimination. I am prompted to address you, however, not as a matter of mere self-justification but in the interest of our common cause, an objective statement of the facts.
 
Involuntary Exemption from Persecution
May I therefore be permitted to recall that my momentary exemption from the list of the accused is not of my own choosing? Had the capitalist authorities precipitated their attack on the legality of the party on any occasion prior to the Sixth Congress, the personnel of the comrades in the prisoners’ dock would to some extent have been different, and as a member of the Central Committee, I should inevitably have shared the honor of indictment. I never withdrew from the Communist Party in whose organization and development I am proud to have participated. I was excluded, against my protests, by the Central Committee for reasons well known to you and to be found in the struggle over questions of principle and strategy ensuing in the Comintern after the death of Lenin.
Since my exclusion I have never ceased to be a member of a Communist committee and subject to its discipline. From the fundamental program of Bolshevism we have not, we believe, deviated a hair’s breadth. We were never more convince! than to-day that the working class can conquer political power and reconstruct society on socialist foundations only by means of the proletarian dictatorship in the form of Soviet Power, and under the leadership of the Communist Party. Never were we more convinced that the world is in the throes of the epoch of the collapse of capitalism and the development of the social revolution. To the October Revolution as the prologue of the World Revolution, to the Soviet Union as the first proletarian state in history, we have never ceased to give our unwavering allegiance. Nor to the Communist International which we have always regarded as the organization of the revolutionary vanguard of the working class.
 
Why Revolutionists Are Proscribed
The Communist Party of Canada is under indictment not for any advocacy of “force and violence” but for organizing the resistance of the working class to the burdens of the economic crisis, against unemployment and wage cuts. That is not to say that we make a secret of our program which flows from the scientific analysis of the motive forces of history. It is capitalism not Communism which engenders revolutionary crises. It is the unbearable contradiction between a mode of production ripe for socialization and the fetters of capitalist private property relations. But constitutional questions are primarily questions of power and the workers’ conquest of political power demands as prerequisites a sufficient degree of the demoralization of the ruling class in a given country and a sufficient degree of class consciousness in a majority of the working class. In this sense there is no immediate revolutionary crisis in Canada. But the attempt of the authorities to stem the tide of revolutionary organization by proscribing revolutionists will prove as futile as the anti-socialist legislation of Bismarck or the corresponding provisions of the Criminal Code of Czarist Russia.
What follows is a matter of course. In an Open letter to the Militant (August 29, 1931) immediately on the arrest of the comrades, inducted under section 98 of the Criminal Code, we publicly declared on behalf of the Canadian group of the Communist League of America (Opposition) our complete solidarity with the party in its struggle against the capitalist attack on its legal existence. In that connection we wrote that “there can be no question of the position every class-conscious worker must take up to wards this trial – absolute and militant struggle against the forces of reaction The workers must organize in a broad united front, whatever their political and industrial affiliations, to protest against the wave of terror which the capitalist authorities have unleashed against the militants of the working class.”
 
Reinstate the Left Opposition!
We are all aware that the Communists of the Left Opposition entertain significant internal differences with the official leadership of the Comintern touching principle and policy. We do not seek to minimize the importance of these differences for the correct Marxian development of the party. But the hour of common peril and crisis demands the utmost concentration of revolutionary forces. Confident that our differences can be resolved by the processes of party democracy and on the basis of the heritage of Marx and Lenin, we appeal for reinstatement in our full membership rights, prepared to submit to the requirements of party discipline.
In this spirit the members of our group have taken an active part in the work of defence of the arrested comrades, as delegates to the Workers Rights and Anti-Deportation Conference from various labor organizations. We shall remain at. the disposition of the party for any tasks it may assign.



 


With Communist Greetings,
(Signed) Maurice Spector



 



The first state trial of its kind in the experience of the Dominion has passed into history. On Friday November 13, eight leading members of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Canada were convicted at the Fall Assizes, under section 98 of the Criminal Code on three counts: of belonging to an unlawful association, of being officers of such an association, and of being parties to a seditious conspiracy. Seven were sentenced to five years imprisonment each on the first two counts and two more years on the third count, the sentences to run concurrently. These are Tim Buck, secretary of the party, T. Ewan, secretary of the Workers Unity League, Malcolm Bruce, editor of The Worker, John Boychuk, M. Popovitch, Sam Carr. Thomas Cacic was sentenced to two years. All those of foreign birth, though citizens, will be subject to an order for deportation under section 9 of the Naturalization Act which provides for the revocation of papers of anyone “who has shown himself by act or speech to be disaffected or disloyal to His Majesty”. An order has been further issued for the confiscation of all party property.
 
The Offensive Against the Workers
The prosecution has been the high-water mark of the political reaction in Canada since the economic crisis set in. The army of the unemployed has risen to unprecedented proportions. The organized workers are confronted with attacks on their standards of living. The wage cut offensive has been launched against railroad workers, mine workers, steel workers and others. To the demands of the workers for unemployment insurance or adequate relief the Bennet Government has turned a deaf ear. Against the Soviet Union, it declared a trade embargo. To crush the resistance of the masses, to terrorize them against manifestations of discontent, the possessing classes through their police power have practically abrogated the civil liberties and other democratic rights. This offensive has been waged with particular bitterness and ruthlessness against the Communist Party as the single political organization of the workers which dared to expose the bankruptcy of the capitalist class and to offer leadership against saddling the workers and poor farmers with the burdens of the crisis. Finally the Attorney-General of Ontario instigated a series of raids last August 11, which resulted in the arrest of the party leaders under section 98 of the Criminal Code.
 
Prosecution Mobilizes Its Heavy Artillery
The section in question was enacted in 1919 by the Conservative Government in office at the time, and determined to suppress the Winnipeg Strike, which was a product of the post war crisis. The section reads:
“Any association, organization, society or corporation whose professed or one of whose professed purposes is to bring about any governmental, industrial or economic change within Canada by use of force, violence, terrorism or physical injury to person or property, or by threats of such injury or which teaches, advocates, advises or defends, the use of force, violence, terrorism or physical injury to person or property, or threats of such injury, in order to accomplish such change, or for any other purpose, or which shall by any means prosecute or pursue such purpose or professed purpose, or shall so teach, advocate, advise or defend, shall be an unlawful association”.
In outlining his case, the special Crown prosecutor charged that the work of the Communist Party was “a deliberate, continuous, subtle conspiracy directed and controlled by Moscow to overturn by force, by violence, by bloodshed, all the existing institutions of church and state in Canada”. To this end he proposed to show that the Communist Party was formed in 1921 as an underground illegal organization known as the “Z” party, while it carried on its public activity under the name of the “A” or Workers’ Party. During this time, he alleged, the Canadian party had been a section of the Communist International and was subject to the control of the E.C.C.I.
 
The Crown Spy a “Sensation”
The Crown entered on an elaborate description of the internal structure of the party, from the nucleus at the bottom to the convention at the top, the division of labor on the Central Committee, the functions of the Political Burean, the role of the fractious. The Workers Unity League and the Farmers Unity League, stated the prosecution, were auxiliaries of the party. The Ukrainian, Finnish, and Hungarian language organizations, were similarly alleged to be controlled by party fractions. Following the technical ritual of identifying the accused as members of the Communist Party, the Crown sprang its “sensation”, which was no sensation to anyone familiar with the course of such trials. They produced Sergeant Leopold of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, their undercover man, who had functioned under the name of Eselwein as the government spy in the party from its inception in 1921 until his exposure and expulsion in 1928.
Leopold-Eselwein deposed that prior to joining the party he had been a member of the O.B.U. He had become secretary of the Regina branch of the party. The Z or underground organization had been formed under the mandate of the Pan-American Bureau of the Comintern which was staffed by Charles Scott, Louis Fraina and Sen Katayama. The Canadian party, he alleged, had received $3,000 to initiate the activity. The organizer of the party on a tour through the West, Jack MacDonald, has informed him that the purpose of the organization was the overthrow of the existing institutions by the advocacy of force and violence. The Z party had been liquidated following the reports of the International delegates to the Fourth Congress, Maurice Spector and Jack MacDonald.

(These brief factual data of the Canadian Communist trial marks a certain culmination of a series of increased reactionary onslaughts. An estimate and review by comrade Spector, of the issues involved and of the conduct of the party on trial will follow in our next issue – Ed.)
 



Communism in Canada is to be subjected to its first major political trial. Proceeding on the instructions of the Attorney-General of Ontario under section 98 of the Criminal Code, federal, provincial and city police officials combined forces August 12, to raid the party headquarters and effect the arrest of several leading members of the Central Committee. Among the comrades for whom warrants had been issued were Tim Buck, secretary of the Party, M. Bruce, editor of the Worker; T. Ewan, secretary of the Workers Unity League; John Boychunk, Tom Hill and Sam Carr. Bail has been set at $15,000 each. The September Assizes will determine whether the Communist party continues its semi-legal existence or is forced completely underground.
Originally enacted by order-in-council in 1919, the section in question was incorporated into the Criminal Code in 1927. It reads as follows: “Any association, organization, society or corporation whose professed purpose or one of whose professed purposes is to bring about any governmental, industrial, or economic change within Canada by use of force, violence or physical injury, or which teaches, advocates, advises or defends the use of force, violence, terrorism or threats of such injury, in order to accomplish such change, or for any other purpose, or which shall by any means prosecute or pursue such purpose or professed purpose, or shall so teach, advocate, advise or defend shall be an unlawful organization.” Anyone convicted of being a member of, or defending such an organization or having its literature in his possession may suffer a penalty of twenty years imprisonment.
 
Canada in the Crisis
Governmental resort to section 98 marks the culminating point in a policy of sharpened police repression. Involved in the common crisis of world capitalism, economic conditions in the Dominion have grown progressively worse. Exports have suffered a catastrophic decline, multitudes of Western farmers are literally destitute, industrial unemployment has reached unprecedented dimensions. At the Federal elections that carried him into office, the millionaire leader of the Conservative party promised to “take such measures as will provide for the giving of work to every man and woman in this country prepared to work”. But in the nature of things, the Bennett Government could as little solve the problems of capitalist anarchy as the preceding Liberal regime. Higher customs tariffs in a world of capitalist states all engaged in raising trade barriers, can only accentuate the general chaos. The Imperial Conference which Mr. Bennett sought to instruct resulted in mutual insults. The masterly stroke of a complete embargo on trade relations with the Soviet Union may possibly satisfy the Archbishop of Canterbury but scarcely contribute to industrial revival.
Meanwhile unemployed demonstrations throughout the country have shown the temper of the jobless victims of the system to be rising – they have not always been ready to disperse submissively at the first threatening gesture of the police. Relief has been pitifully inadequate. To proposals for a system of social insurance Bennett replies that never, never, will he undermine the sturdy independence and pioneering spirit of Canadians with the infamous “dole”. Fearing the radicalizing effect on the masses of starvation in its several degrees, the possessing classes view the approaching winter with uncertainty and uneasiness. Shortly before prorogation of Parliament, the Cabinet rushed through a bill in terms unparalleled since the War Measures Act conferring dictatorial powers “upon the governor-in-council [that is, itself] in respect to unemployment and farm relief; and for the maintenance of peace, order, and good government in all parts of Canada”.
In explanation of this measure Bennett declared that “we will take such action as in the judgment of the executive of this country ... will free this country of those who have proved unworthy of our Canadian citizenship”. He referred to the Immigration Act as already enabling the denaturalization of a naturalized citizen, and of course his subsequent deportation. His relief proposal amounted to a scheme of public works, road construction, etc., to which the registered unemployed will be drafted to work at such wage-rates as the government sees fit. It is a choice between a form of industrial conscription at the lowest possible standard of living or outright starvation. In plain words, the Government gave notice that every manifestation of class consciousness, every attempt to bring home the responsibility for the crisis on capitalism, every movement of industrial or political opposition in the working class to the measures of the government, will be met with censorship, suppression, imprisonment and deportation. And the Communists, as the militant leaven, are to be singled out especially.
 
Police Terror in Toronto
The Ontario provincial authorities have quickly taken their cue. Not that their action will be entirely a new departure. Ever since the advent of General Draper to the police administration in Toronto, so-called civil liberties have been conspicuous by their absence. Draper proceeded to give the most convincing ocular demonstration of Lenin’s thesis that bourgeois democracy is a sham and a lie. Open-air meetings were dispersed on every occasion by police clubs, speakers were cruelly man-handled and beaten. Hall owners were prevented from renting out their assembly halls by the fear of losing their license. A few pacifists and professors uttered a feeble protest for free speech in the name of “British justice”. The “labor leaders” and social-democrats either maintained a cowardly silence or warned the police that their methods would only create more Bolshevism. But the capitalist press with few exceptions virulently urged a holy war of “Christendom” against “Soviet dumping”. The pillars of Business and Finance, including the Chief Justice of the Province, gave Draper’s faith and works their heartiest approval. Liberalism could only emit its odor of decay.
The latest stage of the persecution of the party is by far the most serious, since it attempts to place the Communist program itself under indictment. Upon the comrades selected by circumstance to represent our doctrine rests therefore a great responsibility, – to utilize the occasion despite the technical difficulties of court procedure, as a forum from which to appeal to the working class. It is capitalism that must be placed under indictment. The Communists must show that they have no interests separate and apart from the rest of the workers. If they are on trial at this moment, it is for no “advocacy of force or violence” but because they are leaders in the immediate struggles of the workers against unemployment, against wage-cuts, against capitalist militarism, for the defence of the Soviet Union, for freedom of speech and assembly, etc., and because in the course of these struggles the Communists must expose the mechanism of capitalist exploitation and the class-character of the State.
The Communists make no secret of their aims. Our program is dictated by an objective consideration of the motive forces of history and capitalist society. We are well aware that the government regards the use of “force and violence”, whether for the prosecution of war or the suppression of strikes, as its exclusive monopoly. The “democratic” state is the executive of the capitalist class and an organ of exploitation and coercion of the proletariat. If bourgeois democracy is based on consent, it is the “consent” of the victim who has been stunned or drugged. But constitutional problems are in the first place questions of power and legal institutions change with the social structure. The Communists do not “create” revolutionary situations; they only organize the workers to reap the advantage. Revolutionary explosions must occur when the contradiction between the character of the property relations and the mode of production of a given society becomes unbearable. In this sense it is true that on a world scale capitalist economy is ripe for social revolution. But the workers conquest of political power is not a simultaneous act. It is fought out in national forms. Not only is a thorough-going social and political crisis and the sufficient degree of demoralization of the ruling class necessary but a majority of the workers at least must have accepted Communist leadership.
 
A Trial Out of the Past
The Attorney-General must know as well as we do that the party in Canada cannot yet boast such a following and that there is no immediate revolutionary crisis. If there were such, he must further know that the methods of a jury trial would by mutual consent be altogether inadequate. He has apparently not learned, however, that he cannot for a long time hope to stem the tide of revolutionary agitation, propaganda and organization by proscribing the revolutionists. Bismark’s anti-socialist legislation failed ultimately to prevent the expansion of the social democracy and in our day, the Communist movement. Attorney General Price may not have heard of the trial, following the revolution of 1905 of 52 delegates to the Workers Council of St. Petersburg. They were arrested and tried under section 101 and 102 of the Czarist Criminal Code as having “attended and participated ... in an association which knowingly set itself the purpose of violently overthrowing the legally established form of government of Russia and replacing it with a democratic republic”. The proportions are different but the example is instructive. The 52 were condemned to long terms of imprisonment and Siberian exile. With what results?
There can be no question of the position that every class-conscious worker must take up towards this trial – absolute, militant, intransigent struggle against the forces of reaction. The workers must organize in a broad united front, whatever their political, or industrial affiliations, to protest against the wave of terror which the capitalist authorities have let loose against the militants of their class. Every ounce of energy must be thrown into the defense of the comrades and the right of the party to continue above ground. We Communists of the Left Opposition have serious internal differences with the Centrist leadership of the party touching policy and principle. We do not minimize the importance of these differences for a correct revolutionary Marxian development of the party, but that cannot deter us from rallying to the party in every crisis and emergency and for a united struggle against the reaction. We ask today as before to be re-instated in our membership rights and we are prepared to submit our differences to be resolved by the processes of party democracy.
Toronto, August 1931
 



The National Unemployment Convention is to meet July 4th and 5th in Chicago. If it is animated by a sense of responsible and militant leadership and effective policies of class struggle – if it is not satisfied with noise but embarks on serious organisation and action, this convention can become a protest centre for the mobilization of the millions of unemployed.
The danger is that under the present Party leadership with its erratic hand-to-mouth political practises the convention will develop into nothing more than just another formless mass meeting. It is common knowledge that not a stroke of real organization work has been done to crystallize the unemployed movement since the March 6th demonstrations.
No Signs of Ease-Up in Crisis There are no signs of any alleviation in the economic crisis taking its toll of misery in every city, town and hamlet in the country. The bank discount rate has been sunk to two and a half per cent, the lowest since the war but the successive stock market crashes are assuming the character of a panic. Wheat is selling at a dollar. Automobile production has again registered a decline. Steel production is at 65 per cent capacity. The Commodity price level dropped 4.2 per cent in two weeks. The New York Census figures point to 400,000 unemployed in New York alone. The Annalist Index of Employment is the lowest since 1922.
The Industrial Reserve Army The cyclical crisis has come to add its misery but it must be remembered that it only augments an already standing industrial reserve army – the victims of the technical advance of civilization under the rule of the anarchic capitalist mode of production. Every new machine, every business consolidation, every stop-watch economy for the speed-up, has resulted in fewer jobs. Between 1920 and 1927, the economist Mitchell estimates the number added to the ranks of the unemployment reserve army at no less than 650,000. This is the balance sheet of American “prosperity”. The power that is the greatest creditor state in the world, of the most millionaires of the most abundant resources, the finest machinery, the most productive labor force is the tragic scene of soup-kitchens, flop-houses, corporation charity, park benches and starvation for the working class. In an age when science begins to probe secrets of atomic energy, vast masses of producers must form up in bread-lines. The General Crisis of Capitalism What is the answer of the capitalist government to the unemployed The Hoover brand of mental healing. A Hawley-Smoot Tariff to increase the cost of the necessities of life and assure the Trusts the monopoly of the market. Even the miserable Wagner Bill for the establishment of official instead of private employment bureaux is thrown out of court. At the Senate Investigation into Communist “plotting”, even Wm. Green pleads with his capitalist masters that he will not guarantee to be able to keep the A.F. of L. rank and file in submission unless some small reforms are forthcoming.
The workers must be clear that even were the exploiters willing to grant them without struggle no mere palliatives or reforms could lead out of the blind alley of the antagonisms and contradictions of capitalists imperialism. Partial demands can only serve the working class if they are the starting point for revolutionary class struggle. The only decisive solution of the general crisis of capitalist in the interests of the millions of toilers lies in the international emulation of the Russian workers. Only the revolutionary workers’ state can release the forces of production from the exploiting vise of capital, put an end to industrial enslavement, eliminate the root causes of war and unify world economy.
 
The Socialist Fire Year Flan
The Five Year Plan in the Soviet Union demonstrates the tremendous possibilities of planned economy. Despite capitalist economic encirclement, and the threat of intervention, the achievements of the U.S.S.R. stand out in splendid contrast to the intolerable situation in the capitalist world. The undeniable difficulties in the U.S.S.R. and the Five Year Plan are those of isolation, the retardation of the international revolution. The Five Year Plan provides for a total capital investment of 93 billions for electrification and industrial development. It is in the most vital interests of the international unemployed and especially of the American, to demand large scale credits for the Soviet Union. There are always millions of dollars available for war expenditures. There are millions for the Young Plan loans. Demand credits be given that would at once result in the employment of American workers, and their participation in the realization of the socialist Five Year Plan.
 
Organize for Action!
The Chicago Unemployment Convention must appeal to the unemployed army with demands that will strike immediate and effective response in the hearts of the workers mobilizing them for the class struggle against the capitalist state.

Demand recognition and credits to the Soviets Union.
Demand the enactment of social insurance unemployment insurance and old age pensions to compel the capitalists to bear the charges for the break-down of the system. Demand the six hour day and five day week.
Demand the freedom of class war prisoners, the release of Mooney and Billings, of the leaders of the New York unemployed demonstrations, the prisoners in Georgia, class war victims under sentence in Gastonia.
Organize a united front of the unemployed and employed.

The power of the imperial plutocracy of America is great. But there is a power greater than theirs and that is the power of proletarian numbers. Mobilize and Organize!
 



Social Insurance
The problem of social insurance in a program of Unemployed Demands is treated by the present Party leaders as an illegitimate child. This despite the spasmodic proddings of the Comintern and the R.I.L.U. upon the Party on different occasions to evince a little greater activity and sincerity in this field.
The demands for Unemployment Insurance, Old Age Pensions, Sickness Insurance and the like are treated by the Browder-Bedacht pontiffs as evidence of secret “social-fascist” cravings. They apparently envisage the demand for social insurance as purely parliamentary manoeuvering and not a by-product of the class struggle like all other reforms and concessions “granted” to the workers by capitalist legislatures. Social insurance does not fit in with the rantings of the “third period.”
 
Social Insurance as a By-Product of Struggle
But for the revolutionary party to surrender the representation of these demands of the socialist party, the Muste group or the other petty-bourgeois reformers would be a great blunder. If the Party does that it does not seriously have regard to the possibilities of a revolutionary utilization of parliamentary action. In fact the Communist Party is being misled by the adventurist leadership at its head into the frame of mind and tactics of the bourgeois “boycottists” in the history of the Russian social democracy. It will become so “pure” that it will end in sterility.
The presence of social insurance in Great Britain and Germany on the statute books for many decades has not prevented the development of the class struggle, and can not so long as the basic contradictions of capitalism dominate the social structure. The British workers have continued to organize great strikes and to move steadily to the Left. Bismarck’s legislation to “steal the thunder” of the socialists has not prevented the rise of a Communist mass party and the development of revolutionary crises that under revolutionary leadership could have resulted in a German Soviet Power.
 
Capitalist Responsibility for Unemployment
Will anyone revolutionary seriously argue that the Salvation Army, private soup kitchens, the network of social-service and charitable institutions maintained by the business interests are preferable to State insurance in the sense that they make the workers more class conscious or “pauperize” them less? The bourgeoisie in Great Britain is constantly seeking ways and means for cutting down the “dole”. W.I. King, the well known American statistician, attacks the dole on the ground that it is the real reason preventing an industrial revival. He wants a free market in the commodity of labor power, governed by “supply and demand”. He blames the trade unions and the “dole” for preventing the “deflation” of waves. And he warns the American capitalists that they are running the same risks if they permit the enactment of unemployment insurance in the United States.
W.I. King and his associate bourgeois economists make a deep mystery of the recurrence of the “business-cycle”. They find every explanation of it under the sun, but the real one of the anarchic character of capitalist production for profit. The capitalist system is responsible for the “business-cycles” and for the standing and recurrent mass unemployment. The Capitalist state must be compelled by the organization and struggle of the masses to shoulder the charges of unemployment.
 
Credits for the Soviet Union
Not the least of the derelictions of the Stalinist leadership of the Communist Party has been its failure to rally the unemployed around the demand for credits for the Soviet Union. Unremittingly and windily the Daily Worker “sloganizes” for the “Defence of the Soviet Union”, but when the whole international economic crisis favors the crystallisation of one of the widest mass movements yet for the real and substantial Defence of the Soviet Union, the Stalinist regime and its American agents, Browder-Bedacht-Foster do nothing but hamper the Party from measuring up to its great opportunity. The reason for this attitude of the Party leaders flows not from any malice but inevitably from their false theory of “national socialism” – Stalin’s Russian “exceptionalism”.
 
Economics and Military Defence
The Defence of the Soviet Union is not as the Daily Worker would like to impress its readers, a purely military question, a matter of preventing imperialist intervention. In this age military strength itself depends on industrial power. In the case of the Soviet Union it depends not only on industrial power but on the consolidation of the proletarian dictatorship and socialism. But socialism cannot be built up in the Soviet Union entirely out of its own inner resources and separated from the world market by a Chinese wall. The difficulties that the great Five Year Plan and collectivization are experiencing today in the U.S.S.R. demonstrates this exactly.
To hold anything else is a flagrant rupture with Marxist analysis and proletarian internationalism.
 
International Solidarity
The demand for credits for the Soviet Union at once reveals the inner link between the interests of the American working class and the workers of the Soviet Union. Millions are idle in the United States. But the socialist plans of the Soviet Union cry out for machinery and other industrial equipment. Employment here and collaboration with the Five Year Plan in the U.S.S.R. would be the consequences of large scale credits. Thousands of American workers would receive practical lessons in the implications of internationalism in the fundamental struggle between capitalism and socialism and the meaning of Communism. Thousands could be mobilized for the U.S.S.R. and against the capitalist government of the United States.
The slogan of credits to the Soviet Union is one that the labor bureaucracy and the international social democratic leaders will resist. They would sense in it the possibilities of a united front that would draw the rank and file away from them and towards the leadership of the Soviet Union and the Communists. They are right. “Credits for the Soviet Union”, is one of the most forceful focal points for a united front movement.
 



Reports from subsidized sources minimize it but British imperialism is nevertheless unable to suppress the fact that the Indian ferment is still gaining in breadth and in depth. The insurgents have begun to pass over from breaking the government salt monopoly to the refusal to pay taxes. Simultaneously the civil disobedience campaign – which the petty bourgeoisie, in fear of real mass action strives to hold within the limits of pacifist non-resistance – is overflowing the barriers erected for it by the Nationalist Congress.
After generations of oppression and exploitation, the Indian masses moving in tidal waves of revolt are presenting the world with one of the grandiose spectacles of history. The uprising of the colonial Orient, precipitating the solution of the agrarian and national problems of the democratic revolution in conjunction with the international and socialist revolutionary whose class bearer is the proletariat – this is one of the outstanding features of the final stage of capitalism.
 
MacDonald – Bourgeois Agent
It is no less characteristic that the torch-carriers of the imperialist suppression of the Indian revolt, should be the “socialist” Labor government of the canting MacDonald.
How can any worker still cling to his last remnant of faith in the social democracy? The Indian situation fully confirms the justice of Lenin’s contention that the “socialists” are agents of the bourgeoisie. MacDonald is prepared to repeat a hundred Amritzar massacres to maintain the Empire. No revolutionary Marxist expected anything else from the Labor government but the continuation of the long chain of crimes and betrayals committed by the Second International since 1914. Socialist reformism inevitably becomes socialist imperialism.
But it would be a profound mistake and delusion to conceive of the present crisis in India as the decisive struggle for freedom from British imperialism. The movement of the masses still has no other leadership than the bourgeoisie and all historical experience bears out that the bourgeoisie will betray the struggle at the first opportune agreement that they reach with the foreign Imperialists and at the first sign that the masses are turning not only against the foreign but no less against the native exploiter. The bourgeoisie in the epoch of imperialism is incapable of carrying on a consistent struggle for the democratic revolution, and has no intention of peacefully allowing the proletariat to assume the leadership. Here the lessons of the Chinese Revolution are an invaluable source of instruction and guidance for the proletarian vanguard in India.
 
India and the Proletariat
The Indian Revolution will triumph under the leadership of the Indian proletariat or not at all. It will triumph as the dictatorship of the proletariat or not at all.
This means that there are certain indispensable pre-requisites for the revolution. That the Communist International, the world organization of the revolutionary working class, should have to enact the role practically of a passive onlooker in the present crisis, is one of the most damning indictments of the Stalin regime. That there is no Communist Party in India today worth its salt is the direct outcome of the tragic collaboration of the Stalin-Bucharin faction with the bourgeois Kuomintang in China and the connected theory of Workers and Peasants Parties as substitutes for the Communist Party in the colonial countries.
But instead of soberly recognizing their mistakes, the Stalin faction desperately clings to office by the sowing of illusions inside the official Communist parties. On May 30th, the Daily Worker dedicated almost its entire issue to heralding the convocation of the “First Soviet Congress of China”. There are no words strong enough to condemn the criminal and fantastic light-mindedness with which the Daily Worker misrepresents the actual situation in China. An eighth of the whole territory of the country, it is claimed, is under the sway of Soviet authority. Yet the fact is that there is not a single Communist daily in the country. Thanks to the consequences of the Stalin-Chiang Kai-Shek alliance in the Kuomintang the Communist Party first subordinated to bourgeois discipline for years, was then decimated by the executions of Hankow and Shanghai. The Red Trade Union movement was devastated by the White Terror. The Canton insurrection was drowned in blood.
Nevertheless, with that the adventurism which is the reverse side of Stalinist opportunism, the Sixth Congress refused to work out a series of transitional demands about which to rally the masses anew. As a substitute for the Communist Party and the requirements of mass action, recourse was now had to armed bands who roamed the country waging sporadic guerilla warfare. This expedient for throwing dust in the eyes of the workers was officially termed “a higher stage of development”. The Stalinist slogan for the period of the ebb of the revolutionary tide suddenly became Soviets. But the whole opportunism that is contained in the abuse of this slogan at this time is manifested by the general demands of the so-called First Soviet Congress. Provision is made for the expropriation of foreign capital. But not a word is said of the expropriation and nationalization of the means of production in the hands of the Chinese capitalists. Stalin’s slogan is still “democratic dictatorship” for China and the whole East. Such trifling with the Soviet idea was absolutely unheard of under the regime of Lenin.
The Centrists swing about erratically. They fear the criticism of the Left Opposition and make radical gestures calculated to disassociate them from the blunders of their bloc with the Comintern Right. But their oscillations and the confusion they sow only rebounds to the advantage of the Brandler groups. The latter consistently continue the “democratic dictatorship” and Kuomintang policy unabashed. In a manifesto on the Indian situation signed jointly by Brandler, Roy, Lovestone and others of the Right wing, they openly call upon the Indian bourgeoisie to organize themselves into a “national revolutionary Party” in other words an Indian Kuomintang – into which they can maneuvre the Communist Party – when formed.
The Left Opposition demands a return to the Marxist-Leninist theses on the colonial revolution.
 



Amid the gathering uproar of protest) at home and threats of reprisals from abroad, the Hawley-Smoot Tariff Bill has received legislative enactment and presidential sanction. It cannot be passed over as of no concern to the workers. Its implications for the development of the class struggle in the United States and the struggle of the imperialists for the world market are far too significant.
The Hawley-Smoot Tariff increases the direct taxes on imports to $636,000,600 a year or about 20 per cent above the present rate. This is a direct gift by the imperialist government of the United States to the monopolies. The masses will bear the burden of these direct taxes on food clothing, housing and other necessities of life.
 
Class Legislation
The tariff which is held up as a national policy was always one of the most obvious and flagrant instances of “class legislation”. The manufacturers appealed for the support of the workers on the ground that protectionism would fill their dinner pails and the relatively higher wages were pointed to in substantiation But the wage levels of the workers in this country were due not to the tariff protection but to a combination of circumstances, the great natural resources, the higher productivity of labor and its greater intensity due to superior technical equipment, the inflow of capital, etc. The powerful protection for the United States Steel Corporation has never benefited its industrial slaves. The very people who fiercely resisted trade unionism and proposals for social insurance on the ground that these were class legislation and an interference with “economic laws” of supply and demand, were the interests who continually used their political power to interfere with economic laws of the international division of labor and to secure ever-mounting subsidies from the government treasury. And this was as it should be. The “democratic” state is the political representation of the interests of private property and not of the working class. The fact alone that the British workers enjoyed a relatively higher standard of living than the rest of the European continent during the Victorian period of indilute free trade is enough to prove that the tariff was not responsible for the higher living standards in the United States.
 
The Economic Crisis
The Hawley-Smoot Tariff is the projuct of a deepening economic crisis, which coincided with the advent of the “engineering genius” and “Business Administration’’ of Herbert Hoover. Its sponsors advance the stock argument that it will assure the return of prosperity and keep discreetly silent on the reasons for the loss of prosperity in the first place. That this argument is fraudulent demagogy should be patent to every worker.
Prosperity had come to be regarded as a special divine dispensation to the United States, an eternal institution. Publicists and professors wrote treatises to prove the “bankruptcy of Marxism” in the light of American experience of the wide diffusion of wealth making bloated stock owners of the workers. Pilgrims from the European social democracy journeyed over to marvel at the wonders of Fordism and the “economy of high wages”.
The bubble burst. The stock market began its dizzy dance of calamity. The army of unemployed swelled to five millions. Grain prices fell. Cotton slumped. Commodity prices declined. Output decreased. Exports fell off. American capitalism revealed all the frailities of anarchic production for profit. To propose higher tariffs as the solution for this crisis is sheer demagogy.
The essence of the economic crisis is the cleavage between the power of production and the capacity for consumption (“effective demand”) on the basis, of course, of the relations of distribution that obtain in capitalist society. The masses cannot buy back the amount that is produced. The anarchy of capitalist production for profit manifests itself in the recurrent disproportionality between the various branches of production and the “ineffective demand”
the poverty and inability of the masses in society to buy back – is one of the most important elements in this crisis of disproportion. Goods accumulate in the factories but they cannot find the monetary form for their release. The industrial crisis of over production results. Its storm signals have been manifest in the economic situation of the United States for a considerable period, But it was restrained from full expression by the great credit structure built up on easy rates of interest and the brokers loans, the bull market, that kept the manufacturing and construction industries and the installment plan going.
 
The Workers’ Position
But more concretely, “technological unemployment” – the industrial reserve army – was increasing. The workers paid for the higher organic composition of capital – technical progress – with the penalty of rationalizatton and displacement by the machine. In 1929 production was 42 per cent greater than in 1919 but the number of workers actually decreased in that interval by 585,000. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated the minimum health and decency budget of a working class family of five to be an annual income of $2,262. The average yearly earnings of a worker’s family of this kind was $1,280. Five millions of such families lived below this minimum standard, millions barely reached it. The masses were heavily exploited. Prosperity was only for the labor aristocracy.
This is the situation which the capitalist class of the United States faces today. The aim of capitalist production is the realization of profit. Capital accumulates but the rate of profit at home declines. The domestic market alone becomes too narrow a base for the productive powers of American capitalism. Plant facilities are already in huge excess of domestic requirements. Finished manufactured goods amount to one half of the entire foreign sales. Between 1919 and 1928 American exports totalled 53 billion furnishing a surplus over imports of 14 billion dollars.
American capitalism must gird for a grand offensive on the workers and the world market. This is the significance of the tariff.
The number of mergers and consolidations increased until the United States was dominated by gigantic industrial corporations. The policy of these gigantic consolidations is to maintain a complete monopoly of the home market and to bid for the world dominion in the foreign market.
The crisis will accelerate the ruin of the small businessman and small manufacturer. The wages of the American workers will be deflated. The cost of living will increase.
 
Attack on the World Market
The European competitors of American capitalism profess to be deeply shocked by the cynicism of this tariff, a declaration of economic warfare if ever there was one, coming on the very heels of the London Naval Disarmament Conference. Undoubtedly the economic policy implicit in the tariff is the reality behind the illusions intended to be fostered by the Disarmament Conference. The war that resulted from the economic rivalries of Great Britain and Germany will be a mere sketch compared to the forces of death and destruction that will be released in consequence of the decision of American imperialism to put Europe on a decreasing ration and to throttle her. Protected by the monopolist tariff in the home market, United States mass production will resort to the policy of large-scale dumping campaigns in South America, Asia, and elsewhere.
That the other capitalist powers will counter-attack is plain. Up to the present American imperialism has been able to divide them by demanding the favored nation clause for itself. It has wielded its tremendous financial power to force concessions. Europe barred from access to the great American market will not passively accept its fate without a struggle. The German industrialists have announced a new drive on the world market to release the heavy stocks accumulating in the Ruhr and the drive will open with a ten per cent wage cut for hundreds of thousands of German workers. To meet this challenge the British and American capitalists must in turn bring the pressure of. International competition to bear on the workers in the form of wide-spread wage reductions. The general crisis of capitalism will be intensified.
The plans of American imperialism are titanic in their consequences and must finally crash on the rock of their inner contradictions.
 
Financial Yoke
While seeking to throttle Europe industrially in the world market, American imperialism simultaneously tightens the financial noose. The foreign loans of the United States now total some $26,000,000,000. Capitalist Europe is one of her heaviest debtors. How will Europe liquidate her debts while her markets are conquered by American imperialism? How will she be able to expand while being drained both ways? American imperialism lands in the net of this quandary. Capitalist Europe must either sell goods or default. It is warfare in either case. The record of the United States for armed intervention to collect debts is a very active one.
The pressure on the workers of Europe must become unbearable and create new revolutionary crises. The American section of the German annuities plan, $98,250,000 was recently floated quickly by eleven of the most powerful financial houses in the country headed by J.P. Morgan and Company. These bonds are an integral part of the Young Plan and an unconditional obligation of the German Government. The American experts congratulate themselves on having thus taken the reparations question “out of politics”. But they reckon, without their host – the German proletariat. Do the American capitalists believe that the German masses will recognise as their obligation the payment of the two billion marks annually for 53 years? As little as the October revolution recognized the French loans to the Czar for the suppression of the 1905 revolution!
The tariff is another step on the road that American Imperialism has mapped out for itself to unqualified world power. First, through neutrality and then intervention in the World War, through abstention from the chaos of the Versailles Conference, through the “stabilizing” intervention of the Dawes Plan in 1924 and more recently, the Young Plan.
 
Towards Proletarian Revolution
La Liberté, a Parisian bourgeois paper asks: “Is the capitalistic world doomed to die through excess of production – simply because those who direct it are incapable of organizing it right?”’ The Communists’ answer is directly in the affirmative.
The basic tendencies of world economy are for international unification. The economic crisis, the imperialist wars, the revolutionary struggles are fundamentally expressions of the fact that the productive forces cannot be contained within the frontiers of the national state nor the fetters of private property. Basically European economy cries out for the abolition of tariff barriers, the whole world for the international division of labor, and the free movement of goods. But the resolutions of the World Economic Conference, the Bankers Manifesto of a few years ago, the International Chamber of Commerce, the various proposals for a customs union can have but little effect. So far from the capitalists being prepared to unify world economy, and utilize its technical resources for international cooperation, the Hawley-Smoot tariff demonstrates yet again, that imperialist monopolies based on the exploitation of labor and motivated by the realization of capital, can only increase the antagonisms, the misery of the workers, and bring greater military conflicts.
Only the revolutionary action of the proletariat for the socialization of production can cut the Gordian knot and free the forces of production for a unified world economy and socialist freedom of trade.
The European bourgeoisie is helpless to stem the tide of the American imperialist advance; it can only prepare for war. Despite the talk of reprisals the American tariff will only provisionally here and there bring common action among the European states. In the end the struggle for markets will intensify their mutual hostilities. The action of American imperialism will accelerate the development of the proletarian revolution.
 



We are in receipt of a letter from H. Engelman, a socialist worker in which he takes issue with our bitterness of attack on socialists in general and Norman Thomas, American S.P. leader in particular. The glittering theory of “social fascism” conjured up by the present Comintern regime lumps together the social-democratic officialdom and rank and file in the same fascist pot. It is a theory we decidedly repudiate. We are in a period not of direct revolutionary crisis when arguments must mount the barricades but of preparing the forces of a revolutionary class movement. Accordingly we do not believe that the best way of convincing our correspondent is by cracking his skull open, say with a blackjack. We recall a speech of Zinoviev’s when still an authority in which he sharply condemned the tactics of raising a physical barrier between Communist and social democratic workers. That speech published in the theoretical organ of the International retains all its validity.
“I am a socialist,” the letter runs, “because I do not believe in acquiring anything through violence and bloodshed. I am a true follower of Debs. Of course our Party is infected by opportunists and traitors. Every party has them. Even the Communist Party ...”
And further on he adds,
“while I agree with your denunciations, I fail to comprehend your conclusions. You predict that if Norman Thomas was in MacDonald’s position he would do the same in regards to our colonial policy. You know this is a very dangerous argument, because the same thing can be said of you or anyone else. What is there to assure us that if Trotsky replaces Stalin the former will adhere to Leninist principles ... Suppose I grant the indictment of European socialists. Are they the only workers’ movement that is misleading the workers? According to yourself, Stalin is doing the same. Does that mean the Communists are unworthy of workers’ support? No, you will have betrayals in any movement, no matter what color it is ...You cannot indict a whole movement ...
 
Indictment of Social Democracy
But of course you can indict a whole movement in the sense that we indict the “social democracy”, and the author of the letter would have no difficultly in understanding us if his philosophical point of departure were historical materialism instead of a vague idealism and his argumentation grounded in the realities of the class struggle instead of the sterlity of social pacifism. There are well-intentioned, honest, “sincere’’ and “cultured” people on all sides. But the essence of the matter is the class struggle which rages throughout the capitalist world between those who live by the extraction of rent, interest and profit, determined to maintain their privileges and perquisites either by “democratic” or fascist means and the class subjected to exploitation. Leaders, parties and movements in the social struggle, their program, and their deeds are motivated by class interests.
When we indict the Social Democracy we indict the petty-bourgeois bureaucracy which is in control of the masses, and history has made it possible to predict the course of that bureaucracy with tolerable accuracy. The program of the social democracy is a program of class collaboration, of constitutionalism, of parliamentarism, of legislative reformism in accordance with the interests of the petty-bourgeoisie. It follows inevitably that the socialist leaders will oppose the developing mass action of the workers at every turn in the struggle against Capital, from choking off strikes in the interests of “conciliatory methods” to forcefully resisting the proletarian revolution. In logical accordance with their class interests the socialists practise coalition government with the bourgeoisie and reject the idea of the proletarian dictatorship. It follows inevitably that social reformism and opportunism (class collaboration on the basis of “democracy” in time of peace) will be translated into social imperialism and patriotism (“National Defense”) in time of war.
 
A Record of Betrayals
The records of the past few decades bear this out in full. You cannot serve both the bourgeoisie and the proletariat without committing social treachery. The historic function of the social democracy, ever since its break with Marxism, has been that of an agency of the bourgeoisie inside the working class movement, and the conscious recognition of this fact by the individual social democratic leaders is not necessary to make it true. The march of events speaks for itself. For years before the world war, the Left inside the Second International warned against the ominous consequences of socialist opportunism, of ministerialism, of parliamentary cretinism. The collapse of the International on the declaration of war like a pack of cards was a complete vindication of the Left struggle against both the Right wing and the centrists.
Can it be gainsaid that the German Social Democracy ruined the prospects of the Revolution of 1918 for the working class? With every nerve they consciously worked for the restoration of German capitalism. They deluded the workers with paper plans of socialization. They called in the white guard generals to help crush the revolutionary Spartacist movement with fire and sword. They liquidated the Soviet movement in favor of the bourgeois Assembly in Weimar. They came to the rescue of the capitalists in every subsequent crisis, and notably in 1923. They delivered the German workers over to the tender mercies of the Dawes and Young Plans. And has the course of the “Labor Government” in Great Britain differed in any essential respect? What plans and election promises of socialism have they carried out even on an “installment” plan? They have not had the power? Then what are they doing in office. They are serving the class that has the power – the capitalist class.
We have adduced the classic experience of the German and the British social democrats. We could with equal truth, space permitting, have dealt with the like “socialist” evidence from Sweden, Belgium, Denmark, France or any other party in the Second International. Consider the Russian Mensheviks who strove obstinately to divert the Russian revolution into the channels of a conventional bourgeois republic for expansion of private capital: and now continually hope for a crisis which will compel the Soviet Union to retrace its path to a “democratic revolution” (denationalization of the factories, a stop to collectivization of the country-side, cessation of support of revolutionary movement abroad, entrance into League of Nations, etc.).
 
The Role of the Maxtons
The writer of the letter refers to the Independent Labor Party (Maxton group) as the “real” socialist party. Once more he argues from the present pseudo-oppositionist of the Maxton group as if we had no political experience of the role of the “Independent” socialists in the working class movement. But we have, and it is more than melancholy experience. These “Left Oppositions” in the social democracy are always the reflection of rank and file unrest, dissatisfaction and radicalization. The function of the Maxtons is to canalize this movement, avowedly to prevent it from flowing into the currents of Communism. Their “independence” is a sham. In the course of the developing class struggle in Germany, the Independent Socialists split, the Right going to the majority socialists, the Left to the Communists. The Austrian social democracy presents one of the most shameful spectacles of verbal radicalism as a cover for a petty bourgeois policy of surrender to the pressure of big bourgeois reaction. A municipal program of bigger and better apartment houses and swimming pools cannot conceal the fact that in every crisis Otto Bauer and his associates have held the proletariat back from revolutionary action to the point where the forces of the bourgeoisie, of clericalism and fascism have never been so powerful since the war.
 
The Way of Thomas
In the light of all this we see no reason for inventing some unique exception to the internationally tested principles and experiences of the class struggle so as to exempt Norman Thomas.
Just now it costs him nothing gently to remind the British labor imperialists of the necessity of a modicum of internationalism in their relations with India. It would not be difficult to find an equivalent sentiment among certain sections of the petty bourgeoisie outside the socialist leadership. After all this is England’s funeral. It was not hard in the past, nor in the war to whip up petty bourgeois enthusiasm for the right of self-determination of the other fellow’s subject nationalities and more than once the world rocked with accusations of Belgium’s mismanagement of the Congo, of Germany’s brutalities in her African colonies, of Austrian repressions in Bosnia. During the Brest Litovsk negotiations even the German militarists suddenly manifested an ardent desire for the self-determination – of the Ukraine ... But this Norman Thomas is the man who shortly after the New York civic elections proposed to change the name of his party from “socialist” in order to make it more palatable to, and indistinguishable from, the liberals, and was only prevented by the opposition of the more cautious Hillquit.
 
The Line of Bolshevism
We are quite ready to have the record of Bolshevism stand comparison. The achievements of the socialist dictatorship speak for themselves. Under the Communists the Russian workers conquered poltical power and have held it. They are building the foundations of a socialist society. If they have encountered formidable difficulties the principal reason is not far to seek. The isolation of the Soviet Union, the retardation of the international revolution is the basic objective factor in the difficulties of socialist construction and for this isolation, the successive betrayals of the social democracy and its cooperation with the bourgeoisie, is in turn chiefly responsible. The Communists made mistakes but these mistakes were of an entirely different character from the “mistakes” of the social democrats which were sheer counter-revolution.
Certainly there is no absolute guarantee against the manifestation of conciliatory and social democratic tendencies inside the Communist movement. The present struggle of the factions in the Comintern testifies to that. Under conditions of capitalist stabilization and encirclement of the Soviet Union, of the slowing up in the pace of the world revolution, the petty bourgeoisie begins to exert a pressure on the Soviet and Comintern apparatus that is dangerous. The consequences of such pressure have in some major instances already been tragic. It has been the requirements of the resistance to this petty bourgeois pressure on the Party that has given rise to the fight of the Left Opposition for the continuity of the line of Marx and Lenin against both the Right and Centrist factions in the Comintern. With a keen memory of the reasons for the degeneration of the social democratic leadership, the Left Opposition is determined to fight to the end against every revision of the program of the proletarian revolution, against every deviation from the base of internationalism.
 



Equipped with thousands of dollars for preliminary expenses, the Senate has launched its star-chamber “investigation” into Communist “plotting” in the United States. The Hoover government, the National Civic Federation, and the American Federation of Labor are a single united front. With the ghost of the infamous Palmer presiding, cabinet officials, labor fakers, stool-pigeons, hungry politicians and the remainder of the unsavory crew burdening society, will testify to the existence of a “Red Conspiracy”.
 
The Crisis of American Capitalism
Outside, in every city of the United States, members of an army of six million unemployed form in bread line. In the shops, relentlessly driven by the speed-up, workers face the menace of wage-cuts. Master-incited Southern mobs burn and lynch poor Negroes. Militant labor organizers of the unorganized and the unemployed in Gastonia, Georgia, California and New York are imprisoned, sent to the chain gangs, or threatened with the electric chair. But parasitical coupon clippers garner the biggest dividends in years. Congress stamps approval on a Tariff to assure the corporations still vaster monopoly profits. Military expenditures for the next imperialist struggle reach the highest peak in history.
The tribunals of the Spanish Inquisition sat in judgement over bourgeois protestantism. The Czarist autocracy sat in judgement over Russian revolutionaries. The United States Senate “investigates Communism”. The past is replete with judgements of the dying over the living of the forces of reaction over those of revolution. But when have such investigations and judgements permanently halted the advance of history or the development of the class struggle? The spectre of Communism which Marx marked as haunting the European bourgeoisie of 1848 has materialized in the Soviet power of today. Nor could any Holy Alliance, Romanoff Ochrana, massacre of Communards or strategy of Bismarck prevent it.
 
The Open Conspiracy of Communism
It needs no investigation to establish that international Communism is a greater danger to world capitalism than ever before. Communism is an open conspiracy. “The Communists have always disdained to conceal their aims”. We openly conspire to organize the workers for immediate improvements in their living conditions. We openly conspire to avail ourselves of every strike, every lockout, every demonstration to sharpen the edge of the class struggle, to lay bare the process of capitalist exploitation and government suppression
We openly conspire to rouse the workers to resist the mobilization plans for the next war by a revolutionary struggle for the defence of the Soviet Union. We openly conspire to separate the masses in the American Federation of Labor from the treacherous and bureaucratic misleadership of the William Greens and the Mathew Wolls. We openly conspire to organize the toilers of the United States for the proletarian revolution to overthrow the capitalist system and replace the business dictatorship by a revolutionary Workers’ Government.
But as a matter of fact the capitalist class has no illusions about the nature of the Communist conspiracy. The investigation is a cover for something else. The ruling class aims to master the deepening economic crisis and improve its position for a sharper attack on the world market and by an offensive for wage reductions. The employers are fully aware that as a result of the mass unemployment and the wage-cutting offensive, tens of thousands of workers hitherto faithful to the traditions of capitalist politics and the craft prejudices of the A.F. of L. will be radicalized by their experience of misery. They are further conscious that the leaven in the working class is the Communist movement, that the Communists understand the laws of capitalist economy and the fraud of bourgeois democracy. To suppress the Communists, to terrorize these proletarian leaders who croon no pacifist and liberal lullabies, becomes the entering wedge of the capitalist offensive against the whole working class.
 
The Tasks of the Communist Party
In this situation very heavy responsibilities rest upon the leadership of the Communist Party. Sectarianism in these circumstances would be tantamount to political crime against the interests of the proletariat- The possibilities for the advance of the revolutionary movement are great. But to avail ourselves of this history opportunity, the Party must give leadership to a UNITED FRONT movement against the capitalist offensive. The Party will not be able to do so until it breaks with its present course of blind factionalism and adventurism. The situation must be soberly analyzed for what it is. There is no immediate “acute revolutionary crisis”. There are yet no “offensive revolutionary struggles” on the horizon. The masses have not yet deserted the labor bureaucrats and the social reformists. The capitalist class of this country has not yet lost its confidence and its power to rule. But the defensive struggles of the workers can with correct leadership become the starting point for revolutionary struggles in the future. The Party must weed out the verbiage of the “third period” or the Party will be wrecked for years.
 
For Communist Unity!
The Left Communists (Communist League of America) are profoundly opposed to the present Party regime and its revisionist theories on an international scale. But in the interests of the promotion of the workers’ United Front, we are prepared to support every step that the Party undertakes for a concrete program of action against the capitalist offensive. Once started in this direction, we are confident that the momentum of the class struggle will vindicate to the Party membership the full justice not only of the strategy we advocate for the every-day struggle but the historical validity of the revolutionary Leninist principles which motivate our tactics.
 



The British consulate was the scene of a militant demonstration of 1,500 work[a line of text is missing]tion. Following the mass meeting in Battery Park the march of the workers on Whitehall Street began. Shouting revolutionary slogans and singing revolutionary battle songs, the procession advanced to the vicinity of the consulate. It was here that Mulrooney's police thugs swept in with their accustomed brutalities. One worker who attempted to address the mass from the steps of the building was [attacked by] the police and pulled down.
This was the signal for a concerted onslaught of the police on the demonstrators. The workers fought back bravely until the police reinforcement arrived in the shape of an emergency wagon with sirens shrieking, prepared to hurl tear bombs Four comrades were arrested, Rollins, Manusky, L.B. Cohen and one other. Several workers were terribly manhandled and one Beatrice Blosser was knocked unconscious.
The demonstration was called by the New York district of the Communist Party and all workers organizations were invited to participate. The Communist League (Opposition) in New York immediately signified its decision to take part. We wrote a letter to the International Labor Defense notifying them of our intention and asking whether legal aid and defense would be extended to any comrades of the Opposition who would be arrested in the course of the demonstration. We received no reply from the I.L.D. which still leaves the question open whether the I.L.D. is an organization for the defense of the revolutionary movement at large or only the auxiliary for the defense of the adherents of the Stalin faction which momentarily controls the Party machinery.
Immediately we arrived at the demonstration we unfurled the banner of the Communist League which bore slogans denouncing British Imperialism and manifesting solidarity with the Indian Revolution. It was here that the functionaries of the Stalin group struck an ugly note that threatened to disrupt the mass meeting before the demonstration could get under way. A series of physical attacks began on our comrades who carried the placards bearing our slogans and Militants. Among the rank and file Party comrades there was a noticeable current to resist this breach by their officials of the united front of the demonstration. But the officials went around agitating for a pogrom and comrades Berman and George Clarke were set upon by the functionaries tools, certain half-underworld types that have bored their way into the Communist Party under the present regime. Finally our placard was destroyed, but our comrades held their ground staunchly and would not be eliminated. While the Daily Worker maintains silence regarding our presence at the demonstration, the Freiheit, and the Uj Elore both shamefully surpass themselves.
The Freiheit is the Party organ whose editor is the old Menshevik, Olgin, Abe Cahan's old crony and a former strong believer in the Sisson documents that "Lenin and Trotsky were German spies". This Freiheit came out with the unspeakable statement that the "Left renegades were in a united front with the detectives to break up the meeting, etc., etc." It would be tragic if it were not so ridiculous that no worker in his senses reads this without shrugging his shoulders and feeling ashamed that what was once a Communist paper should have sink to the degraded spiritual level of the yellow Forward.
We repeat—such factional tactics will not deter us. As Communists we continue to participate in every class struggle demonstration of the Party against capitalism and imperialism, without abandoning our Marxist right and duty to work for the clarification of principles, the correction of political blunders, and a Bolshevik Party regime.
 



The seventh convention of the C.P.U.S.A. will take its place as one of the most lamentable in the history of American Communism. The current economic crisis constitutes a more powerful indictment of American capitalism and its tinsel “prosperity”, than the arguments of a thousand theses. The lash of hunger curves about the bodies of millions of unemployed. In their conference rooms the financiers weave schemes for the reduction of the workers existence levels. Yet in this crisis the Party claiming to be the revolutionary vanguard reveals a shallowness of political thought, a pettiness of spirit and impotence in action that bring malicious satisfaction to every enemy of our movement. In speaking of the Party, we draw a sharp line of distinction between the membership and the bureaucracy. Where criticism on all but secondary issues is stigmatized immediately as Right or Left “opportunism” and invites expulsion, the bulk of the rank and file still prefer silence. The convention was a formality – the theses had already been drafted and adopted in Moscow.
 
The New Zig-Zag of Centrism
In substance these theses illustrate all the characteristic features of centrism. Who does not remember Molotov’s formulation of the period at the Tenth Plenum as “we have entered with both feet into the realm of revolutionary events”. Regardless of time or space, the “third period” strategy of the imminent revolutionary crisis was uniformly applied to all countries. When Stalin’s ultra-Left caricature of collectivization and the Five Year Plan brought the Soviet Union to the brink of disaster, the bureaucracy sounded a panicky retreat and unloaded responsibility for the “excesses” on the ranks. In the Comintern, Stalin’s agent, Remmele blamed the membership for the extravagances of the theory of “social fascism”.
Accordingly, the Party statement on the convention condemns as “Leftist” those who do not recognize the cyclical character of the economic crisis. The Daily Worker wakes up to the fact that the struggle for social insurance is one of the foremost Party tasks in connection with the unemployment situation. But eclectic substitution for Marxist analysis still prevails. In the same breath, the theses state that “a revolutionary upsurge grips the masses”. In the United States? Where, how, when? Only in the lurid headlines of the Daily Worker nonchalantly lying that “thousands of miners have gone out in a mass strike against unemployment”. How can a really correct line of political action result from such confusion and self-contradiction.
Consider M. Olgin’s report of the convention. Olgin is one of the present ideological Party leaders and editor of the most widely circulated Party organ. In an article in the Freiheit (July 3rd) he calls for a militant alliance between white and black workers “... to lead to a democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants” (our emphasis) – and this not for China or India but for the greatest imperialist power on earth. In other words, the coming revolution in America is not to be proletarian and socialist but bourgeois and democratic. Either the man knows what he is talking about or he is an imbecile. In either case he should be expelled from a Bolshevik-Leninist party.
Bureaucracy versus Bolshevism This convention in the United States was a pocket edition of the Sixteenth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Both were simply rallies of the Centrist faction. While Stalin indulged his coarse witticisms amid the Bonapartist adulation of his apparatus pretorian guard, hundreds of Left Oppositionists were being arrested and rushed into solitary confinement and concentration camps in Siberia. Similarly in the U.S. we can record the biggest wave of adherents to our opposition movement since its formation after the Sixth Congress. The bureaucrats cannot stifle the Bolsheviks. Fresh cadres are maturing. We will continue our struggle for the Comintern against both Right and Centrists misleaders.
We shall yet have occasion to recur to the plenum of the Lovestone faction which met about the same time. It is the Lovestones in the Comintern who are jointly responsible with Stalin for the Menshevik corruption of the program and policies of the Communist International. Good elements though there are in the ranks of the group, the Lovestone leadership is the same old self-styled “Marxian trunk”. Albert Weisbord criticised the Lovestone misrepresentations of the position of Trotsky on the international questions, the failure to protest the deportation, and the assassination of Blumkin. In answer, B.D. Wolfe came across with the same old falsifications about Trotsky’s alleged “sectarianism”, “conditional defence of the U.S.S.R.”, “advocacy of Thermidor” (sic)! Lovestone has persuaded the group to “broaden out”. He is prepared to admit all tendencies – “even Trotskyites” – under the hegemony of the “Marxian trunk,” of course. The gap between Lovestone and Bolshevism widens.
The names of the 25 elected to the Central Committee of the Party are being kept secret from the membership until they have received the approval of Stalin. Ballam, Engdahl and Wicks, the last of the Lovestone Mohicans in the Party leadership were dropped from the C.E.C. Ella Reeves Bloor takes the place of Anna Damon as the dowager. The Party secretariat – God save the mark! – is composed of Browder, Hathaway and Bedacht. However, Bittelman is on his way home from conquests in the Indian revolution and Bedacht will be transferred to Moscow. Alexander will now prepare to wield the sceptre while Browder and Hathaway run messages.
But the very last word in the Party will be with the Bolshevik-Leninists.
 



The bubble of the Whalen documents has been loudly and derisively punctured. That clown and former police commissioner Whalen presented these documents as “proof” that Amtorg the official Soviet trading agency in New York was the center of Communist propaganda for the United States.
Three witnesses called before the Fish Committee have conclusively demonstrated from different angles that these “documents” are absolute and unadulterated forgeries. The first witness exposed sixteen internal mistakes and discrepancies that pointed to their fabrication by Russian white guards. A newspapermen testified that the “documents” had been offered for sale in Washington six weeks before Whalen released them to the New York press. But the most deadly testimony came from the man in whose print-shop on East Tenth street the letterheads of the Whalen documents were printed.
No one in the least familiar with the history of the series to which Whalen forgeries belonged could have entertained the shadow of a doubt as to their true character. The Sisson documents of some years ago, setting out to prove that Lenin and Trotsky were “German spies” could have been convincing only to such a product of the New York Forward as Moissaye Olgin. The celebrated Zinoviev letter could impose only on the willing credulity of a social-imperialist like Macdonald.
This exposure will, of course not stay the activities of the Fish Committee. It is the time-honored practise of the ruling class always to explain away “social unrest” as a malicious foreign importation. When the masses were once struggling in England for the blessings of parliamentary democracy, the aristocracy blamed this movement on the gold of the French regicides. The source of all evil, the Czarist bureaucracy had it, were the Jews. In our present epoch of proletarian struggle, the capitalists find the key to all the riddles of the universe in ... Moscow gold. The one thing they will not admit is that the roots of the revolutionary are sunk deep in the crisis of a class society that has outlived its historic usefulness.
Commissioned by Congress to investigate Communist propaganda for the overthrow of the government, the Fish Committee was in reality an expedient to distract attention from the misery of the unemployment crisis. In line with this policy, the Fish Committee made a rabid attack on Amtorg. It is no pleasure to the workers of Russia to have to trade with the General Electric or Henry Ford but power in the United States still lies in the hands of the capitalist, not the working class. The development of trade even under these conditions is, however, of direct interest to the American working class. Amtorg bought more than $107,000,000 of American goods in 1928-9 and was planning to double that in the near future. The goods that Amtorg purchases here mostly with hard cash go towards facilitating the work of socialist construction in the Soviet Union and at the same time inevitably alleviate unemployment for thousands of American workers.
The baiting of Amtorg by the Fish Committee aided by the Matthew Wolls constitutes part and parcel of an attack on the interests of the American working class. The defense of the Soviet Union is their own best defense. This does not mean that the U.S.S.R. is any substitute for the action of the American proletariat. The Soviet
Union is the friend and ally of the international revolution which is the only guarantee that socialist society can be built up and maintained in any country. But the development of the class struggle takes place on the basis of the conditions in each capitalist country. The world organization that fights for the establishment of a chain of Soviet Republics is the Communist International. The functions of the Soviet Government and the Comintern are sufficiently distinct without P.A. Bogdanov, the Amtorg head, having resort to Sokolnikov’s worthless, dangerous and revisionist subterfuge at the Geneva Economic Conference to the effect that capitalist and socialist systems can cohabit the world peacefully side by side!
It is imperative to arouse the widest possible mass movement against this Fish Committee and its probable consequences. Elihu Root has already advanced the idea of creating a special secret Federal police, a sort of American Ochrana to spy more effectively over the revolutionary workers. Whether Root’s proposal in this form is realized at this time or not, the coming storm and stress period in the class struggle will mark more and more vicious attempts to place heavier shackles on the labor movement. The Department of Justice will be more extensively subsidized and its stool pigeon activities re-enforced. The revolutionary press will have a constant struggle against being barred from the mails. The industrial espionage system will be intensified. The jailing of militants who organize the workers will gain momentum. The capitalist campaign to terrorize the foreign born workers by the finger-print and passport route will revive. The criminal syndicalism and sedition laws of the various states will be brought into more frequent play.
As the counter-action to this capitalist offensive, the workers must organize a fighting united front. To make the most powerful appeal to the masses in the approaching elections, the Communist Party should demonstrate its re[illegible]ine is to place itself at the head of a movement for working class unity. The immediate objectives of this movement should be the release of all class war prisoners, federal, state and municipal grants for the relief of the workless, the enactment of unemployment insurance and old age pensions, the six hour day and the five day week, and the recognition and extension of large-scale credits to the Soviet Union.
 



The struggle of the factions in the Comintern is in the last analysis a struggle of the classes. Once more the revolutionary Marxists are a persecuted and calumniated minority in the International they founded and Bolshevism an upstream current in the revolution it created. This turn of events can only deter those who fail to understand the dialectic process. History obstinately refuses to flow in the smooth and unruffled channels marked out for it by Fabian doctrinaires of “gradualism”. Only in the brain of a Bucharin is it possible to “abstract” the Soviet Union from the development of world economy and the correlation of class forces.
 
Two Phases of the October Revolution
The October Revolution falls into two phases separated by the death of Lenin. The first was the stage of the conquest of political power and the military and economic consolidation of the proletarian dictatorship through the instrumentality of the conscious Communist vanguard. The second phase is marked by the growth of the elements of dual power, the economic advances of the urban and rural petty bourgeoisie the subjection of the Party to the bureaucracy, the replacement of the line of Communism by Centrism.
To screen their back-sliding the Party bureaucrats had resort to the invention and campaign against “Trotskyism”. Lenin who was safely embalmed in a mausoleum could be disregarded by the bureaucrats but Trotsky remained as the living symbol of the heroic phase of October. To destroy his immense revolutionary authority therefore became the bureaucrats’ prime concern. To this end history and biography were monstrously perverted. An English critic’s definition of history as a “Mississippi of falsehoods” was never more fully merited than by the conscienceless fabrications of the school of Stalin.
The powerful sweep of L.D. Trotsky’s Autobiography leaves the whole tissue of fraud and misrepresentations woven by the official theoreticians in shreds and tatters. In the light of this memorable work how pitiful even to his own faction must appear the scurrilities with which a Yaroslavsky like the Fat Boy in Dickens, seeks to make our flesh creep. The motley careers of those who sat in judgement on the Opposition, wearing the saintly aureole of the “Old Guard” are here passed in merciless review. Concurrently the organizer of the Red Army sets out the course of the development which led to his complete fusion of goal and method with Lenin in the supreme crisis of October. The biographical test, Trotsky once declared to an Opposition-baiting plenum is not decisive. Bernstein who was the literary executor of Engels wound up as a rabid revisionist. Franz Mehring who approached Marx in a critical spirit ended in the camp of Spartacus. But if biography is indeed to be treated as the criterion, then let us have exact biography not of Trotsky alone but of all concerned.
The owl of Minerva, that bird of wisdom, takes flight when the dusk gathers, runs a familiar saying of Hegel. The temporary cloud on the October Revolution is the last thing any of us desired but the facts being what they are, the theoretical and political contributions of Trotsky, since his struggle with the epigones began, are of inestimable service in the education of a whole generation of younger Marxists. Historical Materialism is no philosophy of blind impersonal forces. In reply to the criticism of the Gotha program, the older Liebknecht declared that Marx stood high in his esteem but “the party stands higher”. This is the veriest fetishism, creating an entirely false antithesis between party and principle, between organization and leadership. The choice of leaders is as inescapable today as when it had to be made between Marx and Bakunin, between Lenin and Plechanov, between Rosa Luxemburg and Kautsky. The Autobiography before us perfectly fulfills the requirements of Lassalle’s dictum that the beginning and end of all great political action lies in the statement of that which is. Trotsky is the heir to the revolutionary legacy of Marx and Lenin.
Bolshevism did not spring fully grown and accoutred like Pallas Athene from the head of Jove in the Greek fable.
“Russia.” wrote Lenin, “has attained Marxism ... by dint of fifty years travail and sacrifice ... Thanks to the emigration forced by the Czar, revolutionary Russia in the second half of the 19th century came into possession of rich international connections, of the grasp of superlative forms and theories of the revolutionary movements abroad as no other country had ...”
The road of Bolshevism runs through the struggle with the populist Narodniki, syndicalist “economism”, ultra-Left “otsovism”, and Menshevik and ‘conciliatory’ opportunism”. But not the least of the obstacles it had to clear cut of its path was the conservatism of the “old Bolsheviks” who more than once, declared Lenin, have played a melancholy role in the history of our Party by repeating senseless and obsolete formulae.
These preliminary struggles of Bolshevism have significance only as they serve to prepare the Party for the conquest of political power. Not one of the epigones who called themselves the “Old Guard” measured up to the demands of the great October ordeal. Not one had advanced beyond the position of a Left democrat prior to the arrival of Lenin and his April Theses. The slogan of the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry as Lenin conceived it bore two aspects, one that looked to the past and the other to the future. The epigones only saw the past of this slogan. They were prepared for no more than bourgeois revolution, that is Russia a free market, no repudiation of foreign debts, no assistance to the international proletarian revolution, no nationalisation of the means of production.
If according to Lenin the role of Zinoviev and Kamenev was no accident, neither could it be an accident that from the distance of New York, Trotsky reached the same conclusions regarding the revolutionary motive forces as Lenin in Switzerland. On March 19, 1917 Trotsky wrote from America: “In this struggle the proletariat ought to unite about itself the rising masses of the people with one aim in view – to seize governmental power.” And three days later: “If the first Russian Revolution in 1905 brought about the revolutions in Asia, in Persia, Turkey, China, the second Russian revolution will be the beginning of powerful revolutionary struggle in Europe ...” Trotsky found himself in absolute accord with the April theses. He had remained outside the Bolshevik faction because he feared a tendency would develop within it to limit the revolution to democratic objectives. Fortunately the line of Lenin and the elan of the masses proved stronger than the democratic Right wing which did indeed crystallize. History fused the theory which is anathema to all bureaucrats – the permanent revolution – with the fundamental strategy of Leninism.
 
The Usurpation by the Bureaucrat
The crisis in the International begins with the usurpation of power by the bureaucrats. The struggle to put an end to the alternative zig-zags of opportunism and adventurism is inextricably linked up with the struggle for a correct Party regime. The base of the leadership in the Soviet Union has become more dangerously narrowed. When Marx characterized Bakunin he anticipated Lenin’s characterization of Stalin. Marx wrote: ”Theoretically he is a cipher but as a schemer he is in his element.” To leave a disloyal figure like Stalin at the helm is, as experiences amply demonstrate, to court disaster for the revolution. The Party regimes in the various sections of the Comintern have been made over in his image – a bureaucracy tempered only by fear of the Opposition.
If the policy of the Comintern officialdom in the period of the British General Strike and the Chinese Revolution was a tragedy, that of the so-called “Third Period” has the elements of a tragic farce. What must be done? We recall that there was another “third period” away back in 1902, when Lenin was fighting one who is a present theoretician of Stalinism, namely Martinov. To the question, what must we do, Lenin wrote: “We must give the brief reply: ‘LIQUIDATE THE THIRD PERIOD’.” (N. Lenin, 1902 – Que Faire – Paris 1925) And we must add, liquidate the ascendancy of the epigones, purge the program of the Comintern of national Socialism, and restore the Bolshevik-Leninist Opposition to its rightful position in the Party.
 



[First paragraph illegible in source]
I
The compass by which the revolutionary vanguard steers through the w[hirl] of events, striking the necessary balance between enthusiasm and objectivity – is the analysis of class relations in dynamic development. This is the method of Marxism, and for decisive reasons – the rich experiences of three revolutions, ceaseless preoccupation with theoretical fundamentals, preeminence of its leadership – it finds its finest living expression today in the Russian Opposition. Because as against the Thermidorian Right and bureaucratic Centrist factions, its basic line is still that of the Party under Lenin – the Russian Opposition is the Left. The Russian Opposition is the contemporary embodiment of Bolshevism hardened for decades in the struggle against opportunism as the main danger inside the labor movement, but also against “otsovism” against every form of ultra-Left adventurism. The Russian Opposition represents the spiritual heritage of October and the first four congresses of the Third International. The three issues which L.D. Trotsky proposed as the touchstone of adherence to the Left – Anglo-Russian Committee, Chinese Revolution and Soviet Economy (national socialism) – are no more “merely” tactical differences than the divisions of Bolshevism and Menshevism over the character of the 1905 revolution. They go to the root of the Communist program. They involve questions of the estimate of the epoch, the character of the Russian revolution, the role of the vanguard, the significance of the Soviets, the national and agrarian problems.
It is clear that between the Marxist Left that is the Russian Opposition and the “Left” groupings in the Comintern before 1924, there is a yawning gulf. Conjointly with Lenin, in the period of the Second Congress, Trotsky demolished the sectarian abstractions of Gorter and Pannekoek, the theoreticians of the German Communist Labor Party (K.A.P.D.). Conjointly with Lenin, Trotsky at the Third Congress no less vigorously engaged the ultra-Left adventurism (the “Offensive Theory”) of the eminent “Leninists” Bela Kun, Maslow and Thalheimer. The severe correction proved such a shock to Thalheimer that he lost his balance and ultimately staggered into the camp of the extreme Right, while Maslow declared a permanent vendetta against the Third Congress as the work of the Mephlsto Trotsky who had seduced the Innocent Maslowite Lenin.
 
II
These reminiscences of the Second and particularly the Third Congresses, unfortunately possess more than purely historical interest. They have a direct bearing on the subsequent fate of the Leninbund. For years a whispering and press campaign was carried on among the Left-inclined workers of Hamburg, Berlin, the Ruhr and elsewhere to depict Trotsky as the Right Danger and Zinoviev and Bucharin as the patron-saints of the Left! This gross disorientation of the German Left, the obstinate Opposition to the Third Congress, the failure correctly to distinguish the tendencies in the Russian Party, were bound up with the ideological perversions of Maslow. The blunders of the Leninbund, the Urbahns theory of the so-called “hybrid” state, its fallacious analysis of the Thermidor, its bankruptcy in the Russo-Chinese issue, its oscillation between Brandler and Korsch, all show that the ghost of Maslow has not yet been laid and the evil of Zinoviev lives after him.
Maslow’s method of approach to the problems of the Russian and international revolution was essentially eclectic. It was the method of the editorial writer who upon being asked to compose an article on Chinese Metaphysics read up the Encyclopedia Britannica under China and Metaphysics and combined his information. Maslow learned that Lenin’s slogan in the revolution of 1905 was the democratic dictatorship (bourgeois democracy) and that there were two revolutions in 1917. He therefore instructed his associates that if the world revolution did not come to the assistance of Russia, the Bolsheviks would have “to retreat to the positions of 1905”, that is, the bourgeois revolution. This fundamentally Menshevik theory is the prop of Urbahn’s conception of “Thermidor”. If Kamenev and Zinoviev would have had their way in 1917, the Bolsheviks would never, of course, have advanced beyond “the postions of 1905” – and there would have been – an end to the revolution. The proletarian revolution is not followed by the bourgeois revolution, the proletarian dictatorship can be liquidated only by a Bonapartist or Fascist dictatorship. To conceive of a Thermidor as the threshold of bourgeois democracy in Russia in the epoch of imperialism, and civil war the epoch of the essential decay of bourgeois democracy is a grotesque misreading of history ... In conversation with the writer comrade Urbahns once confessed that he had learned “a great deal” from Maslow. In retrospect, it would have been better if he had learned less and forgotten more.
 
III
The concrete issue of the Defense of the Soviet Union brought with it more than just a settlement of accounts with the Leninbund leadership. It urgently raised the problem of the unification of the whole International Opposition, which was far from homogeneous in its origins, its traditions and ideology. Here the mature leadership of the Russian Opposition proved indispensable, and it exerted the pressure of its natural prestige in favor of ideological clarity and against a bloc of motley opposition tendencies. Already on his arrival in Constantinople, Trotsky uncompromisingly put an end to all speculations on an unprincipled bloc with the Brandler Right. In equally decisive fashion, he rejected the contraband of “neo-syndicalism” of the Revolution Proletarien (Monatte-Loriot) group. Concurrently, he sharply dissociated the Russian Opposition from fraternity with those for whom the Opposition entailed no obligations of mundane political activity, for whom Opposition had become stagnation, routine and a refuge from Party discipline.
But of supreme importance in the ideological fusion of the International Left to the question of the Permanent Revolution, which comrade Trotsky has placed on the order of the day for discussion. The Opposition must be absolutely clear on the significance of this question. Those who reject the epigone-manufactured legend of “Trotskyism” must realise that the Permanent Revolution is the concentrated antithesis of the revisionist program of national socialism, the bloc of four classes, the theory of stages (colonial revolution), Workers and Peasants Parties, the peaceful cohabitation of socialism and capitalism the kulak growth into socialism (Bucharin). Why is it necessary to bring the Permanent Revolution up now, laments Radek, justifying his capitulation. During the period of the first four Congresses of the International it was not necessary to discuss the theory of the Permanent Revolution because its substance was the strategy of the International. It is the revision of Leninism by the epigones that brings the Permanent Revolution into relief as the essence of Bolshevism. It is the attempt of the epigones who before Lenin’s April Theses had not advanced beyond the position of the bourgeois revolution, and who would now inflict the international working class with their reactionary theory – that has raised the question. It is the experiences of the Chinese Revolution that have raised the question.
The recently published theses on the Permanent Revolution are the re-affirmation in the present period of the April Theses of Lenin in all their implications. They link up the national with the international, the democratic with the socialist, the agrarian with the proletarian revolutions. They re-affirm that the emancipation of the peasantry can only come from the leadership of the proletariat. They repudiate the idea of two-class parties and maintain the necessity of the independent leadership of the Communist Party.
The misrepresentations and distortions of the theory of the Permanent Revolution – which is Marxist to the bone – was made possible by the domination of the Party and Comintern apparatus by the Right-Center Bloc under the pressure of alien class elements, the growing influence of the Kulak, Nepman and Bureaucrat.
 
IV
The American Opposition sees in the establishment of an International Bureau of the Opposition, an International Bulletin and Conference – a tremendously significant step forward in the struggle for the revolutionary line and the winning of the Comintern from the opportunist-Blanquist zig-zag of the internationally organized Stalin faction.
The American Opposition was formed under conditions that permitted no illusions of swift victory – or capitulation. It was organized after the Sixth Congress, that is, after the rupture of the bloc with Zinoviev and the capitulation of the Zinovievists. Our group in America attracted militants who realized the consequences of the step they were taking – who saw the mainstream of the Russian Opposition in the Moscow Opposition of 1924, We are a “Trotsky” Opposition, if we may say so without misunderstanding. We repudiate all admixtures of Zinovievism and Maslowism, the theories of Souvarine and those of the Smirnov-Sapronovists. In our Platform we justly recognize L.D. Trotsky as the foremost living teacher and leader of Bolshevism, the foremost representative of the legacy of Marx and Lenin.
With the Russian Opposition we are in complete accord that the Rakovsky declaration was no gesture of capitulation but a necessary demonstration of the united front with the Party. In the same sense do we regard the declaration of October 16, 1926 of the Party loyalty of the Opposition – to which Urbahns takes so much exception.
The situation in the American Communist movement has been immensely clarified since the Sixth Congress, and the greatest contribution in this direction has been made by the militants who formed the Left Opposition. None of the former Party groupings are any longer what they once were. Never was the Lovestone group such an undisguised and outspoken Right wing. Never was the unprincipled swamp-like character of the Foster faction more apparent. Never was there the clear and outspoken conscious Left wing that the American Opposition constitutes today. The limits of the old unprincipled factionalism and intrigue had their rise in the Zinoviev-Bucharin and Stalin regimes. The American Opposition has in the short space of its existence achieved a great revolutionary educational work for the movement that will sooner or later bear its fruit. For this the American Opposition recognizes its historic debt to the Russian Opposition.
 



“... the Franco-German War was the bloody prelude of the great world-holocaust ... The French Commune was the lightning-like prophecy of the proletarian world revelation.”
                                                                                                                                – L.D. Trotsky
Out of the last of the great national struggles of a western bourgeoisie for capitalist state unification sprang the first attempt of the modern working class to conquer political power.
Regardless of Bismark’s diplomatic machinations and provocations, the Franco-Prussian struggle of 1870 was for Germany a war of national self-defence. The task of national unification which the middle and working classes had failed to solve in 1848 by revolutionary democratic means, history passed on to Bismark to achieve by means of Blood and Iron. The empire of Napoleon III. Marx considered “the only possible form of government in the epoch in which the bourgeoisie has already lost the power of governing the people while the working class has not yet acquired it”. The war, he predicted, “would ring the death knell of the Second Empire; it will end as it began – in a parody”. The little Napoleon could only maintain his regime on the basis of the continued feudal particularism and dismemberment of Germany.
The course of the war swiftly revealed the entire rottenness of the Empire. The French armies were outgeneralled and outnumbered; the military demoralization was the measure of the general state of political decay. Sedan was the logical culmination of a series of disastrous adventures in the Crimea, in Italy and Mexico. On September 4th, the French bourgeoisie hastened to proclaim the Third Republic and to set up a “Government of National Defence”. The war now entered on its second phase, the four months siege of Paris. It now ceased to be a war of national defence for the Germans, a “war not against the French people but the French emperor”, and had definitely become the instrument of aggression, the “Prussian military camarilla” whom Marx, on behalf of the International, unreservedly denounced, warning that “the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine would drive France into the arms of Prussia.” Paris capitulated on January 28, 1871. The National Assembly with its reactionary monarchist majority authorised Thiers to conclude peace with Bismark by the cession of Alsace-Lorraine and the agreement to an indemnity of five billion francs.
 
The War and the Misery of the Workers
As usual, the masses had borne the brunt of the suffering and calamity of war; this peace now provoked their deepest resentment as savoring of national betrayal. While the big bourgeoisie, the landlords, the speculators and manufacturers had enriched themselves, the petty bourgeois artisans, peasants and shop-keepers had been ruined and the worker suffered from widespread unemployment. The bourgeois government was aware of the frequent among the people and proceeded to re-establish “law and order” by characteristic means. It pitilessly cancelled the moratorium on rents and other debts, thereby increasing the wholesale misery of the masses: but their cup was full to overflowing, when Thiers attempted to disarm the National Guard, that is to say, the 200,000 armed proletarians. The discontent of the masses broke out into open revolt and on March 18th. the Commune was proclaimed by the Central Committee of the National Guard which constituted itself as the Provisional Government until regular elections could be organized. Thiers and his ministers unfortunately were allowed to remove themselves with impunity to the reactionary Assembly with its headquarters in Versailles.
“France,” wrote Engels, “is a country in which the historical struggle of the classes, more than in any other was carried each time to a decisive conclusion ...” In the veins of the Parisian masses flowed he tradition of the Commune of 1792–4, of the revolutions of July, 1830 and 1848. Paris was now the scene of the first independent proletarian struggle for power, and Versailles the armed camp of the bourgeois coalition supported by Bismark who returned 100,000 French prisoners to help Thiers crush the Commune. The proletarians of a number of other cities (Marseilles, Lyons, etc.) also proclaimed Communes but were smashed by the bourgeoisie before they could render assistance to Paris, which remained isolated.
 
The Proletariat Struggles for Power
The Commune lasted for seventy-two days, from March 18 to May 20, 1871. The Central Committee of the National Guard, according to its pledge, proceeded to the communal elections on March 26 and transferred its authority to the elected council. These democratic elections on the basis of universal suffrage have rejoiced the heart of Kautsky. But the Commune is great despite and not because of its infirmities. Its democratic forms cannot obscure its real import as an “anticipation of the dictatorship of the proletariat”. In that penetrating study of the Commune called the Civil War in France, Marx writes with unerring genius that “the Commune was essentially the government of the working class, the result of the struggle of the producing against the appropriating class; it was the political form discovered at last under which labor could work out its economic emancipation.”
This was borne out in his view both by the structure of the Commune and the nature of its practical program of legislation. The Commune was the direct antithesis of the Empire. It was to have been not a parliamentary but a working corporation, legislative and executive at the same time. It should not be misinterpreted as the resurrection of the mediaeval communes. The communal constitution would have brought the rural producers (peasantry) under the intellectual leadership of the towns. The unity of the nation was to be organized by means of the communal structure. The standing army and the police were abolished and their place taken by the people in arms. A blow was struck at the clerical power by the separation of church and state and the expropriation of church property. The judicial functionaries lost their sham independence and were to be chosen by popular mandate. A further blow was aimed at the bureaucracy by setting the maximum pay at 6,000 francs a year and introducing the right of re-call. The schools were thrown open to popular education. Night work was abolished in the bakeries; workshops that had been closed down were seized, with the aim of transferring them to groups of cooperative workers.
 
The Shortcomings of the Commune
But the Commune was not destined to carry out its program. For a successful social revolution, at least two indispensable conditions are necessary, the sufficient development of the forces ot production and the preparation of the proletariat. Unfortunately, both of these necessary prerequisites were lacking.
To take the latter first. The great misfortune of the Commune was the absence of a centralized single-willed revolutionary Communist party, such as dominated the Russian situation in 1917. The Parisian proletariat was led by the most motley crowd of petty-bourgeois socialists – who did not seem to understand the mission of the Commune and who seemed as anxious as possible to shift responsibility. “They could not understand,” wrote Lissagaray, an eye witness, “that the Commune was a barricade and not an administration.” As a result, the history of the leadership of the Commune is an incredible series of strategic blunders that played right into the hands of the reactionary camp of Versailles.
The major task of the Commune, if it had been guided by a revolutionary party which understood the meaning of civil war, was to crush the National Assembly at Versailles. But instead of assuming the offensive, the Commune waited passively while the Versailles counter-revolution mobilized and organized its forces. Thiers and the rest of the bourgeois executive and bureaucrats were allowed to slip out of Paris under the very noses of the National Guard. The agents of the National Assembly were allowed to carry on their work of sabotage and conspiracy from within the walls of Paris. The Commune suffered from the precipitate transfer of power from the hands of the Central Committee of the Guard to the Council, and then from the lingering division of authority between them. The military work was in a state of confusion. While the bourgeoisie organized its calumny of the Commune on an international scale, the Commune did almost nothing to counteract this poisonous propaganda by popularizing its own true aims. Dissension and disunion prevailed. The Committee of Public Safety that was established, lacked a realization of its true function as an extraordinary commission to protect the revolution.
 
The Triumph of the Bourgeoisie
The result was that the initiative passed over info the hands of the bourgeoisie, who now had a preponderance of forces. Thiers understood very well what the Commune signified and he suffered no “democratic” and humanitarian illusions in circumventing its destruction. The Versaillese entered Paris on May 21st and eight days ot fighting and white terror followed. Vae victis! In the course of that bloody week 30,000 communards were massacred and tens of thousands of others were deported or incarcerated. Altogether the Parisian proletariat was bled white of a generation of its elite. The Commune was crushed. France was made safe for the Third Republic, that monument to the fraud of bourgeois democracy, that regime of the Panama scandals, of Millerandism, of the Dreyfus affair, of Poincaré and the alliance with the Tsar, of the press subsidized by the Tsar’s minister, Isvolaky, of the murder of Jaurès, of Clemenceau and the Treaty of Versailles. The fall of the Commune spelled the end of the first International also. The French government hounded the Internationalists out of France. Bitter dissension arose among the political emigrants. The anarchist opposition of Bakunin based on the Latin countries of small industry, brought about a split. But the real reason for the decline of the International was the same as for the fall of the Commune – the fact that capitalism had not as yet exhausted its latent possibilities. Stalin had not yet been invented and in the view of Marx, the social revolution could be proclaimed, but not solved, within the limits of national boundaries. Neither on the continent nor in Great Britain was the level of economic development ripe for the finish of capitalist production. The British manufacturers dominating the world market, took advantage of the industrial revival to bribe their labor aristocracy, and the desertion of British labor was another heavy blow to the International.
 
The Lessons of the Commune
The center of gravity of the international labor movement, as Marx had foreseen, now passed to Germany, which, experienced its era of great industrial expansion. In the epoch of the Second International and capitalist imperialism, “there could be no more talk of a premature revolution,” wrote Kautsky. It was a period of the preparation of the proletariat. But if the First International disappeared in the glory of the Paris Commune, the Second crashed on the shameful betrayal of the social democracy.
The Lessons of the Commune, its essence as a form of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the necessary role of the revolutionary party as organiser of victory, only became the practical politics of the working class again with the development of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917. It was Lenin who brought into brilliant relief the teachings that Marx had derived from the Commune and be made them the material for epoch-making theses in the struggle against the Provisional Government and menshevism. One of the foremost of these lessons he applied was that “the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery and wield it for its own purposes”. The slogan – All Power to the Soviets – is the resurrection of the Paris Commune on a gigantic scale, in the epoch of the final struggle between the world proletariat and the imperialist bourgeoisie.
 



The Daily Worker, through its great Orientalist Doonping, announces that “the Chinese Revolution advances by leaps and bounds towards the establishment of a Soviet Republics” and that “the red armies grow like snowballs”. (D.W., August 9). The stimulant to this latest effusion is the reported operation of the so-called “Communist armies” in the Yangtse Valley (Hunan, Hupeh, Kiangsu and Fukien).
A couple of months ago, its pages plastered with maps and rhetoric, an issue of the Daily Worker appeared greeting the convocation of the “All-Chinese Congress of Soviets”. Thereafter with the same startling legerdemain this all-Chinese Congress completely disappeared from the eyes of men, “sunk without a trace”. Long, weary weeks afterwards, with the intelligence service of a great state at his disposal, Stalin vaguely referred to this “Soviet Congress” in such terms as “it is said” and “if it is true, it would not surprise us”.
 
Sands of Illusion
The Communist International cannot be built on the shifting sands of illusion. Such scruples however play small part in the factional calculations to those for whom the rising of a Bolivian military clique is a social revolution, a tribal raid is a war against imperialism, five thousand in Union Square are fifty thousand, water turns into wine and the wafer into the body of Christ. Wishes are not facts and we do not propose to replace Marxism by journalistic bally-hoo. We adhere to Lenin’s “old-fashioned” practise of calling a spade a spade, and a putsch a putsch. To avoid mere emotionalism, one must retain a clear picture of the character and the perspectives of the Chinese Revolution.
The theses of the Second Congress of the Comintern energetically warned against the danger of permitting petty-bourgeois democratic movements in the colonial countries to masquerade as Communist. What shall we say today when amorphous guerilla bands of socially uprooted soldiery and peasantry have only to use the insignia of the hammer and sickle to be proclaimed as the genuine Soviet emancipators of China? Yet in this confusion for which the Stalin bureaucracy is responsible there is a certain logic. Here is more testimony to the political consequences that flow from the reactionary idea that the next stage in the social development of China is the “democratic dictatorship”, in theory the peasant democracy” – in fact, the regime either of a Kerensky or Chiang Kai-Shek. Yesterday this famous “democratic dictatorship” was to be realized through the bourgeois Kuomintang; today it is slated to emanate from peasant guerilla warfare. But what of the industrial proletariat ... and the Communist Party? In 1925–6–7, the Communist Party was turned into a mere appendage of the Chinese bourgeoisie; in 1930, the fragment of the Communist Party left after the massacres of Chiang Kai-Shek, has become a red-tinctured edition of the “green” peasant parties of Raditch and Stambulisky.
The Third Chinese revolution is inevitable – if its strategy is Marxist, if its leadership is actuated by the recognition of its real driving forces. Between opportunism and putschism the Stalin machine has shown that it can only retard and ruin revolutionary possibilities. In 1925–6–7 the conditions in China cried out for independent Communist leadership, for the arming of the workers and peasants, for the unleashing the forces of revolt in the cities and the country-side against both tine Chinese and the foreign bourgeoisie. In the name of the “democratic dictatorship” which “could not be skipped” and the bloc of all classes, the Stalin-Bucharin regime worked hand in hand with the Chiang Kai-Sheks and Wang Chin-Weis to stifle the mass movement. To the extent that the Stalin regime is responsible for the leadership of the present “Communist armies” (“Communist” today and with Feng or Chiang tomorrow) it is guilty of hindering the real mobilization of the masses for the class struggle.
 
The Correctness of the Opposition
There is deep discontent and acute suffering in the country. How great the revolutionary tidal wave was when the Russian Opposition wrote its platform, and how correct was its prognosis is evidenced by the fact that three years after the crushing of the Canton insurrection and the industrial proletariat, the movement of 1925–6–7 still finds a belated echo on the countryside. But the peasantry is no independent social force. Its liberation from landlordism and feudal elements, the nationalization of the land and its redistribution can be achieved as the Russian revolution demonstrated, neither in alliance with the bourgeoisie nor by its own independent action, but in alliance with and under the leadership of the industrial proletariat. The democratic revolution, the essence of which is the agrarian revolution, can, in other words, be realized only by the socialist dictatorship, which nationalizes the basic industries and establishes workers’ control. The agrarian revolution by itself cannot solve the problems of the Chinese revolution It can only be one phase of the struggle against world imperialism. The national unification of China and its customs independence – that it the monopoly of foreign trade, will be ushered in under the dynamic action of the proletarian
There is no “short cut” to the revolution. The “easy” ways of opportunism and putschism prove in the end the longest ways. The need of the hour in China is to rally the masses against the counter-revolutionary ruling bourgeois cliques. The Communist Party must root itself again in the industrial proletariat, cement its alliance with the poor peasantry and organize the great masses around a program of partial demands with the Constituent Assembly as the focal point. And the struggle against foreign imperialist intervention, a hindrance to any revolutionary progress, must be taken up in earnest.
 



Canada affords yet another illustration of the fact that under the best of all possible Comintern regimes, nothing is changed – there is only one unprincipled faction fight the more. The Canadian Party, within the living memory of mankind, has always been what Zinoviev in his palmy days would have called a “monolithic” party, Having barely survived the “Bolshevising” measures of the Fifth Congress of the C.I. (1924), the section of the Comintern are now revelling in the “consolidating” effects of the Sixth Congress, on the heels of which, faction fights and expulsion epidemics have broken out in the Soviet Union, Germany, Czecho-Slovakia, the United States; and even Canada at the periphery has not escaped punishment. The Canadian Party whose portion in the Comintern hitherto has been the fate of “those wretched souls” Dante sings about, who “lived without praise or blame” – has achieved the dignity of those other elect whose conventions are mysteriously postponed in deference to cablegrams from “Moscow”. Meanwhile the air is thick with theses, counter-theses and mutual accusations of opportunism and “dishonest political intrigue”. Isn’t this the “Third Period”?
It is only a few months since the Canadian “Trotskyites” scandalously put forward the demand for a sincere discussion of the fundamental problems raised by the Russian Opposition and the crisis in the International. The best attended membership meetings in party history attested to the interest of the rank and file in the issues at stake. But in their fear, the party officialdom countered with bureaucratic repression to stifle this interest, while their machine worked overtime to lull the membership with a “broad ideological campaign” of bulls and encyclicals, threats and rich slander. A Party of Action, the membership was informed, could not indulge in the “luxury of discussion” or of groupings. “Trotskyism” was variously defined as a Right Wing deviation, a Left Wing deviation, a petty-bourgeois deviation, an anti-middle peasant deviation and finally a counter-revolutionary anti-Soviet plot.
With the expulsion of the comrades of the Opposition it might be expected that all original sin had been uprooted, and henceforth and forever only bliss and the oldest Old-Bolshevism would prevail. But alas, the expulsions were the prelude to the outbreak of the present prize-fight in the ranks of the stalinized officialdom, who have also initiated a fake discussion to divert the membership from contamination by dangerous thoughts.
Already before the Sixth Congress discontent was beginning to manifest itself among the younger elements, with the organization conservatism and political inertia of the party secretary, J. Macdonald. In the December Plenum of the American Central Committee, Lovestone attempted to saddle responsibility for the leadership of the Canadian Party on the present writer (“the leader of the Canadian Communist Party, unfortunately, used to be an ex-comrade by the name of Spector” – The Communist, Jan.–Feb. 1929). Not mere modesty but the interests of historic truth, however, and the fact of the actual balance of forces in the Canadian C.E.C., compel me to disclaim this honor. J.P. Cannon was as little the leader of the United States Party under the regime of Jay Lovestone. Macdonald’s base was a tacit but none the less effective majority bloc of the Finnish and Ukrainian sections, who regarded everything with an eye on their property interests, plus opportunist elements like Buck, F. Custance, Shoesmith, Moriarty, the peerless M. Buhay, the ’umble proletarian Roberts, etc. Macdonald himself is the limited type of trade union-I.L.P.er with the most [meag]er equipment of Marxism imaginable in a party leader. He has consistently been a barnacle on the ship in every situation the party could have utilized to its advantage by bold initiative In the current discussion, he is correctly enough accused of being a “Right Danger”, of failing to read the economic postion, of covering-up the tail-end role of the party in the Oshawa Strike and many other things.
But who are his accusers of the “Left?” Our enthusiasm suffers a slump when we recognize the bland countenance of our old-time acquaintance Tim Buck of the Foster caucus. He has become the big chief of the discontented younger group that had begun to crystallize before the last Congress, and which lacked the courage in the test to face the fact that the Macdonalds, the Peppers, the Lovestones, Thaelmanns, Fosters are all either part and parcel or aspirants of the Stalin regime. All they envisage is the perspective of a long-drawn out see-saw struggle between the ins and outs, garnished with cablegrams and “supplementary decisions”, plenipotentiaries and Open Letters. Under the incompetent direction of Buck, his opportunist personal united fronts, the T.U.E.L. has become an empty shell and the trade union work of the party came to a stand-still. A supporter of Macdonald writes “the director of the Industrial Department, Comrade Buck enumerates in the Trade Union Thesis about twenty-five failures, most of them having to do with his own department.” (F. Peel, The Worker, April 13th) The Buck faction’s “ideological leader” is a half-baked Bachelor of Arts recently graduated from the Stalin Academy misnamed the “Lenin School”, who less than two years ago was still of the OBU and SP of C persuasion and had to be bribed with a secretarial post to enter the Young Communist League.
Incidentally, the revolutionary records of some of the other “old bolsheviks” who denounce L.D. Trotsky as a “menshevik” make edifying reading. One Halpern who vociferously edits a party organ was a Zionist three years ago, the older Smith who heads the Labor Defense is a Methodist parson in holy orders. Alderman Kolysnik of Winnipeg, the party’s only “parliamentary representative” is a successful businessman. Wallace, the “colyumist” of the Worker, who describes the writer as an “intellectual” and a “deserter”, is a university graduate, a practicing Churchman, who impartially disposes publicity to the capitalistic parties at election time for a consideration. Limitations of space prevent us from enlarging this list of stone-throwing denizens of glass houses.
The condition of the Canadian Party is at low ebb and unprincipled faction fighting will not improve matters. It will only confuse the real issues and further poison an already empoisoned atmosphere. The present leadership has proven incapable of organizing any resistance to the expulsions from trade unions and trade councils, has failed to counter the disintegration of the Canadian Labor Party with other forms of the political united front. The TUEL exists on paper only. The organization of the unorganized has proceeded by fits and starts. The Dressmakers Union is a shadow. The automobile organization campaign in which the Buck faction were “active” in the shape of an irresponsible adventurer who became Secretary of the Union, is estimated by the Macdonald faction to amount to a “row of beans”. The officialdom has proved impotent to organize any resistance to the police suppression of free speech and the Free-Speech Conference, in which the Macdonald faction were active, is described by the other as a fiasco. The Labor Defence has failed to organize any nationwide mass drive for the release of A. Vaara, the Finnish party editor in jail for “sedition”. The membership of the party is declining, the English-speaking section is down practically to zero. The bulk of the membership is Finnish and it is held in the Communist party by compulsion. The Finnish Organization of Canada is a social and cultural society but every member is also compelled automatically to take out a card in the Party or be blacklisted or expelled. It is a unique basis for a communist party. The Ukrainian membership claims to influence the Ukrainian Labor Temple Association, but in the course of the “Free-Speech” fight in Toronto the Temple refused to place its hall at the disposal of a demonstration on the plea that it would endanger their financial investment.
There is no need to minimize the objective difficulties in the path of building up the communist movement, the defeats in the big miners struggles, the “prosperity” and the democratic illusions connected with it, etc. The Communist Opposition does not pretend that Central Committees can shake mass parties out of their sleeves in six months. But there are also considerable opportunities for the development of the Communist party under current conditions which embrace rationalization, bitter exploitation and low wages for masses of the unskilled, organization of the unorganized, and so on. But the prerequisite for a conscious militant party is a correct regime. The Communist International is a product of the Russian revolution. The regime in the Comintern and its sections is determined by the regime in the Russian Party. Under the Stalin regime in the Comintern, the rank and file of the parties are not being educated but drilled into mechanical obedience in a barracks. The leaders of the national sections are trained to bureaucratic submissiveness and not to critical and independent revolutionary thought and judgement. They rule the membership by demagogy and Lenin held that demagogs were the worst enemies of the working class. The function of the Opposition will be to rouse to revolutionary consciousness that section of the membership which is not actuated simply by primitive Russian patriotism or sterilized against revolutionary thought by their property interests.
 



The results of the British general election could occasion little surprise. The series of preceding bye-elections had clearly indicated the fate of the Baldwin Government. Its record had been so obviously reactionary, its treatment of the working class so provocatory, (the suppression of the miners and the general strikes, the rupture with the USSR, the imperialist expedition to suppress the Chinese revolutionary movement, the repressive anti-trade union act, and the naval parity conflict with the United States), that a second Labor Government or Liberal Labor coalition was logically to be expected.
The British working class has been moving steadily leftward since the end of the war under the circumstance of the loss of British economic supremacy to the United States and powerful challenge of industrial competition on all sides in a consistently shrinking world market. The lords of British finance and industry have abandoned their pre-war conciliatory attitude to the trade union movement and have sought to maintain their pace in a world of increasing competition and rationalization, by applying the screws to the working class. In recent years and particularly under the Baldwin regime, the capitalist attacks on the workers have grown in scope and provocation, and the masses have reacted in turn by a more rapid pace of radicalization.
The Labor Party has reaped the harvest of this growing working class rebelliousness. The experiment of the first labor government may have “unmasked” MacDonaldism to the officials of the British Communist Party, but certainly not to the workers as a whole. Capitalist public opinion has extended the MacDonald Cabinet a very cordial welcome. It realizes that there is little to fear of “socialist experiments” from this Labor Government of extreme Right Wing Trade Union Bureaucrats and Liberals still reeking of their “apostacy” to Lloyd George. MacDonald did not even think it necessary to make concessions to the pseudo-lefts of the I.L.P. Maxton school, who pass so many resolutions for “socialism in our time”. Shaw, Clynes, Henderson, Sankey, Jowett, and their like will prove the same sturdy defenders of British Imperialism in Egypt and India they always have been. The maintenance of the Empire is a point of cardinal policy in the platform of MacDonald. That means “continuity” in the repression of the subject nationalities of the Empire by coercive means if necessary.
 
The MacDonald Program
The program of the MacDonald government is the program of liberalism, dressed up in the shreds and tatters of socialist phraseology. The recognition of Russia would eventually have been carried out by the Conservatives under pressure of their own industrialist delegations to Moscow, and is equally a demand of the Lloyd George Party. The hand that MacDonald extends to the USSR will not be to cement such a class accord as there would exist between two Workers Governments, because MacDonald is not the head of a Workers Government. The capital levy the only demand in the former Labor Party election platforms that threatened a serious clash with capital, has been dropped. Instead of nationalization of the mines and other industries, by the promise of which the masses were rallied to the Labor Party, what will be fostered is the Melchett-Turner scheme of rationalization on the basis of private property. It remains to be seen if there will be any repeal of the Trade Union Act of the Baldwin Government which outlawed the general strike and made mass picketing a crime. MacDonald and the whole labor bureaucracy are as much opposed to the General Strike as Baldwin or Churchill, and if this reactionary legislation hamstringing trade unionism is repealed, it will only be under the most threaten ing pressure of the masses.
The social reformists in the United States bubbled over with delight at this latest “victory for socialism”. The Magdeburg Congress of the German social democratic party sent a telegram of greetings to MacDonald. But so far as the working class is concerned the victory of the laborites in England means as much “socialism” as the presence of the social democrats in the German coalition Government. That is, it means nothing for socialism and everything for the support of a “democracy” which is the camouflage for capitalism. The “peace-loving” German social democracy in convention assembled has just endorsed the action of its cabinet ministers in voting for a cruiser program. MacDonald is busy embracing the notorious Dawes and there is a great hue and cry about the impending settlement of the difficult problems arising from naval competition between the British and American empires. But it is in the nature of the whole position MacDonald and the liberalized Labor Party take to the Empire, that his “pacifism” cannot be more than a vain gesture. The danger of war arises not from the naval race but from the necessities of the capitalist-imperialist struggle for markets. Even if an accord of absolute naval parity could be reached, this does not settle the problem of military supremacy. How does MacDonaldism propose to “disarm” the American monopolies, their appetites just getting whetted for export trade, and basing themselves on the greatest system of mass production in the world, from capturing markets from the British?
 
The Defeat of the Communists
How did the Communists fare in the election? The opportunity for appealing to the masses on a revolutionary program were never before in British history so favorable yet it must be recorded that the vote of 50,000 the Communists drew, constitutes a resounding defeat for our party. There is no sense in sweetening the pill. We are under no political or financial obligations to Stalin that necessitate soft-pedaling on the lessons of the election. It is tr[words missing]f recent years
the methods of analysis of the Stalinized Executives, ‘Agit-Props’ and Press, of the Comintern have become very simple, that is, when the Communist Party suffers a defeat all you need do is to lie about it and shout that it was really a victory, but this was not the method of the Lenin Comintern. Thus latterly the Thaelmann-led German Communist Pasty was isolated in connection with the May Day events, the “red shop stewards” that had been elected proved broken reeds, the Red Front was proscribed, the “general strike”, the party officialdom called, to which 50,000 in the whole country responded, was a terrible fiasco, the subsequent Saxony elections registered Communist losses, but the Stalinites everywhere hail all this as a series of phenomenal successes that elevate the struggle to a “higher plane”. But even downright falsification is unable to serve the Daily Worker and Freiheit for concealing the extent of the defeat of the British party.
How does it come about that at a time when the British masses are admittedly moving leftwards and being radicalized and subjected to rationalization, the Communists are unable to elect a single representative? It is not enough to use another frequent Stalinite alibi and say the social-democrats and the bourgeoisie were against us. That, we believe, is the reason for the existence of a Communist Party. The reason is to be found in the fact that the enormous prestige and resources of the Soviet Government, the Soviet Trade Union Movement, the CPSU and the Comintern have since the Fifth Congress, four years ago, been thrown not on the side of developing and consolidating a revolutionary Communist Party to take advantage of the sharpening class struggle: these were thrown on the side of the reformist trade union bureaucracy thru the agency of the Anglo-Russian Committee. This Committee was held up by Stalin and Bucharin as the real center for the organization of resistance to the war danger. To the exigencies of maintaining this bloc was sacrificed the independence of the Communist Party, which was utterly submerged in the General strike, and which at first even refused to criticise the betrayers of the strike. In the interests of this Anglo-Russian Committee, Tomsky agreed to recognize the fakers of the British General Council as the sole spokesmen of the British trade union movement, and the Minority Movement was a parade of windy speech making and innocuous resolutions. It is ridiculous to assert that Purcell, Hicks and their fellows were “unmasked” by the communists even after the event, when the Stalin-Tomsky-Bucharin bloc sought at all costs, including the surrender of principle, to maintain their relations with the British labor bureaucracy. When you have followed such a consistent opportunist line for years you cannot suddenly turn around and repair the damage with dramatic ultra left gestures. There was nothing in the preceding conduct of the Communist Party to prepare the workers to follow its latest “new line” with conviction The workers saw the spectacle of the Central Committee of the Party itself at one time wide open on the question of an independent electoral policy. The Stalin policy is primarily responsible for the disastrous showing of the British Communists in the election. The slogan of “Class against Class” which they parroted with the French Stalinites, fell on deaf ears. Had the communists carried out the line indicated for them in Trotsky’s Whither England written before the General Strike, the leftward movement of the British working class would not have been directed as it has been, chiefly into the channels of parliamentary reformism.
 



Of organized opposition there was an almost complete absence at this year’s convention of the American Federation of Labor in Toronto. Neither the Left Wing nor the so-called Muste progressive group were in evidence. The internationally notorious hierarchy of “business unionism” reigned supreme and unchallenged from the floor. Yet the old hard-boiled arrogance of which Gompers was the incarnation, seemed noticeably shaken on occasion. As much as it would like to, the bureaucracy of the A.F. of L. can as little as Mussolini succeed in putting a stop to the class struggle. Fighting exploitation bravely and desperately, the awakening of the South at Gastonia, Marion and Elizabethton, became by virtue of their role the sort of opposition that could not easily be ignored, proclaiming more forcefully than a hundred resolutions, the bankruptcy of the bureaucrats.
This bankruptcy is becoming so flagrant and obvious that it begins to make the wiser heads of the American bourgeoisie feel uncomfortable. The Scripps-Howard press carried so pointed and well-informed an editorial attack on the A.F. of L. failure to function as a labor organization, that it made the officialdom wince, stinging that would-be statesman Green into public recrimination. The attitude of the liberal press is understandable. It regards “moderate” trade unionism as a safety-valve, a bulwark against revolutionary movement, a pillar of capitalist society. If the A.F. of L. ceases even to perform the duties of “moderate” trade unionism, and merely duplicates the activity of the National Civic Federation, or say, the American Legion, the Left Wing is given a clear field in which to proceed with the militant organization and leadership of the working class. The activities of the Communists in Passaic, New Bedford, and more recently in Gastonia have made a considerable impression on the more far-sighted circles of the possessing classes.
The liberal view was echoed on the floor of the Convention by the “old-war horse” Furuseth and by Fitzpatrick of the Vaudeville Actors. Furuseth taunted the officialdom with having become soft and comfortable and made a veiled attack particularly on J.L. Lewis, for the latter’s cowardly attitude in the 1919 strike when he refused to fight the federal injunction on the ground that “we cannot fight our government”. In the interests of “the sound A.F. of L. philosophy” Fitzpatrick called for an injection of some of the spirit manifested by “the fanatical Communists who are willing to suffer, bleed and die for their unsound philosophy”. He was also of the opinion that “our mission is not to found banks and life insurance companies, but to be the refuge of the desperate workers who have no other place to turn.”
Under the lash of the Southern events, the bureaucracy had to conduct the necessary manoeuvres to save its face. The convention resolved to raise funds immediately from the international unions and to call a conference within thirty days to map out an organizing campaign into the southern states. Past experience teaches us to accept these gusty resolutions of the machine with a good deal of salt. Similar gestures were made in 1927 in connection with the Pittsburgh coal conference, and at divers times in connection with organizing campaigns in the automobile industry. Green and Company are not overjoyed at the militancy of the Southern workers. In the very midst of discussing the southern situation, Green raised his voice to warn them that “they must not lightly go on strike” expecting the A.F. of L. to pour millions in to help them.
The labor bureaucrats have no stomach for the class struggle. Their ideal is to “sell the trade union movement” (their phrase!) to the boss peacefully, as one businessman to another. Their hearts are in class-collaboration, in “union-management cooperation” in banks and in life insurance companies. They are seriously concerned not about fighting the injunction but in the graft of jurisidictional struggles. Their own security and salaries are first charges on the organization. Militant wage struggles or struggles for unionization disturb the even tenor of their lives and are as far as possible to be avoided. It is with real relief that they welcomed the turn in the needle trades situation that temporarily gives the Rights the upper hand and Schlesinger-Dubinsky were congratulated for having “wiped out the vestiges of Communism” among the fur workers and garment workers. Incidentally it was broadly hinted that negotiation? are under way for the admission of Amalgamated Clothing Workers Sidney Hillman would fit in nowadays and could even teach the others a few tricks of his own about the scientific exploitation of the worker.
The bureaucrats were right in their element listening to Sir Henry Thornton of the Canadian National Railway deliver a eulogy of union-management cooperation of the B. and O. Plan. Sir Henry, whose salary has just been boosted to $90,000 a year, had little difficulty in proving that “cooperation” was very satisfactory – for employers. It brought greater efficiency and higher production, of that there could be no doubt He discreetly omitted to add that it brought no corresponding increases in pay, no improvement of conditions, or greater regularity of employment. As a matter of fact, just about the time Thornton was dilating on cooperation, more men were being laid off in the Canadian National Railway yards.
Fresh from his “good-will” conversations with Hoover, “fellow-workman” Ramsay MacDonald was another guest to the convention and treated it to a goodly modicum of his swollen and meaningless pracifist verbiage. He was hailed with delight. The A.F. of L. bureaucracy never fails to take its cue from the State Department. Momentarily, American imperialism finds it most advantageous to advance its interests under the guise of the Kellogg Pact, naval disarmament conferences, etc. Meanwhile the antagonism between British and American capital for the shrinking world market is growing and maturing the condition for another world war. In these circumstances, the organization of the working class for resistance to the war danger by exposing its roots in capitalism and imperialism, should be a major task of the trade union movement. Instead, Green and his fellow bureaucrats play the pseudo-pacifist game of the American Government as they played its war game in the past and will assuredly re-enact the part of the “patriot” Gompers in the future. When Bodenheimer, commander of the American Legion fulfilled his share of the division of labor by appealing for support of greater preparedness, a bigger navy and universal conscription, Green gently chided him for being out of step which does not mean that he himself is not prepared to be as openly imperialist as Bodenheimer when the amenities next require it, say at the Plattsburg manoeuvres.
No A.F. of L. convention would be complete without jurisdictional squabbles of mutual charges of corruption. The feature this year was the set-to between Lewis and Fishwick of the Illinois district. Each accused the other of corruption. Fishwick sent a wire to the convention proposing that both Lewis’ and: his own books be submitted to an audit, to be followed by the resignation of whichever’s books were discovered not to be straight. Fishwick could have made this confident offer less from any exuberant consciousness of his own integrity as from an overpowering certitude of Lewis’ corruption. Needless to say, Fishwick’s telegram was ignored.
The reactionary character of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy was well demonstrated in its advocacy of old-age pensions. Not that the adoption of this decision was in itself a backward step; on the contrary. But the fact that so elementary a reform of labor conditions, which exists in one manner or other in numerous countries, could be advocated only after so much sharp controversy and then hailed as a “revolutionary forward step” of the A.F. of L. leadership, speaks eloquently of the deep-seated nature of this leadership’s backwardness.
There have been worse conventions of the A.F. of L. than this. It met under the sign of a growing mood of struggle among the workers, which had inevitably to be reflected in the temper of the convention. But the reflection of this mood, in Toronto was a perverted one, a distortion, a caricature. Whole oceans separate the speeches of Green on the textile situation in the South and the sharp reality of the struggles there. When the bureaucrats take “one step forward” it is quite certain that the workers have already taken two or three or ten such steps, so that Green and Wolls continue to remain behind the spirit and actions of the workers, always pulling them backward. The failure or refusal to understand this role of the trade union bureaucracy will nurture the baseless illusions about their “regeneration” which have become current in certain “progressive” circles.
The sectarian policy of the Communists and Left Wing on the one hand, and the timidity of the new progressive movement resulted in a total absence of a single voice at the convention that could speak out in condemnation of the destruction wrought by the present leadership in the labor movement, of the ruination of its strongest unions, of the enormous set-backs in numerical strength and influence precisely in this period. It was open season for the bureaucrats of all shades, with no competition present. The work that has thus far been neglected by the Left wing must be begun in earliest.
 



For the Tory government the recent series of of reverses in agricultural no less than in industrial constituencies spell the handwriting on the wall. A premonition of their political fate prompts one of their noted publicists to remark that “the ministerial dullness is like a processional death march in anticipation of one’s own funeral.” Mr. Baldwin still sucks his pipe blandly but the Chinese poet must have had someone like the British Premier in mind, when his own life having been wrecked by intelligence he prayed for a scion sufficiently dull to qualify for the tranquil career of cabinet minister. It may be doubted if a bushel of the reddest “Zinoviev” letters for the Orloff factory lately raided in Berlin, could steam up the “Great British Electorate” to drown the memories of the last four and a half years of Conservative futility.
On the hustings Baldwin continues to reiterate that “socialism is an economic dance of death” but the large and inescapable fact stands out that there are just a quarter of a million more unemployed on the register today than when the Tories took office with the biggest majority, barring one, in British parliamentary history. Other “achievements” of this regime are the lengthening of the miners’ hours, intervention in China, rupture with the Soviet Union, suppression of the General Strike, and enactment of repressive legislation against trade unionism.
 
The Loyal Oppositions
The signs point to a second Labor government in the form of a more or less veiled “Lib-Lab” coalition, and guided by Ramsey Macdonald’s precepts of “continuity”. That is to say, his present indictment of the Baldwin Administration for its: “inaction and reaction” will fully apply to his own. There will be no Marxian and Bolshevik “despotic inroads into property”. The first Labor government recognized Soviet Russia grudgingly, carried out the cruiser program of their Conservative predecessors, bombed the natives of Irak for taxes, maintained the British Raj in India, avoided anything savoring of nationalization, and helped to put the Dawes Plan into operation.
Since then the British masses have tended more and more to the Left, have gone through the experiences of Red Friday and the General Strike, but the reformist bureaucracy has succeeded in transforming the Labor Party, structurally and in program, into a conventional social-democratic party, worshiping more and more zealously at the shrine of the Constitution and the Empire. Not only are the Communists excluded by chapter and verse but local labor parties suspected of “red” sympathies can be and are also excluded. Nationalization and the capital levy have been dropped from the docket of “practical politics”. Philip Snowden, who may be presumed to know the intentions of his Party, goes so far as to commit himself to the thunderous iconoclasm of a Federal Reserve Banking system! (New York World, March 23, 1929) Nothing is more certain than that the second MacDonald government will prove as helpless in the face of the stern realities as the parties of Capital. It has been truly observed that you cannot make a revolution with rosewater.
 
England’s Economic Position
The chronic depression for the past six years in the British basic industries, coal, iron, steel, textiles, shipbuilding, is no pre-war cyclical fluctuation of “bad trade”. That is why, during this whole period, successive British cabinets have achieved the impressive results of the members of the old German Club who sat around a table over the center of which was suspended an illuminated board bearing the device: “Es muss was geschehen”. (Something must be done about it.)
England experienced a profound economic crisis and sharp class struggle following the Napoleonic wars, but that proved a crisis of growth, heralding an era of unexampled industrial expansion in a world where other countries were still in the grip of feudalism like Japan, struggling for national unification like Germany, or pioneering like the United States. British pre-war prosperity was rooted in primacy and monopoly in the world market, and these advantages have since disappeared. In these circumstances, rationalization can as little avail as free trade or protection: it can only accentuate the dilemma of British capitalism in a world of increased productive power, intensified competition, and a diminishing market and serious enhance the danger of a second world war.
The Anglo-American antagonism has replaced the Anglo-German in the fateful role it plays in world politics.
“We may as well face the fact,” writes the London Economist, “that the United States in the 20th century is likely to be a much more formidable economic competitor than Germany was in the latter part of the 19th century ... A refusal on our part to make the possible and necessary adjustment would court political and economic disaster.”
On the point of how this adjustment is to be made, the Economist is not explicit but points to the pacific note struck by Hoover in his inaugural address. (“I covet for this administration a record of having further contributed to the advance of world peace.”) Bourgeois pacifists generally hope for the elimination of the competitive causes of war through bigger and better production and sales agreements of international cartels. It was this same Hoover however, who as secretary of commerce formulated American economic policy in these terms:
“The establishment of international price-fixing machinery will never be considered by the people of the United States. United States is more pledged to open competition than any other nation in the world.” (U.S. Daily, February 31 [sic!], 1927)
The United States Senate will sign the Kellogg Pact and pass the Cruiser Bill. The British cabinet will endorse the Locarno Agreement and arrange the Anglo-French naval compromise. The Geneva conferences will go up in smoke.
 
Weakness of Communist Party
In this changed position of British capitalism, the British working class has ceased to be the “bourgeois” working class it was in the description of Engels’s letter to Kautsky in 1882. The basis of opportunism and “Liberal-Labor” politics has been profoundly undermined. But, unfortunately, despite the rich instructions of the capitalist offensive, of the great strikes, the general election finds the influences of the reformists strengthened and that of the revolutionaries weakened.
In the municipal elections of last year, the Communists lost even their three seats in Bethnall Green. The British Communist, R.P. Dutt, who is quite free from the taint of “Trotskyism”, nevertheless makes this important admission: “At the same time as the leftward advance of the working class is going forward, in 1927, visibly in every direction, the Communist Party is not only stationary but actually going down.” (Communist International, March 15, 1928.) At the last convention of the British Communist Party, its membership was actually down to 3,500. It is no pleasure to record this rout of British Communism but we are under no obligations to send Stalin war communiques from the realm of Peter Pan trumpeting forth the heavy massacre of the enemy and our own trifling losses.
The impotence of the British Communist Party is the punishment history has meted out for the whole opportunist and centrist line of the Comintern since the Fifth Congress At no point of its analysis has the Opposition led by L.D. Trotsky been vindicated with greater precision than its unflagging criticism of the subordination of the interests of the revolutionary movement to the requirements of the Anglo-Russian Committee (the bloc of the Soviet trade unions with the reformists of the General Council). This policy was initiated in 1924 when Zinoviev, before his temporary break with Stalin, developed the idea that the avenue to the proletarian dictatorship in England might lie through the Purcells, Hickses et al. and not necessarily through the Communist Party, a revisionist conception against which Trotsky protested in his Lessons of October (1924).
It was continued under Buchanan who compared the proposal to withdraw from the Anglo-Russian Committee after the betrayal of the General Strike with the enormity of WITHDRAWING FROM THE SOVIETS IN 1917! Stalin in July 1926 before the Plenum of the Russian Central Committee defined the tasks of the Anglo-Russian Committee “to organize a broad working class movement against new imperialist wars, particularly against intervention in our country”. To this the Opposition replied: “The more acute the international position grows, to that extent the Anglo-Russian Committee will become an instrument of British and international imperialism.”
 
The Anglo-Russian Committee
The Anglo-Russian Committee became the Holy of Holies, which it was sacrilege to attack for inaction. The British Party leadership wanted to renew the agitation for a revival of the Anglo-Russian Committee after it had already become a carcass. In a “confidential” communication to the Presidium of the E.C.C.I. July 1926) the British C.E.C. PROTESTED AGAINST THE CHARACTERIZATION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL AS “LACKEYS OF CAPITALISM”. In the article of Dutt already referred to, he diplomatically reaveals that “there is no doubt that there was some misunderstanding by Communists of the united front as a direct personal support for and building up of the prestige of these treacherous pseudo-Left leaders, and their exposure only after the “event”. The Bells, Murphys and Gallachers had drunk deeply at the well of the Stalin faction.
DID NOT TOMSKY PROPOSE AT THE 14th CONGRESS OF THE RUSSIAN PARTY THAT THE SOVIET TRADE UNIONS SHOULD ENTER THE AMSTERDAM INTERNATIONAL? Does the membership of the Comintern know of Tomsky’s famous telegram from Paris, May 12, to the Russian Polit-Bureau proposing that “the Communist Party of Great Britain should submit to the decision of the General Council” to break off the strike, which in his view was to be considered as a “partial MORAL VICTORY OF THE PROLETARIAT”? The so-called “new line” of the British Communists (independent political action and candidates) is too far at the tail end of events again to influence this election.
 
Trotsky on England
Towards the development of the British revolution, we of the Communist Opposition look forward with supreme confidence.
“The entire world situation and role of the British proletariat in production and in society assure it of the victory provided its leadership be truly and resolutely revolutionary ... The Communist Party will prepare itself for the function of leadership only by a merciless criticism of the entire dominating staff of the English labor movement, only by a constant unmasking of the conservative, anti-proletarian, imperialist functionaries in all the fields of social life ... It would be a monstrous illusion that these ‘left’ elements of the Old School are capable of heading the revolutionary movement of the English proletariat in its struggle for power.”
These words were written by comrade Trotsky in his Whither England, in the heyday of the Anglo-Russian Committee and before the General Strike, and they are a golden text for working class strategy today. The second Labor government or Liberal-Labor coalition will collapse miserably under the weight of the contradictions of British imperialism, maturing still further the conditions for a mass Communist Party, capable of leading towards a revolutionary socialist workers’ dictatorship.
 



The “cloud by day and pillar of fire by night” that the Stalin E.C.C.I. conjures up to shield its disastrous ultra-left zig-zag, is the so-called “Third Period” invented in the theses of the Comintern Congress last July. Now in every Daily Worker contribution to the fraudulent “enlightenment campaign” this “third period” is invoked with deadly monotony as the latest all-sufficient, all-hallowing fetish before which the credulous party member must make the sign of the cross.
Insight into the motives for the invention of the “Third Period” may be gained from the study of a not dissimilar manoeuvre executed by the Zinoviev-Stalin leadership at the Fifth Congress (1924) at the beginning of the present crisis in the Soviet Union and the International. The German revolutionary situation of 1923 precipitated by the occupation of the Ruhr and economic collapse, the most favorable opportunity for the workers’ conquest of political power since the Russian, was lost not only by the impotent Brandler-Thalheimer strategy but the no less feeble direction of the E.C.C.I. Zinoviev repeated the laisser-faire policy that disgraced him in the crucial test of 1917. The sagacious Stalin advocated allowing the Fascisti to get power first! Following the debacle, the bureaucratic Zinoviev-Stalin bloc dominating the E.C.C.I. had to salvage their papal infallibility in the Comintern at all costs, particularly as they were entrenching themselves for the thermidorian falsification of the legacy of Lenin under the guise of a crusade against “trotskyism”. The slogan that was invented for this purpose was “Bolshevization”, ostensibly aimed at social-democratic traditions in the communist parties.
 
The Fifth Congress
The Fifth Congress was accordingly fixed up to look very “left” The E.C.C.I. proceeded to throw the blame for all that had gone wrong on the German leadership, on the objective situation, on the Russian Opposition, on the form of party organization, on everybody and anything but itself. The ultra-lefts whom Zinoviev had long patronized in, reserve displaced the Brandlers and Thalheimers. “Give us fifty such as Maslow,” said Stalin in a session of the International Control Commission, “and we will have no more anxiety on the score of the German Revolution”. The chameleon Varga, taking on protective coloration, helped Zinoviev to furnish the Congress with a suitably misleading estimate of the world situation. The significance of American intervention for the stabilization of Europe, for the revival of social-democracy, and as a source of future revolutionary upheavals, was completely missed. Armed insurrection was retained on the agenda as an immediate prospect and the putsch in Esthonia was a subsequent by-product.
But the “left course” did not endure very long. Like a bolt from the blue to the Congress itself, came the announcement that the Russian unions were negotiating a bloc with the British General Council for international trade union unity and resistance to the war danger. This orientation on unity with the Amsterdam bureaucracy was the entering wedge of the series of opportunist acts which was the yielding of the Right-Center bloc in the Russian party to the increasing pressure of outside capitalist stabilization and the internal pressure of the kulak, nepman and bureaucrat. At a time when the stabilization was again showing its weaknesses in Great Britain, when the revolution was developing in China, and a new stage of struggle between capitalist and socialist elements was opening in the Soviet Union, Stalin promulgated the slogan “Fire to the Left”, formulated the theory of “socialism in one country” with its implication of capitalist stabilization for decades, and came into sharp conflict with the Leningrad Opposition headed by the left centrist Zinoviev at the Fourteenth Party Congress (1925). The swing to the right of the Marxist line in the Russian party was thereupon automatically effected in the whole International. By means of such dishonest expedients as the Open Letter to the German Party, the Fisher-Maslow leadership was eliminated to cut the Leningrad Opposition off from a base in Western Europe, and the E.C.C.I. so unanimously elected at the Fifth Congress was bureaucratically re-constructed in the image of Stalin at successive plenums without mandate from any Congress and in violation of the statutes.
 
Juggling with “Periods”
Four years elapsed between the Fifth and Sixth Congresses, during which time the re-vamped E.C.C.I. was the obedient instrument and rubber-stamp of the ruling Right-Center (Rykov-Bucharin-Stalin) bloc. We have seen how the analysis of the international situation was made at the Fifth Congress to suit factional ends. This procedure was repeated at the Sixth Congress four years later, when Bucharin and Stalin did their juggling with the “periods”. The official Communist International (Vol. VI No. 9–10) recently smuggled in an editorial admission that “in 1926–7 ... on the basis of the partial stabilization of capitalism, a revolutionary crisis developed in the far West and East”. This is what the Communist Opposition, of course, said in those years when it was most important to say it. But for transparent reasons the theses of the Sixth Congress (1928) define the interval between the Fifth and Sixth Congresses, inclusive of 1926–7, the “second period of the post-war capitalism”, in a way to suggest that it was not a period of revolutionary possibilities. In the re-capitulation of the attributes of this “second period”, its architects conveniently “forget” to mention the facts of the Chinese Revolution, the British General Strike and the Viennese uprising. It is merely spoken of as a period of “relative stabilization, defensive struggles of the workers, successful socialist construction in the U.S.S.R. growing political influence of the Communist Parties, and inner consolidation of the Comintern.” Nine-tenths of this characterization is falsehood and the remaining tenth needs qualification.
The method of optimistic lying to maintain the prestige of the leadership and keep up the “morale” of the home populace is not Marxist but was habitually resorted to by the general staffs in their communiques during the late world war. The history of the “second period” was falsified to stifle discussion and prevent the heavy accounting that otherwise Stalin and Bucharin would have had to render. They would have had to explain why they failed to give the correct bolshevik leadership that would have utilized the revolutionary possibilities of this period to develop offensives for the overthrow of the stabilization. They would have had to admit that they displayed no revolutionary initiative but pursued such right wing and centrist policies that objectively helped to strengthen capitalism, that they staked nearly all on the Kuomintang bourgeoisie, undermined the independence of the Chinese Communist Party, and opposed the propagation of the Soviets. They would have been found guilty of transforming the British Communist Party and the Minority movement into adjuncts of the British General Council, incapable of offering any substantial resistance to the betrayal of the General Strike. Under the shadow of their regime, the Viennese uprising found the Communist Party helpless and bewildered, the Sacco-Vanzetti demonstrations developed really outside the orbit of the Comintern influence, the French Party after heroic proclamations against the American Legion, turned tail and retired for polite demonstration to a Parisian suburb and the Red Day organized by the Czech Party against Fascism was turned into a farce by the passivity of the leadership.
The extension of the political influence of the Communist parties and their inner consolidation during this period are equally myths. The machine man Piatnitski’s brochure Organization of the World Party establishes for the critical reader that the membership of nearly every communist party declined, as did their trade union influence, press circulation and political activity of the nuclei. The membership of the American Party, it may be recalled, fell from 16,325 in 1925 to 7,277 in 1928. The proceedings of the Sixth Congress will show that every “monolithic” party was rent by violent factional struggles that resulted in fresh splits in Czecho-Slovakia, the United States, Germany in addition to those which had already taken place in France, Holland, Belgium and the Soviet Union. The authors of the “second” and “third” periods equally misrepresent the real situation in the Soviet Union, where under their regime the growth of the restorationist elements culminated in a bloodless uprising of the Kulaks creating the grain crisis of 1927–8, and they omit to record the unparalleled development of bureaucracy in party and state apparatus.
(Concluded in Next Issue)
 



(Concluded from Last Issue)
So much for the first part of their manoeuvre to avoid responsibility. But the rank and file was beginning to get restive. The hammer-blows of the Opposition platform were beginning to sink in especially as the passage of events continued swiftly to vindicate its every important argument and criticism. Repression, deportation, expulsion, slander, and victimization were proving insufficient for the bureaucracy to maintain their grip on office. The grain crisis in Russia, the Chiang Kai-Shek coup in China, the corpse of the Anglo-Russian committee, the consequent weakening of the international position of the Soviet Union (Arcos and Pekin raids) the exposures of degeneration and corruption in the party and state machines, were too flagrant to dispose of with mere abuse of the Opposition. The growing unrest had to be canalized. The old gag of “bolshevization” had lost its force. So resort was had first to “self criticism”, which meant anything but criticism, of the leadership,” and secondly, a “new line” for a “new period”. At the Fifteenth Russian Party Congress (1927) and at the subsequent Ninth Plenum of the E.C.C.I. the outlines and the strategy of the “Third Period” began to emerge. The sophistic Bucharin suddenly discovered that the social-democratic leaders were merging with the state-apparatus and were traitors to the working class and that henceforth only a “united front” from below” was permissible. Hitherto communists had been under the impression that the social democratic leaders were traitors in 1914, 1927, 1919, 1923 and a number of intervening years and that they had been pretty well merged with the state apparatus all this time. Is Arthur Henderson more “merged” with the State and a bigger traitor today than when Lenin urged that the Communists support him as a rope does a man hanged, or when Henderson was in the first Labor Government? But the capitulations to Purcell, Hicks, and Cook, during the “second period” had to be explained away. Furthermore said Bucharin, the independent role of the communist parties must now be strengthened and the British and French Communist Parties, but yesterday enthusiasts for the Chiang Kai-Sheks and the Cooks, were presented with the slogan of “Class Against Class” for use in forthcoming struggles. Apparently Bucharin-Stalin would have us believe the communist parties knew and practised nothing of their independent role during the active leadership of Lenin before the “class against class” slogan was launched.
The “Third Period” with which the “Right Danger” was tied up, blossomed out into full glory at the Sixth Congress. Bucharin and Stalin, Serra and Ercoli, Ewert and Thaelmann, Lovestone and Foster equally gave it their blessing. It was a meaningless and platitudinous substitute for the concrete Marxist analysis of the given class relations and world situation upon which communist strategy must base itself. The “Third Period” is defined as one of capitalist stabilization but of growing contradictions which leads to the danger of fresh wars for the shrinking world market, sharpens the danger of an attack on the Soviet Union, and brings with it a leftward movement of the working class and an intensification of the general crisis of capitalism. This definition adds exactly nothing to the fundamental and elementary communist conception of the epoch of imperialism as one of wars and revolutions and capitalist decline which was as true at the Third Congress in 1922 as at the Sixth in 1928. But because it is so general and vague, the definition of the “Third Period” unanimously endorsed by the Right and Center at the Congress, has also served as the argument of each of these factions against the other since the struggle in the Right-Center bloc began to assume sharpen forms.
 
The Comintern Rights
The Right Wing in the Soviet Union bases itself socially on the state bureaucracy, and the upper crust of the labor aristocracy, and the new possessing classes. It worked out its real perspectives on the international situation and the stabilization in common with the centrist Stalin party apparatus, in the theory of socialism in one country, which is the revision of the international socialist character of the Russian revolution. It implies the stabilization of capitalism for decades, the attempted retreat to the theoretical positions of the party in 1905 (bourgeois revolution) The rights in the Comintern must formulate their outlook less bluntly than the social democracy which expresses its outright belief in the consolidation of capitalism as a progressive historical factor. The tradition of Marx and Lenin is still strong in the Communist masses, and this compels the Rights to proceed in round about ways. Their perspective includes the peaceful cohabitation of socialist and capitalist system, the formation of Workers and Peasants Parties, the kulak’s growth into socialism, the orientation on Amsterdam, collaboration with the national colonial bourgeoisie. Brandler and Thalheimer have expressed agreement with the program of the Bucharin-Rykov Right in Russia, and so does the Right elsewhere.
The ultra-left zig-zag is represented by the Russian party bureaucracy which is centrist, that is, it swings between social democracy and communism, between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. The strength of Stalin is in the party apparatus, which however, is more subject to the pressure of the party masses, with their revolutionary traditions of October. Jointly responsible for the opportunist theories and course of the past six years with the Rights, the fear of the influence of the Opposition among the industrial workers and The awakening of their revolutionary class consciousness, has led the Center to advertise a “swing to the left” a move which is either shadow-boxing or a swing to the left of the Marxist line. The centrist staffs of the parties of the Comintern, subsidized appointees of Stalin, imitate their master closely or follow out instructions implicitly. The centrists seek to extricate themselves from the fruits of their past collaboration with the Rights unsuccessfully because they cannot follow a true Marxist policy without recognizing the monstrous errors committed in the fight against the Leninist Opposition. Hence the obverse side of Stalin’s cooperation with Chiang Kai-Shek is the Canton Putsch.
 
Ultra-Left Adventurism of Centrists
The centrists interpret their “Third Period” as an almost immediate revolutionary and war situation. The May Day events in Germany were hailed in extravagant terms as a proof of the rising tide of the revolutionary movement. The terms of the call of the Western European Bureau of the Comintern leave little doubt that the First of August was conceived as some sort of dress rehearsal for the insurrection. The Soviet Union is pictured as in danger of imminent attack. Fascism and social democracy are identified without regard for their specific political functions. The social democratic worker is characterized as the most reactionary element of the working class, and the unorganized worker as the most revolutionary. The leftward movement of the working class is monstrously exaggerated. The slogans of “united front from below” and “class against class” are used to liquidate the policy of the united front in general and in the trade union work in particular. All warnings are disregarded. No heed is paid to the results of the Saxony elections which registered losses for the communist party despite the May day events, to the apathy of the German workers in face of the proscription of the Red Front organization, to the fiasco of the “new line” in England where the party secured some paltry 50.000 votes, to communist impotence in the Ruhr struggle. The results of this ultra-left adventurism are seen clearly in the United States in the isolation of the party in the fight for Gastonia, in the debacle of the left wing furriers’ strike which it was responsible for, in its failure to exercise any influence on the cloak makers stoppage, in the loss of its base in the needle trades in general, in the playing with the idea of a new socialist trades and labor alliance of dual unions, in its inability to manoeuvre in connection with the new progressive movement in the trade unions. For the real Left in the Comintern, the Communist Opposition, the basic estimate of the epoch given by Lenin remains valid to day as it was several years ago when it began to fight the theory of national socialism. No real Marxist policy can be pursued until the program of the International is cleared of revisionist undergrowth. We recognize more than ever the force of Lenin’s dictum that without revolutionary theory there can be no revolutionary practise. The decline of the capitalist system, however, does not proceed in an unbroken curve. The defeats of the proletariat in 1923 helped the capitalists stabilize the system, and gave the social democracy a new lease of life though on a different basis than before 1914. We cannot disregard the fact that the defeats in China, Great Britain have not strengthened but weakened the proletariat. The contradictions of capitalism are again in the process of maturing and not explosion.
 
Class Against Class
The leftward movement of the workers must not be exaggerated. There is such a movement but it still flows in reformist and parliamentary channels. In Europe it is a movement from the bourgeois parties to the social democracy and and on a much smaller scale to the communist parties. In the United States it takes the comparatively primitive form of sporadic struggles in the worst paid industries, in a certain revival of progressivism in the trade unions, in scattered signs of labor party sentiment. Our policies must be adapted accordingly. The united front must be our guide to the winning of the masses, and unity must be our slogan in the trade unions even while we proceed legitimately to the organization of the unorganized. The slogan of “class against class” as issued by the Comintern looks terribly radical but is in reality a reversion to the Lasallean theory of the single reactionary mass outside the industrial workers. A class movements is not created by the use of so general a slogan but on the basis of the concrete needs and demands of the workers in their developing struggles linked up with the final goals. Not “class against class” but peace, land and bread was the slogan launched by the bolsheviki even in the directly revolutionary crisis of 1917. The period requires concrete programs of action, flowing not only from the revolutionary estimate of the international situation but expressing the specific characteristic and demands of the situation in each country. The senseless confusion of social democracy and fascism must be abandoned. The former play their main role as agents of the bourgeoisie in the peaceful parliamentary period and the fascisti are their arm in the period of direct civil war, and different tactics must be applied in the approach to each. Millions of workers are still in the fold of the social democracy and their leaders have not yet been “unmasked” to them. The “united front from below” cannot be regarded as the exclusive legitimate form of the united front. It cannot be any less permissible now than in the days of Lenin to engage in united fronts form “above” as well as below, if that does not take the form of the Anglo-Russian Committee replacing the mobilization of the masses and the independence of the party, by mere combinations with the leaders. It is the Opposition that has been fighting all these years for the independent role of the Communist Party in England, in China and else-whore. The idea of Workers and Peasants Parties. and Blocs as a substitute for the party should be expunged from the program and strategy of the Comintern.
 



Pravda has published a long statement on “the deviations and mistakes of Comrade Bucharin”. By order of the Stalin bureaucracy, Zinoviev’s successor may now be openly and fearlessly reviled by all the faithful who but recently applauded his every utterance as the distilled essence of Leninism. Perhaps we may yet read the sad story of the “golden child of the revolution” who was transformed into MISTER Bucharin and trod the snowy wastes of Siberia – with notes and addenda by the saintly fish-wife Emelian Yaroslavsky.
The official communique on Bucharin’s fate finds our eyes dry. In 1917 he paid tribute to Trotsky as “that brilliant and heroic tribune of the insurrection, that flaming apostle of the revolution”. That did not prevent him, on the death of Lenin, from joining in the bureaucratic conspiracy to distort the history of the revolution and defame the great revolutionary he had admired. Thereafter there was no gathering of the Communist International in Moscow where Bucharin was not set up to deliver scholastic diatribes against the “permanent revolution” and to lecture Trotsky on his “mistakes”. The innocent by-stander would never have guessed of this theoretician, of whom Lenin wrote in his last Testament that “he never has learned, and I think never fully understood the (Marxian) dialectic”.
 
The “Infallible Old Guard”
We did not have to wait for the latest ukase of Pravda to learn that “it is impossible for the Party to consider Comrade Bucharin as the infallible guardian of Lenin’s legacy.” One by one the veneer has been scraped off these “infallible guardians”. We have got to know the individuals of this self-congratulatory “Old Guard”, who have resorted to every expedient of demagogy to usurp the power in the Party. The story of the strikebreaking role of Zinoviev and Kamenev in October has been retold officially. Rykov and Losovsky were no better. But when will Pravda oblige us with some data on the role of Stalin, this artificially manufactured “great man” who never had an idea before the revolution, hatched one for a coalition with Tseretelli during the revolution, and became joint author with Bucharin of the reactionary idea of national socialism since. When will Pravda oblige with the political biographies of the crowd of lesser guardians of Leninism, the motley crowds of ex-Mensheviks, nationalists, Social Revolutionaries, Bundists, and adventurers, who wormed themselves into the apparatus of the Comintern, Bela Kun, Remmele, Semard, Smeral, Manuilsky, Martinov, Petrovsky – Goldfarb, Pepper and Lovestpne, Jilek, Hais, Brandler and Thalheimer – these too once did great feats of arms in the crusade against Trotsky.
Somewhat tardily the political biography of Bucharin is gone over in the stereotyped verbiage of the officialdom. It would have been more important to have gone into that a couple of years ago, to have warned the Party then that Bucharin was not “infallible”, to have told of his differences with Lenin on the Brest Treaty and the Trade Unions and state capitalism and Comintern strategy, to have pointed out at the time the reactionary nonsense implicit in his theory of building socialism “even at a snail’s pace”. But the Centrist Stalin faction was as deeply involved in steering a course towards the “development of capitalist relations in the village” and towards slowing up the tempo of industrialization, as Rykov, Bucharin and Tomsky. When over two years ago the Platform of the Opposition warned against the Right danger and named the groupings and persons in the Central Committee, it was denounced as slander. The present Pravda statement relates that there have been “profound, fundamental differences for more than a year” but the Centrist boss Stalin has lied to the Party again and again, denying that there were any internal differences in the Politbureau. This is the typically bureaucratic method of leading the Party blind-folded.
 
The Centrists and the Right
Under the crack of the Opposition whip, the Centrists have executed a series of manoeuvres to give the appearance of a change of course. They have made it lawful to talk of the “Right danger is the main danger”. But the bloc of the Centrists with the Right wing in the Russian Party has not yet been dissolved. Rykov, Kalinin, Voroshilov and many more like them still sit either in the Politbureau or the Central Committee biding their time, waiting for more favorable winds to resume the offensive. Impolite words may be used against the Rights, but the Stalin machine redoubles its measure of savage persecution of the Lenin (Trotsky) Opposition of the Left, The Centrists are incapable of waging a serious or prolonged battle against the Rights. The removals of Bucharin and Tomsky are apparatus manipulations. A serious fight would involve the mobilization of the masses and the Stalinite bureaucracy is afraid of the masses no less than the Right wing. The Rights would prefer an orderly and bureaucratic orientation in favor of their policies and hesitate at the moment to appeal to their real constituency with the battle cry used so effectively against the Opposition: “Peasants Unite! Trotsky is going to rob you of your little properties and savings”. Without the Party apparatus in their hands the Rights would have to appeal practically for civil war, and for this they are not prepared.
Only the Communist Opposition of Trotsky which retains its independence of both the Right and Center can afford to appeal to the masses to be on their guard against the Thermidorians.
“Where is the Party?” is a question that is frequently asked. The answer is that the bureaucracy has kept the Party strangled. With the machinery of repression in its control, the Stalin officialdom talks in the name of the Party. For the Opposition therefore the serious fight against the Right wing which must emanate from the mobilization of the masses, involves the fight to free the Party masses from the strangle-hold of the Centrist bureaucracy. It is a struggle not only against Bucharin but no less against boss Stalin, with his national socialism.
Bucharin started out as un ultra left. John Reed in his Ten Days reported that Bucharin was deemed by many to be “more Left than Lenin”. Today Professor Ustrialov, the spokesman for the new Soviet possessing classes (Nepman, bureaucrat and Kulak) hails him as the hope of the Soviet bourgeoisie. “Bucharin – that means peace,” writes this former Cadet.
 



FIVE YEARS HAVE passed since the inauguration of the New Deal and what is the celebrated State of the Union? The level of industrial production in March of this year stood at 37 per cent below last year’s. Production plunged from 1929 to 1933 levels, in the brief span of a single year, a feat the Hoover Administration took three years to chalk up. Quoted stock values on the New York Stock Exchange were reduced by $27,000,000,000 in the course of a year. Steel is working at 30 per cent capacity. The purchasing power of the farm dollar is 25 per cent less than a year ago. The ranks of the unemployed have swollen to thirteen million. AH in all, it would seem, a singularly inappropriate moment for the Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt to appear! The five volumes successively bear these titles: The Genesis of the New Deal, 1928–1932; the Year of the Crisis, 1933; The Advance of Recovery and Reform, 1934; The Court Disapproves, 1935; The People Approve, 1936. The conclusive sequel to this apotheosis was furnished rudely and without permission of the Brain Trust, by history in 1937.
The precipitous economic decline is relegating the myth of the New Deal to a place alongside its predecessor, the illusion of the New Era (1923–29). The economic millenium of Harding and Coolidge seems now pre-glacially remote. But dewy-eyed pilgrims from the European social-democracy once came questing to those shores for the secret of eternal prosperity. The installment plan promised to go on world without end, the nearest thing under capitalism to the just-pluck-yourself-a-banana economy of the South Sea islands. The supply of American heiresses for noble transatlantic studs loomed as inexhaustible. The learned professors proclaimed the permanent annulment of the business cycle. Poor Marx was triumphantly demolished as a sour German Jew, an exploded Hegelian, or charitably, as another eminent Victorian. It was the Golden Age, Peterkin, and a man named Lovestone explained it as “American exceptionalism”. At the Moscow Congresses of the Comintern, the American communist delegates basked in the reflected glory of their bourgeoisie, masochistically proud of the strength of American imperialism.
Until there came a day in the chill autumn of 1929, when leaves were sere and pedestrians trod warily to avoid colliding with brokers leaping from the topmost flights of Wall Street skyscrapers. American capitalism crashed. While the extreme left of society had been predicting this in a general and routine way for years, the actual event found them perhaps no less incredulous and unready than the Union League Club. In the momentous period of 1929-1932, wages sank 60 per cent, salaries dropped 40 per cent, and dividends 57 per cent. Industrial paralysis created an army of 15,000,000 unemployed and 30,000,000 people were thrown on private or public charity.
 
The “Roosevelt Revolution”
Whatever difficulties historians may have assessing Roosevelt’s place in history, there can be no doubt that he did manage for a time to salvage capitalism. On the morning of his inauguration, the entire banking structure of the country had broken down and the masses were on the verge of hunger revolts. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which Roosevelt inherited from Hoover, took over the functions of Wall Street, pumping billions of dollars into every kind of financial and industrial enterprise, railroads, banks, insurance companies. By the close of 1934 there were 25,000,000 on relief. The country was put on a colossal dole.
In 1934 steel-rail production was 1,008,000 tons as against 408,000 in 1933. But of the 600,000 ton increase, the government lent the railroads the cash with which to buy 425,000 tons.
“The steel industry, the automobile industry, every industry that has been boasting about its better business in 1934 got that better business out of Federal funds paid out to its customers,” wrote John T. Flynn. “These industries are on the dole ... Their employees are on the dole ... The stockholders who have been getting the rising dividends and the bondholders who have been getting their continuing interest are on the dole too.”
But the “Roosevelt Revolution” claimed more than that it had put America on relief. It promised that it would plan reform and recovery.
“Yes,” boasted Roosevelt in his Charleston speech in 1935, “we are on our way back, not just by pure chance, my friends, not just by a turn of the wheel, of the cycle. We are coming back more soundly than ever because we are planning it that way, and don’t let anybody tell you differently.”
The nature of New Deal planning was quickly established. It was an attempt to curb the productive forces, by restriction of output and subsidizing scarcity. It was organized sabotage for the purpose of creating an artificial shortage. The Agricultural Adjustment Act was essentially a measure to restrict farm output. The NRA swept aside the obstacles of the anti-trust laws.
Big Business was not originally averse to “planning” and actually took a big hand in framing the NRA. In 1932 industry had suffered losses of probably not less than $8,000,000,000 and was thoroughly panic-stricken. In reply to a questionnaire of the US Chamber of Commerce in 1932, ninety per cent of the replies declared in favor of economic planning. The Chamber wanted to eliminate “the evils of unrestricted competition”, modify the anti-trust laws, and regulate wages and hours by trade associations under NRA supervision instead of by statute. Big Business wrote the codes. Stabilizing industry meant stabilizing its largest units. Monopoly profits rose. Big Business was perfectly willing to accept all the state subsidies, loans and guarantees necessary. It had no objection to HOLC and the various farm credit instruments where the government took the risk and secured the mortgage-holder, the banks and insurance companies. 1435 manufacturing and trading companies quickly increased their net profits from $640,000,000 in 1933 to $1,051,000,000 in 1934, or 64 per cent. But once profits were restored Big Business demanded an end to government encroachment, a return to untramelled exploitation.
The New Deal is primarily a petty-bourgeois attempt to rescue capitalism by the methods of social reformism. If the present Stalinist effort to mobilize the masses in support of the New Deal is treacherous, no less false was their first characterization of the New Deal as fascist. Certainly the New Deal contains elements common to all capitalist state-planning and Roosevelt represents the Wall Street bankers in the general sense that he aims to preserve capitalist property. But. it must be remembered that the social-democracy at different times also attempted to “control” capitalism by these methods. Examples are available from the experience of Australia, Sweden and other countries. Essentially based on the demands of the middle classes for reform, security and control of the natural resources, and with the organized labor movement in tow, the New Deal is the American equivalent of the Popular Front, social reformism sans a social-democracy. Section 7a of the statute requiring the codes to grant labor the right to organize and bargain collectively was conceived as a counterweight to Big Business.
The same fate which has overtaken social-democratic coalitionism, labor governments and Popular Fronts has caught up with the New Deal. Economic planning without attacking the profit system itself, must either lead to the iron rule of the monopolies, or create greater disproportions and chaos. Planned economy on a socialist basis involves creating a balance between production and consumption on an ascending scale by control of investment. It would mean control of production and prices, consumption, wages, profits, and income, of the output of capital goods and consumption goods, capital accumulation and investment, of agriculture and industry. The New Deal could prime the pump but could not control the flow of investment, a control impossible without abolishing capital claims and profits. Tugwell, Berle, Frankfurter and the other Brains thought they could have planned economy without the messiness of revolution. While capitalism was still licking its wounds, they would sneak up behind and before it could say Robinson, they would knock it senseless into a managed economy. That a change of property relations, of ownership was necessary was in Berle’s view a Marxist prejudice. Under the corporate system, he contended, ownership didn’t count – it was too dispersed. Management exercised control over production. Therefore it was easier to make demands on this “control group” than to put a government machine in place of it. Damn clever these Harvard boys!
 
Recovery – Diminuendo
The short-lived New Deal recovery proved an illusion. The Roosevelt Administration spent $20,000,000,000 trying to pull capitalism up by its bootstraps.
“It has actually spent more money in five years,” moans the New York Times, “than was spent in the aggregate by all the administrations that have governed this country from the days of George Washington to the days of Woodrow Wilson ... Yet the business of the country has been subnormal three-fourths of the time.”
The fact of the matter is that there never was any recovery in the sense of an expansion of capital. There was a restoration of profits and a temporary stabilization at a lower level. In the past, capitalist prosperity depended upon the increasing output and absorption of capital goods; under the New Deal capital secured its profits by restriction. The New Dealers were no doubt equally aware that normal recovery starts from an increase in private investment but it was hoped that after government spending had sown the seed of the upswing, increased demand from private sources would replace pump-priming – and so make an honest woman out of the recovery. But when government expenditures were cut in the hope of balancing the budget, the upswing stopped dead. Private capital failed to “take up the slack”.
Every depression before 1929 had ended with a recovery that carried economic activity to a point above the pre-depression level. Crises were once a means of actually advancing capitalist production. But when the Roosevelt recession set in, production was still ten per cent short of the 1929 level. The most striking feature of the present crisis has been the complete stoppage of industrial development. There is no parallel for this in American economic history. New Deal expenditures served to prop up the sagging foundations of capitalism but not to restore its progressive economic force. Formerly capitalism surmounted its crises and restored prosperity because of increasing opportunities for accumulation. Today the productive forces are already too highly developed for the fetters of the wage system. The Brookings study showed there was an unused capacity to produce goods of over 20 percent in 1929 and yet 20,000,000 families had incomes below $2,000. But unused capacity exists under capitalism because its use is unprofitable. Most important fact of all is that the New Deal could not solve the crisis for the simple reason that its roots are international. The loss of foreign trade is directly bound up with the world crisis. Recovery in the case of the United States, as of every other nation, depends upon the restoration of markets for normal export trade, and this prospect is more remote than ever. Every capitalist State is placing increasing obstacles to the international division of labor and trade expansion. Since the end of the World War there has been simultaneously a great increase in the process of industrialization and of barriers to economic intercourse. Incessant economic warfare has been waged since the armistice, a warfare that is now rapidly turning to military means for the solution of the world market problem.
 
The Social Crisis
The American crisis is thus no longer merely a cyclical fluctuation but a state of decline, ruling out all prospects of a new period of genuine expansion or durable stability. It is a social crisis, a crisis of the social order itself, involving all classes, and every aspect of economic activity. The present depression is a stage in the development of this permanent crisis in the economic and social relations of American capitalism. This by no means excludes the possibility of a revival but one brief and fitful, on a lower level, and yielding to a fresh catastrophe and more grinding depression. What is the last wisdom of the New Dealers in the face of the most recent slump? Precisely the same program of pump-priming that has already failed and is at most a form of relief, chiefly a matter of PWA lending and granting activities. Paul Y. Anderson, a friend of the Administration comments:
“The country will be fortunate if half this sum [the new PWA appropriation of $1,465,000,000] is spent by this time next year. The amount is too small to have a decisive effect on the national economy.”
Even if industrial production were again to rise to the 1929 level, we have Harry Hopkins’ assurance that the number of the unemployed would remain between six and a half and seven and a half million. The increasing rise in the workers’ output means their progressive displacement in railroading, mining and manufacturing, a displacement that, in the absence of industrial expansion, tends to become absolute.
The development of the crisis through its various stages, recurring upswings and precipitous declines, must have a searing effect on the consciousness of the American masses. The revolutionary movement will not have to wait for success until the American workers’ standard of living has reached the depths of the German or Italian. American Marxists have in general been overcautious in estimating the solidity and power of American capitalism. There is, of course, no justification for rushing to the conclusion that American capitalism can be knocked down with a feather. But there undoubtedly has been a tendency to overestimate its staying power and to be dazzled by its facade.
The masses themselves are evidencing less and less their old confidence in capitalism. Twenty-five million Americans have been on relief, millions more on other forms of government bounty. American farmers have been evicted and foreclosed, overturned milk trucks and battled the sheriff. The jobless have invaded and occupied the precincts of the legislatures. The ex-servicemen have marched on Washington. The middle classes, their security gone, have been in a state of ferment. The Townsend movement, the Epic movement, Share the Wealth movement, Father Coughlin, are all signs of a changing attitude towards capitalism. The American working class has staged the unprecedented wave of sit-down strikes, in violation of capitalist law and order. They have shown the most impressive ingenuity and militancy in struggle. All this vast radicalization is proceeding under conditions of world crisis and imperialist preparations for war.
There exists an undeniable gap between the objective revolutionary conditions and the political consciousness of the masses. How to help bridge that is the crucial problem of the revolutionary party. The older forms of revolutionary propaganda and agitation for the socialist goal combined with daily agitation for minimum demands realizable within the framework of capitalism, have been outlived. The proportion of the total wage bill to the total value of manufacturing output in the United States has been growing progressively smaller. During nine years only of this last third of a century do available records of the wages and cost of living of 22,000,000 employed workers show any marked improvement. During the whole period from 1890 to 1918, the index numbers of real earnings moved within a range of only eight points. Under the conditions of capitalist decline, with the output of capital goods and capital accumulation moving downwards, unemployment and lower wages reduce still further the worker’s share of the national wealth. If in the period of capitalist expansion the welfare of the masses lagged behind the development of the productive forces, today successful resistance to exploitation is impossible without coming into conflict with the barriers of capitalism. Even the struggle for the so-called immediate demands must take on the character of a struggle against the confines of capitalist law and order (sit-down).
The situation therefore demands that the revolutionary Marxists develop a program of revolutionary transitional demands which will at once impress the masses with their essential realism as an answer to their immediate requirements and at the same time present a revolutionary challenge to capitalism. The failure of the New Deal must lead to deeper ferment and disillusionment of the masses with half-way measures and mere reformism. In growing despair, the middle classes may become more receptive to the demagogy of fascism. The sharpening class struggle will undoubtedly lead capitalism to subsidize reactionary violence against trade union movement, crush strikes, and suppress civil liberties. The imperialist war preparations will likewise be used to fetter working class freedom of action. Nobody can foretell the exact speed of events, but nobody has the right, in view of the catastrophic developments of the American scene in the past two decades, to count on an even and gradualist course of the class struggle. The big, immediate task of the revolutionary Marxists, therefore, is to discover America.



President Roosevelt’s message to Congress last week called for naval and military appropriations totalling one billion dollars, the greatest “preparedness” budget in the peace-time history of the country.
In 1932 the Democratic platform had attacked Hoover for burdening a tax-ridden populace with military and naval expenditures “approaching a billion dollars annually.” That is a thing of the past. In complete disregard of the express anti-war sentiment of the masses, Roosevelt continues spelling out the imperialist logic of his Chicago speech.
 
Stages of Policy
There he contemptuously jettisoned the laboriously constructed Neutrality policy of Congress; next he ordered American diplomatic participation, in the Brussels Conference; now comes the huge arms Bill; and on February 14 there is to be American participation in the British naval demonstration at Singapore.
Glib assurances are forthcoming that the appropriations are a measure of national defense.” But nobody need innocently imagine that “national defense” here merely means coastal defenses because it does not. As Admiral William D. Leahy made plain, it means the defense of American imperialist interests wherever they be.
It means for example the self-arrogated “defense” of the Latin and Caribbean Americans under the Monroe Doctrine. It means the defense of Standard Oil tankers on the Yangtze. Finally it means implementing the policy Roosevelt enunciated of the quarantine, which is another word for blockade, anywhere on the seven seas.
 
Pushed By Depression
American imperialism has emerged from its phase of temporary quiescence. To this the collapse of the: New Deal has powerfully contributed. The more catastrophic his domestic policies turn out, the more insistently Franklin (Happy Days Are Here Again) Roosevelt will turn in the direction of the world market.
Representative Maverick, a friend of the Administration, charges that “the New Deal has more or less abandoned all its economic ideals and is riding horses in all directions without getting anywhere.” The cost of living travels upwards. The millions of unemployed continue to add to their ranks. The trust busters and brain trustees are at sixes and sevens. The New Deal has labored mightily and alphabetically to produce another slump, in accord with the laws of a decaying capitalism.
As the keenest representative of the American ruling class, Roosevelt realizes that the predatory set-up of Versailles is in ruins. The struggle for redistribution of the world’s spoils, colonies, materials and markets is in process. In the future the post-war antagonism between the British Empire and American interests, temporarily tided over by the naval parity agreement, will again come to the fore. But at this juncture Roosevelt is captiously moving in the direction of Anglo-American collaboration against the lean hungry fascist powers, menacing the accumulated fat of both. The New York Times reports that the news of the Roosevelt message was received in London almost “as if Britain had won a war victory.”
 
Realize Mass Opposition
Roosevelt is aware that the masses are opposed to his imperialism. The Gallup Poll showed at least 60% of the electorate favoring withdrawal of U.S. forces from China, and an equal percentage in favor of the Ludlow amendment. The masses are hostile to the League of Nations, and the whole idea of “collective security.” But the forces of jingoism, militarism and social-patriotism are intent on swinging them into line.
The Japanese are counted on to assist. There will be more Panay incidents, and a few more U.S. diplomats will stick out their chins to he slapped. The American war front is forming: the sixty families, the economic royalists, Landon and Knox, the Nation and the Daily Worker, William Green and Lewis, Heywood Broun and Barney Baruch, Nicholas Murray Butler and Earl Browder.
 
Browder’s Fair Fields
Browder salutes the “President’s declaration of a positive peace policy” more lyrically than anybody. Debating with Charles H. Beard in the New Republic he openly undertakes the defense of American imperialist interests and colonies. He conjures up the possibility of the Japanese seizing Guam, the Philippines and Alaska. There is a throb in his voice, as he envisions the danger confronting “the beautiful and rich lands of California.”
We must not, he suggests, encourage the enemy by giving them a picture of an America sharply torn by class struggle. There is little that can be added by way of comment to “expose” Browder. The Stalinist agents of imperialism proceed so brazenly now that their own statements are the plainest avowals of their treason. Browder in the U.S. loyally follows in the path of Social Democratic allies in France and Czecho-Slovakia who vote the war budgets without a quaver.
The greatest of all the lies which Browder uses to trick his own following is the distinction between “aggressor” and “non-aggressor.” In 1915 Lenin wrote:
“The truth is that for decades three highway robbers, the bourgeoisie and the governments of England, Russia and France, were arming to sack Germany. Is there anything surprising in the fact that two highway robbers launched an attack before the other three got the new knives they had ordered? Is it not sophism when the phrases about the ‘initiators’ are used to obliterate the equal guilt of the bourgeoisie of all countries?’’
 



THE PREREQUISITE of sound revolutionary policy is to see things as they are. No little part of the victorious advance of Hitler is the gift of his opponents’ inability to give a straight account of reality. How little these illusions have served the cause of effective struggle against fascism! When the Nazi movement appeared, clever liberals said Germany was not Italy. The Munich beer-hall putsch they thought very funny, very funny, what with Ludendorff falling down flat on his stomach and Hitler landing up in jail. The social crisis and with it the Nazi movement grew. Hitler lost two million votes and the German communists proclaimed that fascism was finished. The Rote Fahne vociferated that the proletariat was ready to strike at the command of the Communist Party. Hitler took power with little more resistance than a couple of street fights. The social democrats, headed by Otto Wels, and trade unionists led by Leipart hoped that by declaring their loyalty to the Nazi state, they would be allowed to function as a legal opposition. Hitler destroyed the entire German free trade union movement and put its leaders into concentration camps. Undeterred by any prejudice for truth, the Stalinists kept telling their followers that all was not yet over; the revolution would break out any day. The country was allegedly honeycombed with red cells and Storm Troopers were preparing to transfer their allegiance. But the German proletariat kept paying the price of capitulation. The next self-deception of these tragi-comic politicians was in Germany’s isolation. Hitler was surrounded by the “democracies”. The Reichswehr generals were in opposition. Hitler, however, had taken the measure of the “democracies”. He occupied the Rhineland and introduced conscription. He made a deal with the Poles and Mussolini. Austria was taken. Czechoslovakia was hemmed in. The gallant Czech people would fight, the world was next told. The French army was the best in Europe. The Russians had the deadliest air fleet and could drop whole regiments behind the enemy’s lines by the parachute route. But the ramshackle edifice of the Popular Front and collective security, put to the test, collapsed like a pricked balloon.
The fact is that the Munich accord is the greatest victory that German fascism has carried off since 1933. Hitler stands at the head of a totalitarian state of 80 million Germans, more powerful than Bismarck, or perhaps Napoleon. Munich was the final smash-up of the Versailles balance of power. The map of Central Europe is now redrawn. Economic and political domination of Southeastern Europe goes to Nazi Germany. The Little Entente is dissolved. The Czech alliance with the USSR is broken. The Franco-Soviet pact is dead. The Baltic countries are whipped into the orbit of either Germany or Poland. Hungary will be a satellite and nobody takes the military power of Carol’s Rumanian dictatorship seriously. In the last war von Mackensen romped through the gallant Rumanian army in the matter of a couple of weeks, if our memory serves us. The remnant of Czechoslovakia has become totalitarian. The French have appointed an ambassador to Rome. Chamberlain and Mussolini are preparing to liquidate Spain. Barcelona can be transformed into a fascist set-up as rapidly as Prague. The Soviet Union is isolated and to all intents and purposes the German army is encamped on the borders of the Ukraine.
Fascism bestrides the continent; it is idle to deny it. Munich was the grand pay-off for two decades of defeat of the proletarian revolution. In 1918 the German Social Democracy could have chosen an “eastern orientation”, a bloc with revolutionary agrarian Russia. The Bolsheviks proposed such a bloc. Europe was still in a state of post-war revolutionary ferment. A union of Russia and Germany would have put an end to capitalist domination and led to a United States of Europe. It was the most natural alliance for both parties. The bourgeois Germany of Rathenau found it necessary to conclude the Rappallo Treaty and foster trade relations. The German Reichswehr found it necessary to seek collaboration with the General Staff of the Red Army. But the Social Democracy contemptuously rejected the Bolshevik advances and embarked on a Western orientation. They decided to fulfil the impossible terms of the Treaty of Versailles, taking on themselves an odium that was to cost them dearly in the future, the odium for the degradation and humiliation of a once great power. But no matter how “loyally” the Weimar Republic kowtowed to the Versailles powers, they were always kept humbly waiting on the door-step of the servants entrance. Otto Bauer preferred the same policy for Austria. In 1923 and again in 1933, social democratic and communist parties evacuated all their positions, surrendered all the social gains of decades to fascism without a struggle. The Austrian workers fought, proving that the rank and file was made of different mettle than the parliamentary leadership. But it was too late.
The tide of revolutionary unrest and the will to combat fascism rose high again in the French labor movement in 1934. The combined efforts of the Socialists and Stalinists succeeded in diverting the revolutionary ferment into the channels of popular frontism. Social-patriotism and class collaboration were sweetened in the interests of the Soviet bureaucracy which had entered into an alliance with the imperialist “democracies”. To this alliance the revolutionary cause of the Spanish workers was sacrificed. The struggle of the Spanish workers for their social liberation was prohibited by the united threats and pressure of the “democracies” and Moscow. To all protests of the militants, to all the warnings of revolutionary Marxists the Second and Third Internationals replied that the Popular Front was the way to fight fascism at home, and collective security the way to hold the fascist powers in check abroad. This was the “struggle for peace and democracy”. A revolutionary policy, a policy of the class struggle would we were told open the road to fascist aggression; it would weaken the democracies and encourage the aggressor. The Internationals of Social Democracy and Stalinism thus became the most ardent defenders of the capitalist status quo and of the Versailles set-up.
To Hitler these policies of the Comintern and Social Democracy were worth any number of army corps. He no longer had to fear the effect that a revolutionary working class in the “democratic countries” would have on the workers of the fascist countries. The Popular Front’s acceptance of the status quo as its point of departure enabled Hitler to represent his opponents as the people who wanted to perpetuate the Peace Treaty of 1919. On the other hand despite all the propaganda for the democracy of “brave little Czechoslovakia”, the event has shown that the French workers were little impressed. Millions of workers in both England and France must have had an uneasy feeling that they would be fighting to maintain three million Germans under Czech rule. There must have been many in France who recalled that when a proposal was made in the French Chamber in 1933 to join in the celebration of the fifteenth anniversary of the Czech republic, the Stalinist Peri got up to oppose it on the ground that “our sympathy goes to the working classes of Czechoslovakia and the minorities oppressed by the central power in Prague”. He proceeded to accuse Benes of preparing “concentration camps on the model of Hitler’s Germany”. In the debates in the Socialist party, Paul Faure recently reminded his colleagues that “at the moment when the Sudeten Germans were ceded to Czechoslovakia, the Socialist party took a position in favor of the Sudetens”. When it came to the point the French worker proved unwilling to fight for the rotten fruits of the Versailles Peace.
Collective Security proved to be a colossal swindle. What happened at Munich was a more grandiose repetition of the sanctions farce during the Italo-Ethiopian war. The Munich accord writes finis to the successive hoaxes of the Covenant of the League, the Kellogg Pact to outlaw war, the Nine-Power Treaty to safeguard China and all the rest of the legalistic skullduggery that was to lull the peoples into the illusion that “power politics” had given way to the “reign of law”, but was in reality a means of sanctifying the existing partition of the world among the powers on the basis of their relation of forces in 1918. All that the collective security talk did was to blunt the edge of the revolutionary struggle against war and militarism inside the mass movement and thereby enable Hitler, with the acquiescence of the “democratic” imperialisms to advance his interests in Central Europe and effect a new equilibrium. Collective Security was as little capable of stopping Hitler as sanctions stopped Mussolini.
Munich enables us to draw a fresh balance of the condition of “democracy”. Several years of the Popular Front have issued in the growth of reaction. The Manchester Guardian’s correspondent confirms this.
“The internal consequences of Munich in France are still incalculable. The idea of building up a tremendous defence machine has gained ground and with it all sorts of theories about an authoritarian regime, a military dictatorship, a totalitarian financial system.”
A hopeful sign is the report that
“among the working class, on the other hand, there is profound disgust with the ‘Republican regime’ as it has functioned in the last few months and a great loss of loyalty to ‘democracy’.”
The danger is that in default of revolutionary leadership, this same disgust with “democracy” may easily wind up in the channels of fascism. Frank Hanighen in the New Republic reports much in the same vein:
“... disquieting results are now back of the relief at demobilization and peace, one can discern among the workers not only a disgust with their clumsy government but also a disillusion with such slogans as ‘democracy’, ‘front against fascism’, etc.”
Such darlings of the Left as Kerillis are calling for an authoritarian republic. The mystique of the Popular Front is gone.
The role of the USSR those weeks of crisis was a complete reflection of the impotence and degeneration of the Soviet bureaucracy. Nobody has yet explained how the destruction of the political and spiritual capital of the Russian revolution could possibly enhance the authority of the USSR in international diplomacy. When Eden was toasting Stalin in Moscow and Litvinoff was toasting His Majesty, when Barthou and Herriot were negotiating for Russia’s entrance into the League, and the Franco-Soviet pact appeared in outline, it looked like a diplomatic triumph for the Stalinist regime, particularly after the accession of Hitler in Germany. But all this was a pretentious facade. The complete isolation of the USSR during the Berchtesgaden-Godesberg-Munich negotiations is the pay-off. While Chamberlain and Hitler talked, Litvinoff sat in the charnel-house of Geneva. At no time was the voice of the Soviet Union heard clearly. Litvinoff mumbled something, Maisky mumbled something. Poland was warned not to take Teschen (which she proceeded to do nevertheless). It appears that the real explanation for Soviet paralysis was Colonel Lindbergh. Against the colonel, Stalin ordered full mobilization (of verbal batteries) and war to the knife. Lindbergh destroyed the Popular Front, Lindbergh overthrew collective security and Lindbergh is the mortal enemy of democracy.
Anyone familiar with Stalin’s record of diplomatic “successes” cannot be surprised by the addition of Munich. The famous Anglo-Russian Committee experiment wound up in the Scotland Yard raid on Arcos. The famous strategy of Stalin in the Kuomintang ended with the slaughter of Russian functionaries in Shanghai and Borodin and Galen taking to their heels with Chiang Kai Shek’s men in hot pursuit. When Hitler came to power Trotsky’s suggestion that the Red Army mobilize was denounced as adventurism (despite the acknowledged fact that the Reichswehr was not prepared to resist had the French marched during the occupation of the Rhineland much later). Instead Stalin hurried to conclude a trade treaty with Hitler. When the workers of all other countries were demonstrating in protest against Hitler’s terrorism, only the Soviet workers were ordered to remain silent. Loudly demanding the application of sanctions during the Italo-Ethiopian war, the Stalinist bureaucracy itself steadily maintained its oil shipments to Mussolini. When the Spanish civil war broke out, Stalin did intervene – to keep the working class harnessed to the Popular Front and bourgeois democracy.
But the sabotage and ruination of the revolutionary movement abroad means the increasing isolation of the October revolution. The fear of the gathering volume of political and social discontent in the Soviet Union forces Stalin to his preventive purges, which undermine the strength and morale of the army, the navy, the schools, and every institution in the country. The one shortage that Stalinist Russia escapes is executions. The imperialist powers have naturally drawn their conclusions, Daladier and Chamberlain ignore the USSR in their calculations, and Hitler speculates on the state of mind of the Ukrainian peasant – and no doubt also receives reports on the outlook of fascism among the soviet bureaucrats.
The European crisis has strikingly revealed the horror that the masses entertain for modern war. This is confirmed on all hands. The Paris correspondent of the New Republic writes: “the mobilization instead of reviving nationalist brio among the people, had an almost reverse effect”. If anything more was needed the sense of relief that swept Europe after the Munich conference is sufficient evidence of the desire for peace. Yet in this situation, where the masses are helpless without leadership, the Stalinists, laborites and social democrats were out in the forefront as vociferous warmongers. The Social Democracy of 1914 cannot be said to have actually assumed the initiative of agitating for war. The Comintern of 1938 did. The masses drifted, in the clutch of the diplomacy of their governments. As an organized international force and as a political factor, the working class were therefore absent. The Britsh Labor party on account of its pro-war stand is committed to the heavier rearmament program of Chamberlain. Their leaders like Lord Strabolgi have already come out “for a measure of compulsory National Service” that is to say, conscription.
In sharp contrast with the chauvinist incitements of the Laborite and Stalinist organizations was the fervent peace sentiment manifested by the masses. More than ever that peace sentiment becomes a progressive factor that intelligent revolutionary socialist policy must reckon with. The “struggle for peace” which the Moscow Comintern proclaimed as its guiding light at its Seventh Congress, and which ostensibly justified the Franco-Soviet pact and USSR. entry into the League of Nations, turned in reality into a struggle for imperialist war. The American League for Peace and Democracy (erstwhile League Against War and Fascism) became the leading exponents of “collective security” for the imperialist status quo. The crisis made clear that the “pacifism” of the masses, repeatedly evidenced in the United States by the figures of the Gallup poll and the support of the Ludlow Amendment, is well nigh universal. Even in France when the workers were brought face to face with the impending catastrophe of war, Stalinist propaganda rapidly lost influence. The struggle for peace must become one of the cornerstones of our policy. But we must convince the masses that the way to peace lies as little in “isolation” as in “collective security” and certainly does not lie in huge programs of rearmament. We must prove that the struggle for peace can be victorious only as a struggle for socialism, that it can be secured not by congressional resolutions or constitutional amendments, but by the working class conquest of power.
 



THE FASCIST POWERS worship what Goethe called the inseparable trinity of war trade and piracy is plain as a pikestaff. They wreak their imperialist violence on Ethiopia, Spain and Austria. They pile up super-arms for the day of Armegeddon. They are the enemies of human civilization and harbingers of a new barbarism. All this and more the liberal and Stalinist press pound into us incessantly and it is true enough. But what follows? That we reverently thrill to the sermons of Cordell Hull and march with the New York Times in a crusade for collective security? That we range ourselves with “the great law-abiding, liberty-loving powers”? But who are these Great Democracies, these bulwarks of our liberties, guardians of world peace and repositories of civilization? One glance is sufficient to disclose our old friends, the Allied and Associated Powers who saved Democracy from 1914 to 1918.
The opening sentence of a 5-volume history [1] of the Versailles Peace Conference reads as follows:
“The war was a conflict between the principles of moral influence and material force, of government by consent and government by compulsion.”
Our favorite whited sepulchre, H.G. Wells, wrote,
“We fight because a whole nation has become obsessed by pride, by the cant of cynicism and the vanity of violence, by the evil suggestion of such third-rate writers as Gobineau and Stewart Chamberlain, that they were a people of peculiar excellence, destined to dominate the earth ...”
Said Premier Asquith,
“The purpose of the Allies in this war is to pave the way for an international system which will secure the principle of equal rights for all civilized states.”
England would not sheathe the sword “until the rights of the small nationalities are placed upon an unassailable foundation.” Woodrow Wilson issued a proclamation of the signing of the Armistice in which he declared,
“Everything for which America fought has been accomplished. It will now be our fortunate duty to assist by example, by sober friendly counsel, and by material aid, in the establishment of just democracy throughout the world.”
Now that Bernhardi and Treitschke were cast down and Grotius and the sanctity of treaties exalted, what did the democratic Peace of Paris look like? Pretty much as the terms of the Secret Treaties regarding the future peace settlement had laid down. In 1915 the Allies secretly supplemented their lofty aspirations by inducements of a more substantial character. Tsarist Russia was promised Constantinople and all of Poland. France was to recover Alsace Lorraine and be given control of all German territory as far as the Rhine, and Great Britain should appropriate the bulk of the German colonies. Italy in 1915, and Roumania in 1916 were both promised territorial aggrandizement. In 1916 Russia was secretly awarded Central and Northern Armenia and lands south of the Black Sea; France was given the sovereignty over Southern Armenia, Cilicia and the Syrian coast, with Damascus and Mosul as a sphere of influence. Mesopotamia was reserved for Great Britain. A year later Italy was promised the southern half of Anatolia. (Smyrna was simultaneously pledged to Italy and Greece!) Though China too had entered the war on the side of the Allies, Japan was to have the forcibly-leased German Chinese port of Kiaouchau.
The peace treaty deprived Germany of two-thirds of her iron, 26% of her coal, 13% of her territory, 7% of her population, 40% of her blast furnaces, 30% of her steel mills, 28% of her rolling mills, and a million square miles of her colonies. To the protesting Germans the Allies virtuously explained that it was all being done for the good of the natives.
“Germany’s dereliction in the sphere of colonial civilization has been revealed too clearly to admit of the Allied and Associated Powers consenting to make a second experiment of their assuming the responsibility of again abandoning 13 or 14 million natives to a fate from which the war has delivered them.”
The colonies were thus assigned to those more humane and experienced in the art of their administration. England saw her duty and accepted the extra load to her White Man’s Burden without demur.
  
2.
In 1914 England ruled over an empire of 12 million square miles, one quarter of the inhabitable surface of the globe, and of which area she herself constituted less than one hundredth part. The possessing class of one-tenth of the population of this empire dominated 370 million natives of India, 50 million natives of Africa, and millions of Malay, Polynesian and Chinese natives. To this overseas empire Britain now added Mesopotamia, Trans-Jordania, Palestine, the German colonies of East Africa and Southwest Africa, as well as parts of the Kamerun and Togoland. The British Empire now controls half the world’s annual production of gold, a third of the coal, a fourth of the cotton, a fifth of the wheat and a sixth of the pig-iron. British capitalist investments of 20 billion dollars abroad netted the governing classes a return of 1 billion dollars a year. The “Blessed Isle” had indeed won the war. German competition was destroyed and England dominated trade from Cairo to Singapore.
Occasionally the natives, for whose welfare she is a trustee, doubt England’s democracy and there is trouble. Concentration camps have to be set up in India, and the extremes of the massacre of Amritzar may become necessary to restore the natives to a mood of cooperation. The “pacification” of the Indian Northwest Frontier keeps thousands of British troops constantly engaged. In 1927 the Chinese went on a rampage against British extra-territorial rights and Great Britain was compelled to dispatch an expeditionary force. The Arabs take violent exception to the British Zionist policy in Palestine, and it becomes necessary to stamp out terrorism by burning their villages wholesale. But enough has been said, perhaps, to demonstrate the high moral difference between British occupation of Egypt and the brutal Japanese conquest of Manchuria. To confuse these would be tantamount to missing the fine ethical distinction between Italian ambitions to replace France in Tunisia and France’s replacement of Turkey in Algiers. What Britain finds unpardonable is the utter disregard that Japan and Italy have manifested for the sanctity of treaties.
She can never condone a breach of faith. For example, in 1897 Lord Salisbury who suspected that a Belgian syndicate had obtained a concession for building a railway from Peking to Hankow, directed the British Minister to inform the Chinese that Her Majesty’s Government had been badly treated.
“Unless they agree at once (to employ British capital) we shall regard their breach of faith concerning the Peking-Hankow Railway as an act of deliberate hostility against this country and shall act accordingly. After consultation with the Admiral you may give them the number of days or hours you think proper within which to send their reply.”
The status quo created by the Treaty of Versailles was naturally a beautiful thing for the imperialist states satisfied with their holdings. The present territorial distribution of markets, colonies and raw materials was declared virtually sacrosanct and boundaries were treated as immutable. Having destroyed German competition, Great Britain however finds herself menaced anew. Japan in the east and Italy in the Mediterranean give the City sleepless nights. With almost a billion dollars of British capital invested in China, with Hong Kong, Singapore, the East Indies and Australasia to defend, there is every reason for the British government to express abhorrence of those who violate the sanctity of treaties. The Ethiopian crisis sent Britain into a paroxysm of idealism over the League covenant, with what results are generally known. The conquest of Ethiopia, like the present Japanese occupation of China, places England before accomplished facts and negotiations are proceeding on both fronts for a deal at the expense of the colonial populations, with democracy having nothing to do with it.
  
3.
The other great beneficiary of the Versailles Peace was the French Republic. With an area of 212,659 square miles, and a population of 42,900,000, France exploits African colonies with an area of 3,894,727 square miles, and a native population of 38,668,000, including Algeria, Tunis, Morocco, part of West Africa, Equatorial Africa, Madagascar, parts of former German Togoland and Kamerun Colonies. Her Asiatic Empire comprises the five provinces of French-Indo-China, and Syria and Lebanon, a total area of 331,050 square miles with a native population of 25,660,000. Here too the natives are singularly lacking in appreciation of the benefits of French democracy, whether it is of the National Union or the Popular Front variety. Again and again French troops have had to put down popular uprisings in Syria, Morocco and Algiers.
The restoration of Alsace-Lorraine and the control of the Saar gave France the illusion that the old equilibrium having been displaced, she could replace it with her own diplomatic and military hegemony. To this end she built up an elaborate system of post-war alliances with the other beneficiaries of the new distribution of power, Belgium, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia and Roumania. But the base for long-range French hegemony on the continent was too narrow. The center of world economic gravity had shifted to the United States and France never was in a position to organize European economy. On the contrary, her post-war authority depended on the chaos brought about by the Balkanization of Europe. Every move of French imperialism against Germany from the imposition of the impossible reparations to the occupation of the Ruhr merely accentuated the antagonisms and the crisis. French security was built on sand. The world-wide economic crash finally blasted away the foundations of French hegemony.
As a result of French policy the foundations of bourgeois democracy in post-war Germany were also blasted away, but at no time were the Allies concerned about preserving European “democracy”. England was interested in the restoration of Germany’s industry so far as it was necessary for the stability of British markets, and the extraction of a reasonable amount of reparations. She was equally concerned about maintaining the balance of power, since that has always been the aim of Downing Street. The British government, therefore, viewed Hitler’s advent with some satisfaction as a means of holding French ambitions in check. France was interested chiefly in keeping Germany in a state of perpetual subordination. Neither of the two victorious Democracies were motivated by any other than imperialist considerations. Although the Weimar Republic had suppressed the uprising of the revolutionary Spartacists in blood, it never was for that reason treated other than as a potential imperialist rival. When the Cuno government attempted to evade reparations payments France occupied the Ruhr regardless of what revolutionary situation might ensue. The German middle class was wrecked and in default of proletarian action became ripe for the Hitler coup d’etat. French financial coercion of Austria, when the Bruening government tried to evade the prohibition of Anschluss by framing the Austro-German Tariff Union Pact, helped pave the way for the crash of 1931 in the Reich. It could not be otherwise. The notion that England or France are animated by concern for democracy is fantastic. The imperialist power which only yields a dominion government to Ireland in bloody civil war, and the imperialist power which suppresses the colonial populations of Indo-China, can hardly be expected to foster either genuine democracy or self-determination. The League of Nations was what Lenin called it, “a den of thieves”.
  
4.
One of the most revealing chapters in the record of the Great Democracies was their attempt to strangle the Russian Revolution. Allied intervention in Soviet Russia began in March 1918. The Czechoslovaks were organized. Allied Expeditionary Forces landed at Murmansk and Vladivostock. White Guard revolts were incited. Lloyd George and Winston Churchill strained every nerve and expended huge sums to foment counter revolution in the Caucasus in order to gain possession of its oil. Wilson sent an expedition to the Archangel on his own hook. The end of Allied military support witnessed the collapse of the counter revolution and the anti-Bolshevik uprisings. Yudenitch was driven out of the Baltic area, Denikin was expelled from Southern Russia, and Kolchak collapsed in Siberia. But the famous French democracy continued nevertheless in its efforts to destroy the Soviet Republic. Poland was encouraged in her territorial ambitions and Wrangel was subsidized to renew the struggle in Southern Russia. That counter revolution did not triumph was due only to the heroic resistance of the Russian workers and peasants.
  
5.
Something should be said about the role of the third Great Democracy. No one has expressed it more succinctly than Harold G. Knowles, formerly American Ambassador to Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic and Bolivia.
“We have been guilty of violating the sovereign rights of neighbors and proceeding contrary to universally recognized principles of international law. We have imposed our force upon weak people, and defenceless countries, and slaughtered thousands of her citizens. We have attacked them when they expected we would defend them.”
The Monroe Doctrine sets the United States up as the imperialist guardian of South America. Monroe’s own formulation has been adapted to the requirements of modern imperialism until it means the right of the United States to declare which is the constitutional party in the event of a revolution in Latin America (1912 first intervention in Nicaragua), and to take over political and economic control as in Haiti in 1915 when the United States reaches the conclusion that the Latin America country is unable to maintain law and order. It is applied to enforce and secure the cancellation of public debts, as in the case of Santo Domingo 1916, and it has been applied when revolutionary ideas are conceived to endanger the private interests of American capitalists (Nicaragua and Mexico).
The same Wilson who was to utter his solemn platitudes about self-determination ordered the bombardment of Vera Cruz when Huerta failed to salute the United States flag by way of reparation for an alleged insult. Vera Cruz was captured by United States forces and occupied for several months. That was in 1914. Two years later a punitive expedition was dispatched to capture Villa. They didn’t capture Villa but they spent about $130,000,000 trying to.
During the Great Depression there was an apparent retreat from Dollar imperialism. Roosevelt proclaimed his good neighbor policy. Thus the Hawes-Cutting bill of January 1933, and the Tydings-McDuffie bill of March 1934 provided independence for the Philippines after a ten year period. In March 1930 the J. Reuben Clark memorandum on the Monroe Doctrine reiterated that it would not be used to justify intervention in Latin America. In 1934 a new treaty abrogated the Platt Amendment Treaty of May 1903, abolishing all United States rights of intervention or of military and fiscal control in Cuba. Haiti was relinquished by executive agreement in 1933, and the Marines withdrew from Nicaragua the same year. But at no time has there been any real surrender of United States strategic, political or financial interests. The principal motive behind these concessions was the desire to retain the good-will of the Latin American countries and restore shrinking markets for American exports. Cordell Hull explained the new dispensation in these words,
“A new spirit inspired by the policy of the good neighbor was born at Montevideo. It was the spirit of the Golden Rule ... We must sell abroad more of our surpluses.”
In the last few months American imperialism has resumed its aggressive attitude. The independence of the Philippines is being adjourned, reprisals are directed against Mexico for its oil nationalization policy, and the “utmost concern” is evinced by the State Department about the commercial relations of South American countries with the “Fascist Aggressors”. As a measure of reprisal against the Mexican government’s nationalization of the oil industry Roosevelt and Hull have decided to strike a blow at the very foundations of Mexican economy. Washington announces that the Silver-Purchase Scheme will be halted. Since metal constitutes 76% of Mexico’s exports and provides 13% of her revenues, the meaning of the New Deal’s policy towards Mexico is plain. It is the attempted imperialist coercion of a semi-colonial country to prevent her national self-determination, to dictate her domestic policies, sabotage her agrarian program and keep her workers in the US owned oil industry on starvation wages. Washington stands solidly behind the rapacious American oil interests. The New Deal’s velvet glove is a thin cover for the mailed fist of dollar diplomacy.
  
6.
It is nothing but a liberal myth that bourgeois democracy is somehow a guarantee of a pacific foreign policy. We have seen how little democracy there can be in the relations between the British ruling class and the Indian “native”. Bourgeois democracy is founded in the economic exploitation of both the working classes and the colonial masses.
“Pacifism”, as Trotsky says, “stands on the same foundation as the theory of the harmony of social interests. The antagonisms between capitalist nations have the same economic roots as the antagonism between the classes.”
The theory of bourgeois democracy which is based on the assumption that government is the expression of the popular will implies that there is such a thing as “democratic control of international policy”. The fact of the matter, of course, is that no department of the State is a closer preserve of the imperialist interests, the interests of the economically dominant class, than foreign policy. The stakes of diplomacy arise from the interests of the ruling class. The agrarian autocracy of Tzarist Russia ruled by the landed nobility was territorially aggressive and so was the agrarian democracy of the United States before the Civil War. The Dutch commercial state of the 17th century and the English state of the 18th century were hungry for commodity markets. The industrialized capitalist states of the 20th century fight for investment markets, and monopolies in trade and finance.
The foreign policy of a country like Japan, or of the Fascist countries, is obviously free of control by democratic pressure. But it should be noted that in England foreign policy is equally free of “democratic control”. The power to make war and peace is part of the prerogative of the Crown which Parliament has never taken away. Treaties are made without legislative consent. The House of Commons never even discussed the Anglo-Russian Treaty of 1907 before it was ratified by the Crown. Nor did the Commons ever have the chance to discuss the Anglo-Japanese Alliance of 1905. Everybody knows the familiar instance of the repeated assurances to Parliament in 1913-14 that England had no obligations to France until the outbreak of the war when Parliament was informed that the country was bound by the terms of the Entente Cordiale. While the power of the French President to declare a war is dependent upon the consent of parliament, the term war does not cover military expeditions against backward peoples, which permits the President to take in quite a lot of territory. Nor is there any obligation to submit alliances, arbitration treaties, etc. to Parliament. Neither the Treaty of Berlin 1878, nor the Franco-Russian Alliance 1891, were approved by the French Parliament before being ratified.
In the United States where the Presidential power to make treaties is subject to the consent of two-thirds of the Senate and the power to declare war rests with Congress, the Executive has nevertheless been able to evade these checks. If the United States is “attacked” the President may declare a blockade and permit acts of war without waiting for Congress. McKinley sent troops to China in 1900, Wilson sent troops to the Archangel in 1918, and Coolidge sent three warships to Honduras in 1923, all without authorization of Congress. As Commander in Chief of the military forces, the President has repeatedly intervened in Caribbean and Latin American countries upon his own authority. The President has a further device for evading restrictions imposed upon his treaty-making power. He may annex territory to the United States, make an armistice or negotiate a treaty by “Executive Agreement” such as Theodore Roosevelt negotiated with Santo Domingo, when the Senate balked.
More recent evidence of the disregard of the “will of the people” when the imperialist interests of the United States demands it, is furnished by Franklin Roosevelt’s manipulation of the Neutrality Law and his aggressive formulation of a foreign policy that is the opposite of the “isolationism” implied in the popular support for the Ludlow Referendum. In an injured tone Secretary of State Hull recently asked:
“What warrant is there in reason or in experience, for the assumption – which underlies such proposals as the plan for a popular referendum on the subject of declaring war – that the Chief Executive and the Congress will be at any time more eager and more likely to embark upon war than would be the general body of citizens to whom they are directly responsible? No President and no Congress have ever carried this country into war against the will of the people.”
Woodrow Wilson was elected on the slogan that he “kept us out of war”, but on his re-election he plunged the country into the war on the side of the Allies. In the period of 1914–1917 United States trade with the Allies increased from 1½ billion to 4 billion dollars. By 1917 the United States had loaned the Allies 2 billion dollars. In 1917 Walter Hines Page, US Ambassador to Great Britain, sent the following confidential message to Wilson:
“Perhaps our going to war is the only way in which our present pre-eminent trade position can be maintained and a panic averted.”
So we went to war.
  
7.
All the sermonizing in the world cannot obliterate the fundamental fact that the “crisis of democracy” derives from the decay of capitalism. Consider such a thing as the evaporation of the famous Spirit of Locarno. Signed in the Autumn of 1925 the accords of Locarno adjourned all territorial disputes arising from the Treaty of Versailles. Germany renounced the purpose of recovering her lost provinces. Great Britain and Italy guaranteed the status quo at the Rhine against either French or German aggression. Germany entered the League of Nations. To bourgeois pacifists it looked for a moment as if the terrors of the Versailles Peace and the occupation of the Ruhr were to be dissipated. But the “appeasement” of the Germans that followed proved illusory. The temporary German prosperity of the period was based not on a real development of industry or commerce, but on American and British loans with which to pay reparations and purchase essential raw materials abroad. With the crash in the United States and the end of American and British loans, the economic life of the Reich collapsed again. This also was the end of the Stresemann policy which had worked on the assumption that if Germany loyally accepted the terms of the Versailles Treaty she would be able to recover material prosperity along with her former enemies. German capitalism in fact had only adopted the Stresemann idea as a stop-gap; its revenge for the bankruptcy of Stresemannism took the form of Hitlerism.
German collapse was of course due to the Versailles Peace in part only. Versailles intensified all contradictions of capitalist imperialism by creating eleven new national states, with eleven new national frontiers. In their own way the international bankers saw this when in 1926 in convention in London they declared,
“It is difficult to view without dismay the extent to which tariff barriers, special licenses and prohibitions since the war have been allowed to interfere with international trade and to prevent it from flowing in its natural channels ... One state lost its supplies of cheap food, another its supplies of cheap manufacturers, industry suffered from want of coal, factories for want of raw materials. Prices have risen, artificial dearness has been created. Production as a whole has been diminished, credit has been contracted, and currencies have depreciated ...”
Or as Trotsky once put it, far more concisely,
“Imperialism is the predatory expression of the tendency of modern industry to tear itself completely away from the stupidity of national narrowness, as it did formerly with regard to local and provincial confinement.”
The mere restoration of the old German frontiers would not have solved the crisis materially. The cause of the crisis was that the productive forces in Germany were potentially geared for the frontiers of the world market. The real and permanent solution of the crisis lay therefore in the political and economic union of Europe without state barriers, without strangling tariffs, and without armaments. But such a United States of Europe is only conceivable under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and despite the urgent revolutionary situations of 1918, 1923 and 1933, the German proletariat under its social democratic and Stalinist leadership failed to take revolutionary action. The initiative thereupon passed into the hands of Fascism and neo-German imperialism.
The inglorious liquidation of bourgeois democracy in Germany points the roads-end of popular frontism in France, Spain and wherever it is tried. Whatever its form, Catholic-social-democratic-liberal coalition, socialist-communist-radical-Popular Front, Labor-Government or New Deal – bourgeois democracy in the epoch of its imperialist transformation, is utterly incapable of maintaining the social equilibrium nationally or internationally. It is profoundly true and attested by every fresh experience since 1914 that humanity faces the alternatives either of slaughter under imperialism or peace through the Revolution in Permanence. The futility of the bourgeois peace societies lies in the fact that though frequently aware of the economic reasons for imperialism they propose solutions that are impossible without social revolution. What they ask is the voluntary, self-liquidation of capitalism. Thus they suggest that trade restrictions should be done away with, that embargoes on exports should be lifted, that monopolies should be abolished, that international cartels should be dissolved, that all people should have equal access to raw materials, that tariffs should be reduced, the standards of living raised, and the world disarm. But how all this is to be done without waging war on capitalism is a mystery.
The war against Fascism can only be waged as a class war against imperialism. Between the Fascist and the so-called democratic powers the real antagonism is not of “ideologies” or the political regimes, but of markets, colonies and raw materials. The idea of England or France or the United States waging a war for democracy as a political ideal is nonsense. As well have expected the Russian bourgeoisie to initiate the bourgeois revolution. The foreign policy of the Popular Front is a sheer caricature of Jacobinism. Marx supported Germany against France in 1870 and the north against the south in the American Civil War, but he did so on the basis of the then existing class relations. He was supporting an aggressive capitalism against a decaying feudal order. In the war against feudalism, Marx saw a way to the victory of democracy as the prerequisite for the victory of the working class movement.
The reformists tried to exploit Marx’ position of that time in order to justify their own support of the rival imperialisms of 1914. But the imperialist transformation of democracy already accomplished in 1914 carries with it today, the Fascist transformation of the bourgeoisie.
The war against Fascism can be waged successfully only as a revolutionary war. Such a war would have been justified in 1923 when the revolutionary crisis was maturing in Germany, the country was splitting up into two armed camps, and the Red army was on the alert in the Soviet Union. Had the German workers fought Hitler in 1933, and had the military forces of the Soviet Union not been weakened by Stalin’s economic adventurism, mobilization of the Red army against German Fascism, and the revolutionary war in cooperation with the German proletariat would have been in order. But that is not the kind of war that the advocates of Collective Security, and of the “peace-loving” nations against the aggressor nations, have in mind. In the United States the last war produced 21,000 new millionaires, one for every five American doughboys killed. The proletariat of the Fascist and “democratic” countries equally must proclaim Karl Liebknecht’s slogan, “The enemy is within your own country”!
 
Footnote
1. Published under the auspices of the Institute of International Affairs.



Moscow, 1937
by Lion Feuchtwanger
Trans. from the German by Irene Josephy
xiii+151 pp. New York. The Viking Press. $2.00
Return from the USSR
by André Gide
Trans, from the French by Dorothy Bussy
xvi+94 pp. New York. Alfred A. Knopf. $1.00
Retouches a Mon Retour de l’URSSs
par André Gide
126 pp. Paris. Gallimard. Fr.9
What Has Become of the Russian Revolution
by M. Yvon
Trans. from the French by Integer
64 pp. New York. International Review. 25c
Proletarian Journey
by Fred Beal
xiv+352 pp. Illus. New York. Hillman-Curl Inc. $2.75
Assignment in Utopia
by Eugene Lyons
648 pp. New York. Harcourt, Brace and Co. $3.50
Russia: Twenty Years After
by Victor Serge
Trans. from the French with an introduction by Max Shachtman
xii+298 pp. New York. Pioneer Publishers. $2.50
Some years ago Julien Benda wrote a striking little book called The Treason of the Intellectuals. The reference was to the literary prophets, the world reconstructionists and moral iconclasts who noisily strutted their ideals in the security of peace, but in 1914 effortlessly prostrated themselves before the imperialist war machine. The Fabian exhibitionist Shaw toured the Western Front in the company of General Sir Douglas Haig; Wells entered the British Intelligence Service. Upton Sinclair discovered the messianic mission of Wilson. The German professors whitewashed the invasion of Belgium. But the treason of contemporary intellectuals has already outdistanced the infamy of their predecessors. Racing ahead of the very General Staffs themselves, they clamor for a Holy War to Save Democracy. And most conspicuous of the lot are the intellectual lackeys of Stalinism. The depths of their treason are still unplumbed.
Intellectuals who once professionally invoked 18-carat words like Truth, Humanity and Civilization have been converted to the Machiavellian morality of the OGPU. The Moscow trials? It will take a hundred years to learn the truth. There may have been no convincing court evidence but the crimes imputed to the Old Bolsheviks were psychologically possible. If there was a frame-up, it is best for the sake of the Soviet Union to keep loyally quiet. Granted Trotsky is no terrorist, his program of world revolution is a menace to Peace and Democracy anyway. Whatever atrocities Stalin commits, still he is for the Popular Front, isn’t he? When all is said and done, the Purges have only killed off a few thousand; over a hundred million Soviet citizens still go about their business. What if several million peasants did die of starvation during Stalin’s dizzy collectivization, they were only peasants, weren’t they. You can’t make an omelette without breaking eggs.
It is this school of Truth that the noble Feuchtwanger has joined. His book is the product of exactly ten days in Moscow made up of interviews conducted through the lucid medium of a translator. But Feuchtwanger is no ordinary tourist. He is a refugee whose property has been confiscated by the Nazis. His novels have dramatized the cause of Justice. He branded Nazi book-burning as a return to mediaevalism. He has excoriated the Gestapo, mocked the Führer cult, and pilloried totalitarian art, science and literature. Ten days in Moscow and Feuchtwanger is sure that socialism is being built, the living standards of the masses are being raised, and everything else will inevitably follow. He is admitted into the illumined Presence of the Beloved Leader himself and finds that the Stalin cult is simply a naive expression of the enthusiasm of the masses for socialism. The “confessions” of the OGPU’s victims he glibly accepts as genuine. The persecution of Soviet writers like Pilnyak for deviating from the Line is a matter of indifference. That no bonfire need be made of Trotsky’s writings because they may be read only at the risk of deportation or death, is a small point. Feuchtwanger finds no censorship. Feuchtwanger says, Yes, Yes, Yes, and Feuchtwanger’s works will be published by the State in waves of many thousands and the royalties will mount up. Feuchtwanger has become an “engineer of the soul”.
That Feuchtwanger’s debut should coincide with André Gide’s break with the Stalinist regime cannot have been accidental. It was necessary to counteract that blow at once. Gide is one of a number of intellectuals who either never lost or who have recovered their integrity. Since he published Return from the Soviet Union, he has been subjected to the usual virulent Stalinist barrage. But he has stood his ground manfully. His first book was a series of impressions. He was able to discount the honeyed pep-talk of the translators. The door was sometimes left sufficiently ajar for Gide to catch a glimpse of the underlying reality and what he saw shocked him into a candid reexamination. His conclusions will be remembered:
“... the spirit which is today held to be counter-revolutionary is that same spirit which first broke through the half-rotten dam of the Tsarist world ... I doubt whether in any other country in the world, even Hitler’s Germany, thought is less free, more bowed down, more terrorized, more vassalized.”
The objection was then made that Gide was unduly preoccupied with the fate of the mind, and ignored the decisive criterion of economics. Retouches is mainly an answer to his critics, fortified by much reading and economic data from Soviet sources, and contrasting the actuality of Stalinism with the program of Leninism.
The significance of Gide’s two books lies not of course in their accuracy as works of theory; Gide sets up no pretensions there. What is important is the man’s integrity as an observer able to fight off the cloying fog of official adulation threatening to drug every writer who visits the USSR. The great “cultural front” that Stalinism built up during the years of the Five Year Plan is beginning to crack and the single biggest hammer-blow was struck by the Moscow trials. Stalin has been so successful in the art of “managing” the intellectuals either by flattery or bribery that he has become too contemptuous of them. The special privileges that writers enjoyed in the Soviet Union, the royalties, the salaries, the automobiles, the country-houses, were Stalin’s crafty means of guaranteeing an airtight censorship. Deadened consciences made the task of the police easier. Gide shows that the human mind will survive even Stalin. There is still enough of the spirit of scientific research and respect for truth, of that idealism to which Trotsky paid tribute in Dewey, to encourage the hope that an increasing number of intellectuals will take their stand with the revolutionary working class against the totalitarianisms of both Hitler and Stalin.
One of the sources upon which Gide draws for confirmation is Yvon, a French worker who spent eleven years in the Soviet Union both at the bench and in a managerial capacity. Regardless of his conclusions which we find inacceptable, Yvon’s pamphlet is valuable for the light it throws on the cold facts. These facts completely deflate the official myth that the Soviet Union has “already entered upon the final and irrevocable victory of socialism”, a myth serving to justify the ends of unscrupulous reaction and the bloody suppression of all criticism and opposition. Especially do we recommend these facts to the “social worker” who becomes an expert on the Soviet Union on the strength of having peered at the inevitable creche, to the visiting professor who avidly jots down notes for a book on progressive educational institutions that will be relegated to limbo by the time of his return home, and not least to the Webbs weaving their endless cocoons from official Soviet blue books.
It is not a pretty picture that Yvon draws of the housing, food, wages and working conditions of the Soviet factory worker. The new apartment houses photograph as impressively as the giant plants that inspired Miss Bourke-White’s trick camera shots. The trouble with those magnificent photographs was that they didn’t tell you whether the newly erected plant worked. The new apartments are reserved for the bureaucracy, specialists, army officers, soul engineers. Those still higher in the social scale live in “private pavilions”. Personal servants of the bureaucrats have special quarters. The Stakhanovite has the newly built “common house”. The prevailing system of housing for the “common worker” is the wooden barracks whose single rooms contain from 25 to 40 beds. The furniture is of the meanest and ugliest. Ten percent of the worker’s wages goes for rent. To graduate out of these barracks may entail years of probation as a “candidate tenant”.
The ordinary Russian worker’s daily menu consists of: Breakfast (before eight o’clock), tea and bread; lunch (at noon), factory meal or when not at work, tea and bread; dinner (5 p.m.), soup and kaska; supper (8 p.m.), tea and bread. Fish, butter, eggs, oil, rice and sugar are luxuries for workers who must make ends meet on a monthly wage ranging from 80 to 200 rubles. The incomes of the bureaucracy range from 1,500 to 10,000 rubles a month, and that applies equally to so-called “party” members. From his meager wages, the worker suffers further reductions in the form of taxes, loans and assessments running from 15 to 21 percent of his pay envelope. The piecework system drives him without regard to his nerves or muscles. “Produce in seven hours more than in seven,” is the managerial slogan. The best sanatoria, rest homes, and pleasure resorts go to the officials and Stakhanovites. For their two weeks’ holiday, the rank and file are herded and regimented in dormitories of the “barracks of rest”.
Even more dismal, of course, is the recital of the deprivation of the workers’ political liberties. The regime of the “internal passport”. Never-ending surveillance by the OGPU. Universal mutual espionage of Soviet citizens encouraged as the highest morality. The system of hostages. Re-introduction of military ranks. Totalitarian “elections” with the opposition eliminated by the firing squad. Capital punishment. Concentration camps. Liquidation of Soviets. Bureaucratization of trade unions. Stalinist absolutism.
Such were the conditions which another worker, this time an American, encountered. Fred Beal is of the authentic American proletariat, a mill-worker from his earliest youth. He led strikes, he marshalled picket lines, he organized demonstrations. He joined the Communist Party in the days before it was de rigeur for the YCL to scrub the statue of Nathan Hale and for Browder to lead in the singing of the “Stars and Stripes”. For his part in the famous Gastonia strike, Beal was sentenced to twenty years. While out on bail, along with the other co-defendants he sought sanctuary in the Soviet Union. What he witnessed there made him revolt. He saw the degeneration of the once revolutionary Comintern at close quarters. He witnessed one of the great fake demonstration trials. He lived through the period of the Stalin-made famine of 1930-1933 and ran across graves with inscriptions: “I love Stalin. Bury him here as soon as possible”. But when Beal, honest to his finger tips, expressed his mounting sense of horror he was told roughly and menacingly to hold his tongue. “This is not Union Square.”
He determined “to make a complete break with the Stalin gang and return to the capitalist world, no matter what the consequences would be”. But not to make his peace with the capitalist world. He escaped to the United States where his twenty-year sentence in North Carolina may catch up with him any day. He is on the run. Yet a liberal conspiracy of silence has been built up around his case. The officials of the Communist Party would doubtless enjoy seeing Beal arrested. One of their scribblers, Joseph Freeman, has already tipped off the police. Friendless and hunted, Beal, no giant of tactics, made the mistake of prejudicing his situation by writing up his experiences in the Hearst press. But who are the one hundred percent Bolsheviks of the Civil Liberties Union to point the finger of scorn at Beal? What right have these petty bourgeois elements to treat Beal as a pariah? In the name of what revolutionary principles and activity do the well-padded ladies and gentlemen of the Nation and New Republic cast Beal into the outer darkness? Except that he is more articulate, Beal’s experiences are shared by hundreds of workers who have returned from the Stalinist USSR, their hearts swept by disillusion. The country is studded with them, not softies who expected to wallow in Roman luxury, but hard-bitten, rugged, class conscious miners, lumberjacks and the like. They wanted no privileges, they fully expected the struggle for socialist construction. It is a slander that these men are counter-revolutionists. They come back empty and remain silent But for the most part, they remain loyal to the Soviet Union. Only their closest associates know what has happened. And when they talk, the story is much the same as Fred Beal’s, a story of proletarian degradation at the hands of an insolent, omnipotent bureaucracy in the years of Soviet reaction.
This whole period has been covered with great reportorial verve and brilliance in Eugene Lyons’ Assignment in Utopia, a book that is as sure a product of Soviet reaction as John Reed’s was of the revolutionary upsurge of October. Lyons was United Press correspondent in Moscow. Those who read the Bulletin of the Russian Opposition recall with bitterness the glib official news reporting that came out of the USSR in those days under the names of Duranty, Chamberlain or Lyons. We knew that we were getting half-truths and lies. Read Lyons’ chapter on the failure of the correspondents to report the great famine, to present a true picture of the “Five Year Plan in Four”, of the dictatorship of RAPP, of the show trials. Duranty is still cynically performing for Stalin in the New York Times, transcribing whole editorials from Pravda and Izvestia as “news”. Chamberlain came back and once safely home wrote Russia’s Iron Age in which he not only denounced the bureaucracy but renounced the whole of Socialism. His most recent work is entitled Collectivism, a False Utopia. Lyons, formerly a communist sympathizer, is now working for the American Labor Party.
Lyons’ vivid and detailed account of the totalitarian Stalinist regime dovetails at all points with the political study of the same period by Victor Serge, former collaborator of the Executive of the Communist International. Each from his own point of view illuminates the underlying theory and the processes of the Utopian Stalinist attempt to achieve complete “socialism in a single country”, upon the basis of its own inner resources and without regard for the development of the world revolution. Trotsky’s economic platform of industrialization and collectivization were parts of a larger context of workers’ democracy and revolutionary internationalism. Stalin’s attempt to force this program into the strait-jacket of “socialism” in a single country was bound to lead to results that were the startling antithesis of everything Trotsky stood for. The economic adventurism of the “Five Year Plan in Four” against which Trotsky protested from exile, brought the country to the brink of ruin. The bureaucracy, surprised by the unexpected successes of the planned economy which they had first resisted, drunkenly proceeded as if there were no limits but the human will. The living standards of the workers, the most important of the productive forces, were callously sacrificed. Millions of peasants became victims of Stalin’s administrative collectivization. Bureaucratic privilege and social inequality flourished apace. The human travail in the wake of Stalinism was immeasurable but the political consequences were no less reactionary. To unload responsibility for economic blunders and bureaucratic oppression, Stalin resorted to trumped-up sabotage and conspiracy trials. Not even Hitler’s Gestapo tracked down communists more pitilessly than the OGPU. Camouflaged in pseudo-parliamentary forms, a new despotism arose in the Kremlin. Stalinism produced a totalitarian regime by the side of which Hobbes’ Leviathan would look like an anarchist Utopia.
Yvon, Lyons and Serge all agree as to the facts. All arrive at different conclusions. No genuine revolutionist will be a party to painting up the situation in the Soviet Union. But neither is it sufficient to set down the stark figures of the poverty of the Soviet worker as Yvon has done, without seeing those figures in historical perspective, and without searching for the basic causes of the Soviet Union’s degeneration as a workers’ state. At no point does it occur to Yvon that without the October revolution the Russian worker’s status would have approached that of the Chinese coolie, and Russia would have become a colony of Western capitalism. At no point does Yvon realize that despite the monstrous distortions of the bureaucracy, nationalized property relations and planned economy have even in this backward country celebrated the superiority of socialist over capitalist methods of production. Yvon is in too great haste to bury the revolution. For him nationalization is a “fiction” and the bureaucracy has become the real ruling class. One cannot very well get out an injunction prohibiting Yvon from characterizing the bureaucracy as a “class” if he insists. But for Marxists a class is definitely fixed by its independent role in production and by its special and characteristic property forms. The Soviet bureaucracy or considerable sections of it don’t appear to have even a reasonable tenure on bare life let alone on property and its assignment or transmission. Yvon confuses the social parasitism of the bureaucracy with class exploitation. So little is nationalization a “fiction” that after all the years of reaction Stalin has not yet been able to change the basic property relations of the October revolution.
It is only confusing when, in their hatred of the Stalinist frame-ups, honest intellectuals like Silone are led to talk of “Red Fascism”. Despite all the gestures of the “Corporate State” the fascist military-bureaucratic state is what it always was, the praetorian guard of heavy industry and finance capital. The control of economic life is more firmly lodged in the grip of Big Business than it has ever been. The Soviet State has degenerated into a bureaucratic-police or Bonapartist dictatorship it is true, but it still rests on the foundations of October. The analysis of the dual role of the Soviet bureaucracy given by Trotsky in his Revolution Betrayed remains the only key to the explanation of the past decade of Soviet history. Whether the bureaucracy will extend its present political monopoly and attack the economic basis of the Soviet state, or the proletariat will overthrow the bureaucracy and restore workers’ democracy, will be decided by the living struggle of forces. It will be decided moreover not merely by what happens in the USSR but by the victory or defeat of the European working class. Serge sees this clearly.
“At no point in its history can the socialist revolution in Russia be considered apart from the international labor movement – the victory of the bureaucracy was prepared by the defeat of the European revolution.”
What has Lyons to offer as an alternative to Bolshevism? The politically shabby and threadbare garment of Social-Democracy! And not even the German social-democracy which once had a coherent theory as well as masses, but the American Labor Party! It is true that Stalinism has betrayed the ideals of the October revolution, but the parties of Mr. Lyons’ new creed betrayed the revolution long ago. Had Menshevism triumphed in 1917 the revolution would not have degenerated for the simple reason that there would have been no revolution. Mr. Lyons’ present political friends have been consistently counter-revolutionary since 1914, or will he deny it? Instead of utilizing the postwar crisis for socialist reconstruction, the social-democrats worked to rebuild capitalist economy and preserve bourgeois democracy. They fulfilled the terms of the infamous Versailles Treaty. They transferred political power from the Workers’ Councils to the Weimar Assembly. They restored the morale of the bourgeoisie by the coalition set-up. They deluded the masses with promises of gradual socialization. Well, what is the upshot? The German socialist party was not even able to save bourgeois democracy. The bourgeoisie rewarded its loyalty with the boot of fascism. The Scandinavian parties still administer the affairs of the capitalist state. The British Labour Party, after two trials in office, vegetates as His Majesty’s Opposition, a miserable stooge for British imperialism. But has the social-democracy learned anything? They are again enthusiastically building up the old coalition under the mask of the new Comintern-varnished Popular Front.
The Russian revolution gave humanity its first glimpse of the workers’ state. Neither its course nor its problems could have been charted in advance. Nor is there any gainsaying that its latter-day developments have had a profoundly depressing effect on the revolutionary movement Stalin’s crimes have served to throw discredit on the proletarian dictatorship and his Popular Frontism to prop up bourgeois democracy. But those who shrink from the proletarian revolution must ask themselves whether they will not be rejecting civilization itself because of its evil accompaniments.
The Great French Revolution was followed by the intellectual rehabilitation of Catholicism, Voltaire and Rousseau by De Maistre and Bonald. But who will deny that the struggle for bourgeois democracy, for free trade as well as parliamentarism, was once progressive? Nobody wants to idealize suffering or want. But imperialism and war and economic collapse are a harsh school of political manners and social morals. Ours is simply not an epoch of peace and tranquillity. It is as definitely an epoch of upheaval as the Reformation. Individuals can still find peace but not the masses. The revolution will offend the spirit of John Stuart Mill more than once. The issue of destiny is acquiescence with the course of the imperialists or, with all its hazards – the proletarian revolution. The revolution is not a streamlined Pullman to Utopia but the only, if thorny, road along which all mankind can reach freedom.
 



If there was one pillar of the early Comintern that seemed more unshakable than Gibraltar, it was its intransigent internationalism, its basic policy of world revolution. The Communist International was conceived during the world war in the course of the revolutionary struggle against social patriotism.
The collapse of the Second International was due to its opportunistic adaptation to the capitalist legality of the national state. To pillory the social patriotism of the Social Democracy, to attack its policy of coalition government, to denounce its fetishistic support of bourgeois democracy, its voting of military credits, all this was part of everyday communist agitation and propaganda. Whenever the international situation sharpened, the air resounded with Comintern pledges to work for the transformation of any imperialist war into a civil war.
 
Lenin’s Teachings
Every communist knew that Lenin had drawn two decisive conclusions from the law of the irregularity of capitalist political and economic development: (1) that, contrary to the opinion of Kautsky, it was possible to begin the revolution in a single country, without waiting for the rest of the world, but (2) that it was impossible for a single country to achieve the victory of socialism without the advance of the frontiers of the revolution in the industrial West. There was no ambiguity about this.
Again and again he repeated that the existence of the Soviet republic alongside the imperialist states was in the long run impossible. One or the other would triumph. The big historical problem of the October revolution as he saw it, and as the entire Comintern appeared to agree, lay in resolving the international problem by means of stimulating and organizing the world revolution.
So long as the post-Leninist struggle inside the Russian Communist party proceeded on such apparently separate questions, as workers democracy, the lessons of the German communist failure of 1923, the experiences of the Anglo-Russian committee, and economic planning, many communists of the West, increasingly restive over the turn of events and the character of the Russian discussions, were still uncertain. In many cases it still seemed possible to reconcile the conflicting views within the framework of the same party and International. Loyalty to the Communist International permeated such militants to the core, and decisions would involve a rupture with what they had been accustomed to regard as “the General Staff of the World Revolution” were not taken lightly.
 
The Final Straw
What shook their faith in the post-Leninist Moscow leadership to the point where “loyal” acceptance of the majority thesis was no longer possible, was the final emergence of the Stalinist theory of “socialism in one country.” The stand that the Russian Opposition made against this revision of Leninism proved to be a stand against the Stalinist counter-revolution. There were friends of the Opposition who thought that Trotsky was unduly magnifying the issue and allowing himself to be outsmarted. The Brandler-Thalheimer group attempted to minimize the issue as academic. Even close sympathizers of Trotsky, reading his Critique of, the Draft Program of the Comintern during the Sixth Congress (1928) wondered if its author was not anticipating too much and too readily.
Experience itself has established that the official adoption of the theory of socialism in a single country, a product of the ebb of the revolution in Europe, and the defeats administered to the working class, has become the fully rounded out formula of Stalinist social-patriotism and the degeneration of the Comintern.
 
Renunciation of Revolution
The tactics of the Leninist Comintern in a period of capitalist stabilization were necessarily different than in a period of stormy assault on the capitalist fortress during a revolutionary crisis. But the policy of Stalinist national socialism involved a renunciation of the proletarian revolution itself. Since the adoption of that policy the consequences for both the Soviet Union and the international proletariat have been increasingly tragic. What happened, objectively speaking, is that Stalin joined Hitler in crushing out the revolutionary spirit of the working class vanguard. Even their methods became indistinguishable.
With every retreat from the policy of world revolution, with every new improvisation of popular frontism, the advance of fascism became more rapid and more powerful. Fascism is today on the offensive. The Munich pact signals the complete bankruptcy of the whole edifice of collective security. The Popular Front is a shambles.
The Stalinists sold out the interests of the French working class for the sake of “the defense of the Soviet Union.” Their “realism” has left the Soviet Union in a position of the greatest isolation. After absorbing Czechoslovakia, as he had absorbed Germany before that, thanks to the cowardly passivity of the Comintern, Hitler is now proceeding with plans for the political and economic hegemony of Europe and the future partition of the Soviet Union.
 
There Is No Substitute
It has been proved that the revolutionary aid of the Western workers cannot be replaced by imperialist alliances without catastrophic results for the October revolution. The Permanent Revolution, the special object of Stalinist hatred, has been replaced by permanent executions. National socialism in Russia has destroyed the soviet superstructure, replacing it with a totalitarianism as complete as Hitlers. The “socialist accumulation” of the five-year plans under Stalin rivalled the infamies of early capitalist accumulation.
Twenty years after the October revolution and the “complete victory of socialism,” Denny of the New York Times reports that the coming winter in the U.S.S.R. is expected to be one of the hardest. The old familiar queues stretch for blocks. Twenty years after, the masses still wait for a pair of boots, an overcoat, a dress, a bottle of milk, a pound of butter.
 
Undermine the Only Force
The one force that could solve the Soviet Union’s “international problem” was the working class and this is the force that the Soviet Union has consistently undermined. The policy of Soviet national socialism has been to use the workers abroad merely as diplomatic cannon fodder. Armaments are greater than ever, the power of Hitlerism has expanded – and the workers have been filled with the virus of social patriotism.
The masses deep down are against imperialist war. They are ready to struggle for peace. The task is to show them that peace is attainable only by a struggle for power. But the Stalinist parties join with the most extreme reactionaries and nationalists in their agitation and incitement for war.
The Stalinists, like Browder in the United States, no longer even talk of the “defense of the Soviet Union.” They proclaim their readiness to go to the defence of their own capitalist “fatherlands.” They urge their own capitalist classes to protect and further their investments in colonies and markets abroad, so that the “democracies” can checkmate the fascists in South America or China!
The sole repository of the revolutionary internationalism of the early Comintern is now the Fourth international. The small groups of the new International in all countries have courageously struggled against the current of social-patriotism and uncompromisingly exposed the sources of Stalinist corruption. The Fourth International can have no illusions that it has the present strength to deter the imperialists in their war-provocations, or save the U.S.S.R, from inner degeneration or outside attack. This strength must come from the masses and the successful penetration of the masses by the revolutionary Marxists.
 



IMMEDIATELY AFTER the accession of Hitler, Trotsky wrote that the issue presenting itself to the masses was no longer Bolshevism versus Fascism but Fascism versus Democracy. Our subsequent critique of the Popular Front might make it appear that we had perversely abandoned this view when Moscow adopted it. That would be a complete misunderstanding. We rejected the whole conception of the Popular Front precisely because it was impotent to combat fascism. The struggle for the democracy vital to the workers could not be waged in a bourgeois alliance for the maintenance of a corrupt parliamentary regime and decaying capitalist social order. The Popular Front was a gigantic piece of political blackmail. The liberal bourgeoisie of France said to the workers: we shall collaborate with you and keep de la Roque and Doriot out, we shall let you have your unions and political parties, provided only that you quit the militant struggle against private property and the wage system, against militarism and imperialism. Otherwise we shall have to let the fascists restore order.
The sweep of Totalitarianism in Central Europe was appalling. At the stage of social development when humanity seemed to have reached the scientific mastery of nature, when the expansion of the productive powers seemed to have made possible the world state, a counter movement arose to set back the clock of civilization, a reaction against the ideals of humanitarianism and libertarianism, against the best traditions of the classical bourgeois revolutions. But especially was this counter revolution directed against the proletariat, as the social class which by its origins and position was the bearer of the internationalist, humanitarian, egalitarian society of the future which had been heralded by the Russian revolution.
Instinctively the workers rallied to the defence of their social conquests and their civil liberties. They felt that the immediate struggle must be for the preservation of democracy and they were right. But their true political instincts and aroused militancy were disgracefully aborted by their leaders. The revolutionary Marxist position has been that the struggle for democracy could only be successfully waged by methods of proletarian mass action that burst the confines of parliamentarism and the capitalist system. It was the class collaboration practised by the German Social Democrats that had paved the road for economic chaos and Hitler’s triumph. The parties of the Second and Third Internationals, impotent in the struggle against capitalism, were powerful enough to transform the great mass movement of France and Spain into adjuncts of “democratic” imperialism. The Social Democracy, despite its name, has nowhere been able to preserve democracy and everywhere succumbed miserably either to the demands of the bourgeois democracy or the blows of totalitarian dictatorship.
The urgency of the struggle for democracy as one of the central tasks of our epoch received striking reinforcement about this time from the totalitarian transformation of the Soviet regime under Stalin. After twenty years of the October revolution, the Russian proletariat and vanguard lay prone under the iron heel of a totalitarian bureaucracy. The Soviet superstructure became indistinguishable from the Fascist. The technique of oppression and tyranny was the same, purges and concentration camps. The workers and peasants were deprived of civil liberties, the rights of the various nationalities were violated, the Soviets were abolished, the trade unions were incorporated into the totalitarian state, Workers’ Democracy was replaced by the hollow demagogy of the plebiscite. The arts were stultified. The revolutionaries were killed. The ideas of Marxism were hounded and driven underground.
The critical elements of the working class are compelled to sum up the lessons not only of the failure of the Western Social Democracy but of the degeneration of the Russian revolution as well. If the experiences of the European Social Democracy prove that socialism cannot be achieved by the methods and within the framework of bourgeois democracy, the Russian experiences show that socialism cannot be established without Workers’ Democracy. It was Karl Radek who asserted that socialism would inevitably follow from the expansion of the Soviet productive forces. It was Trotsky who countered that genuine socialist construction was impossible without the democratic control and creative participation of the masses. The totalitarian development of the bureaucratic regime threatens to destroy completely the foundations of the October upheaval. What would emerge would be neither democracy nor socialism. The totalitarian regime in Moscow has reached the point where it is a prime obstacle to the further development of the revolution in the West.
The Russian proletariat could never have been rallied to the revolution in the name of this new despotism. Lenin justified the dictatorship of the proletariat as a higher form of democracy. Every cook would learn to govern. The Soviets would guarantee genuine liberty to the masses, truly reflect their will, assure genuine freedom of the press, of speech, of assembly. In an earlier generation Marx and Engels had learned from the Commune that the workers could not use a state apparatus subserving capitalist ends for entirely opposite socialist ends. The coercive machinery of the old sovereignty, police, army, judiciary, bureaucracy would have to be shattered first. The transition dictatorship of the proletariat would differ as radically from bourgeois democracy as parliamentarism from monarchical absolutism. The Commune would represent a higher stage of democracy based on social equality. The Russian development has been the very opposite.
If the workers are to be organized for militant resistance to world fascism they must be completely convinced that they are fighting for the genuine democracy that Marx and Lenin held out. The Russian revolution was the beacon light in the struggle for liberation. The Russian Bolsheviks once spoke with unparalleled authority. They had, as Rosa Luxemburg said, “saved the honor of the working class”. Latter-day developments have raised grave questions in the minds of militants most thoroughly convinced of the bankruptcy of social reformism. What brought about the Russian degeneration? In this and subsequent articles we hope to analyze the various elements of this question.

For the Soviet Union the year 1923 was big with fate. Lenin was stricken down. A creeping economic crisis threatened to paralyze the ties of city and countryside. The hopes of a revolution abroad were dimmed when the German communists rehearsed their subsequent capitulation to Hitler. The arrogant encroachments of the party and government bureaucracy were provoking widespread discontent in the masses. It was at this crucial period that the first of the great “discussions” between Trotsky, and the bureaucracy broke out. In a series of articles entitled The New Course, Trotsky opened fire on the bureaucracy as a menace to the aims and future of the proletarian revolution. The New Course is necessarily less graphic and more oblique than the analysis given in The Revolution Betrayed many years later. But even so brilliant a Marxist as Trotsky could not anticipate the full ravages of the coming Totalitarianism. The main question, however, is clearly defined: could the proletarian dictatorship survive to achieve the socialist society in the absence of Workers Democracy, economic planning and the international revolution.
Adopted under the pressure of strikes, peasant uprisings, and the Kronstadt Rebellion, the New Economic Policy [1] was a frankly acknowledged retreat. War communism, imposed as a military necessity had not proven an economic success. It was “systematic regimentation of consumption in a besieged fortress”. Only the material aid of a victorious German revolution could have facilitated the direct transition to planned socialist economy. The Soviet power had otherwise to change its policy or invite destruction. “It was the first and I hope the last time in the history of Soviet Russia,” Lenin reported, “that we had the great masses of the peasantry arrayed against us.” The peasants had come to associate the gift of the soil with the “Bolsheviks” but the confiscation of its fruits with the “Communists”. With no tangible industrial goods in exchange for grain surrendered to the bayonet, the peasantry declared a virtual sit-down strike. In 1920 Trotsky had submitted a project, then unacceptable to the Central Committee, for replacing the food-levy by a grain tax. The economic deadlock continued until a year later Lenin himself sought a way out by introducing the NEP. Forcible requisitioning of grain gave way to a fixed tax and free trading. The area under cultivation rose by several million desiatins, and industry received a marked impetus.
But in the summer of 1923 the NEP revealed its limitations. At first the farm surplus was small, the city was hungry, and to obtain working capital, the state trusts sold available stocks at bargain prices. The peasants consequently netted a profit of some 200,000,000 gold rubles. The abundant harvest of 1922 forced agricultural prices down, thus reversing the situation. Aided by the State bank and the stable chervonetz, industry had freed itself from immediate dependence on the sales market. The brightly-colored paper ruble fell rapidly and the peasant was left holding the bag. In Trotsky’s metaphor, the prices of industrial and of farm products, like the blades of an extended pair of scissors, tended to draw ever more widely apart. The reaction on the city was inevitable. Trade began to dry up. The banks shut off further credits. Industry slowed down and paid out wages irregularly. Strikes broke out and unemployment increased.
Since only thirty per cent of the pre-war level of industrial output had been reached, the crisis could scarcely be ascribed to overproduction. The contrary was indeed the fact. Should industrial development continue to lag, there was every indication that a better harvest might spell a more acute crisis. So decisive for the stability of the Soviet power, the “link” between the workers and peasants depended upon the capacity of state industry to produce machinery and consumers’ goods of good quality and at low prices. But the problem of prices was bound up with the productive efficiency not of the individual factory alone, but of industry as a whole. Slashing prices and extending the benefits of the stable currency to the village would relieve the immediate tension. Unless however, there was far-sighted industrial coordination and planning, the costs of production would again be driven upwards, the chervonetz undermined, and agriculture retarded. An inadequate state industry would throw the peasant mass into the hands of the kulak (big peasant) and the Nepman (private trader). Twenty-five million small farms would constitute too fertile a breeding ground of capitalist relations. The socialist revolution must justify itself in terms of superior productivity. A socialist economy was only possible on the basis of large-scale machine industry and modern technique capable of collectivizing agriculture. But without long-term economic planning this perspective would be impossible of achievement.
This substantially was Trotsky’s analysis of the crisis to the Twelfth Party Congress (April 1923), which officially adopted his proposals in the form of a resolution. But like the concurrent resolution on Workers’ Democracy, it was destined to remain a dead letter. With Lenin’s approaching death, the party bureaucrats were mainly pre-occupied with conspiring for power. Planning was all very well but they did not want Trotsky in charge of industrialization. Lip-service to Workers Democracy was unavoidable but they did not want their grip on the party machinery shaken.
With its limited outlook the party bureaucracy more naturally preferred to muddle along. Summing up the “discussion” as spokesman Zinoviev jeered at
“the obstinate persistence in clinging to a beautiful plan ... We want transport affairs managed by Dzerzhinsky, economics by Rykov, finance by Sokolnikov; Trotsky on the other hand wants to carry out everything with the aid of a ‘state plan’.”
Lenin had sharply rebuked those who attacked Trotsky’s methodical restoration in 1920 of the transport system.
“We have before us a real plan,” declared Lenin, “worked out for a number of years. Decree No.1042 looks five years ahead ... This is also how to work in other spheres of industry.”
The bureaucracy, however, continued to underestimate the resources of planned economy. When Trotsky wrote [2] in 1925 that even with an independent reproduction based on socialist accumulation an annual coefficient of 20 per cent was possible, this was greeted with ridicule. As late as 1928 Commissar of Agriculture Yakovlev contended that collectives would for years to come remain “little islets in the sea of private peasant farms”. The prevailing outlook was Bukharin’s “socialism at a snail’s pace”. Trotsky was stigmatized as a “super-industrialist”. Pravda urged that “the economic possibilities of the well-to-do peasant ... of the kulak must be unfettered”. Bukharin exhorted the peasants to “enrich yourselves”. Under the dictatorship of the proletariat, the theory held, there was nothing to fear from the kulak; he could peacefully be fitted into the framework of socialism. The bureaucrats were equally hostile to the Opposition’s demand for a swifter pace of industrialization. The 1927 Five Year Plan provided for a growth of industrial production annually declining from the first year’s coefficient of 9 to 4 in the last; consumption to rise 12 per cent over the whole period. A year later the “general line” was patched up to provide for an annual average increase of 9 per cent. Only the third project of the plan approximated the platform of the Opposition.
It took the “grain strike” of 1928 to demonstrate that the kulak danger was no figment of Trotsky’s imagination. The catastrophically low grain collections necessitated rationing and encroaching on the “untouchable reserves”. Unemployment in the cities reached the two million mark. With the aid of the Right element, Stalin had crushed the Left Opposition. The force of the crisis now drove him to appropriate its economic platform. Socialism at a snail’s pace gave way to socialism at a frenzied gallop.
Suppose that Stalin did “steal” Trotsky’s program would it not be more principled to swallow mere pride of authorship? This more or less was the argument of every former Oppositionist who took the road of capitulation. Thus did Karl Radek write in 1929,
“We may be dissatisfied with the tempo, we may suggest this or that often very important amendment but we have no distinct general line; consequently Trotsky must either take a step towards the party or think up a new platform. ... In returning to the party we do not surrender a single Leninist principle for which we fought.”
The fate that befell Kamenev, Zinoviev and Radek is itself an eloquent answer. What separated Trotsky from Stalin was not a matter of tempo but principle. The economics of state planning could be properly and creatively applied only under conditions of Soviet democracy and revolutionary internationalism. For this reason the question of the party regime was crucial.
That the issue of Workers’ Democracy should have been linked up in 1923 with the question of planned economy was therefore inevitable. The economic crisis stirred widespread political discontent. While war communism had been abandoned as an economic policy, it survived in the party regime. Lenin had grown acutely conscious that “we have bureaucratism not only in the state but in the party”. To check this menace, he had sponsored the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. This organ of control, in turn, succumbed to the dead hand of bureaucracy. Of Stalin who was at its head, Lenin was writing in his famous Testament that “he has concentrated an immense power in his hands” and was urging that he be replaced in the post of General Secretary of the party by somebody wiser, less rude, more loyal. “Above all,” Lenin had been stressing, “freedom of criticism in the party. We have always stood for that in theory, we must now put it into practise.” But instead the party regime met criticism by the rigid enforcement of an emergency resolution of the Tenth Congress adopted in the emergency of the Kronstadt uprising, which proscribed factions. Nevertheless secret groups began to form. The “Workers’ Truth” demanded freedom of working class press and association and attacked the privileges of the “new bourgeoisie”. The “Workers’ Group” criticised the dictatorship of the Triumvirate (Kamenev, Zinoviev, Stalin) and called upon the workers to strike. Actual dissatisfaction extended far beyond the limits of these semi-menshevik or anarchist circles. Anxious to preserve the authority of the party and to achieve all necessary reforms through its channels, Trotsky was not satisfied however that the way to stop factions was to call in the police. In 1922 the Twelfth Congress had passed a resolution in favor of Workers’ Democracy; unfortunately it had never taken on the least semblance of reality. Trotsky’s letter of October 8, 1923 to the Central Committee begins with a reference to Dzerzhinsky’s proposal that all party members having knowledge of groupings in the party must communicate the fact to the GPU, the Control Commission and the Central Committee
“In the fiercest moment of war communism the system of appointment within the party did not have one tenth of the extent it has now. Appointments of the secretaries of provincial committees is now the rule. That creates for the secretary a position essentially independent of the local organization ... This present regime which began to form itself before the Twelfth Congress ... is much further from workers’ democracy than the regime of the fiercest period of war communism ... A very broad strata of party workers has been created, entering into the governing apparatus of the party who completely renounce their own party opinion, before whom every decision stands in the form of a summons or command.”
Why did Trotsky not protest sooner?
“It is known to the members of the Central Committee that while fighting with all decisiveness within the Central Committee against a false policy I decidedly declined to bring the struggle within the Central Committee to the judgment of even a very limited circle of (outside) comrades ... I must state that my efforts of a year and a half have given no results. This threatens us with the danger that the party may be taken unawares by a crisis of exceptional severity ... In view of the situation created I consider it not only my right but my duty to make known the state of affairs to every member of the party whom I consider sufficiently prepared, mature and self-restrained, consequently able to help the party out of this blind alley without factional convulsions.”
Under pressure, the ruling group now operating as a tightly-bound caucus drafted a new resolution for workers’ democracy. It warned of the danger of a “loss of perspective of socialist construction and of the world revolution” and degeneration of the party workers as a result of their activities in close contact with a bourgeois milieu. Workers’ Democracy was defined as a regime of “free discussion and the election of governing officials from top to bottom”. The governing organs were not to treat every criticism as a manifestation of factionalism. Momentarily it looked like a triumph for Trotsky, but these concessions proved purely formal. The bureaucracy embraced democracy the better to strangle it. Seizing on Trotsky’s comment on the resolution as some sort of breach of cabinet solidarity, the Triumvirate launched a savage attack. Trotsky was accused of attempting to pit the youth against the Old Guard, of wanting to shatter the party apparatus, and encouraging factionalism. The carefully oiled machinery of calumny and repression was set in motion. The Central Conference of party officials meeting in January 1924 formally condemned the Opposition “with Comrade Trotsky at the head of it”. Stalin’s control of the secretarial hierarchy now made itself fully felt. Trotsky’s supporters were removed from every position of influence, and subjected to intimidation in office and factory. Students were expelled from the universities. The Red Army was “purged”. Rakovsky was sent to London, Krestinsky to Berlin. A couple of hundred thousand raw recruits, watchfully shepherded by the bureaucracy, were immediately given the vote. The Thirteenth Party Congress of May 1924 was a foregone conclusion, packed by the apparatus men. A few days before, Krupskaya had transmitted to the Central Committee the Testament in which Lenin proposes Stalin’s removal from the position of General Secretary. It was a culmination of a sharpening struggle with Stalin covering the last half year of Lenin’s life. He had successively attacked Stalin’s national policy, his tampering with the foreign trade monopoly, his bureaucratic stultification of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. This did not prevent the cynical bureaucrats from setting themselves up as Lenin’s only true disciples. The handpicked delegates would not hear of Stalin’s resignation – though the latter made the hypocritical gesture. Unscrupulously exploiting the reverence of the masses for Lenin, the bureaucracy conjured up the spectre of Trotskyism. There began that unparalleled falsification of history that has continued without let-up and has been reinforced by the monstrous technique of frame-ups, “confessions”, and bloody executions. Every effort was strained to make the masses forget the political accord which united Lenin and Trotsky – their cooperation in the October insurrection, the years of civil war, the organization of the Red Army, the development of the Communist International. Instead they were served with a steady diet of polemical quotations torn from their context of time and circumstance.
“You must understand,” Zinoviev later confessed, “that it was a struggle for power. The whole art of the thing was to combine old disagreements with new questions.”
Zinoviev was later to rue his part in the conspiracy, to state that the struggle against Trotsky had been the greatest mistake of my life, more dangerous than the mistake of 1917. Amid the menacing outcries of Stalin’s henchmen, Kamenev was to exclaim:
“We are against the elevation of a ‘Leader’ ... We are opposed to the Secretariat setting itself up above the party organization.”
Bukharin was to cry out
“What can we do, what can we do in the face of an adversary of this kind, a debased Genghis-Khan of the Central Committee.”
For the defeat of the 1923 Opposition platform of Workers’ Democracy eventually led to the complete political despotism of Stalin. The old Bolsheviks were mercilessly exterminated. But first, as the price of membership in the party they were compelled to disarm not only organizationally but ideologically.
 
Footnotes
1. Tenth Party Congress, March 1921.
2. Whither Russia, International Publishers, NY.







We print herewith in part the statement of Comrade Spector to the Political Committee of the Communist Party at its meeting on Nov. 6th, 1928 in response to the demand that he state his position on the expulsion of Cannon, Abern and Shachtman from the Workers (Communist) Party of America and on the issues connected with the expulsion. As reported in the last number of The Militant Comrade Spector was forthwith suspended from the party and removed from all responsible positions. Since then he was declared expelled from the party for refusing to retract his stand. In view of the great prominence and popularity of Comrade Spector as the outstanding Communist leader in Canada his arbitrary expulsion has made a sensation in the labor movement and has called forth the greatest indignation of the rank and file of the Party. Comrade Spector was elected to the Executive Committee of the Communist International at the Sixth World Congress. He has been for years the Chairman of the Party and editor of its organs, the Canadian Worker and the Canadian Labor Monthly. He represented the Communist Party of Canada at the Fourth and Sixth World Congresses of the Communist International.—Editor





Toronto, November 6th, 1928
To The Political Committee, Communist Party of Canada
Following upon the motion at yesterday’s session of the Polcom to endorse the expulsion of the three comrades J.P. Cannon, Max Shachtman, and Martin Abern, from the Workers Party of America for their stand on behalf of the opening of a serious discussion of the fundamental problems of the Communist International, a motion which I was unable to support, certain questions have been directed to me by the Polcom as to my own position. These may be boiled down to the following:
First whether I believe that the ideological line of “Trotskyism” is correct and whether I am prepared to carry on an aggressive campaign against Trotskyism and the comrades who have been expelled from the W.P. for their solidarity with the platform of the Russian Opposition.
In reply to the question whether I am prepared “to wage an aggressive campaign against ‘Trotskyism’,” I can assure the Polcom that I am prepared to wage an aggressive campaign for Leninism. Historical Trotskyism was liquidated with the entrance of L.D. Trotsky into the Communist Party and his collaboration with Lenin following his return to Russia in 1917. Trotsky has declared before the Russian Party that in all questions bearing any character of principle at all, in which he had differences with Lenin prior to 1917, Lenin was correct. The revival of the issue of so-called “Trotskyism by the majority in 1924 and 1925 was an attempt to obscure the real issues by an artificial issue. Zinoviev who was one of the leading comrades in the fight against Trotsky has not only admitted since that the latter was correct in his fight for internal Party democracy in 1923–24, but also that the issue of “Trotskyism” was then invented by himself and a few other comrades for strategical purposes, to link up the current differences with differences that had long passed into history.
The comrades in the vanguard of the fight against “Trotskyism” were most of them further removed from the position of Lenin on his return to Russia and his presentation of the April Theses of 1917 than L.D. Trotsky. Zinoviev and Karnenev, Rykov, Losovsky, etc. were opposed to the insurrection by which the Bolsheviks conquered power and were for a coalition of all the Socialist Parties. Comrade Stalin, prior to Lenin’s return had written articles for co-operation with Tseretelli. When so much is made of the differences between Trotsky and Lenin during the course of the revolution itself, it should be borne in mind that all these differences are being exaggerated and distorted for factional ends, and that silence is maintained on the differences that other comrades, Bucharin for instance, had with Lenin but who are nevertheless regarded as one hundred percent Leninists. Comrade Bucharin not only fought Lenin on the Brest Litovsk question but; also on a Trade Union question, and on the question of State Capitalism. On the Peasant question he was the author of one of the most dangerous slogans ever put out by a leading comrade, the slogan of “enrich yourselves,” the objective significance of which meant a call on the Kulaks to intensify their exploitation of the poor peasantry. The present leader of the C.I., Bucharin, had to be overruled on the question of the validity of partial demands in the Communist Program by the intervention of Lenin, Trotsky and others at the Fourth Congress.
Not only did Lenin during his lifetime deny all slanderous rumors of any differences between himself and Trotsky on the Peasant Question, but up to his last days he considered L.D. Trotsky his closest collaborator as may be seen by the correspondence which passed between these two leaders of the revolution in the letter to the Institute of Party History by L.D. Trotsky. Lenin called upon the latter to defend his views for him on the following questions, the National Question, the Question of Workers and Peasants Control, the Monopoly of Foreign trade, the struggle against Bureaucracy, etc. It is high time that a stop be put to the falsification of Party history that has accompanied the unscrupulous and demagogic campaign against the revolutionist who next to Lenin was the most authentic leader and organizer of the October Revolution, and was so recognized by Lenin himself. Trotsky today stands foursquare for the maintenance of the principles of Leninism, uncontaminated by the opportunist deviations that have been smuggled into the Comintern and U.S.S.R. policy by the present Rvkov-Stalin-Bucharin regime and to which the lessons of the Chinese revolution, the economic situation in the U.S.S.R., the situation within the C.P.S.U., and the experiences of the Anglo-Russian Committee bear eloquent witness.
For these latter are the real issues. In retrospect it is clear that the Sixth Congress, meeting after a delay of four years, nevertheless failed to measure up to its great tasks. Eclecticism and a zig-zag line replaced a real analysis of the rich treasures or political experience of the past four years. The discussion of the Chinese revolution, the greatest upheaval since the November revolution, was utterly inadequate. As in the case of discussion of the failure of October 1923 in Germany, the attempt to throw major responsibility for what happened in China on the leadership of a Chinese Communist Party will not down. The responsibility for the opportunist policy of our Party in China lies in the first place with the Ex. Committee of the Comintern and with the formulations of policy of Stalin, Bucharin, Martynov. Lenin at the II Congress proposed a clear line in the Colonial question, for the independence of the Communist Parties and the working class movement even in embryonic form; against the National bourgeoisie, struggle for proletarian hegemony in the the National emancipation movement even when the National Revolution has only bourgeois democratic tasks to solve; constant propaganda of the Soviet idea and creation of Soviets at the earliest moment possible; finally, possibility of the non-capitalist development of backward colonial and semi-colonial countries on condition that they receive support from the U.S.S.R. and the proletariat of the advanced capitalist countries.
Otherwise, Lenin pointed out, the alliance with the national bourgeoisie would be dangerous to the revolution. This alliance could only be affected on the basis that the bourgeoisie carried on an effective struggle against imperialism and did not prevent the Communist Party from organizing the revolutionary action of the workers and peasants. Failure to exact these guarantees would lead to a repetition of the Kemalism of the Turkish national struggle which has made its peace with Imperialism. Nearly every one of these cardinal points of Lenin’s revolutionary colonial policies was violated in China. By throwing out the smoke screen that the creation of Soviets would be tantamount to the dictatorship of the proletariat, despite the fact that Lenin proposed the Soviets already as a form of the democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants in the 1905 revolution, the leadership of the Comintern misrepresented the criticism and theses of the opposition and covered up their own opportunist mistakes.
Our Chinese party was subordinated to the National bourgeoisie in the Kuomintang under cover of the old Menshevik Martynov policy of the “Block of Four Classes” (renunciation of right to criticize Kuomintang from the outside, renunciation of the right to criticize Sun Yat Senism, renunciation of an illegal fighting apparatus and of the creation of cells in the National Army.) The working class movement was subordinated to the Government of the National bourgeoisie (prohibition in certain cases of picketing and strikes, disarmament of the workers, etc.) The C.P. maintained silence at the beginning of the repression period (coup d’etat of Chiang Kai Shek etc.) The enlarged Executive of the C.I. did not subsequently straighten out the line. The slogan of Soviets was issued not when the revolutionary movement was at its height but when the bourgeoisie had already betrayed and the workers and peasants were being decimated. Stalin was making a speech still hailing Chiang Kai Shek as a revolutionary warrior only a few days prior to Chiang Kai Shek coup in a speech, which was criticized at the time by Comrade Radek, and which was of course suppressed to avoid compromising himself. The opportunist line followed in the Chinese revolution is of course by no means isolated. I have dwelt at some length on the opportunist line followed in the refusal to break with the traitorous British General Council in the Anglo-Russian Committee. The Anglo-Russian Committee was a political block between two trade union centres. The proposal of the opposition demonstratively to break with the General Council was falsely represented as being a parallel to leaving the old unions. Any Communist who reads the resolutions adopted by the Anglo-Russian conferences of Paris, July 1926, and Berlin, August 1926, and, finally of the Berlin conference at the beginning of April 1927 should convince themselves that an absolutely impermissible capitulation line was followed. At the latter meeting the Soviet representatives went on record recognizing the General Council, “as the sole representative and spokesman” of the British Trade Union movement at a time when the traitors of the General Council were suppressing the minority movement. But at the Enlarged Executive of May 1927, Comrade Bucharin sought to justify the Berlin capitulation by the theory of “exceptional circumstances,” that is, that it was in the diplomatic interests of the Soviet Union which was under threat of war danger from the provocation of the British Government.
Such an attitude has little in common with the instructions of Lenin to the Soviet delegation that went to the Hague Conference, to ruthlessly unmask the Pacifists and Reformists. By the policy pursued in the Anglo-Russian Committee the British Communist Party developed such a degree of opportunism that it was at first even opposed to the Soviet Trade Union manifesto announcing the treachery of the Left as well as the Right Labor fakers of the General Council and wanted to continue a fight for the re-establishment of the moribund Anglo-Russian Committee. The whole line followed in the Anglo-Russian Committee was, like that in the Chinese Revolution, based on maneuvers with the reformists at the top instead of regard for the unleashing of the mass movement below.
The economic analysis of the opposition on the situation within the U.S.S.R. on the danger of the growth of the Kulak, the Nep man, and the bureaucrat has been swiftly vindicated. Undoubtedly there are Thermidorean elements in the country which are striving to bring their class pressure to bear on the Party. The highest duty of a revolutionist is to warn of these dangers and to propose the necessary measures to combat them. That was always the case while Lenin was alive. The crisis last February in connection with the grain collection proved strikingly the clanger of the Kulak. The events in Smolensk, the Don Basin, the Ukraine, etc. proved the absolute necessity not only for such a campaign of self-criticism as Comrade Stalin felt the need to initiate but for effective internal Party democracy. One of the first guarantees of such real Party democracy would be the return of the exiled revolutionary oppositionists and their reinstatement with full rights to their former positions in the Party.
I have been a foundation member of the Communist Party of Canada since its organization in which I took a joint part. I have also been a member of the C.E.C. practically all the time since. Regardless of the immediate organizational consequences, I find myself compelled to make the above statement and to further register the fact that nothing on earth can separate me from the Revolutionary Communist movement. Everything that I have stated flows from my convictions that the deviations from Leninism in the C.I. can and must be corrected by a struggle within the International and its sections.
Long live the Communist International!
Long live the Proletarian Revolution!
 


 “... In the last imperialist war, the Allies made use of the slogan, ‘Fight Against Prussian Militarism’ while the Central Empires used the slogan, ‘Fight Against Tsarism’; both sides used the respective slogans to mobilise the masses for war. In a future war between Italy and France or Yugo-Slavia, the same purpose will be served by the slogan, ‘Fight Against Reactionary Fascism’, for the bourgeoisie of the latter countries will take advantage of the anti-Fascist sentiments of the masses of the people to justify imperialist war.” – Resolution on War, Sixth Congress of the Communist International, Moscow, 1928.  
I. THE ITALO-ETHIOPIAN war throws into sharp relief the basic issues of the Marxist struggle against imperialism and social-chauvinism. After the German catastrophe established Hitler, the Marxists declared that the cup of poison brewed by the Stalinist doctrine of national-Bolshevism was filled to the brim; the capitulation of the German Communist party was the death of the Comintern. Less “subjective” critics of Stalinism countered that our judgment was precipitate and premature. They required still further evidence of bankruptcy. For some people, apparently nothing short of a police confession, and sworn affidavits taken before a duly accredited commissioner, would suffice. The Marxists know no other tests than those applied by Lenin. The Second International collapsed when it turned disloyal to its anti-imperialist pledge of 1912; the German social democracy turned traitor when it joined with the general staff, the government and the bourgeoisie. One difference between the situation two decades ago and today is that even Lenin did not completely recognize how inevitably the opportunism of peace-time would develop into the chauvinism of the war. The Third International does not even wait for the actual outbreak of world war; it unmistakably flaunts its social-patriotism and class treason against the background of the Italo-Ethiopian struggle. The bitter antagonists of the past, the Second and Third Internationals, embrace on a common platform of mobilizing the masses in support of the League of Nations, “collective security” and governmental sanctions against the “aggressor”. A writer in the Old Guard New Leader registers his heart-felt satisfaction at “the isolation of the small extremist groups who take the Trotskyist position ...” i.e., those who oppose the League of Nations and sanctions as instruments of imperialist policy. One is strongly reminded of the days when those eminently “successful” statesmen of socialism, the Eberts and Scheidemanns, the Hendersons and Lavals, poured withering contempt on “the fellows without home and country”, Lenin, Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg and Liebknecht.  
II. There was no mobilization of the League of Nations and the Royal British Navy when imperialist Japan annexed Manchuria; no intervention in the spirit of Grotius, Immanuel Kant and Woodrow Wilson, when Paraguay and Bolivia, both members of the League, warred desperately in the Chaco. Nor was the sonorous Covenant invoked to prevent the earlier Greco-Turkish war that ended in the sack of Smyrna or when insurgent Polish militarists seized Vilna. The League calmly contemplated its navel as the French occupied the Ruhr, and the government of Alfonso suppressed Abd-El-Krim. The democratic Third Republic of Laval-Herriot and their similars mercilessly crushed the Syrians; parliamentary Britain coerced India, bombarded Alexandria, and dispatched the 1927 expedition to Shanghai. But not the faintest suggestion of sanctions ruffled Geneva. For all this happened within the precincts of the Thieves’ Kitchen.
But the Italian eruption is part of the new chapter in international relations, the prologue of a second world war. The status quo of Versailles has been undermined with accelerated speed by the development of the world economic crisis. The war of 1914-18 could not eliminate its own cause; only the European revolution could have clone that. The gigantic increase of the powers of production had exploded against the limitations of national sovereignty. But the Peace of Versailles proceeded to Balkanize Europe, at a time when the economic sceptre passed to America, the rise of the Soviet Union challenged capitalism, and Japanese imperialism contested Asia. In these circumstances European peace and stability could never be more than relatively brief interludes. Economic chaos, mass unemployment, middle class ruination, peasant impoverishment resumed their sway. Parliamentary democracy, the political expression of capitalist progress, could no longer confine the class antagonisms of capitalist decay. Fascism captivates the middle classes with promises to restore order, control capitalism, and develop national self-sufficiency. But capitalist planning fails as dismally as the World Economic Conference. “National self-sufficiency”, which results in progressively reduced standards of living, proves a necessary means of rearmament in the renewed struggle for the repartitioning of the world market. Armaments, on which expenditures are three or four times their magnitude of 1914, are the only industry that flourishes.
But to describe the ensuing struggle in terms of democracy versus Fascism is radically false. This much the Sixth Congress of the Comintern which, in 1928 was not yet completely “liberated” from Leninist tradition, still acknowledged.
“In the last imperialist war,” ran its war resolution, “the Allies made use of the slogan, ‘Fight Against Prussian Militarism’ while the Central Empires used the slogan, ‘Fight Against Tsarism’; both sides used the respective slogans to mobilize the masses for war. In a future war between Italy and France or Yugo-Slavia, the same purpose will be served by the slogan, ‘Fight Against Reactionary Fascism’, for the bourgeoisie in the latter countries will take advantage of the anti-Fascist sentiments of the masses of the people to justify imperialist war.”
The major emphasis of both the Second and Third Internationals today is a complete denial of this indubitably correct position. Those who completely failed to distinguish between Fascism and social democracy in the struggle against Hitler (Stalin’s theory that they were “twins”) and those who failed to organize militant working class resistance to Fascism (like Otto Bauer) now call on the capitalist “democratic” states like England and France to win their battles for them. Dimitroff of the Comintern and Adler of the LSI vie with each other mightily to save the “remnants of bourgeois democracy”.
The strategy of both Internationals is based on the support of the “peace-loving”, satiated, and hence defensive capitalist powers, against the lean and hungry Fascist aggressors. This point of view is frequently crystallized in the formula, “Fascism Means War.” The Stalinist writer, Strachey, explains the Fascist tendency to the “extreme of imperialism” and “extreme of bellicosity” as due (1) to the destruction of the home market by cutting of wages and raising of prices, and (2) the consequent drive on the foreign market on pain of complete collapse. The slightest reflection suggests that there is no essential difference between this Fascist policy and that of the National government in England or the Herriot-Laval government in France. Inasmuch as it refuses to accept the status quo, Fascism intensifies the inner conflicts of capitalism and sharpens the war danger. But what is of paramount consideration in the struggle against both Fascism and war is to realize that both spring from the existence of capitalism.
Imperialist war has its inception in the struggle of the monopolies for the market. The proletariat cannot afford to distinguish between “aggressor” and “non-aggressor” trusts, syndicates, cartels, consortiums, etc., and as little between the capitalist states which are the general executive committees of these predatory interests. To support the “system of collective security” is equivalent to supporting the balance of power of the pre-war epoch, or in other words, it is to call on the working class to bleed for the present distribution of the world markets, of colonies, mandates and spheres of influence. It is to enlist in defense of one or the other of two rival imperialist camps. The democratic forms of certain imperialist states like France or Great Britain can no more justify giving them support than it would justify the German workers supporting the Nazi regime. In any future conflict “constitutional” and “authoritarian” states will be found mixed up. Even now it is clear that without the complicity of England, it would have been impossible for Nazi Germany to rearm. Even now negotiations persist for a Franco-German rapprochement. Even now Schacht is reported to have disclosed to French and British bankers the Nazi desire for expansion in the Baltic and Soviet Ukraine.
Neither the argument of democracy, nor the argument of the “aggressor” are new. In 1912 the Basle manifesto already rejected these specious ideas, “declaring that the coming war could not be justified by even the slightest pretext of being in the interests of the people”, and pointing out that the war would be the product of capitalist imperialism, “of the policy of conquests pursued by both group’s of belligerents, both the Austro-German and Anglo-French-Russian group”. Which did not prevent the Socialist parties on both sides later discovering that ideals and not investment were the prime movers of “their” governments. The bourgeoisie is no longer capable of waging a “progressive” war, such as in the period of national state unification against aristocracy and feudalism. In the imperialist epoch, the bourgeoisie, confronted in all countries by the problems of the general crisis of capitalism, strives for a solution by the sharper exploitation of the proletariat and the subjection of the “backward races”. To summon the working class to support any policy leading to national unity or national defense under capitalism is to be an accessory of imperialism. The Italian invasion of Ethiopia is an example of undisguised imperialist aggression, but the Italian conflict with England is no meaningless struggle between “the principles of the Covenant and imperialist aggression”; it is a collision of rival imperialisms, with the more powerful in temporary command of the League machinery.  
III. The Italian Fascist dictatorship has become steadily more involved in internal economic and social contradictions. Italian economy rests on a very narrow basis; Italy is an importer of coal, cotton, iron, raw wool and vegetable fibres. It is one of the principal grievances of the Italian bourgeoisie that the price they got at Versailles for betraying the Triple Alliance was practically an insult. Despite the utmost restrictions of imports, the adverse trade balance for the first half of this year was approximately 1.4 billion lire, the total for 1934. The budgetary deficit for 1933-34 was nearly seven billion lire. Treasury bonds can no longer be issued at a favorable rate of interest, and postal savings notes which formerly could be cashed at sight no longer find takers. Trade restrictions throughout the world make it difficult for Italy to export. Public works and reclamation no longer suffice to keep unemployment down, and the safety-valve of the United States labor market is not now available. The worsening economic situation has stirred up the latent reserves of class antagonism and Mussolini has realized that Fascism will be in danger unless it extends its markets. Or as the Fascist journalist Gayda put it:
“We must define the year 13 of the Fascist era as the year of the last stages of Fascist concentration and the beginning of the international struggle for affirmation of her right to life and power.”
The puffed-up verbiage of this statement cannot conceal the real meaning.
The Tripartite Treaty of 1906 between Great Britain, Italy and France, ostensibly guaranteeing Ethiopia’s territorial integrity, was a preliminary agreement to partition the country at the first favorable opportunity. What saved the last independent African state at the time was the balance of imperial interests. England was anxious to halt the German advance. Though defeated at Adowa in her direct attempt at conquest, Italy was accorded a sphere of influence practically covering the whole of Ethiopia. By the secret Treaty of London, on the strength of which Italy sided with the Allies, France and England agreed that should they themselves increase their African colonies at the expense of Germany, and that Italy would be accorded compensation. The war ended with England, France and Belgium adding one million square miles to their African holdings. All the Italian diplomats got was a good cry. In 1926 a series of colonial uprisings induced England to agree to support the Italian claim for a railway concession connecting Eritrea and Somaliland, running west of Addis Ababa, in return for recognition of England’s right to carry out works on a motor road from Lake Tana to the Sudan and works on a barrage on that lake. Getting wind of this, the unfortunate Ethiopian government protested to both signatories and in a rider to Great Britain pathetically added:
“We should never have suspected that the British government would come to an agreement with another government regarding our lake.”
The League of Nations blandly promised the Negus that it would take cognizance of his protest and the matter was smoothed over. Ras Tafari proceeded, however, to negotiate with the J.G. White Engineering Corporation of New York with a view to having the Lake Tana dam built by American interests, and invited the United States to re-open its legation in Addis Ababa.
But the agreement with Great Britain did not bring any practical results and Italy began pressing forward, against the resistance of the Negus, independently. Italy began plainly preparing for invasion, and the necessary “incident” at Walwal found 200,000 Italian troops mobilized for the autumn campaign. As at Fashoda at the end of the last century in her African rivalry with France, Britain’s attitude suddenly hardened. Italy’s expansion in Ethiopia would endanger British control of the head-waters of the Nile, of strategic importance for the Anglo-Egyptian Suden, and no less menace British control of the Red Sea, predominance in the Mediterranean and the whole chain of imperial communications. The development of the Italian air and naval forces, accompanied by Italian talk of “mare Nostrum”, pointed an obvious challenge. The Baldwin-Hoare government decided that this was the most opportune moment in years to take a stand against further attrition of the Empire. British control in Egypt, Iraq, Palestine and India were at stake. Not for the first time, the British mobilized not only their fleets but the whole moral order and the world of ideals. What could be more edifying than the abrupt conversion to the Covenant of Winston Churchill. The lesson of the crisis, states the former Lord of the Admiralty, is that Britain must have secure and lasting control of the Mediterranean; the British fleet will enable the League of Nations to give Britain secure and lasting control of the Mediterranean. England becomes the League’s most devoted proponent of sanctions to “punish the guilty aggressor”.  
IV. The pro-sanctions policy of the Second and Third Internationals came as a veritable god-send to British imperialism. The War Office and Admiralty are able to execute their plans to increase enormously their armaments in an atmosphere of “national unity”. In 1933 the Labor party declared that it would “take no part in war and resist it with the whole force of the labor movement”. In 1935 the Labor party demands military sanctions. As for the Communist party – its leader, Pollitt, calls upon the British navy to close the Suez Canal! When recently the Edinburgh Trades Council passed a resolution supporting the League in all measures “short of war” (i.e., “military sanctions”) the communists supported an amendment to delete the qualification “short of war”. But if you want the government to close the Suez Canal you must also vote the naval appropriations for that purpose. If you want the government to apply military as well as economic sanctions, you must support the government’s armament program. You may feebly protest that it does not follow. The masses, subject to the tremendous pressure of bourgeois as well as social-patriotic propaganda, see it in that light. The chauvinism of the Labor party actually facilitates the National government’s return to power. The sorry spectacle of the Labor party in the present elections is a repetition of the fate of social-patriotism and class collaboration in every crucial election. Lloyd George won the post-war election on the slogan, “Hang the Kaiser.” The Labor party complained. But it had supported Lloyd George in the prosecution of the imperialist war. The Labor government was turned out when the Tories raised the fake Zinoviev letter issue. The Labor party complained; but it had been administering capitalism! The Tories turned the second Labor government out by conjuring up a grave financial crisis; but the Laborites themselves had been preparing wage cuts. In the present crisis, Garvin of the Observer, a leading Tory weekly, jeers at the Labor party,
“the incredible advocates of both disarmament and defiance, of both feebleness and challenge, of both weakness and war ... The main body of Labor opinion has surrendered to a sheer stampede of jingoism ... They have clamored for sanctions, blockade and war.”
The resolution of the Sixth Congress of the Comintern which we cited above contains this additional injunction:
“The first duty of the communists in the fight against the imperialist war is to tear down the screen by which the bourgeoisie conceals their preparations for war and the real state of affairs from the masses of workers ... This duty implies above all, a determined political and ideological struggle against pacifism.”
Official pacifism especially is singled out (League of Nations, Locarno, disarmament conferences, etc.). The Stalinists have completely forgotten this “directive” but it is the none less sound for that. Their support of sanctions is part and parcel of their participation with the social democrats in the treacherous front of “Official Pacifism”. “Sanctions” (which have nothing in common with the international workers’ boycott, a form of mass action) are the instrumentality of imperialist policy, of the powers that dominate the “League”. That is the League which Lenin described as a “Thieves’ Kitchen”, and the Soviet government characterized it in 1923 as
“a coalition of certain states endeavoring to usurp power over other states, and masking their attempts on the rights and independence of other nations by a false appearance of groundless legality in the form of mandates ... a pseudo-international body ... a mere mask to conceal from the masses the aggressive aims of the imperialistic policy of the great powers or their vassals.”
“The League of Nations,” declares the 1928 resolution of the Comintern, “was founded nine years ago as an imperialist alliance in defense of the robber peace of Versailles, and for the suppression of the revolutionary movement of the world ...”
Apparently England and France only became “satiated” in the last few years.
Identifying the policy of a Soviet state in circumstances of capitalist encirclement with the policy of a working class struggling for power, the Stalinists and social democrats plead that the workers must take advantage of the imperialist antagonisms. Of course, but the methods are quite different. The Soviet state is compelled to manoeuvre between the capitalist states, to conclude pacts and alliances. Even then the limits of the concessions and agreements are the basic principles of the proletarian dictatorship. Anything that concedes these is betrayal. The struggle for peace is a legitimate and necessary aspiration of the Soviet state, but the Soviet state would commit high treason to the principles on which it was founded if it used its authority and influence to force the workers of capitalist countries to conclude civil peace with the ruling classes. The crime of the Stalin regime against the cause of internationalism is that it has forced the vanguard of the French working class into an alliance with its ruling class, that it has forced its supporters throughout the world to become adherents and apologists of the League of Nations, the association of capitalist states. The way the working class in capitalist countries must take advantage of imperialist antagonisms, particularly if they take the form of war, is to direct their struggle and arms against the ruling class of their “own countries”. Civil war and not civil peace is the Leninist method of utilizing the imperialist antagonisms – the policy of revolutionary defeatism and not the policy of social-patriotism. Revolutionary defeatism in capitalist countries is the real defense of the Soviet Union too. The international working class and not paper treaties are its real allies.
The Italo-Ethiopian war has thrown a glaring light on the methods by which the new version of social-patriotism, no less rank than the old, seeks to rivet the workers to the imperialist war machine. Tomorrow Roosevelt or his successor may decide to stem the advance of Japanese imperialism by concluding some sort of agreement with the Soviet Union, and the social-patriots will muster all their arguments to save American democracy from the talons of the Mikado. Oh, certainly, Browder will probably plead that he is fighting not only for Lenin, but for Jefferson, Tom Paine, and Abraham Lincoln. But that will not help the overthrow of American capitalism. We accuse the Second and Third Internationals of enlisting their services to enhance the prestige of the robber League, and of the “democratic and satiated powers” whose power is based on the exploitation of the proletariat and oppression of millions of colonial subjects. We accuse these social-patriotic organizations of sabotaging the organization of a real workers’ boycott against Italy by directing their attention to a belief in the League sanctions; we accuse them of consolidating Fascism in Italy and Germany by permitting the Hitlers and Mussolinis to use the argument of encirclement and Versailles, and appeal for national unity to counter national unity elsewhere. We accuse them of hallowing the status quo, of a course of class collaboration, national unity, and civil peace that will re-enact the tragedy of August, 1914. No thinking worker today can any longer afford to temporize with the issues. The treachery of the Second and Third Internationals is too plain. The building of the Fourth International to organize the revolutionary-internationalist struggle against imperialism brooks no delay.



Theodore Dan of the Russian Social-Democratic Party bitterly resisted the Soviet seizure of power. Otto Bauer of the Austrian Social-Democratic Party drugged the masses with poison of “constitutional” Marxism and confidingly took Dollfuss’ word for it that the latter was not plotting a counter-revolutionary coup d’etat. Jean Zyromski of the French Socialist Party lavishly scatters revolutionary phrases while supporting the expulsion of the Bolshevik-Leninists. Having thus brilliantly acquitted themselves in the class struggles of their several countries, these worthies in a thesis on Socialism and the War Danger jointly rally to the defense of the Soviet Union.
The International, they declare, meaning the Second International, must free itself from “traditional opinions.” It is common knowledge that the “traditional opinions” meant rattling the sword of “revolution against war” in the security of peace-time and docilely capitulating to the military budgets on the declaration of war. In 1914, says Bauer, “the International could not decide in favor of either of the two coalitions which were both composed of capitalist and imperialist powers, and the Socialist parties accepted a policy of National Union with their respective governments.” But the present danger of a war between two coalitions, one headed by Hitler Germany, the other including the Soviet Union, creates an entirely different situation. The amendments to the “traditional opinions” the thesis presents for the changed situation only prove that the more Bauerism changes, the more it remains the same, with this difference that in its pre-war manifestoes at least, the Second International at least, the Second International never did come out in support of “National Union.” In words at least, the pre-war pledges of the International threatened the imperialist war-mongers with a revolutionary crisis.
 
Defending the Soviet Union With Social Patriotism!
On their own candid admission, the motives impelling Bauer-Dan-Zyromski to flaunt their social-patriotic policy are the noblest, the most impeccable. “The interests of international socialism demand that German fascism shall he defeated. The interests of international socialism demand that the Soviet Union shall be victorious.” How is all that to be effected? By a revolutionary struggle against capitalism, and not against the war danger merely as some isolated phenomenon? By organizing the forces of the working class in the direction of the dictatorship of the proletariat? By registering the bankruptcy of the Second and Third Internationals whose policies and leadership were impotent to stem the tide of fascism? Do Bauer and Company urge the British Labor Party to fight for a government to establish socialism and not administer capitalism or the Socialist-Stalinist leadership of the People’s Front to quit collaborating with Herriot-Laval and organize the workers’ militia against the armed menace of La Roque?
Not at all. To appeal to the independent action of the masses was never the weakness of Bauer-Dan-Zyromski. As their signal achievements indicate, they are realists. To overthrow Fascism, promising their recruiting services in advance, they invoke the powerful aid of the peaceful and democratic imperialist powers associated in the League. The Comité des Forges, Schneider-Creusot, and Winston Churchill, these will make the world safe for the Soviet Union! But if you think we are going too far, let us quote: “In fighting against war, international socialism must support the governments of those countries which, saturated by the results of the last war, want to preserve peace” – as the British Royal Air Force is preserving peace beyond the north-west frontier of India. “International socialism,” they add, “must support the institution of the League of Nations ... In all countries allied with the Soviet Union, Socialists cannot and must not hinder the conduct of the war. They must appeal to the workers to do their duty as soldiers as well as in the war industry.” Compelled by the obvious realities to admit that the League is an instrument of imperialism, that the good Democracies are based on subjection of the proletariat and the colonial peoples, that the regional pacts are modern military alliances, they nevertheless cling to their main thesis that imperialism in military alliance with the U.S.S.R. is still hallowed.
Essentially the Bauer thesis urging the alliance of the working class with the capitalist state allied with the U.S.S.R., is the now familiar and treasonable position of the Stalin-Laval communique. Both declarations of policy serve as the basis for “organic unity” of the Second and Third Internationals. Unless the masses can be organized to resist the social-patriotic sophistry of Stalin-Bauer, they will be involved in a ghastly repetition of August 1914. The most tragic illusion of all is that the defense of the Soviet Union requires the betrayal of the working class independence in countries allied with the U.S.S.R. The Stalin-Bauer policy invites the defeat of both the Soviet Union and the international working class.
The one reliable ally of the Soviet Union is the international working class. But it is that ally that Stalin and Bauer with their social-patriotism are attempting to demoralize, systematically driving them into the camp of the rival imperialisms struggling for the redistribution of the world market On this point there can be no doubt. The whole policy of the People’s Front in France is directed to civil peace, class collaboration in preparation for the- coming war. The support of the sanctions policy of the League of Nations involves the proletariat in support of the governmental policies of the imperialist powers in the League. The Bauer thesis piously expresses the hope that the lessons of the last war “will inspire the working class of the world with the determined will to use a new war ... to overthrow the capitalist system.” The Bauer position will do anything but that. The fruits of the Stalin-Laval pact are already tragically apparent. The former communist and revolutionary ideology in the ranks of the Comintern is being supplanted by the ideology of liberalism, patriotism, and pacifism. The collaboration with the “remnants of bourgeois democracy” proclaimed by the Seventh Comintern Congress must inevitably sabotage any developing struggle for power, lest it undermine the military capacity of the bourgeois ally and appear to redound to Hitler’s advantage. Once educated in the Spirit of the “sacred union,” it is not easy to make a right about face at anybody’s command. Declaration of war will be followed by the suppression of all critical working class organization and press. The General Staff will rule. Bauer’s policy will never lead to the revolution; it can only lead to another Versailles or the complete collapse of civilization.
 
Ours Is the Policy of Lenin
To the social-patriotism of Bauer-Dan we oppose the only policy that can save the Soviet Union as a socialist state, the position of revolutionary defeatism in every capitalist country whether allied with the Soviet Union or not. Lenin advocated the defeat of Czarist Russia and the overthrow of the Kerensky Government regardless of the protestations and objurgations of patriotic socialists that defeat, revolution and a separate peace would betray the cause of Western Democracy and play into the hands of Prussian Militarism. Lenin and Trotsky were vociferously denounced as German agents. Their former slogan of “make the world safe for democracy” – the democracy represented by the imperialist Allies, – the socialist-patriots have now supplemented with the plea of the Defense of the Soviet Union. But this kind of “defense” must lead exactly to the same results as their 1914 defense of Entente democracy or “socialism” on the part of the German government-socialists. Social-patriotism had done its work so thoroughly that despite the terrible slaughter of the war and the subsequent chaos, in the victorious and vanquished countries alike, the proletariat was unable to overthrow the guilty ruling classes. “The working class,” Bauer-Dan write coolly, “were not able to overthrow capitalism when It was weakened by the World War; they are now threatened with the danger of having to go through the hell of a second World War.” If that is the case, it is thanks principally to the social-patriotic and treacherous doctrine and leadership of Bauer and Company in the last war.
 
Logic of Stalinism Predicted
The whole course of events which culminated in the Stalin-Laval pact and now finds expression in the Bauer thesis accurately verifies the consistent contention of the Russian Opposition that for the U.S.S.R. the most serious of all questions in connection with the war danger was the inner regime. The ebb in the tide of the post-war revolutionary movement nurtured the soil of the nationally disposed bureaucracy. Stalinism rationalized its position in the familiar theory of socialism-in-a-single-country, which by implication dispensed with the necessity of a revolutionary Communist International, since socialist construction was independent of the “state aid of the Western proletariat.” Accomodation with the “neutralized bourgeoisie” and maneuvering through the League of Nations realistically followed. To destroy the Leninist Opposition it was necessary to crush the party. The anti-Marxist policies of the Stalinized Comintern contributed decisively to the accession of Hitler. The sequel of it all was the defensive measure of the Stalin-Laval communique which directs a mortal blow at the remnants of revolutionary policy of the Comintern. Every defeat of the Western working class has in turn resulted in the strengthening of the bureaucratic reaction, to the point where its most perfect expression is the personal dictatorship of Stalin. A new world war in which the workers would fail to achieve their independence of both the Soviet and the Comintern bureaucracy, in which they would continue to take part as an ally of the imperialist governments would spell doom to the Soviet Union as a workers’ state.
 
The Two Roads
If the Stalin-Bauer policy leads to the calamitous repetition of August 1914, it criminally opens the door to the peril of imperialist intervention, not only from the direction of Hitler, but also from the “democratic” allies of the U.S.S.R. In the event of a protracted struggle and under the dictatorship of the most reactionary elements whom the imperialist war inevitably brings to the top, the “democratic” allies may turn openly fascist, concluding their own peace with their fellow-fascists at the expense of the Soviet Union. Even now, Laval’s collaboration with the Soviet Union is sufficiently precarious and feelers for a rapproachment with Hitler have been extended more than once. But if the proletarian revolution does not destroy Western imperialism, the Soviet Union will be subjected to the terrific pressure of world reaction. This and the exhausting demands of modern military operations would confront the Soviet Union with the peril of an internal bourgeois-Bonapartist attack on its social basis. In these circumstances it is in the vital interests of the defense and-preservation of the U.S.S.R. as a Workers’ State (1) to build up the new revolutionary Fourth International independent of the diplomacy of the Soviet bureaucracy, and directing its energies to the transformation of the impending world imperialist war into a civil war for international socialism; (2) despite the perilous difficulties involved, to make every effort to renew the Bolshevik party of Lenin by the organization of the Soviet section of the Fourth International, pledged to the unconditional defense of the U.S.S.R. but in the interests of that very defense to the unsparing criticism of everything in the war and diplomatic policy of the Stalin regime that is incompatible with revolutionary Marxism.
 



The Baldwin government was returned to power by a majority that exceeded every Tory expectation. The distribution by parties in the new House of Commons is:

For the National Government: Conservatives, 385; Liberal National, 32; National Labor, 8; National, 3; total, 428.
Against the government: Labor, 154; Liberal, 17; Independent Liberal, 4; Independent Labor Party, 4; Communist, 1; Independent 3; total, 183: Four seats were still in doubt when these lists were compiled.

If one considers the entire national and international background of this election, the British working class, under the leadership of the class-collaborationist, pro-“sanctions,” Labor Party, has sustained a severe defeat. The increased Labor representation from the low-water mark of 52 in the elections of 1931, may be Thanksgiving fodder for the New Leader of this city, but it will be no occasion for mad revelry in the ranks even of the British Labor bureaucracy.
The Conservative strategists themselves, who learned their “cricket” on the playing fields of Eton, did not expect a government majority of 250. In the face of such a majority the return of the lone Stalinist Gallacher will hardly send any tremor through the Empire, particularly as the Stalinists stood for “sanctions” and the “League” as staunchly as Sir Samuel Hoare. Besides which British Communist Party representatives have a way either of deserting to the Tories like Colonel Malone, to the Labor Party like Walton Newbold and Ellen Wilkinson or feebly subsiding at the first supercilious Tory’s push like the unfortunate Parsee Saklatvala.
 
Labor Party Prepares Own Defeat
For the past four years the Labor Party has assiduously prepared its own defeat. When you estimate the results, remember that the Labor Party has already formed two Labor governments. We are not dealing with an election victory of our own cherished C.P. who proclaim a one hundred percent increase when (probably with the aid of a little colonization) they add another vote to the solitary vote in Oshkosh! The British Labor Party is the party of the majority of the organized British working class.
In these past four years, the army of nearly two million unemployed has not appreciably declined. Wages and the social services have been reduced. Conditions in the ‘distressed areas” have become a bye-word of destitution. As in the case of the miners now threatening a great strike, longer hours were imposed by legislation of the National Government in 1932. In the field of foreign affairs, the disarmament conferences have dismally collapsed. Hitler rearmed with the complicity of the government and the Bank Of England. But the elections nevertheless give the party of National Reaction five more years of a free hand at home and abroad.
 
Supports and “Deplores’’
And the principal reason? At this crucial juncture of the postwar epoch the policy of the British Labor Party is in every practical essential a capitulation to the interests of British imperialism. The outstanding? fact is that there is virtually nothing but a feeble protestation to distinguish the pro-“League Covenant,” pro-collective security, pro-sanctions position of the Laborites from the Tories. Both the Labor Party and the Trades Congress went on record urging not only economic but military sanctions. They gave the Tories just the right ammunition for the imperialist plans to increase the air and naval forces on a gigantic scale in preparation for war.
The Labor Party manifesto declared that it “deplored this attempt to exploit for partisan ends a situation of grave international anxiety.” But they have deplored before! The Labor Party “deplored” Lloyd George’s Khaki election but they had ardently helped Lloyd George prosecute the war. They “deplored” the fake Zinoviev letter sensation which won another election for the Tories, but the Labor government had been prosecuting Communists. They “deplored” the financial panic stratagem by which the Tories turned out the second Labor government in 1931; but with what right when they had themselves been preparing to cut wages and social services in the interests of economy? MacDonald was merely following out the extreme logic of his position as the leader of the Labor Party, when he entered the coalition. MacDonald’s policy was always based on “continuity” instead of class struggle and “community” as against “class-consciousness.” Those who believe in “continuity” and socialism by parliamentary procedure must accept the consequences. MacDonald is not the only “undone old man” in the ranks of the present and former heroes of the Second International.
 
Right Party for Right Job
The point cannot be too strongly stressed. If what is wanted is a party that will maintain the imperial establishment, support the present distribution of world markets, called “collective security,” and enforce military sanctions, then a single-minded, strong-willed, forthright imperialist party like the Tories will get the support over the “arf-and-arf,” milk-and-water, “Socialistic dilution” of these objectives by the Labor Party. The twelve million who participated in the straw vote for the League of Nations prefer to put their trust in additions to the fleet and the air force rather than in more professors of international law.
 
Role of Independent Labor Party
That there are prospects for a revolutionary party in Great Britain is indicated by the fact that the Independent Labor Party which has vacillated so badly for so long was yet able to return four members. The I.L.P. must make up its mind which route to travel or be dissipated by the C.P. For a considerable time, Maxton and Brockway have balanced themselves on a tight-rope. The stand of the I.L.P. In opposition to sanctions and its approximation to the revolutionary anti-war policy should clear the air if followed up with a clear-cut orientation on the problem of the International. Precious time has been frittered away in the attempt to establish the united front with the Stalinists. The result was demoralization of the I.L.P. The British C.P. is sterile and the problem was to engage in united front activities with the Labor Party for fruitful contacts with the masses, but the leaders of the I.L.P. adamantly insisted that they wanted a “revolutionary” united front. For a while they even utilized the “third period” concepts of the C.P. The social-patriotic rightward swing of the Comintern seems to have had a sobering effect on some leading elements of the I.L.P.
But the I.L.P. is still bound up with the London-Amsterdam Bureau of “Socialist Revolutionary Unity.” That means ‘that they are still pursuing “organic unity” of the Second and Third Internationals. If any country provides an illustration of the futility of mere unity on the basis of a program of social reformism, bourgeois democracy and social-chauvinism, surely it is Britain with its Labor Party, already overwhelmingly in fact the party of “organic unity.” To imagine that the addition of the British Labor Party to the German Social Democracy to the Stalinist bureaucracy (Comintern) will somehow engender the social revolution is mysticism, not Marxism. The unity of the working class movement can only be progressive if it embarks on a program of class struggle, if it breaks with bourgeois democracy, if it is a revolutionary unity. The I.L.P. has recently been rid of the Gaster-Lovestoneite (R.P.C.) clique that was striving to liquidate the I.L.P. into the C.P. The revolutionary left of the I.L.P., the Marxist Group, clearly indicates the road the party must travel – the road of the Fourth International.
 
Years Ahead
We have said that the next years will be crucial, confronting the revolutionists with gigantic problems and decisions. Consider that in the half decade of the National government just gone, history inscribed on its rolls the Spanish revolution, the victory of Hitler, the Viennese insurrection, the seizure of Manchuria, the Italo-Ethiopian war. Ahead of us lie the prospects of yet greater upheavals. Japanese imperialism is systematically carving up China. The United States is carefully preparing for the great struggle In the Pacific. German rearmament proceeds apace. The Egyptian demonstrations indicate the challenge to imperialism generally contained in the colonial ferment. The capitalist world is a powder keg. The British Labor Party has given every evidence of its impotence, in the tests of office and of opposition. The LL.P., if it takes the road of revolutionary Marxism, can become the party of socialist power.
 

