

One reason teachers have been slow to struggle is that they constituted an aristocratic stratum of the working class. Their wage level was higher than the average wage level of the workers. They enjoyed job security to a great extent and all sorts of perquisites the worker in mine or factory never had under capitalist rule. And on top of that they are permeated with bourgeois ideology to a degree that places them, in this sense, at the rear of the class.
But all that is beginning to change now. The crisis is affecting them ruthlessly. The signs point to resistance by them against the attacks on their teaching and living conditions.
Teachers’ salaries in New York and elsewhere are fixed by law and are changeable only by legislative action in the state legislature or local governmental agency. In the first three years of the crisis prices fell precipitately. Teachers wages, consequently, which apparently remained fixed actually rose in purchasing value. This appreciation together with the yearly increments made mandatory under the law in some cities, constituted a more or leas steady improvement in their condition.
Only when the crisis began to interfere with the smooth functioning of this ideal set-up, as in Chicago where no wages were paid for the better part of a year, did the teachers put up some kind of a fight. In New York the state legislature cut wages about six percent. Five hundred teachers joined the Teachers Union in New York City in the period of the wage cut fight.
Schools everywhere are closing or curtailing their terms. Teachers wages are in arrears and are piling up. Further wage cuts are impending. The conditions for organized resistance are maturing.
In New York the defense fight is centering around the attempt by one means or another to prevent legislative reduction of wages and reduction or abolishment of increments. In itself this fight is correct. But it is not sufficient even from the point of view of defeating attempts to cut wages.
Wages are reduced in other ways than by legislative action. The government is making determined efforts to drive prices up to, at least the 1926 level. With wages fixed up by legislative action the rising cost of living will constitute a wage cut. If the government resorts to currency inflation to accomplish its purpose the real wage cut will be drastic.
The experience of the inflation of 1861–65, is very instructive. Teachers wages then were fixed by law. Within that period the average wage of the teachers on a national scale was increased by 37.4 per cent. But, as a result of the currency inflation prices rose 116.8 percent. Consequently, teachers salaries, measured in terms of their real purchasing power, fell to 62.3 of the 1860 basis a practical wage cut of 37.7 per cent, It follows that even a successful fight against legislative reductions of wages will not, necessarily, prevent wage cuts. That does not mean that this fight should be abandoned. It means that it should be broadened.
Just as the workers struggle for higher wages to keep pace with rising prices so should the teachers organize and fight for higher wages to meet the increase in the cost of living.
 



The great importance of the Montevideo Pan-American Conference for the Cuban workers and their American imperialist masters can be seen in the latest developments in the world’s former sugar bowl. At Montevideo the Latin American capitalists, supported and inspired by the English and Japanese imperialists, are maneuvering for advantages for themselves and Uncle Sam’s rivals at his expense. The U.S. is sitting so tightly on the lid that about all they can do is, to borrow a word from the Blue Eagle general, chisel.
Just the same they have the American moneybags in a delicate situation. If he makes a miscue any place in Latin America while this conference is on they will squeeze him for all they can get out of him.
 
Strike Wave Rising Again
The news coming out of Cuba is fragmentary and unreliable, being either capitalist or Stalinist in origin. But it seems the Cuban workers understand that Uncle Sam’s necessity for stepping warily gives them more latitude. The strike wave is rising high again. If Harry Cannes, head of the Anti-Imperialist Delegation to Cuba, is to be believed the workers of 30 sugar mills in Santa Clara province have been involved in strikes recently (Daily Worker, December 9, 1933). The scope of this struggle can be seen from the fact that, according to the Cuban Review of February 1927, there were 53 sugar mills in this province in 1920, nearly thirty percent of all the sugar mills on the island, producing seventeen percent of all the bags of sugar of that year.
Other strikes are taking place; tobacco workers are out in thousands; all the Woolworth Co. stores are closed, and have been bombed. Most important among the strikes is the strike against the Cuban Electric Co. of which Machado is a vice-president, an affiliate of the Electric Bond and Share Company. The Emperor of America, J.P. Morgan, is the big shot in both of these outfits. How big the Electric Bond and Share is can be seen from the fact that its subsidiaries in 1930 supplied light, power, gas, water and ice to 1,520,000 Cubans, thirty-eight percent of the population.
 
Importance of the Strike
The importance of the strike lies not only in the size and importance of the company. The Martin government, government of the petty bourgeoisie, is using the strike and the temporary weakness of the American imperialists’ position to consolidate its position and delude the masses of the country. The army high command told the Cuban Department of Interior delegates to the meeting of the electric workers which decided on the strike that it would not interfere with the strike. This is a bid for support by the masses.
At the same time it is part of a more comprehensive scheme: The government has issued an order to the Electric Company to reduce its electric and gas rates by forty-five percent and had forbidden it to reduce salaries or discharge workers in carrying through this necessary and insufficient reduction in the rates. In a previous article we gave the figures for electric rates: 17 cents a kilowatt hour in Havana an 20 cents in the interior; compared to New York which has a high rate of 6 and 5 cents a kilowatt hour. A second order struck at another Morgan outfit, the Cuban Telephone Company, a subsidiary of the International Telephone and Telegraph Company, also controlled by J.P. Morgan.
 
Strategy of the Martin Government
The attack on the utility rates is a sop thrown to the petty bourgeoisie who have had to bear the traffic; workers’ towns in the interior have long [been] without gas and electricity although equipped to use them. The threat to take over the American monopolies if they ceased operations in protest against the rate reductions is a gesture made by the government, to the anti-imperialist sentiments of the workers and petty bourgeoisie. The order not to lay off workers or cut wages is part of the bid for support by labor.
Now the Martin government can afford this show of strength. It doesn’t cost it anything now. It knows that only the most direct and serious threat to the stakes of Wall Street in Cuba will cause Roosevelt to risk arousing the whole of Latin America and playing into the hands of England, France, Spain and Japan by sending armed forces into Cuba.
At the same time the government is strengthening itself internally, so that when the conference is over, or maybe before if all goes well, its bargaining hand for recognition by Washington will be a whole lot stronger.
 
Cuban Workers Need International Support
That is how the government figures the lay of the land. But what about the workers? They are still putting forward only economic demands. We take that as a sign of the absence of an influential revolutionary Communist party. A Marxist vanguard could take great advantage of the situation in the interests of the workers by consciously raising the struggle to the political plane under the slogan of nationalization of industry under workers’ control of production. The weakness of the American capitalists’ position now is also, in the last analysis, the weakness of the Martin government. The advancing workers’ movement could also count on the weakness of the American imperialists’ position, its present, necessary reluctance to assist the beleaguered petty bourgeois government.
The momentary weakness of the world’s leading imperialist power should be exploited in another way to assist the Cuban revolution. An international protest movement demanding hands off Cuba, centering in Latin America, and on Montevideo would cause Washington great embarrassment and would weaken its position still further. It is in this connection and at this moment that we feel most acutely the collapse of the C.I. and the nationalist orientation of the Communist Parties.
It is not loo late to build the defense movement. That task stands high on the agenda of international working class problems. The Stalinists have demonstrated their failure to understand the problem and build the movement. The Left Opposition together with all other revolutionary elements must take the initiative and issue the call to the masses of the United States and Latin America, and the entire world to organize the movement of support and defense of the Cuban revolution.
 



For the third time in three years a jury of “his peers” has found Heywood Patterson guilty of the rape of Victoria Price, locally notorious prostitute, and condemned him to death. The capitalist beast, is determined not to give up its prey. The wheels of justice are moving now with greater speed than they did last April at the last trial, almost as fast as the San Jose and St. Joseph lynch mobs did, and Clarence Norris is standing trial a second time for the same “crime”. By the time this reaches the press the verdict will be in and the trial of the third or maybe even the fourth Scottsboro boy will be over.
 
The “Impartial” Jury
The jury which tried Patterson and the juries which will try the other defendants are supposed to be made up of impartial men who have no fixed ideas about the innocence or guilt of the boys. They are all white men, and if you wish you can believe that they have no prejudices against other men just because their skins are black. These jurymen are all local residents in a none-too-numerous community where the Scottsboro case has been the subject of discussion for years. How many sat in the courtroom during the previous trials? Leastways we are asked to believe that these men heard a good deal of argument on the case, participated in it, read the editorials in the Southern papers urging them to “lynch the damned niggers”, and still have open minds. One has to be as simple and trusting as a child to believe this fairy tale out of the capitalist propaganda book. These men are all set against the Scottsboro boys no matter what they say they believe or don’t believe.
If there was one among them who had any lingering doubt, the way Judge Callahan ran the trial would have removed it. Callahan was fair. He gave the defense its day in court. Sure, he didn’t allow the Jew lawyers from New York to play tricks on the court. He defended Southern womanhood. Yes, sir.
 
Cards Dealt from the Bottom
There isn’t a white farmer in the neighborhood who could have held his opinion of Patterson’s innocence against the bias of the upright justice’s charge to the jury and his bewildering judicial hair-splittings. Callahan dealt cards from the bottom of the deck. That’s what he is there for.
Callahan does his job well. There’s nothing raw like the stuff Horton pulled and the speeches prosecutors Knight and Wright made in the last trial. It’s all strictly according to Hoyle. Callahan is carrying out the order of the Supreme Court to do it over again and cut out the mistakes.
Callahan made one serious slip. In his charge to the jury which consumed an hour and a half of Patterson’s life he FORGOT to remind the jury that if they found the evidence insufficient to prove the charge against Patterson they could bring in a verdict of acquittal. Strange omission! Convenient memory! Only when reminded by the defense counsel and the prosecutor did he perfunctorily add this detail.
That slip gave the whole show away. What of that? Bias is no ground for acquittal in the higher courts. The learned justices do not arrive at their decisions by obvious facts and simple considerations. For them the question is not whether Callahan showed bias. They will take out their legal yardstick and see whether what Callahan said or did denied the defendant, who is presumed innocent until proven guilty, a fair trial by violating this statute or that law or is not in accord with the decision of judge so-and-so in this-and-that case. You can be as lunatic on the bench as Rolph of California is in the governor’s chair, but if you want your stuff to go over with the boys higher up you have got to make it appear that you are sticking within the law. If you do they will give you the official o.k.
 
Learned from Massachusetts
And whoever heard of a high court saying straight out: the man is innocent, release him? Where and when did that happen? In the Mooney case? In the Sacco-Vanzetti case? Where? When? The cards are stacked against the boys all the way up the line.
The strategy of the capitalists is plain. They want to give the country another ‘”fine lesson”. “In California”, they want to say, “and in Maryland they do it with the rope and the faggot; but in Alabama they are civilized. There they burn innocent men in the electric chair according to the law. But first they torture them in jail for years, holding out a ray of hope to them and snatching it away again. They learned that from what Massachusetts did to Sacco and Vanzetti.”
Between St. Joseph, Mo., and Scottsboro there is no essential difference. Scottsboro is a legal version of St. Joseph. Priests can approve it with undisturbed consciences. Editors can congratulate the nation on the triumph of law and justice. The pious, the patriotic, the reformers can all sleep easier. Capitalism can breathe more freely.
 
The Meaning of “Justice”
Scottsboro should open the eyes of the last doubting Thomas to the meaning of justice in capitalist courts. It ought to burn the lesson home that only the workers can get the boys off; only the workers organized in a powerful movement of mass demonstrations.
When the workers put a pressure mi the capitalists by protest demonstrations the judicial fossils will discover that any number of laws and statutes and decisions have been violated, by Callahan, by the governor, by the president, by god himself. That is the way the boys can be saved from death. That is the way they have been kept alive thus far. That is the only way they can be snatched free from the blood lust of the bourbon tiger. There is no other way.
That is where the defense made a major strategical mistake. The mass movement which has kept the boys alive for almost three years has been allowed to die down. Here and there they get up a demonstration, but the militancy and the numbers of the early days of the movement are gone.
 
Playing Down Class Issue
The policy of playing down the class nature of the case was carried out in the courtroom. There was no talk of the misery of the southern workers which drove the nine boys to roam the country on freight trains looking for work to supplement the pittances their mothers’ drudgery eked out. No word was said of the frightful oppression of the negro masses. It was all a strictly legal question with the defense. At least that is how they fought it.
On the legal plane it is all in favor of the capitalists. It is their court, their law, their judge. WE are there on sufferance because of the hard fight we put up for two years on three continents to save these innocent boys from death or life imprisonment. When we fail to bring that fight right into the courtroom we give the judge a chance to put on a show of a fair trial, we thereby say in effect that the capitalists are right, that justice is above the classes equal and impartial.
 
Change of Strategy Needed
Without losing any more time we have got to change this strategy. If the boys are to be saved the workers must be mobilized. How? There are four million organized in the A.F. of L. There are a million in the railroad brotherhoods, several thousands more in the T.U.U.L., I.W.W., independent unions, Socialist Party, Communist Party, etc. There are a number of defense organizations. We think that all of these organizations should be asked to come together in one united front movement to fight for the immediate, unconditional and safe release of the Scottsboro boys.
When the united front conferences are organized we will be there to participate in the work. And we are going to insist on one thing; the first duty of the movement is the mobilization of the workers in mass meetings, demonstrations, parades, in every form of protest that is known to the working class.
The banner of the working class is stained with the blood of Sacco and Vanzetti, with the blood of hundreds and thousands of its sons and daughters, done to death under the wheels of the capitalist juggernaut. It is woven of the sufferings of thousands more, of Mooney and the historic though, so far, unsuccessful struggle to set him free.
If the working class will inscribe on its banner the immediate, unconditional and safe release of the Scottsboro boys, and organize to fight for their freedom they can be set free.
 



The growth of the population, the struggle against illiteracy, the lack of schools and the increasing specialization of knowledge and improvement in educational methods all make necessary an expansion of the educational system of the United States, particularly what is called the free school system. But no expansion is taking place. On the contrary, under the pressure of the crisis the capitalists are trying to conserve profits or reduce losses, among other means, by easing the tax burden through economy in civil and state government at the expense of the educational system.
The toll this economy has exacted can be gauged from some figures given in a recent resolution presented to George F. Zook, United States Commissioner of Education, by four hundred representatives of forty educational organizations. “More than 2,200,000 children of school age are already deprived of educational opportunity” and “nearly 2,000 rural schools failed to open this fall”. To these figures should be added the curtailment of school terms, the shortage of indispensable material like text books, the crowded class-rooms and the other easily imagined injurious effects of this economy.
What all this means to the teachers can be seen from statements in the same resolution. “One in every three American teachers is now receiving less than $750 per year. Thousands of teachers are receiving no salary at all.”
 
Not A Temporary Phenomenon
There is good reason to believe that this contraction is not a temporary phenomenon. The need for economy is not likely soon to disappear. The crisis is not over. The bankers and realty interests will continue to squeeze for greater profits and greater economies. And this crisis, should the capitalists succeed in overcoming, it, will be succeeded by others of a deeper character. If our present experience means anything it indicates that the attacks on the educational system will increase and cut deeper.
It follows that the employed teachers will suffer a drastic lowering of their living and working conditions if they do not organize and resist. The thousands of unemployed teachers and the thousands more who are qualifying to teach will never do so if they wait for the capitalist masters of society to provide them with the opportunity. Together they should struggle for the expansion of the educational system and resist its contraction.
For this they need unity. The unemployed should support the struggle of the employed against curtailment of school facilities as every successful resistance increases the possibility of advancing to the counter-attack for expansion of them. The employed should support the struggle of the unemployed for work and relief as every success in this direction removes a threat against the lowering of their own standards through the pressure of the unemployed’ for work.
 
Unemployment Insurance for Teachers
The fight for unemployment insurance is one of the best means of uniting the employed end unemployed teachers. It conforms to the bitter need of the unemployed for relief. And it thereby deprives the economizers of a lever to lower the standards of the employed.
At bottom the problems of the educational system are insoluble except on the basis of the social revolution. Sooner or later the course of the teachers’ struggles will lead them into the channels of the revolutionary movement.
Today the problem is the organization of a struggle for defense and relief. By their own efforts the teachers cannot succeed against their powerful enemies. They need assistance from the workers who have the same enemies.
In the struggle for unemployment insurance the teachers have a means of joining their struggle with that of the workers movement. In the Cincinnati 1932 and Washington 1933 conventions the A.F. of L. went on record for unemployment insurance. We do not expect that Green and Woll will organize the movement for it of their own accord. But the wheels can be set in motion by pressure from the rank and file.
The teachers now have an opportunity to begin the agitation in the A.F. of L. The American Federation of Teachers is a part of it. The passage of the resolution for unemployment insurance two years running gives a good basis to raise the question of doing something about it in the A.F. of L. It gives the teachers’ movement a card of entry to almost every union meeting to present its case for united action. The teachers should begin this important activity.
 



First National’s Wild Boys of the Road is the first socially serious picture to be made since the crisis hit us like one of Moses’ plagues. It tells the story of the tens of thousands of boys of all ages who are driven from home by the pressure of the crisis on their families; how they live; and the brutal treatment capitalist society gives them.
The break-up of working class families is faithfully recorded, but the scenes on the freight trains as the boys fight with and lick the railroad bulls by throwing fruit at them were written to order in the studio, not copied from life. None the less some effort was made to paint the police as the brutal ruffians they are. They are shown in action swinging clubs against kids. For once they don’t appear as moralizing protectors of society.
In the last scene the boys who are hailed up before a juvenile court judge explain how they came to hit the road. They fix the blame on society and make themselves out to be its victims. The words they use are obviously put into their mouths. The sentiments they express are way beyond their understanding. On the other hand this is a new kind of talk for the moving pictures.
The producers vitiated their indictment of capitalist society by their treatment throughout the picture and, particularly, by its conclusion. Whenever a scene threatens to carry a biting sting and reach the spot in a man’s heart where outrage lives the producers put in some light touch to set the audience laughing. The audience we sat with did just that.
Most of them that got by this trick fell for the end. The juvenile court judge turned out to be a kind hearted gent who let the boys off, got them jobs, and told them everything was going to be alright and their folks would get jobs so they could go back home. They left out only the American flag and F.D.’s face. In this way the picture made the whole thing out to be one of those temporary dislocations in society which recovery will set straight. And in this sense the picture is false.
On the other hand the faithful presentation of much of the brutality and suffering which these young workers and workers’ children are made to experience by the breakdown of the profit system gives the picture a positive value.
 



As movies go Noel Coward’s Cavalcade is an old picture. Fox turned it out almost a year ago. The thing got so much publicity, and was talked about by so many people we got curious about it. And we figured that workers felt the same way about it. So we went to see it.
This is what we found: a story which begins in the Victorian era in England and takes us through to 1933. In a way it is a love story. But it is a much more ambitious production than a mere tale of heart beats. The producers think, no doubt, that they have made a faithful chronicle of an epoch that has passed into history and truthfully recorded the life of a generation.
Let us take them on their own terms. What do they tell us about these years and the people who move across the screen? The central figures, man and wife, who are happily married ten years at the opening of the picture, obviously belong to the upper class. They live in a big house, have servants, and move in elite circles. The source of their income is not even indicated. A sordid detail in a story of love that endures through the ages!
The war against the Boers separates them for a time. In the elaborate scenes of the fervor that overtakes every patriotic British citizen the producers who are, no doubt, opposed to propaganda in the movies have an opportunity to tell us the truth about the brutal course that empire treads. Do they? Not a bit. The war is only an incident in the love life of four people.
Do men die in the brush? Are Boers murdered to establish Britannia’s might? These are unimportant details, are not mentioned in polite society. But our hero comes back at the head of his troop, safe and sound, very much in love with his wife, and is knighted.
The queen dies and everybody dresses in black. This signalizes the close of the Victorian era. The world moves on. The butler and his wife, the maid, leave to open a pub. The children grow up. The butler turns out to be a drunkard who dies in a street accident.
The elder son goes down with his bride on the Titanic on their honeymoon. The World War comes. Father and son do their duty. The latter falls in love with the daughter of the dead butler. She is now a famous musical comedy dancer.
The girl’s mother goes round to see the boy’s mother about the affair. Servant confronts mistress. The mistress is still the same courteous, kindly, sweet woman she has always been toward her servants. But the former maid; she dresses ridiculously and put on airs. Her pretensions of equality are so much vulgarity. Oh, the lower orders! Unworthy wretches, drunkards, ungrateful, offensive. They don’t know that quality is inborn.
It is armistice day. The painful interview between mistress and former servant is terminated by a telegram announcing the death of the boy. The girl becomes a night club blues singer. Her mother disappears from the chronicle.
Come crises, revolutions. The world moves at a faster tempo. It is restless, nervous – the twentieth century is full blast. But the old house – it is still the same. Nothing changes here; not custom, not the very furniture (only the curtains are changed one week before the close), and certainly not the people in it. At the end as in the beginning they have each other; they are still in love; that counts more than all else in the world.
Is there a moral to this story? You bet. Old virtues are the best. Just how to the line of bourgeois morality and the world will muddle through somehow. It is not your business to remake the world. Just look at the butler; he was not satisfied with his station in life and kindly treatment. He tried to remake his world and he came to an untimely end. Do your duty; be content with your lot; love your wife! It is written – by Noel Coward and Fox.
 



Under date of January 21, Tom Mooney issued a call for a Free Tom Mooney Congress to be held at Chicago, April 30 to May 2, under the auspices of the Tom Mooney Molder’s Defense Committee – “to plan the final fight for my freedom”.
The appeal is issued – “to every A.F. of L. union-local, district, state, and national in its jurisdiction; to the railroad brotherhoods, and all other labor unions; to all working class organizations – political, economic, defense, social, athletic, fraternal or cultural; and to all liberal organizations sympathetic to the workers.” Mooney says, “The time has come when all organizations fighting for my freedom must be welded into the widest possible united front.”
In essence this call is no different from that issued by Mooney on August 20, 1931. On that date Mooney said, “The time for action has come – I ask for a genuine united front. I call upon the following groups – to unite and organize – for immediate action.” In the list of organizations which follow are to be found the entire Communist movement, the progressives, the social reformists, and outright conservative organizations like the Amalgamated Clothing Workers.
The question arises: what is the necessity for the second call? Who and what is responsible for the failure to build the movement upon the basis of the call of August 20, 1931? What role did the party and the ILD play?
As our readers will remember the Militant greeted Mooney’s appeal of August 20th, and urged the party to take the initiative in building the movement for his release. Our analaysis pointed out that under the circumstances, Mooney’s appeal was a direct invitations to the Communists to take over the leadership of the movement. In issue after issue, and in conferences, wherever they were called, we raised our voice to urge the party to accept Mooney’s invitation and forge the weapon to smash the chains that hold him in jail.
The response of the Stalinist leadership of our party was to sabotage and wreck those conferences not organized by them. In St. Louis, for instance, where the local Mooney Molders’ Defense Committee, in cooperation with the Communist League of America had organized a genuine united front to which all working class organizations were invited, the Stalinists split the conference and organized one of their own. In southern Illinois, in Minneapolis, all over the U.S. they pursued the same tactics. This strategy played into the hands of the reactionaries who, while professing belief in Mooney’s innocence and a desire to fight for his release, have not and will not lift a finger toward this end. Their special job is to divide the class and keep it divided. It also served the Socialist party and the IWW and the liberals of all hues. For their failure to act they found a convenient excuse – “the impossibility of working with the Communists”.
As a result no movement was built. The opportunity to set the class in motion was lost. For this the Stalinist leadership of the party and the ILD are to blame. The “theoretical” motivation for their course was the now half-abandoned idiocy of social Fascism. “How can we”, the argument ran, “unite with the social democratic betrayers of the workers? How can we unite with Green and Woll? We want the workers. But the workers are divided. Ergo – the united front from below!”
Mooney waited patiently for the party to move. But the party, saddled with a false theoretical approach to the problem, made no headway in passing from agitation in the press to struggle. Now Mooney has issued a call for the same purpose through the Molders’ Defense Committee.
This does not mean that Mooney has abandoned the road of the class struggle as the only means of attaining his freedom. No. The language of the call precludes any such idea. There is also the fact that the date is set for April and May. Mooney chose this time knowing that a hearing in the Superior Court on the last count in the original indictment against him and Billings is scheduled for February 11. The dates alone speak volumes.
But what Mooney’s move does mean is that he considers the apathy of the Communists no means of solving the problem of his freedom. And we must acknowledge that he is correct. Our failure to act is a disgrace. But for that we are not to blame. The Stalinists, as we have pointed out, must answer to the class for this.
At the Chicago Conference everything will again favor the Communists. Mooney’s call insures that no liberal-socialist-Wobbly clique will bar them. It lays the basis for a class struggle fight. Chicago is the scene of the recent gigantic united front of socialist and Communist workers for relief. The traditions of that struggle and the fighting role of the Communists will stand them in good stead at the coming conference. It will give them a sympathetic hearing and following.
Lastly, there is the half-turn that the party and the ILD are making. Hacker admitted at a meeting last Sunday that the line of the ILD in the Mooney fight had been sectarian. And Frank Spector writes in the February issue of the Labor Defender: “At the bottom of our failure to develop a broad united front has nearly always been the sectarian attitude on our part.” This does not trace the root of the trouble to the soil from which spring these weeds of policy – the theory of social-Fascism. But it is the beginning of wisdom.
If the party members will raise their voices and demand a full accounting instead of this half-way apology (which is accompanied by the usual benedictions of the line and the criticisms of the execution) they can make this turn a genuine one. They must insist that they enter the Chicago conference prepared to work with the other groups represented there, not giving up for a minute their independent role as the vanguard of the class and their right to criticism of their opponents. With a correct policy on the question of the united front and the capital of Mooney’s call, plus their splendid record in the relief demonstrations the Communists can win the leadership of the movement and raise the struggle to new heights.
This can very well be the impetus which the class needs to resist the onslaughts of the bosses. Mooney has correctly insisted that the struggle for his freedom is inextricably bound up with the fight of the class against its capitalist masters. That is how we approach the problem, too. Everything now depends on the party. The Left Opposition will be present to raise its voice for Mooney’s freedom and Communism, and work energetically in the movement.
 



On April 6th the Senate passed a bill introduced by Senator Black of Alabama forbidding, for two years, the shipment of interstate and foreign commerce of commodities made in industries which do not adopt the six-hour day and five-day week. The restricted scope of the measure, formally, is made necessary for the capitalist parliamentary cretins by the limited powers accorded the federal government by the “founding fathers.” Its negative formulation is imposed by the necessity of circumventing these limitations by legal language which does not violate the Constitution.
The provisions of the bill did not apply equally to all industries. The canning and printing industry were exempted as were several others. Nor were the thirty hours a week entirely binding. The bill provided for an extension of hours where business was seasonal.
As it stood the bill was a national legalization of the stagger system of Hoover and Teagle. Its ostensible motivation was to put men back to work. The bill, in this sense, represents an attempt on the part of the more far sighted section of the capitalist class to anticipate the coming struggles of the working class for a shorter workday and, if possible, as they think, to take the wind out of the sails of this struggle.
The bill had another aspect. Old boy moneybags understands that any reduction in hours through congressional legislation without explicit provisions to the contrary means a corresponding wage cut. The administration tried to sugar-coat this aspect of the bill by introducing an amendment through Secretary of Labor, Perkins, providing for a minimum wage.
 
Opposition to Bill
Opposition to the bill as a whole and in part developed from all sides. The New York Times of May 2 reports that:
“Spokesmen of the sugar, anthracite coal, cannery and building materials industries appeared before the House Labor Committee (where hearings are being held on the bill following its passage by the Senate) and opposed the thirty hour week measure as being too inflexible.”
Representative Connery asserted that unless the bill carried an amendment barring imports manufactured by industries operating on more than the thirty hours a week it would not carry. In this he was supported by those industries which are competing in the domestic market with the product of industries abroad. The administration is opposed to this provision. It contradicts all the presidential blah about trade agreements and freely flowing international exchange (Ramsay Mac Donald).
William Green appeared before the House Labor Committee and opposed the minimum wage provision. (Later he appeared again and urged the passage of the bill as it stands.). The New York World-Telegram of May 1 reports that “Eastern representatives of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen and Engineers are in favor of the principle of the six-hour day for railroad employees – with no reduction in pay. A resolution endorsing it is sent to President Roosevelt, Secretary of Labor Perkins, and chairmen of interested congressional committees.”
Under the accumulating pressure the administration retreated. Senator Robinson, the administration’s “whip”, announced that the bill is “not now in the picture.” The bill will probably die in committee.
In the period when this bill which so vitally affects the working class was in the process of becoming legislation, the official Communist party, caught unawares, did not lift a finger to rally the masses against its inimical provisions. The TUUL, to be sure, sent a representative to the Senate Judiciary Committee to put forward its view. That is one thing. Another is to organize a movement behind this delegation to give its view a force.
Why did the party stand by with folded hands? Why did it allow the initiative in opposing the bill to fall in the hands of Green and others?
 
The Seven-Hour Day
There is a reason. The party was committed to the slogan of the seven hour day without reduction in pay. It has never explained why. At the meeting of the Resolutions Committee, in the N.Y. May Day conference, in voting down our proposal for the inclusion of the six hour day slogan in the May Day Resolution, Winter explained that the A F. of L. stood for the six-hour day and that the C.P. had to “distinguish itself from the demagogic A.F. of L. fakers!”
When the capitalists themselves proposed the six-hour day and the five-day week they inadvertently exposed the bankruptcy of the party’s position on the question. The Black Bill made it impossible for the party to advance the seven hour day any longer. And, as a matter of fact, the party press is now free of it.
Instead, with typical, bureaucratic cowardliness the Stalinists have changed the slogan without saying so, and without explanation to the party membership and the working class.
And to what have they changed the slogan! On April 8 the Daily Worker said that to the capitalist wage cutting bill we must oppose the slogan of a shorter work day without reduction in pay. This formulation is broad enough to include the I.W.W. slogan of the four hour day without reduction in pay. And it can also include the position of the A.F. of L. demagogic fakers for the six hour day, from whom, said Winter, the revolutionary movement, must distinguish itself by the clock!
But the Stalinists were unable to crawl out of a bad situation by the use of an ambiguous and confusion-sowing slogan. The struggle against the bill requires concrete measures and definite slogans. The Daily Worker of April 20 carried an article by Stachel, in which he reports that the TUUL appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee and proposed an amendment to the Black Bill providing for the six-hour day, five-day week with no reduction in pay advanced by the Left Opposition years before.
But the Stalinists do not say so openly to the party and the class. Worse! As yet they are confining the struggle to the parliamentary Held. Appearances before the Senate Judiciary Committee and the House Labor Committee (May 6) are undoubtedly correct. But when they are not backed by a mass movement they become opportunist.
That is how the question stands today. With a rise in the economic conjuncture the workers will begin to struggle against their bosses. A prominent place in these struggles will be occupied by the fight for the six hour day. If the party seriously means to influence these struggles in a revolutionary direction it must begin now to lay the ground.
It must begin to organize the movement. The first prerequisite for this is an open admission of the change in slogans and a Marxist explanation for it.
The second prerequisite is the organization of the movement. The positions of the leading working class organizations on the question makes the situation favorable. The A.F. of L. is officially on record for the six hour day. The railroad brotherhoods similarly. And the socialist party is also on record for it. A correct united front approach to these bodies by the party for a movement for this objective can yield fruitful results for the interests of the workers and Communism.
Over this possibility the policy laid down in the C.I. Manifesto hangs like an ominous cloud. This policy must be rejected. In its place we must adopt and apply the tactic of Leninist united front of workers’ organizations.
 



Events in Cuba are moving toward a crisis. The strike wave is coming up again. The struggle against American imperialism is taking a violent form in the cities. In the interior the situation is still deadlocked: the workers hold some mills and plantations as guarantees of their demands for higher wages and better conditions while the soldiers and student bands of the Caribbean Army sent against them have not come to grips with the workers except in one or two cases.
But this state of affairs cannot long continue. One way or another they must be resolve definitely in the interests of the workers or the American imperialists and their Cuban bourgeois servants. The sugar crop in Cuba matures in autumn or early winter. The harvesting begins in December. It is the aim of the government to drive the workers off the seized plantations, before the harvest season comes round to insure the American and Cuban owners their vested rights and whatever potential profit there is in the crop.
The workers on the plantations who are armed and organized to some extent will resist the attempt to evict them. In the one or two attempts to evict them that have already taken place the workers have demonstrated that. The coming conflict may develop into a widespread civil war. If the government is successful the United States warships will not land their complement of devil dogs.
But if the fighting should go the other way through the going over of the soldiers to the workers as is not impossible, the American imperialists may resort to armed intervention. The capitalist press reports that the Washington administration is looking for a formula by which it can land marines.
The difficulty here is the result this action and its consequences in Cuba would have in Latin America. Today the Latin American aspect of the question is at an acute stage. The attempt to drive the workers off the plantations coincides in time with the Pan-American Congress which is to convene shortly in Montevideo. For the United States capitalists this congress is an extremely important one. They will make a determined effort there to “adjust” the South and Latin American markets in the interests of “our” own trade. Any misstep in Cuba may tip the scales at Montevideo in favor of [the] English, which have been making inroads into these markets at the expense of the American brigands.
But if the policy of Yankee piracy is beset with difficulties from its trade rivalries it is unhampered by the international working class outside of Cuba. Nowhere is there a broad movement of the workers in defense of the struggling Cuban workers. The responsibility rests, in the first instance, on the Stalinized Comintern.
The policy of the Comintern in the Cuban revolution is also the policy of the Communist Party of the United States, which of all the Communist parties outside of the Cuban party is the most directly involved in the struggle against American armed intervention. There is no movement in the United States. The Communist Party of the United States has demonstrated again its conception of internationalism. Its agitation is confined to articles in the Daily Worker and forum lectures. Demonstrations? There was one puny affair of the “vanguard” in Philadelphia. There may have been one or two others. But there has been no serious attempt to build a movement of support to the Cuban workers! Are the American Stalinists under orders not to “interfere” with the success of Litvinoff diplomatic mission?
It is now the immediate, burning task of the advanced section of the American working class to come to the aid of the Cuban workers.
 



The third session of the Congress Organization Committee of the New York United Front Free Tom Mooney Conference revealed that the party has taken another step deeper into the opportunism swamp. The party was the dominating political current in the conference. It is in control of the Congress Organization Committee. If the party seriously means to build a united front movement and bring pressure to bear on the summits of the S.P. and the A.F. of L. through their ranks the organs of the united front are the instruments they must use.
The conference represented thousands of workers. The Congress Organization Committee has the right and the duty to speak in their name. What it has to say has a certain force and can constitute a pressure on the S.P. and the A.F. of L. bureaucrats and misleaders to remove the barriers they have erected across the road to the united front of the Mooney movement.
But the procedure must be open and take place before the eyes of the entire working class. When this is done the workers of both parties and in neither will see who stands in the way of unity and why. This is the way to teach the workers that the Communists are the spokesmen for the unity of the class.
This is not the procedure the party is following. It ignores the organs of the united front. Instead it has entered into a Negotiations Committee outside of the united front and its organs with Muste of the C.P.L.A. and Palmer of the Federated Press to draw the S.P. and A.F. of L. into the movement and the Chicago Congress behind the backs of its own membership and the working class. Hathaway’s article in the Daily Worker of April 8 makes it appear that the negotiations are taking place openly before the eyes of the working class. This is false.
The party has two men (names unknown) on this Negotiations Committee. What they do there except to commit the party to these behind-the-scenes maneuvers is not clear. Palmer does not report it.
According to his reports Palmer seems to be doing all the work of back-door bargaining. Last Saturday he reported the following: the second session of the Organization Committee voted to issue an open letter to the S.P. and the A.F. of L. inviting them to enter the Mooney movement and participate in the Chicago Congress. The letter was not issued because Louis B. Scott, Mooney’s personal representative, thought it inadvisable to issue such a letter at the present time in view of the stage which the negotiations have reached, instead Scott sent a personal letter to Julius Gerber! Palmer objected to Hathaway’s article in the Daily Worker of April 8 which sharply criticized the S.P. for its sabotage of the movement and its slanders against the Communist party and the Chicago Congress. He implied that it might have a disastrous effect on the negotiations.
Palmer reported that Clarence Senior had told him that the S.P. was conferring in Chicago with the A.C.W., the I.L.G.W.U. and the Chicago Federation of Labor over the question of participating in the Chicago Congress. Senior said that they had come to this understanding with the Chicago Federation of Labor: Fitzpatrick agreed that if Frank P. Walsh would state publicly that the participation of the Chicago Federation of Labor would help the Mooney movement they might come in. On this basis the S.P. would also consider the question.
Palmer got to Walsh. Walsh said that he had nothing to do with the propaganda end of the Mooney movement. He also said that he would not ask the Chicago Federation of Labor to participate in the Chicago Congress with Communists because of the latters’ attacks in the past on Nockels and Fitzpatrick.
So Palmer chased around to Nockels. Nockels said that the Chicago Federation would not go into the Congress if there was one Communist there.
Nothing daunted Palmer reported back to Clarence Senior. Senior said that the S.P. was anxious to have the Chicago Federation of Labor, the A.C.W. and the I.L.G.W.U. participate but if they refused the S.P. would vote on the question of participation nevertheless.
Earlier in the week Senior had wired Palmer the conditions on which the S.P. would consider the question of participation. These were two in number (1) the management Committee for the National Chicago Congress must be composed entirely of Chicagoans. This, said Palmer, was to insure control for the S.P., (2) the Mooney movement must drop all talk of a general strike.
To these ultimatist conditions the Negotiations Committee replied suggesting that a majority of the Management Committee should be composed of Chicagoans. How this would avoid giving the S.P. control Palmer did not make clear. To the demand for the dropping of the general strike slogan the Negotiations Committee, with two Stalinists on it, replied that no one, including Mooney, wanted Mooney’s name associated with adventurous stunts; the slogan was held in reserve, so to speak, in case Mooney got a raw deal at his forthcoming trial and was sentenced to be hanged, and his innocence was apparent to all – and so on ad nauseam; then we could consider a general strike!
All of this, Palmer told us, he reported to Hathaway! And all of this is reported to the Congress Organization Committee in the control of the Stalinists which votes to accept these reports! Only the Left Opposition raises its voice in criticism. Against our sharp warnings that this road leads to the swamp, plays into the hands of the enemies of the Mooney movement and discredits Communism in the eyes of the workers the Stalinists make a united front with Muste and Palmer in the Committee to reject our criticism and proposals.
At this session, at the conclusion of Palmer’s report, the Left Opposition moved that the Congress Organization Committee publish a summary of the negotiations up to date. Palmer ruled that the motion was out of order for lack of a second. He was about to proceed to the next item on the agenda when the miracle happened. Five delegates got up, one after another, and spoke for the motion. And it carried!
We attribute this stroke of good fortune to two causes. Palmer’s report was too raw for Communists to swallow. And the front line Stalinist bureaucrats were not present to put the seal of authority and discipline on this opportunist brew. Nessin, Winter, Ballam, Moore must be mightily pleased with the results of the Negotiations Committee and content to let it replace the organs of the united front in broadening the Mooney movement. They did not attend the meeting of the Congress Organization Committee!
The speakers’ committees of which Nessin is the chairman reported through one of its members that, among the speakers for the Mooney mass meeting which is being arranged for April 27, will be, if the committee’s invitation is accepted, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise.
Wise needs no introduction to our readers. His attitude toward the Soviet Union and the working class movement is well known. It is sometimes necessary to suffer such people in united fronts – when they are the representatives of organizations participating in the united front. But that is not the case with Wise. He represents no one in this united front. Why does the party invite him to speak? This is not the way to build a united movement. But it is the Stalinist opportunist substitute for it. These adventurers think they will use Wise to fool the masses into believing that Hathaway and Wise on the platform are symbols of a united movement!
Strenuous objection was made to Wise by Linn of the I.W.O. and the Left Opposition. The motion of the Left Opposition to reject him was defeated. A motion to refer the matter back to the speakers’ committee carried.
That is how the movement for Mooney’s release stands now. The S.P. continues its cynical sabotage of the movement with impunity. And the Stalinists pursue their course deeper into the swamp. There were some people who greeted the party’s turn from the ultra Leftism of the united front from below with the hope that the Stalinists were steering a correct course. They showed little understanding of the nature of bureaucratic centrism. The Stalinists are incapable of pursuing a correct policy consistently. They move either to the extreme of ultra-Leftism or to the opposite extreme of Right opportunism. This is the direction in which they are pushing the party today.
That Muste and Palmer would engineer such dickers with the S.P. as this is to be expected. That is their political milieu. But that the Communist party should become a partner to such a shameful business is the special contribution to the repertoire of opportunism of Stalinism – a species of social reformism within the Communist movement. For people who turned over the leadership of the Chinese revolution to Chiang Kai-Shek, of the English General Strike to Purcell and Cook, of the fight against war to Holland and Barbusse it is a little matter to turn over to a Frank Palmer and a Muste the initiative in and the choice of method of building a united front movement to get Mooney out of jail! Against them and all they stand for the Left Opposition carries on and will continue to wage an irreconcilable struggle.
 



Legally, the Scottsboro Case stands as follows: an appeal is being taken by the defense from the death verdict of the Decatur jury; the trial judge has continued the cases of the other defendants on the ground that a fair trial under the present circumstances is impossible; and, irony of ironies!, he places the blame for the prejudiced atmosphere on Liebowitz! The I.L.D. has applied for a writ of habeas corpus for two of the boys on various legal grounds.
With the temporary lull on the legal front the mass protest movement alone occupies the center of the stage in this great class drama in which we are fighting for the democratic rights of the Negroes and the unity of the black and white workers. In the forefront of the protest and defense movement stands the march on Washington scheduled to arrive there on May 8.
 
The March to Washington
The march was first projected by the Harlem petty bourgeois newspaper, The Amsterdam News. Riding the crest of the first wave of the spontaneous protest of the Negro masses this paper issued a call for fifty thousand to march on the capital. With the entry of the I.L.D. on the scene, the initiative in organizing such a demonstration passed into its hands. Since then the Amsterdam News has shown that its first burst of enthusiasm was not sustained by the determination necessary to carry out this mass action and the I.L.D. is undisputed leader of the march, as, indeed, it should be. If the I.L.D. is the undisputed leader of the march then, leaving objective conditions aside for the moment, the responsibility for its success or failure as an organized mass demonstration rests squarely on the I.L.D. A successfully organized and militantly conducted march can raise the protest movement of the masses to greater heights. It can inspire the terrorized masses of the south to struggle for their democratic rights and draw, them further into united mass action with the white workers. And since the whole movement is being conducted under the banner of militant mass action, which the whole working class knows, in this instance, to be the banner of Communism, a successful march must increase the prestige of Communism in the eyes of the masses.
Conversely a poor organized march with no spirit, the morale of which is low will react on the movement unfavorably. The spark of enthusiasm and contagion will not be struck. The I.L.D. would lose prestige and the prestige of Communism would also suffer.
It is from this point of view that we criticize the preparations for the march. The call asks all participants to supply their own food and the organizations sending representatives to provide transportation for them. It is not a little matter to ask workers to suspend their activities, pull up their stakes, so to speak, and march to Washington at the risk of serious fighting with the police and armed forces of the state. Workers will ask: how are we to be fed, transported there and back, and defended if attacked? The preparations do not answer these questions in a way to encourage workers to participate in the march.
 
The Scottsboro Bill
One purpose of the march is to present a bill to Congress. This bill, the Civil Rights Bill, provides for the enforcement of the thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth amendments to the U.S. Constitution. This raises the fight for the democratic rights of the Negroes to a higher political plane. It dramatically focuses attention on one of the burning problems of the American revolution. Before the eyes of the entire nation the Communists will lead a march on the citadel of American imperialism to demand that capitalism declare itself openly on the question of those provisions in its constitution which “guarantee” to the Negro masses political equality with the white population.
Such a march can acquire a tremendous force and significance if it is a culminating point in a mass movement. That is the weakness of this march. It is not the highest wave in an organized protest movement. Preceding it there have been no united front conferences of working class organizations from coast to coast: There has been a burst of protest against the Decatur verdict. This is the basis for the! organization of a protest movement, but it cannot replace the protect movement itself. And it is a fatal error to try, even with the best and sincerest of motives, to make it a substitute for an organized protest movement.
But the march is projected. The party and the I.L.D. must bend every effort to organize it and rally the masses of workers behind it. In the first instance this means the organized workers. The approach must be made to the trade unions. No time must be lost.
 
The S.P., the A.F. of L. and the Negroes
The terrific pressure which the party is bringing to bear qn the S.P. leadership over the Mooney and May Day issues is the direct result of its turn from the ultra Leftist policy of the united front fromb elow to one which comes from below to one which comes question. If the party means it seriously it will apply that pressure now on the A.F. of L. and S.P. bureaucracies to enter a united front movement to get the Scottsboro boys out of jail.
Here is the weapon with which to strike at the reactionary restrictions against Negroes in the A.F. of L. unions. Here is the weapon with which to strike smashing blows at the whole system of Jim Crowism. Here is a means of forging the unity of the white and Negro masses in struggle.
Great opportunities lie before us. To realize them we must bend every effort to organize the movement and set the masses in motion. The key to the problem is the united front. Concretely now, that means the open approach to the S.P. and A.F. of L. for united front conferences. This the party must do without delay, openly before the eyes of the working class. No back door negotiations with the Clarence Seniors! No hiding behind Frank Palmers and Mustes!
In this work the Left Opposition will do its loyal best as it has done for years in the Mooney movement. The delegation sent by the New York Branch of the League to place itself at the disposal of the Scottsboro Action Committee for work in the movement was assigned the task of distributing leaflets in Harlem calling on the workers to attend a monster Mooney-Scottsboro mass meeting Our comrades’ are going on the march to Washington. And everywhere the Left Opposition is calling on the party to issue the call for united front conferences and approach the S.P. and A.F. of L to build the defense and protest movement.
 



The second session of the Congress Organization Committee of the New York United Front Free Tom Mooney Conference revealed that the turn of the party on the united front is showing a dangerous drift to the Right. Palmer of the Federated Press, chairman of the committee, reported the following: Some time between the first and second sessions a little informal meeting took place in Palmer’s office. There were present two members of the Communist Party, Muste of the CPLA, and Palmer. They called Norman Thomas on the phone to discuss with him the question of drawing the S.P. into the Mooney movement.
 
Dicker with Thomas
Politically this meant that they were asking Thomas to lay down the conditions on which the S.P. would participate. Thomas, according to the report, pledged himself personally to work for the participation of the S.P. on the basis of a management committee for the National Congress to be held in Chicago, consisting of representatives of the C.P., S.P, ILD, LID, five trade unionists, and three liberals. This unofficial arrangement was submitted to Mooney for his approval. He wired back adding two representatives of the Mooney Molders’ Defense Committee.
The Left Opposition immediately demanded that the entire proceedings be made public and that all future negotiations be conducted openly before the entire working class. This demand provoked a discussion. The discussion revealed much confusion on the part of the Stalinists who are in control of the Committee. Politically the discussion revolved around the united front. The feeble attempts of the Molders’ Defense representatives to settle the matter on a legal-technical basis were simply brushed aside. It was obvious that the question could not be discussed aside from its political essence. The Stalinists gave their political interpretation a Rightist content. They refused to put the conference on record against the slanderous attack on the Chicago Congress by the Labor Committee of the Socialist party. This statement, issued on March 24, says that the Communists use the Congress as a tool to wreck other working class organizations. Labor Action, Muste’s organ quotes the statement without comment, though it is an active participants in the conference and probably will be in the Chicago Congress.
Winter, Nessin, Moore, Ballam united to hamstring the attempt to make the negotiations public. They so qualified the conference pronouncements that what will be issued will omit the essential facts given above and give a highly distorted picture of the proceedings.
It has come to this. Yesterday our Stalinist masters of revolutionary strategy and tactics shouted down the wind that we could make no united front with the “social Fascist leaders”. Today they are beginning to crawl on all fours before these treacherous fakers. They are trying to prove to the Thomases that they are good Communists! They are in full flight from the ultra-Leftism of yesterday. And they bow down before the old idol of Right opportunism!
 
Bureaucrats Fall Out
In the discussion Winter and Nessin once more took different stands. Nessin again advocated a Rightist position. Winter’s role is becoming clearer. He is carried along in the Right drift. His job is to put a plausible face on the thing. His proposals are designed to make it possible to point to efforts made for a genuine united front. This may fool some for a time but as the party swings further to the right this false face artist will be assigned other chores.
Ballam poured oil on tha troubled waters and evoked the anger of Moore. It is a pitiable sight to see these bureaucrats fall out among themselves. How sharp must be the fight in the party if it is carried out into the open at every meeting! Why is it confined to the top? Why isn’t the party membership allowed to participate in the discussions? Why is there no discussion in the party press?
The Stalinist bureaucracy cannot allow the party membership to intervene in its disputes. That would be disastrous for its position and prestige. So it maneuvers desperately to retain its weakening grip on the party But its base is narrowing and the day of reckoning is approaching. Then as now the Left Opposition will know how to act to build the party shoulder’ to shoulder with the party membership.
 



A viciously prejudiced jury composed of twelve representatives of the poisoned ideology of the reactionary, capitalist South brought in a verdict of guilty against Haywood Patterson, the first of the Scottsboro boys to be tried in the new trials ordered by the United States Supreme Curt. According to Alabama law the jury is charged with the duty of fixing the penalty. This jury decided on death in the electric chair.
With this verdict the blood-lust ridden, southern capitalists have reaffirmed their intention to snuff out the lives of all who dare to resent and struggle against the intolerable conditions to which capitalism reduces the workers and share croppers in the South in its ruthless scramble for profit. That is the significance of the verdict for our class and our cause. As far as the Scottsboro boys themselves are concerned, it is not at all a verdict arrived at after due process of law. There is no such thing for workers in capitalist courts. It is murder done according to the niceties of the law and with due regard for the devious course of “justice” in the higher courts. It is class murder.
From the legal point of view the state had no case. Its witnesses were the usual social riff-raff sharked up by the prosecution in frame-up cases. A notorious prostitute was its chief witness. And her testimony was flatly contradicted by Ruby Bates’ sensational repudiation of her former evidence. Other evidence introduced by the defense left no doubt that the state’s chief witness was a perjuror. The weakness of the state’s legal case was compensated for by extra-legal “arguments”. Fiery crosses flamed against the night sky from the hills surrounding the town. Armed mobs threatened to storm the jail, lynch the boys, the witnesses and the defense lawyers. Armed militiamen were on duty in the court-room. The prosecution appealed to local prejudice throughout. But in its summation it reached the depths of narrow-minded provincialism and medieval bigotry. To read it is to make the blood boil. All of this, inevitable and to be foreseen from the beginning, outweighed the legal evidence or lack of it.
That is how it was in the Mooney and the Sacco and Vanzetti trials: the same frame-up, perjury, intimidation, corruption and inflaming of ignorance and vicious prejudice In these monuments to capitalist bestiality are lessons which have been burned into the consciousness of the workers the world over. Large sections of the workers know what these trials are worth. Their experience teaches them daily what capitalist justice is. In their understanding it is all inseparable part of the capitalist system.
The capitalist press, the handmaiden of these brutal orgies, has not been slow to discharge its duty to its masters. It pretends to be astonished by the verdict. The New York World Telegram feigns astonishment. It is sure that the verdict will be overthrown in the higher courts. By this perfidious hypocrisy it strives to keep alive the illusion that justice is impartial, above the classes. The Times also bemoans the sad miscarriage of justice. But it cannot see what remains to be done. Perhaps the Governor of Alabama will pardon the victims or commute their sentence to a term of imprisonment! That is the Times’ way of saying that the case is a legal one, a matter of “justice”, not to be taken out of the channels of bourgeois democracy.
The N.A.A.C.P. says the same thing but says it more openly. The attack on the I.L.D. and the Communist Party for organizing a mass protest movement, which the Times only implies, the N.A.A.C.P. makes explicit. The record of this reformist organization in Scottsboro Case is a foul blot on the pages of the struggle of the Negroes for economic, political and social equality. From the very beginning of the case it assisted the prosecution to the best of its ability. It strove with all its resources to hamstring the defense organized by the I.L.D. All through the fight it rabidly attacked the I.L.D. and the Communist Party. Clarence Darrow and Arthur Garfleld Hays of its legal staff, and prominent in its executive councils, offered to enter the case on condition that all the lawyers in the defense would agree to disassociate themselves from all organizations. This was equivalent to a demand that the I.L.D. retire from the case.
The black thread of treachery runs through the policy of the N.A.A.C.P. and its white, liberal supporters and executives: John Haynes Holmes, Oswald Garrison Villard, Clarence Darrow, Arthur Garfield Hays, etc., etc. And it runs through it today. At the last meeting of its directors they adopted a resolution on the Scottsboro Case. It was reported in the Times of April 11. The Times says:
“The board commended the ‘firmness and fairness in which Judge Horton conducted the trial’ ...”
And:
“... adopted a resolution at the meeting – expressing the belief that a different verdict would have been obtained had not the Communist Party entered the case ...”
“‘It feels that the only remaining hope for the boys is to remove from the already overwhelming prejudices which militate against them the additional burden of Communism’.”
“It called for the organisation of a ‘new defense committee’ ...”
The capitalist press and the N.A.A.C.P. and all the other agencies of capitalism are working overtime to counteract the spontaneous mass protest that is arising against this monstrous verdict. They are hammering on all keys the theme of justice. That is their function in capitalist society.
But it is no part of the I.L.D.’s role or policy to conduct a course which lends support to such illusions. Yet this is what it has done. We want our criticism to be clearly understood. The fight of the I.L.D. from the first day of its courageous entry into this case has been an inspiring struggle against some of the most reactionary practise of a predatory capitalist South. It has held aloft the banner of mass struggle on behalf of nine innocent Negro class brothers in the face of a reign of terror. It lit the spark which kindled a blaze of protest on four continents. It took a long step forward on the road to the unity of the white and black workers by showing the black workers that white workers were leading the struggle in which they were vitally involved.
But some time last summer the I.L.D. allowed the mass movement here to lag. Following the decision of the United States Supreme Court it did nothing to organize the workers’ into a gigantic protest movement behind its legal defense. It did not call the united front conferences to set the workers in motion.
Instead it made the mistake of riding the wave of protest. And it retained as its chief defense lawyer, a notorious gangster lawyer, a Democrat, a patriot. Moreover, it allowed him to attack the Communist party in the capitalist press without reply. It allowed him to repeat his attacks on the mass movement which had saved the boys from the electric chair with out making any public reply.
Worse than this, it allowed Liebowitz to dictate the line of the defense. It permitted him to confine the defense to legal lines essentially. It permitted him to order a National Students’ League delegation out of town. It permitted him to say in the capitalist press that he would not tolerate any demonstrations by radical and Communist organizations.
The capitalists took pains to give the impression of a fair trial. It chose an “objective” jurist to try the case. Horton was careful to avoid any appearance of hostility to the defense. He unquestionably favored the prosecution in his denials of motions for mistrials motivated on the outrageous speeches of the prosecution. But he made it possible for the entire capitalist press to laud him to the skies. And Liebowitz – at the conclusion of the trial – Liebowitz, according to the New York Times:
“... ‘I walked to the bench and grasped Judge Horton’s hand. The judge shook it warmly.’ Mr. Liebowitz, who had undertaken the defense of the penniless Negro without a fee, was trembling. He said: ‘I am taking back to New York with me a picture of one of the finest jurists I have ever met.’”
Mr. Liebowitz, the I. L.D. chief defense lawyer has done his bit to nurture the illusions of the masses in the class institutions of capitalism.
The I.L.D. has not yet uttered a word of criticism of this gross perversion of its principles. On the contrary it is playing up its white elephant. It permits Liebowitz to be hailed as a hero.
But if the I.L.D. is silent about its hero it went out of its way to attack the Left Opposition. On April 7, Patterson, National Secretary of the I.L.D., fired a broadside against the Militant in the Daily Worker. The Militant of March 25 warned the party and the I.L.D. that it was making a mistake in allowing Liebowitz to dictate the line in the Scottsboro Case. It said:
“He (Liebowitz) is getting a free hand to attack that defense from a platform given him by the I.L.D. He attacks the mass struggle which has saved the Scottsboro boys four times ... When one considers these facts in relation to the equally regrettable fact that the mass movement has died down in recent weeks almost to the vanishing point, it begins to look as though the I.L.D. were teetering on the brink of a rotten and dangerous piece of opportunism.”
The verdict, the events leading up to it, and particularly the role of Liebowitz and the criminal silence of the I.L.D. about him confirm the analysis of the Militant up to the hilt. Patterson rushes to Liebowitz’s defense. “The Militant – hurls a bouquet of slander and invective at the I.L.D. because of its utilization of the services of S. Liebowitz, prominent attorney in the Scottsboro Case.” So! And: “Mr. Liebowitz is carrying out the line of the I.L.D. in the court room in this particular case.” Mr. Liebowitz closed his appeal to the jury by intoning the Lord’s Prayer! “He was not asked to nor could be engaged in the political defense of the accused, but his legal defense is political!” There is more of the same. And now, Patterson, and, with him, the whole I.L.D., is silent.
But if Patterson is silent one of his masters has a word to say. In the Daily Worker of April 12, there appears a note from Foster to Stachel. Foster says:
“That statement of Liebowitz was tragic, endorsing the chief lyncher, Horton and condemning the southern masses indiscriminately as morons, lantern-jawed, etc., etc. These statements will be used against us in the gigantic struggle ahead, both in the courts and among the masses. Surely our party statements will disassociate us from that trash and put all these matters in their true light.”
Against whom is this directed? Surely not against us. We warned against it in time.
Whether the party and the I.L.D. will disassociate themselves from this trash remains to be seen. We hope they will. And the sooner the better. Much time has been lost and much damage done. The first step to repair it is to repudiate Liebowitz’s statements and tell him to confine himself to the purely legal aspects of the case.
But that is not enough. The central and most immediate task is to organize the protest movement of the workers. If that is not done the protest movement will find other leaders and be directed into reformist channels. There are signs of this already. Upon receiving news of! the verdict the Amsterdam News, a petty bourgeois Negro newspaper in Harlem, began a petition campaign against the death sentence. Plans are already under way to organize a march, from all parts of the country on Washington to protest the verdict.
The party says that the struggle must rise to a higher stage. But it has not given the signal to organize it. This it must do without delay. The masses are burning with a sense of outrage. They are eager to fight. They seek leadership. Only the Communist party can give correct leadership and direction to the struggle and save the movement from being diverted into channels harmless to the capitalists. That is its duty in the situation.
Call the united front conferences! Organize the protest movement: of the workers! Let their indignation mount to the skies! United, they can smash the Scottsboro frame-up! The Scottsboro boys shall not die!
 



At the first session of the Congress Organization Committee of the N.Y. Free Tom Mooney Conference, in which Stalinists have the control, a serious discussion arose over the question of the united front. The question arose in connection with the problem of broadening the conference.
It was the unanimous sentiment of the Committee that the crux of the problem was the approach to the SP and AF of L. It was proposed to send a delegation to the SP City Central Committee and the AF of L Central Trades and Labor Alliance to invite them into the work of the conference. To bring them in, it was proposed to offer them a number of places on the Congress Organization Committee equal to the number held by any other single group. It was further proposed that the invitation specify that all participants agreed in advance not to “attack” other organizations. Nessin was elected to this delegation.
The Left Opposition which is represented on the Committee proposed that the Committee issue a leaflet to the Socialist and AF of L workers asking them to raise in their organizations the questions of why their organizations did not participate in the Conference and asking them to demand that they participate as organizations. This was voted down. The vote was one for; all the others against.
Following the rejection of our proposal, Winter proposed an open letter to the SP and AF of L embodying the proposal of the delegation. A lively passage of arms took place over this proposition between Nessin and Winter. Nessin was opposed to the open letter. He argued that we must give the appearance of sincerity to our proposal to the SP and AF of L. He was afraid that an open letter would frighten them away.
The Left Opposition proposed an open letter to the SP and AF of L asking them to appoint committees to meet with a sub-committee of the Congress Committee to work out the means of drawing them into the work of the conference. The motion was defeated. Winter’s carried.
As it stands now the party is swinging to the Right. The people who but yesterday thundered that the united front from below was the simon-pure Marxian version, are today beginning to tread in the steps of the Anglo-Russian Committee policy. From the united from below the Stalinist zigzag is moving toward the united front from the top. Therein lies the danger.
Bureaucratic Centrism cannot consistently carry out a correct policy. In the process of oscillating from the extreme of ultra-Leftism to the extreme of Right opportunism Stalinism strikes a point at which it appears to coincide with the Marxian policy of the Left Opposition. The Left Opposition strives with all its influence to hold the policy to the correct line. But the nature of bureaucratic Centrism makes this impossible for the Stalinists. They continue their course.
At the present the direction is toward the united front from the top. Left Oppositionists must be on guard.
 



Five hundred and thirty delegates from one hundred and sixteen organizations gathered to constitute the New York United Front May Day Conference, on Sunday, March 19th. For the most part they were the same delegates who make up all the party united front masquerades hereabouts. Its breadth can be seen from the credentials committee report: four AF of L unions were represented by six delegates; there were no representatives from the Socialist party or YPSL.
The proceedings were the usual six-cyclinder, Stalinist machine affair. In last Sunday’s dull routine points of great importance for the movement as a whole stood out and must become known to our movement.
Hathaway made the report. His speech was marked by the utmost confusion on the question of Fascism in Germany and the fight against it. According to him, the danger of war has become more acute since Hitler’s accession to power, not because the inevitable development of a triumphant Fascism makes it the spearhead of the imperialist intervention of the USSR – according to Hathaway; the danger lies in Hitler’s attempt to organize an anti-Versailles bloc to recapture the territory of Germany lost to the Allied power’s.
Hathaway’s analysis of the perspectives of German Fascism were the last word in confusion. He foretold its mechanical collapse! Italian Fascism, said he, improved the conditions of the masses because it came to power in the upward curve of the economic conjuncture! But Hitler has come to power in the period of the downward curve! The workers will become quickly disillusioned with Hitler’s bankrupt program and the German Communist Party will continue the struggle against Hitler, taking advantage of his every failure to fulfill his demagogic promises!
But Hathaway surprised us mightily when he spoke on the question of broadening the conference and the united front. We thought he was reading from the Militant! To be sure, his speech on this point does not settle the question. He and his fellow-bureaucrats remain today the same Centrists there were yesterday and the day before. It is not excluded that, under the pressure of events, the C.I. turn and the criticism of the Left Opposition, they may, for a time, make an effort to carry out a correct united front policy. But even in this case, in view of the past, and the dubious circumstances surrounding the new half-turn, it will require more than occasional speeches to prove that a turn is being made in reality. That is in the best case.
How far the party is from a genuine turn can be seen from what followed. Wagenknecht, in the discussion following Hathaway’s report, spoke for the united front from below. In the discussion both points of view found supporters. This can mean only that the utmost unclarity and possible dispute exists in the party on the united front question, which became obvious some time ago – and it is breaking out into the open. This was to be seen in the discussion between Nessin and Winter in the session of the Mooney Conference Organization Committee reported elsewhere in this issue. It was to be seen again in the discussion between these two faces of the Stalinist Janus which took place in the resolutions committee of the May Day Conference.
Here, again, as in the Mooney Committee session, Nessin leans far to the Right. Winter’s position is not as clear. He appeals to stand half-way between the ultra-Leftist position of yesterday and the Right wing position of Nessin. No doubt further developments will make the picture clearer.
In the days when the Left Opposition was hammering on the gates of the Stalinist, conferences organized under the ultra-Leftist sign of the united front from below the difference between our position on the united front question and the Lovestonite position was not as clear to the Communist workers as a whole as it is becoming today. This great advantage for us is an indirect result of the party’s half turn on the united front question.
Heretofore, we had to fight for admission to the conference. That is how we won the respect of the party membership.
Today we are all seated. We utilize the opportunity and the beginnings of worker’s democracy accorded the Left Opposition to explain our conception of the united front, to elucidate our policy of face to the party, and to throw our weight into the scale to broaden en the conference from the point of view of strengthening Communism. The Lovestoneites pursue a different policy. They fill their conception of the united front with a content manifestly hostile to the party and sympathetic to the social democracy. As a result, they antagonize the conferences they attend. In this negative way. they differentiate themselves from us and help us make clearer the differences on this point among the three wings in the Communist movement.
The resolutions adopted by the conference were not satisfactory. The main resolution on May Day gave a false perspective of the war danger; it was Hathaway’s. The Resolutions Committee voted down our motions to include demands for the six hour day and long term credits for the Soviet Uinon. The latter demand was simply ignored. In rejecting the first Winter explained that we have to distinguish our demands from those of the demagogic AF of L leadership! The special resolution on Fascism avoided most of the errors of Hathaway’s speech but was an abstract protest. The Committee rejected our proposal to demand a united front of all working class organizations in Germany against Fascism.
The conference decided to issue an open letter to the Socialist party and A.F. of L. inviting them to participate in the organization of one united May Day demonstration. The conference agreed to allow all organizations participating in the demonstrations to march under their own banners. Hundreds of thousands of leaflets will be printed calling on all workers and workers’ organizations to unite for a gigantic demonstration. The Left Opposition will do its utmost to achieve this aim.
 



The fourth session of the Congress Organization committee of New York United Front Free Tom Mooney Conference established that the course of the Stalinists in their back-door bargaining with the Socialist party failed to bring the latter into the movement. Palmer reported that on Thursday, April 13, Clarence Senior informed the negotiations committee that the N.E.C. of the S.P. had decided not to approve the Chicago Mooney Congress.
Our readers will remember that a negotiations committee consisting of Muste of the C.P.L.A. Palmer of the Federated Press and, as it is now revealed, Hathaway and Stachel of the C.P. had been knocking on the back door of the S.P., hat in hand, asking it to participate in the Chicago Congress. The S.P. attacked the Congress in its press, delayed, laid down ultimatist conditions and finally said no. The reason advanced by the S.P., according to Palmer, is incredibly trivial and absurd. It seems that Mooney wrote a letter to Palmer in which he sharply criticized the course of the S.P. from 1913 up to date, and objected to the present attitude of the S.P. toward the Chicago Congress. A copy of this letter of which several copies must have been sent by Mooney to various individuals fell into the hands of the S.P. And upon this basis and other objections of an equally trivial character, the sensitive social democratic leadership (Hillquit! O’Neal! Lee! et al.) decided to withhold approval of the Chicago Congress. By this they deliberately sabotaged the movement for Mooney’s release.
 
The Committee’s Statement on S.P.
Palmer went on to say that upon receiving this news, the negotiations committee decided to release a statement to the capitalist and radical press summarizing the negotiations and stating the refusal of the S.P. to participate in the Chicago Congress. Palmer said that the committee decided not to include the reasons advanced by the S.P. leaving it to them to do so. The statement is unsatisfactory. It offers no analysis and certainly should have included the reasons advanced by the S.P. for its refusal to participate in the Chicago Congress. Had this been done the part played by the S.P. in the movement would be more clearly established. The statement would be more convincing even to the socialist workers. But it is something. It clearly shows that efforts were made to draw the S.P. into the movement and that the S.P. refused. It thus places the responsibility for the failure to build a united movement squarely where it belongs – on the S.P.
Palmer concluded by saying that he couldn’t see what more could be done, that it was now no longer a matter between the united front conference and the S.P. but a matter between Mooney and the S.P. The Left Opposition protested against this pessimistic and capitulationist attitude. We moved that the Congress Organization Committee issue a leaflet to the S.P. and A.F. of L. workers calling on them to raise the question in their organizations and to demand that their organizations participate in the Chicago Congress. The motion carried unanimously, the Stalinists voting for it.
This was the same motion made by us at the first session of the Committee in March. At that time the Stalinists exerted themselves to defeat our proposal. The responsibility for the loss of time is on their shoulders. The loss of time acquires great significance in view of the latest developments in the movement to free Mooney. According to the New Leader, the N.E.C. of the S.P. voted six to five against participation in the Chicago Conference. Thomas is quoted as saying that the S.P. must participate because it cannot afford to give the appearance of blocking unity. This reflects the pressure on the S.P. leadership both from without (Mooney and the C.P.) and the penetration of this influence into the socialist movement itself. The entire Chicago Yipsel movement has had its charter revoked because of its participation in united fronts with the Communists.
Had the party adopted a correct approach to this aspect of the united front problem, had it approached the S.P. openly before the eyes of the members of both parties and the entire working class, it could have increased the pressure on the S.P. leadership, forced it to vote favorably on the question of the participation of the S.P. in the Chicago Congress and succeeded in broadening the movement. The advantages to the movement and Communism in the united front are clearly indicated and need not be discussed at this point.
But Hathaway, Stachel, Palmer and Muste, having drawn losing cards against the S.P. bureaucrats, have rigged up a Management Committee for the Chicago Congress which is calculated to mitigate the disappointment of the party members who still have faith in the infallible line. On the Management Committee are included such well known socialists as Professor Robert Morss Lovett, Professor Keinhold Niebuhr and Frans Daniels!
The reports of the sessions of the Congress Organization Committee and the developments reported in the labor and radical press have served to illuminate the roles of the S.P., the Stalinists and the “progressives” in the Mooney movement.
The Lovestoneites have played a far smaller role. All of it has been disruption and sabotage. The April 15 issue of the Workers Age reports that Zimmerman of the Lovestone group was elected manager of Local 22 of the I.L.G.W.U., testimony to the influence of the Lovestoneites in Local 22.
How this influence is exerted to build the movement for Mooney’s release can be seen from the same issue of the paper. Under the revealing head, Union Hits N.Y. Mooney Meet, the Workers Age prints a letter from the Local to Mooney. The letter informs Mooney that the Executive Committee of the Local approved the action of the Local’s delegate (Nelson of the Lovestone group) in withdrawing from the March 12 New York United Front Free Tom Mooney Conference.
The reason speaks for itself. “From the report of our delegates it is evident that the official Communist party, which has apparently captured control of the Tom Mooney Molders Defense Committee, is bent upon running the ‘show’ for its own aggrandizement, and is determined – under all circumstances – not to permit a genuine united front of all workers’ organizations, regardless of their political or social views.”!!
As we go to press delegates are on their way to the Chicago Congress from all parts of the country. Present reports indicate that it will be a very large gathering with possibilities which extend far beyond the defense movement. And Mooney is standing trial on the last indictment against him. Both events will be reported in the forthcoming issues of the Militant.
 



The teachers are going to have their pay cut. Wall Street decided that. The City of New York which spends from twenty-five to thirty-three percent of its budget on interest on loans made to it by Wall Street, recently applied again to the bankers for additional financial assistance. The men who overthrew Herriot and the Belgian ministry told our city moguls to economize to the tune of forty million. Twenty million, they said, must come out of the wages of the policemen, the firemen, the city employees and the teachers.
The city employees did nothing about it. The policemen and firemen took it lying down. But the teachers showed active resentment. A number of organizations representing the more advanced minority attempted to fight. They called conferences, sent delegations to Albany to plead their case with the state legislature and the chief executive of the state. Their fight ran a short course and ended in defeat. The poor showing they made was due to the fact that the overwhelming majority of the teachers are full of illusions about society and the state they teach their pupils. The Times quoted one of their spokesmen as saying that the teachers had no faith in the city politicians but trusted the state legislature. Such political naiveté made the teachers easy prey for the experienced sharks in Albany. After much fruitless rushing to and fro the teachers’ delegations (except the small teachers’ Committee to protect salaries) decided not to oppose the wage cut but to “compromise’’ by “protecting” the legislation reserving to the state legislature the right to cut their wages; their pension rights, and other such fol-de-rol which will go by the board under the next assault by Wall Street. A third item in their “compromise” was the attempt to limit the reduction to two years.
Just before the special session of the legislature got around to this particular item on the agenda of the bankers’ instructions a delegation of teachers went up to Albany to see Roosevelt, Lehman et al. about this compromise. When they broached this ultimatum to Roosevelt he told them that he would relay it to New York. Dejectedly but still hopefully the delegation filed into an ante-room, here they cooled their heels for two hours while the wires hummed between Albany and New York. Finally, Roosevelt told them that the bankers were opposed to the time limit. Meekly they accepted the decision. That was the inevitable conclusion of their fight under the circumstances of their lack of class consciousness, lack of organization and their poor fighting method.
Further attacks on the living conditions of the teachers are foreshadowed. Roosevelt recently announced that the state will be about $100,000,000 short by the middle of 1933. He suggests that a large share of this deficit will be made up by a drastic cut in the appropriations for education.
The attacks on their standards will compel the teachers to resist. To make their resistance effective they must make clear to themselves what they are resisting. The bankers, of course, are the people who initiate these attacks. But they are routed through the state apparatus. In defense of their interests the teachers are brought into conflict with the state bureaucracy.
Against its crushing weight they cannot contend alone. They must seek support among the classes whose economic and social interests impel them to struggle against the capitalist state. They can find allies among the petty bourgeoisie. They can enlist the aid of the taxpayers’ associations; social service organizations, women’s clubs, etc. Their support, in the long run, will amount to paper resolutions passed at conferences in expensive hotels; futile appeals to the state legislature the Board of Estimate and every board which will allow steam to be let off in its presence; and “moral support” in the press. But when it comes to a showdown these doughty knights of democracy, good-will and what not will leave them in the lurch. The class which lives in eternal hope of becoming big bourgeois and in everlasting fear of being pushed into the proletariat by the bourgeoisie cannot be counted on to risk its stakes in a fight against the stronghold of world reaction.
The teachers will have to seek and find allies in their own class, the working class. This raises the question of the relation of the teachers to the working class movement. The relation must be the central axis of their program. On this point they must strive to attain the greatest possible clarity. They must formulate their relation to the working class movement on class lines. To do this they must slough off their illusions. They must become clear on their class position in society, the class nature of their conflict with the capitalist state, their need of fighting support against it. In a word they must develop class consciousness.
The problem of which current-reactionary, socialist or Communist – to ally themselves with has already sought the teachers out and is pressing for solution. The Communists have begun to penetrate their ranks. They are not alone in the effort to win influence among the teachers. Others groups and interests are attempting the same thing in the interest of patriotism and paycuts, of reform and milk-and-water protest. If the Communists pursue a correct policy they can win the teachers for Communism.
These are the basic considerations which the teachers must take into account in formulating their program. According to the answer they give to these questions will depend the organisations they build. The question of organization is a very complicated one. At the present time there are about seventy organizations among the approximately 40,000 teachers in New York City They range all the way from a Teachers’ Welfare League through the Teachers Union of the American Federation of Teachers in the AF of L, to the Teachers Committee to Protect Salaries organized by the Educational Worker’s League of the TUUL. We will return to this aspect of the situation in an early issue.
 



On Sunday, January 22, tens of thousands of Fascists made a demonstration in Germany. In clashes with workers and Communists one worker was killed and a hundred were wounded. According to the press the occasion was the anniversary of the death of a Fascist killed in an assault upon workers. Touching sentimentality! The Kaiser sent a wreath of flowers to lay upon the grave.
Had the demonstration for this sort of human rubbish been part of the usual Fascist tinsel of bluster and burlesque pomp it could have been set down as another item in the ledger of the working class account with these agents of capitalist reaction, to be settled in full and forever by the proletarian revolution. But there are aspects of the demonstration that mark it as an event of great significance for the German and international working class and its vanguard.
In Berlin the Fascists invaded the heart of the proletarian districts to assemble in front of Communist party headquarters. Alone the Fascists would not have dared the anger of the workers. But the Fascists were “guarded” by the largest police mobilization ever made in Berlin. This was a sinister united front between the Fascist hordes and the Bonapartist police. This fact gave the demonstration a character of the highest political significance. It was not a memorial meeting at all, but an enormous provocation of the workers’ vanguard. Under the circumstances the party correctly refused to be drawn. That is to its credit.
In the mind of every worker questions will arise: Why was the party not able to arouse the masses of workers to resist this hostile demonstration in its stronghold? Why could it not call on the social democratic workers to join with it against their common foe? The knowledge of its ability to do so would have made the demonstration in red Berlin impossible.
To ask the questions is to hint at their answers. The demonstration succeeded in establishing the weakness of the party. This must be said openly. The reason is to be found in the false theories of the Thaelmann-Stalin leadership which harnessed the party to the yoke of social-Fascism and erected barriers across the line of march to the unity of the working class. That is why the socialist workers today remain under the bloodstained flag of the Noskes and Scheidemanns. And that is why the party had to suffer the humiliating insult of a Fascist demonstration in front of its windows. The demonstration was another warning to the party leadership to redress its line and begin, without delay, the approach to the social democratic workers and trade unions through their organizations, mobilize the whole class for the extra-parliamentary struggle against the Bonapartist, Fascist and social democratic pillars of capitalist reaction.
Having escaped disaster on one reef the party leadership is still unable to steer by the charts of a Leninist course. It has not assimilated the lessons of this “memorial meeting”. It is now embarked on a course of counter demonstrations lasting a week. “We have numbers too” seems to be the essence of their reaction to the Fascist insult and provocation. Such demonstrations are significant when they are manned by workers following a correct policy. In the present situation these demonstrations must take place on the basis of the extra-parliamentary united front. Otherwise they are futile protests against the Fascist outrage.
That is one aspect of the events of January 22. The united front between Von Schleicher’s police and Hitler’s mercenaries is a new and striking development in the German situation. What is the meaning of this co-operation?
In the interregnum of the Bonapartist regime of Von Schleicher the class situation has not stood still. The economic crisis has continued to deepen. Unemployment is rising again. Dissatisfaction with Von Schleicher is growing. He has successfully postponed the convening of the Reichstag for a time but on its next assembling he may find himself and his cabinet forced out, the precarious equilibrium of his Bonapartist regime disrupted by a rising tide of working class struggle.
The united front of Hitler and Von Schleicher was a maneuver directed against the spearhead of the working class. Von Schleicher utilized the Fascist troops to provoke the Communist party to struggle under unfavorable conditions; to drown its defense in blood and make bloody reprisals against the working class; to appease the restlessness in the Fascist ranks with this “dress rehearsal” by this means to bolster his regime; this was the game of Von Schleicher and Hitler.
To accomplish this, Hitler moved up to the firing line. The time is not ripe for his special services of unrestrained murder and pillage of the working class organizations. But it may be soon in the calculations of the world bourgeoisie. The working class throughout the world must be on guard, alert.
Some shifts are taking place in the world situation but the key is still in Germany. Some shifts have taken place in the German situation but the slower tempo has not altered the basic issue. It is still: Communism or Fascism. The workers must tell Von Schleicher and the bourgeoisie that the alternative to Bonapartism is not Fascism but that the solution to the problem is the proletarian revolution. Everywhere the workers, and particularly the Communist vanguard must raise, their voices with the Left Opposition to demand that the C.I. and the German party throw overboard the ruinous theory of social-Fascism and adopt the Leninist united front to unite, the German working class around the banner of Communism for the proletarian revolution.
 



The New York United Front Mooney Conference was no ordinary demonstration of the strength and weakness of the Satlinlst machine. As it turned out the conference got out of control of the Stalinist steering committee. Bedlam broke loose. A riot was avoided only by summarily adjourning.
The conference, overwhelming Stalinist in its political complexion, was oriented on the party’s half-turn on the united front. The contradiction between this political orientation and the attempt on the part of the party steering committee to run it in the well known Stalinist, closed-corporation manner is the key to an understanding of the tense political drama that was fought for eight hours on the floor of the conference.
The conference was opened by the reading of a message from Mooney. Following this Palmer of the Federated Press was elected temporary chairman. A motion to elect a credentials committee was carried and the following were elected: Sultan of the Freiheit; Nessin of the TUUC; Gubernick of the Huntington Branch of the S.P.; Mac Christian of the NWIU; Riner of the Brotherhood of Painters, Local 445; Penn of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen; and Berman of the Left Opposition who was a regularly elected delegate from a Workmen’s Circle Branch. Berman’s election caused the party members no end of confusion. Comrade Berman is well known to party members as a member of the L.O. When it came to voting on Berman the party steering committee raise their hands. Half the party members followed suit. But the other half were confused by the sight of their leaders voting for a counter-revolutionary Trotskyite and did not vote. The 140 votes Berman got were enough.
From this point on the confusion grew apace until the conclusion of this eventful gathering. Louis Scott, Mooney’s personal representative made the report. He summarized some of the outstanding points in the legal aspect of the case. His perspective for the future of the fight was essentially a legal one. He laid down the tasks of the movement as follows: united front mass meetings and demonstrations; a delegation to Roph to demand the immediate and unconditional release of Mooney; a delegation to Roosevelt to get him to intercede with Roph for Mooney; a congressional investigation; and if all these measures fail, a general strike. The emphasis he gave the legal fight gave the impression that he regarded the mass movement as a somewhat helpful auxiliary; an ace-in-the-hole to be sprung on the capitalists if all else fails.
In the discussion which took place later the party offered no line of its own nor any criticism of this essentially liberal-legalistic line. Why did the party maintain an opportunist silence? On the vital question of policy and line it must speak openly and clearly its silence contributes only confusion.
The credentials committee tried to carry out the pretence of a genuine united front. Nessin reported 599 delegates from 347 organizations. All attempts to obtain an analysis of the report met with the stubborn resistance of the party steering committee which publicly prevented Nessin from giving the information asked for from the floor. 40 trade union organizations were reported but what they were was not revealed. 31 political organizations, 50 defense organizations, 22 unemployed organizations, 195 fraternal organizations were also listed but no analysis was given.
However, it is known that there were very few A.F. of L. locals. The CPLA was there as were Weisbord, the Lovestoneites, the League for Industrial Democracy. The New York district of the CP was represented. In front of us sat delegates from the YCL. It was said that some YPSL locals were present. The SP was represented by a lone individual, Gubernick of the Huntington, Long Island Branch. It was reported from the floor that the S.P. had instructed the locals of the ILWGU over which it has control to stay away. Scott reported later that the City Central Committee of the S.P. had voted unanimously not to endorse the conference and not to attend. That is how the Socialist party answered Mooney’s call. But it also testifies to the weakness of the united front policy of the C.P.
The fight to establish the composition of the conference on the floor was intense but short-lived and unavailing. The Stalinists were in complete control of the proceedings at this point. The matter was finally disposed of by Scott’s personal promise to publish a detailed report within 48 hours. The report which has just arrived confirms our analysis of the composition of the conference.
But what the credentials committee report failed to establish, was made clear from the collection which together with pledges exceeded $500. For some forty minutes a flood of donations and pledges was poured into the treasury of the conference by IWO branches, ILD Branches, Unemployed Councils, TUUL unions, the C.P. and Communist opposition groups. It was clear to all that this was a Stalinist conference.
The resolutions committee was carefully selected by the Stalinist steering committee. It was composed of “reliable” people: Becker, Benjamin, Gubernick (!), Corliss Lamont, etc. Its retirement to consider the resolutions of the conference created a vacuum in the proceedings which was filled by discussion.
The Stalinists intended, no doubt, to confine the discussion to the routine speeches by their leading comrades. The discussion that took place caught them completely unawares. Delegate after delegate spoke. And all the speeches centered around the united front.
In this discussion the Lovestoneites were jeered and howled down. Boos greeted other delegates who even timidly proposed that to draw the socialist workers into the conference it was necessary to suffer the presence of their leaders. Not all of these proposals were correct in their formulation and content. But they were the gusts of a new wind.
The voice of the Left Opposition rang loudly and clearly for a genuine, Leninist united front. From beginning to end the speech of our delegate was accorded the closest attention. An attempt to heckle was squelched by the entire conference. At its conclusion there was not the faintest sign of hostility.
The blow the Opposition delivered to the Stalinist policy on the united front accounts for what happened afterward. Even the Stalinists were forced to take this into account. All their later attacks against the people who “represent tendencies but no masses” were careful to avoid any reference to the Left Opposition. It was easy to see that the tremendous impression made on the party members by our campaign on the situation in Germany made them eager to hear what we had to say on the Mooney question and especially on the united front.
Under the hammering the Stalinists were losing control of the conference. Their feeble attempts to counter the political attack with parliamentary procedure alienated them. Panic began to seize the the chairman who publicly rebuked party steering committee. They turned loose their heavest artillery. The speeches were the same as yesterday’s but the difference was clear. Heretofore there were violent incitements to violence. Sunday they were last line defenses.
Politically they were a denial of the Comintern’s invitation to the Second International for a united front. Alexander strained himself to prove that we couldn’t have any traffic with Green and Well, Hillquit and Thomas. If the Stalinists did not dare to say it openly they made the implication clear: no united front with the leaders.
The resolutions were abstract expressions on the Mooney question and class war prisoners. The resolution on Mooney set May Day as a day of united struggle for his release. It proposes a united demonstration of the socialist and Communist workers and includes the A.F. of L. Formally the proposal is correct, But the line of the conference and the content with which the Stalinists fill their united front proposals make it doubtful whether this will be realized.
The final blow which accomplished the rout of the Stalinists came with the domination of a permanent committee of 25. Nessin reporting for the credentials committee which had been instructed to make the nomination read only 24 names. Comrade Berman protested from the floor, pointing out that the name of the delegate from the Left Opposition who had been agreed on by the committee had been omitted. The chair asked Nessin to explain. He attempted to lay the blame on Berman. Berman’s contention was supported by another member of the credentials committee. The already heated atmosphere was beginning to simmer. The chair appealed to Scott for his explanation of the incident. Scott came forward and supported Berman. Nessin was left standing on the platform, in view of the entire conference, caught red-handed in a clumsy attempt to remove the
delegate from the Left Opposition. This incident aroused a furious storm of indignation and protest. The chair was deluged with motions, points of order, questions seeking information, and verbal protests. The Stalinists made a desperate attempt to unseat the delegate from the Left Opposition from the permanent committee. Ballham made a motion to replace our delegate by a delegate from the Amalgamated Food Workers. This brought forth a roar of protest from the delegate from that union. He said that the union would willingly serve on the committee but not at the expense of unseating any other organization. The motion was defeated. Two additional delegates were added. The proposals to provide spaces on the permanent committee for all political tendencies represented were defeated. Notwithstanding, Ballham read a statement welcoming all Socialist and A.F. of L. workers as the sentiment of the conference. It carried.
By this time delegates were standing on seats speaking at the tops of their voices as was the chairman. Not a word anyone said could be heard. Above the roar the IWW announced that they were withdrawing from the conference. Half the conference was on its feet. A riot was imminent. To avoid it the conference was adjourned.
The Stalinists have succeeded in wrecking another conference. Nothing fruitful came out of Sunday’s session. The approach to the Socialist and A.F. of L. workers is still incorrect. The positive sides of the conference are its size and enthusiasm, and the beginnings of workers’ democracy accorded to the Left Opposition. The Left Opposition will use its position on the permanent committee to broaden the conference and make it a genuine united front.
 



The fight of the teachers in defense of their living and teaching conditions cannot be won by themselves alone. The experience of the Chicago and Havana teachers, to take only recent events, proves this. The militant mass demonstrations of the Chicago teachers were successful in winning a measure of relief. But the attacks on the school system and on the teachers directly and indirectly are not only continued but intensified. In Cuba it required the action of the entire population to unseat the dictator who oppressed the country including the teachers.
The teachers are employees of the state. In defense of their interests they must contend directly against its enormous power and manifold apparatus of coercion and repression. The character of the movement which can successfully resist its onslaughts is indicated by the hurricane which swept Machado out of office. Such a movement the teachers cannot build nor even lead.
In a word the teachers movement must seek allies among those strata of the population whose interests bring them into conflict with the state. Real estate associations, chambers of commerce, civic betterment societies, etc., etc., sometimes fight government policies in pursuit of their special interests, principally in the matter of reduction of taxes. But this coincidence is more apparent than real. Real estate associations everywhere are now pressing for reduction in taxes at the expense of the school system and the living and teaching conditions pf the teachers. The present drastic economy program in education is proceeding under the whip of the United States Chamber of Commerce.
More fundamentally, the real estate associations and chambers of commerce are the organizations of the ruling classes who instigate and carry through the attacks on the teachers THROUGH THE STATE. The state is their state. Their conflict with it is an attempt to REFORM ITS POLICIES IN THEIR INTEREST AT THE EXPENSE OF THE WORKING CLASSES WHICH INCLUDE THE TEACHERS. That is why they were not found in the ranks of the demonstrators in Chicago and Havana. If the teachers depend on them they will be betrayed. That is inevitable.
The position of teachers in capitalist society as a section of the working class marks out the road they must travel in resisting the blows of the capitalist class. They must join hands with the workers. Only the working class movement of which the teachers must become a part, as they have in France, can solve the problems of the free school system and the living and teaching conditions of the teachers.
This fundamental orientation must be reflected in the policies of the teachers movement and its organizational forms. The organization of teachers unions has already given the historic answer to the question: what organizational forms shall the teachers movement take? It follows that the basic organizational form of the teachers resistance is the trade union. And it makes it necessary for the teachers to enter the trade union movement. The defense of culture leads to the trade union movement.
This fundamental orientation and this fundamental organizational form does not exclude other, temporary forms of organized resistance. But it indicates the relation in which they must stand toward the teachers trade unions and the trade union movement.
 



The Stalinist theoretical program for Cuba places on the order of the day the “agrarian, anti-imperialist revolution.” According to the Stalinists the task of the Cuban Communist Party is to “agitate and organize the peasants” for this end. Among their slogans stands the demand for the division of the land which the apply to the sugar plantations.
Unquestionably the central problem of Cuban economy is the agrarian question. But the agrarian question in Cuba has an entirely different content than it had In Russia. Russian agriculture was organized on the basis of a number of large estates in the hands of feudal landowners and a myriad of small holdings worked by individual peasants. The land was cultivated with primitive methods and equipment. Those who worked the land stood in the relation to it of peasants. They constituted the majority of the population.
That is not the picture which greets the eye in Cuba. Most of the land under cultivation is devoted to sugar cane. In area this is equal to more than one third of the island. Ninety percent of this land is owned or controlled on long term leases by large American sugar companies. Some of these plantations are of enormous size. They extend beyond the county limits and include towns. Some plantations embrace tens of thousands of acres. As early as 1900 one plantation alone refined 200,000 bags of sugar, ten per cent of the entire crop. Since then centralization has gone on apace by consolidation of large plantations and the bankruptcy of the smaller ones under the prodding guidance of the Chase National and National City banks. The Chaparra plantation which began in 1900 with 66,000 acres had grown to 250,000 by 1926.
Millions of dollars in machinery have been poured into the sugar plantations. The process began in 1820 with the introduction of steam machinery. In 1840 the appearance of railroads gave this process a new development. Today the plantations boast the most up to date machinery in the world.
In short, the sugar plantations are operated on an INDUSTRIAL basis. For the most part the men who toil on them are wage workers. Wages are unbelievably low; in Camaguey under Machado they were as low as three cents a day, the working year in many cases does not exceed one month. A number of the sugar workers try to supplement their meager earnings between harvests by cultivating the small and patches of relatives.
Because of the high degree of concentration of the industry large numbers of workers are massed on the plantations. As early as 1893 twelve hundred workers were required to harvest the crop on one plantation. Carleton Beales reports that one sugar company in 1933 fed over 7,000 unemployed persons – not so much out of charity as to prevent sabotage and the burning of cane fields.”
Moreover, the majority of the sugar workers have little or no affinity with the soil in the sense of a peasantry. It is estimated that from 1913 to 1927 forty thousand negroes a year were smuggled into Cuba. During the World war, in the period of the great expansion of sugar lands, thousands of negroes from Haiti and Jamaica and even Chinese coolies were brought into Cuba to work on the sugar plantations. Inasmuch as the number of sugar workers today is estimated at 500,000 the labor turnover on the plantations has been great. The sugar workers, for the most part, have no roots in the soil. There is, in Cuba, no land hunger comparable to the land hunger of the Russian peasants.
Thousands of the half million plantation workers – approximately half of the entire working population – have been organized into TRADE UNIONS.
One strike brought out twenty thousand. Sugar workers participated in the general strike of two hundred thousand workers in 1930 in protest against the terrorism of the trade unions by Machado. Today they are on strike on a scale surpassing all previous struggles. The press reports state that the workers have seized 15 sugar mills and are attempting to operate them by workers’ committees. The New York Times of September 20 reports that the owners of the plantations “are willing to make concessions on wages, hours, and working conditions but say the workers demand the impossible”. And what is the impossible demand of the workers? They want their committees to manage the mills. In a word the sugar workers are putting forward the demand for workers control and management of industry. In the next stage this will lead to the demand for nationalization of the industry and will indicate the corresponding state form under which alone it is possible – the dictatorship of the proletariat.
A peasantry exists in Cuba but its weight In economy is small and consequently its weight in society is correspondingly small.
But it is hopeless to think that the peasantry can lead the Cuban revolution. The Stalinists who want to “agitate and organize the peasants” to lead the “agrarian revolution” do not know what they are talking about.
It is no better with the “anti-imperialist revolution.” Ninety per cent of the sugar industry is in the hands of American capital. Most in the hands of American capital, of the tobacco industry is likewise Nearly all the banks, railroads, street car lines, electric plants, the telephone systems, public utilities, docks, etc., etc., are owned by United States capitalists. Three banks, principally, control all of Cuban economy: the National City Bank, the Chase National Bank, and the House of Morgan.
Thus the struggle of the Cuban workers in all industries for higher wages and better conditions must, of necessity, develop into a struggle against American imperialism. The universal impoverishment of the Cuban workers has profoundly imbued them with a hatred of their imperialist masters.
If we are to speak of an “agrarian, anti-imperialist revolution” – an impermissibly ambiguous formulation – we can do so only in the sense of the proletariat leading the struggle. The first steps are Indicated – the slogan of the nationalization of industry under workers’ control of production.
 



The situation in Cuba is developing into civil war. Soldiers have been sent against the striking sugar workers to recapture from them the plantations they have seized. The workers are armed and are determined to resist. Conflicting press reports state that the soldiers fired on workers; that they fraternize with the workers. At any rate the struggles of the workers for increased pay, better working conditions, and against imperialism has brought them to the point where they are beginning to confront the army. Will the soldiers go over to the side of the workers? Or will the soldiers support the government, which it is leaning ever more heavily upon the Cuban bourgeoisie and the American imperialists? The next days will decide.
With the passing of each day the ground is being cut from under the feet of the San Martin government. On the one hand it is being subjected to enormous pressure from the Cuban bourgeoisie and the United States. The Menocal and Mendieta factions together with the ABC are insistently demanding the resignation of the government. The financial sabotage continues unremittingly. Welles is busy conniving and plotting to replace the Martin government with an outright bourgeois regime.
The petty bourgeoisie, too, bringing pressure to bear on the government to drive it to the Right, against the workers, on the ground that strikes are paralyzing business and ruining them. In Havana they threatened a 24 hour closure of all business houses “in protest against workers’ acts of violence”. Another report has it that they “threaten to close their doors unless the government compromises with the opposition (bourgeois factions) and agrees to a coalition cabinet that will satisfy all, win U.S. recognition and restore the country’s economic life.” Out of fear of the workers the petty bourgeoisie are asking the Cuban bourgeoisie and the U.S. imperialists, to suppress the workers.
The rising tide of workers’ struggles is leaving the San Martin government suspended over an erupting volcano. The workers are seizing the sugar plantations and are attempting to operate them by workers’ committees. They are arming themselves against the threat of the government to retake the plantations by force. The strike wave is spreading continuously. Santiago is threatened with a complete tie-up. The struggles of the workers to improve their economic condition is bringing them into more direct conflict with the bourgeoisie and with the American imperialists upon the fundamental issues of the Cuban, revolution, the influence of Communism is growing.
Condemned to futility and extinction from its birth the government of the petty bourgeoisie, both as revolutionary junta and as its offspring, the San Martin government, has pursued a steady course toward the Right, toward the bourgeoisie and American imperialism. Although it came into power as an anti-imperialist government it promised the payment of all foreign obligations, that is to say, of the enormous debt to Wall Street which can be paid only by the sweat and blood of the toiling masses. On the 14th of September it guaranteed the investments of the United States in its statutes: “No one shall be deprived of legitimate property except by competent authority and for verified reasons of public welfare after proper indemnification.” This regime which began to conciliate the workers by sending arbitration commissions of students and soldiers to settle the disputes between, the sugar workers and the plantation owners has yielded’ to the demand of the imperialists, and has sent troops against the workers, it has also resolved upon the dissolution of all political parties which means, not the bourgeois opposition parties whose supporters have organized armed revolts but the illegalization of the Communist party.
The final capitulation of the San Martin government to the combined pressure of American imperialism and the Cuban bourgeois is indicated by the reports of the discussion among the government, Welles, and the factions of the bourgeois opposition, and the ABC which are preparing a bourgeois coalition to supplant the present set-up.
But no bourgeois coalition cannot [sic] cope with the situation on the basis of bourgeois parliamentary democracy. The bourgeoisie can re-establish their rule only by the armed suppression of the workers. If their own forces are insufficient for this purpose – if the army goes over to the workers – the bourgeoisie can and will call upon the armed might of U.S. imperialism.
For the Cuban workers there is only one road to travel. They have seized plantations, and have set up workers’ committees to control and manage production. They are threatening to take over mines and’ fruit plantations. They must now begin to establish their Soviets as organs of struggle.
For this is necessary a Communist party in Cuba correctly oriented in the questions of revolutionary strategy and the IMMEDIATE and active assistance of the Latin American and, in the first instance, the American proletariat. If the Cuban workers are not to be bloodily suppressed and driven back into the yoke of slavery as frightful as that of the Chinese coolie the American workers must organize a movement against armed intervention in Cuba.
The solidarity of the American proletariat with the Cuban workers is not an abstract nor a sentimental question. The worker in the Buffalo steel mills and the Cuban iron miner at Daiquiri work for the same boss, the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. The exploiters and oppressors of the Cuban workers are the oppressors and exploiters of the American workers. They must unite their forces to overthrow their common enemy.
The Cuban proletariat which has entered, upon the revolutionary road before the American proletariat cannot wait. The Cuban workers need help now. The American workers must be aroused to come to their aid. That is the immediate duty of the Communist movement.
 



The New York Times of September 10 quotes Albert Einstein, world famous pacifist, as follows; “If I were a Belgian I would not refuse military service under the present circumstances, but I would, on the contrary, accept it with a clear conscience with the sentiment of a contribution toward securing European civilization.”
The “present circumstances” are Einstein’s fear of a threat of war emanating from Hitler. Einstein thinks that the tide of war will roll westward and that Belgium will fall beneath the Nazi chariot wheels. Hence the gratuitous admonition to Belgian workers to train for the defense of “their” country.
The French Socialists and the British labor skates want to defend European democracy against Fascist and “Soviet dictatorships”. Hitler, too, wants to defend European civilization against “the East”. How many saviors of European civilization there are!
It is difficult to reconcile this latest position of Einstein’s with his endorsement of and services for the Stalinist Amsterdam World Anti-War Congress. This the Stalinists will have to explain away. We warned in time against entrusting the leadership of the fight against imperialist war to well meaning intellectuals and pacifists. For our good advice the Stalinists gave us curses and blows.
This latest advice of Einstein’s stands in contradiction to his former, well known advice to the entire world to refuse to bear arms. He is the formulator of the pacifist idea that if only two percent of a population refuse to bear arms that number will suffice to defeat the war plans of the imperialists.
But if you think you see a contradiction here Einstein does not. He explains this point: “There does not mean I renounce my previous opinions. I desire nothing more than to see the moment come when the refusal of military service will be the means for an efficacious struggle for the progress of humanity.” You see, he merely postpones his idea of refusing military service for a while. And in the meantime he advocates the exact opposite.
Is there a contradiction here? Yes and no. It all depends on how you look at it. Workers should remember that Einstein is the author of the theory of relativity which, despite its positive contributions to science, implies that there is no objective world independent of consciousness and that the world is only the result of the position of the measurer. In other words if you stick your head between your legs and look at the world from that position the Empire State Building grows down from the sky and calling on Belgian workers to enter the military service of the capitalist class to defend the capitalist state is not in contradiction to pacifist ideas.
That is generally the conclusion to which the petty bourgeois, confusionist theories of pacifism lead. We hope that Einstein will forgive us if we see in his playing with serious questions the bankruptcy of pacifism and its objective support of imperialism.
 



The April 1933 issue of the American Teacher, official organ of the American Federation of Teachers in the A.F. of L. lists twenty recommendations for economy in education sent out by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to all chambers of Commerce in the United States.
“(4) Postponement of new capital outlay for buildings and replacements; (8) Shorten school day one hour; (9) Increase size of classes; (10) Increase teaching hours; (12) Suspend automatic increase of salaries; (13) Reduction in teachers salaries not to exceed 10 percent; (14) Shorten school year not to exceed 12 per cent; (15) Discontinue evening classes; (16) Discontinue kindergartens; (17) Reduce elementary school curriculums by consideration from eight to seven years; (18) Reduce high school curriculums by consolidation from four to three years; (19) Transfer one-third of cost of instruction above high school levels from taxpayer to pupil; (20) Impose a fee on high school students.”
This program is already being carried out. In Ohio, California and other states the school year has been cut; in some states drastically. In New York City and elsewhere salaries have been cut: in some places more than once and more than ten per cent. New building is virtually at a standstill. Classes have been increased in size all over. Similarly with the other items in this bill of particulars.
It is clear at a glance that the burden of this economy will fall on the teachers and pupils. The teachers have already begun to struggle against it. The militant demonstrations in Chicago and the protests and activities of the Left wing in the Teachers Union in New York are laying the foundations for a teachers movement in the United States.
But the scope of the Chamber of Commerce economy proposals transcends the interests of the teachers as teachers. It is an integral part of the attack of the capitalist class on the working class. In New York City the backbone of the organized labor movement are the Building Trades. They have a direct and immediate interest in new school construction. Imposing fees on high school students increases the cost of living for the workers. Increase in the size of classes places hardships on the children.
Under capitalism labor struggles to assimilate the culture which science and the arts place nt the disposal of society. The labor movement has to fight the poisonous ideology which the capitalists inculcate in working class children in the schools. In the United States labor has a stake in the preservation and extension of the free school system.
This economy move on the part of the capitalist class is a reactionary one. The teachers by themselves will not, cannot be successful in defeating it. The experience of the Chicago teachers proves this. They must ally themselves with the working class movement. The teachers movement must steer in this direction.
 



Both from the point of view of the number of strikes and strikers, on the one hand, and the militancy of the workers on the other, Pennsylvania occupies the center of the stage. Within this area are taking place the strike of the Reading Hosiery workers and the struggle of the central western miners. In the eastern section of the state small strikes are occurring in the textile and manufacturing industries against sweat shop conditions. The strike of the miners marks the high water mark thus far of the developing working class offensive.
The capitalist class is moving in this area too. From Philadelphia to Fayette County there is the familiar story of police brutality and the viciousness of hired deputies. The armed forces of the state have also been brought into play. Demagogy in the high places of the .state bureaucracy and in the ranks of organized labor has been trained on the workers to dull the edge of their militancy. Betrayal too plays its part. These are the time honored methods of “dealing with labor troubles”.
But now for the first time a new element has made its appearance. The political flunkies of Mellon and Morgan have acquired a new weapon. They are beginning to use liberal policies which they accompany with deeds. Mrs. Pinchot, the first lady of the state, appears on picket lines and marches with the strikers; she bawls out the head of the Philadelphia police force for his brutality in dispersing strikers. Pinchot himself, after Roosevelt, appoints a lady to the position of state secretary of labor. She carries out a policy “in the interests of the workers” which brings down on her head the charge of being a “strike fomentor”. Pinchot sends troops to the mine strike area to “protect the strikers against the deputies”.
“He blamed the strike on efforts to deprive the miners of the rights guaranteed in the National Recovery Act. The time has gone by when striking miners can be clubbed into submission by deputy sheriffs with the assistance of the national guard and the state police – and it will not come back while. I am governor.’” (N.Y. Times, August 6, 1933.) Bravo! Bravo!
There are some unkind people who say that all this is not meant sincerely, that Pinchot is keeping up appearances and furthering personal political ambitions. They say that Mrs. Pinchot has her eye fixed on a senatorial seat. They say that the appointment of Miss Carr to the position of state secretary of labor was a blow directed at boss Grundy with whose machine Pinchot had broken in pursuit of a “liberal” reputation.
All this may be true.
We are not in the confidence of the Pinchots and we cannot say. At any rate we are ready to believe that the servants of the capitalist class do not serve their masters out of altruistic motives.
The Daily Worker takes a somewhat different view from that of Pinchot’s critics. The Daily holds to the idea that the Pinchot variety of demagogy is the familiar brand the capitalists have been doling out for decades. It notices neither quantitative nor qualitative differences. It applies a correct ABSTRACT formula to all situations and gets the same results.
What is actually taking place in Pennsylvania is what Roosevelt is doing on a national scale – the Europeanization of American politics – from the capitalist side. The capitalists not only talk of labor’s rights and needs. They make a sentence of doing something about it. And under cover of these “concessions” they plot and carry through further attacks in the workers.
The whole of the Pinchot policy fits into the Roosevelt labor policy as a finger fits into a glove. Roosevelt calls for class peace while he carries out measures “in the interest of the workers” – the NIRA – Pinchot does essentially the same. Only through his wife he goes a step further; he “intervenes” on the side of the strikers”! Pinchot’s methods are an extension of Roosevelt’s. Why do they do this? They do it, because they foresee a rise of working class struggles. They understand that the workers will make attempts to recover some of the ground they lost during the years of the capitalist onslaught. This they seek to prevent as far as possible and where it is not possible they want to confine the results to a minimum.
At the same time the capitalists are trying to put their house in order to launch their assault on the world market. They need a further concentration and centralization of industry and its administration and a reorganization of labor to the reorganized industrial apparatus at the expense of the working class. To carry through this program they have devised the measures embraced by the New Deal, among them the NIRA: And to carry them through they need class peace in a period of rising working class struggles. That is why they try to carry measures through under cover of liberalism. The key to the strategy is summed up in the formula: the Europeanization of capitalist politics to prevent the political development of the working class.
 



Under the pressure of capitalist rationalization of industry and the great swath which the crisis cut in employment, the organized labor movement in its larger part has turned toward the shorter work day as a means of absorbing into industry some part of the great army of unemployed.
The Socialist party and the A.F. of L. have officially gone on record for the six hour day, five day week. It goes without saying that the economic development of the United States makes possible not only a six hour day but even a shorter one.
The blanket code provides a thirty five and forty maximum hour week. Most of the codes submitted provide for forty hours. Thirty-five and forty hour maximum are stagger systems. They will not absorb the unemployed workers. The spokesmen for the electrical workers union stated that to absorb the unemployed in that trade an 11 hour maximum was necessary! On the other hand a forty hour maximum is an increase in hours in some trades.
The contradiction between the official position of organized labor and the labor provisions of the N.I.R. A. creates the condition for a struggle for a shorter day in the interest of the working class. But there is no struggle for the six hour day. Instead the labor fakers make a pretense of opposing the hours stipulated in the various codes. Sidney Hillman appeared before the National Recovery Administration and attacked the forty hours demanded by the bosses on the ground that the average number of hours in the men’s clothing industry in 1932 was a fraction over 37. To put men back to work he proposed 35! Others like John L. Lewis have come forward as the champions of the thirty hour week. They are of two kinds. Those that qualify the demand for the thirty hour week by stipulating a five day week or a six hour day are making demagogic use of the slogan to retain their leadership and their hold over their followers. Those who do not embellish their fakery with these qualifications are trying to put over a stagger system on the workers. For a maximum of thirty hours a week is not at all the six hour day, five day week. It may and most likely will be a three day week of ten hours.
The reasons for the absence of a militant struggle around the slogan of the six hour day, five day week are many. The A.F. of L. and S.P. bureaucracies are not going to conduct struggles if they can avoid them. And they will lead those the workers force upon them only to sell them out or steer them into channels as little harmful to the capitalist class as they can manage. The illusions sown by the NIRA also tend to keep the workers in a state of expectant and hopeful passivity.
But, deeper than these reasons lies the failure of the Communist party to give a correct analysis of the situation, to foresee the blows of the capitalist class and arm the workers with a correct policy and the correct slogans. The party’s trade-union policy isolated it from the organized working class movement. On the other hand from the beginning of the crisis the party staked its cards on the unemployed movement and attempted to build it as a movement separate and apart from the struggles of the class as a whole and the organized trade union movement. In pursuing this orientation it made unemployment insurance its central slogan. Later it added immediate relief. But at all times in this period it rejected the slogan of the six hour day five day week. In our thesis for our second national conference we held out the perspective for what was then the coming period of struggles by the workers against the capitalist offensive. We are now entering that period. The wave of strikes is assuming the character of an offensive. Nearly all of them center around wage increases, shorter hours and union recognition.
In its Open Letter to the Central Committee of the C. P. on February 15, 1931, the Left Opposition with regard to the question of a central slogan and its relation to the stage of the movement: “In each tactics must lay the basis for correct preparation and direction of the next one.” And in line with this idea the Opposition proposed: “The central immediate demand must be the six hour day without reduction in pay.” (Today it is necessary to demand increased pay to keep step with the rising cost of living.) And the opposition has consistently advanced this slogan as the means of uniting the employed and the unemployed.
The failure of the Stalinist leadership of our party to lay the basis in the past period for the transition to the present one is the reason the party has been unable thus far to influence the workers in their attitude toward the NIRA. It also explains the failure of the party to build a united movement of the employed and unemployed workers.
But the Stalinists have learned nothing from their blundering. Yesterday the six hour day slogan was a propaganda slogan, a slogan of preparation for action. The Stalinists rejected it as counter-revolutionary. They adopted the slogan of the seven hour day. Later it changed its slogan from the seven hour day to the shorter workday with no reduction in pay. (Daily Worker of April 8, 1933)
For a time the party was able to get by with this ambiguous and confusionist slogan. But the NIRA gave it its quietus. The codes are specific. The Stalinists who foresee nothing and reel under the blows of the class struggle were taken by surprise by the Act. In their reaction to it the bankruptcy of their position in the trade union question and the shorter workday was exposed.
Today they are trailing not only the reformists and the labor fakers but even the capitalists. Their policy on the shorter workdayis entirely empiric. It varies with each industry and each trade and each iode. And in nearly every case it trails the labor fakers. Dubinsky appeared before the NIRA and spoke for the 30 hour week. Hyman of the Industrial Union spoke for the 35 hour week according to the Freiheit and 33 according to the Daily Worker. McMahon of the U.T.W. spoke for a thirty hour week, Ann Burlak of the N.T.W.I.U. asked for a 30 to 40 hour week.
On the other hand Powers, chairman of a delegation of workers in speaking on the shipbuilding code, demanded the six hour day five day week. (Daily Worker, July 24, 1933) And two days later the New York Times and the Daily Worker reported that Alex Noral of the Lumber Workers Union of the Northwest in speaking on the lumbermen’s code, demanded “That the six hour day and five day week be established for the industry as a whole.”
The lack of a correct policy by the Stalinists on the question of the shorter workday should be clear. In this respect the party can record only failure. The party is unable to influence the workers in their attitude toward the NIRA. It is seriously handicapped in exposing the fakery of its provisions. It has allowed the reformist and labor fakers to make capital out of the shorter work day for their own ends and in the interests of the capitalists.
Serious struggles of the workers against the slavery which the NIRA will impose on them are ahead. If the party is going to discharge its duty toward the class it must break through its frightful sectarian isolation. At present it is travelling in the opposite direction. One of the first steps to change the course is a serious analysis of the past course and open admission that its policy on the shorter workday was false. Analyses like the bureaucratic whitewash of the Open Letter only make the confusion deeper. The party must adopt the slogan of the six hour day, five day week with increased pay and approach the A.F. of L. and the S.P. with a serious offer of a united front struggle for it. That is the road to defeat the attack which lies hidden in the wooden horse of the NIRA.
 



About a month ago the Militant printed an account of a meeting held in New York by the local F.S.U. The feature attraction was a eulogy of the Soviet regime by – Archbishop Benjamin, a self-confessed, unabashed Wrangelite priest. At that time the exact nature of the services His Eminence had rendered the White Guard troops of General Baron Peter Wrangel was unknown to us. Nor did the meager notices of the meeting in the Daily Worker enlighten us in this respect.
Some idea of his faithful devotion to the Soviet cause in the dark days of the Civil War may be gleaned from a brief passage in a recent history of the counter-revolution and intervention, The White Armies of Russia by George Stewart, the MacMillan Company, 1933. In the spring of 1920 the White Guard forces in the south of Russia were bottled up in the Crimea. The Red Army was pressing them hard, threatening to drive them into the Black Sea. Wrangel was defending the mountain passes into the Crimea.
Stewart records: “The Red Army attacked in the Perekop area on March 31 and were repulsed. After bloody fighting, the Crimean passes were taken and fortified by the Whites. During the operation before the Djimbuluk Station, Wrangel walked along the skirmish lines encouraging the men while Bishop Benjamin” – he has been promoted since – by the F.S.U. – “ who was with him, blessed them with his cross before General Auguladze led them in the storming of the Red positions.” (Page 363)
Times have changed. The Soviet is now a power. But the venerable ecclesiastic still believes in the futile magic of his cross. The difference is that he now sells blessings to the Stalinists. And the Stalinists who invented the dirty story of the Wrangel officer in the pay of the Left Opposition are not above anointing their bankruptcy with holy oil compounded of the blood of the Red Army.
 



The continued attacks on their living and teaching conditions and the attacks now pending are awakening the rank and file of the Teachers Union of New York City to the need of action to protect their interests. Their alarm and their desire to resist is making itself felt on the conservative union administration. Under this pressure the administration is moving toward the left. It now demands unemployment insurance for unemployed teachers and speaks of holding mass meetings of the teachers and is engaged in organizing them, whereas formerly it preached the gospel of reliance on the state legislature and condemned the Left wing for insisting on mass actions of the teachers themselves.
It goes without saying that we have no faith in the administration. It sold out the teachers in the fight against salary cuts a year ago. And if it gets the chance it will do it again. But what is important for the teachers in this new “turn” of the union administration is that it has been forced to move in the correct direction. By this “turn” it opens up possibilities that may well sweep beyond the limits which it sets for the fight.
 
Left Wing’s Opportunity
An alert and correctly oriented Left wing can play a decisive part in this movement. This is the opportunity for which it has been working and preparing. In this period and in the period to come its influence and strength should grow.
But this new perspective finds the Left wing unable to realize the opportunities that are presented to it. The Left wing is divided into two groups that are as hostile to each other as they are to the union administration. The Progressive Group which carries out a Lovestoneite trade union policy thunders against the administration in its literature and speeches but supports it against the rank and file, the other Left wing group. Their orientation was reform of the administration. They condemned in principle any independent activity on the part of the Left wing. They branded as dual unionist any such attempt. That they themselves organized some of the unemployed teachers outside the union and did not until a few weeks ago bring them to the union did not prevent them from denouncing as dual unionist the other organization of the unemployed by the rank and file. In short they supported the administration from the left.
The rank and file have carried out a policy which is now contradicted by the new developments in the union. Their thesis was that the union was hopeless; that the administration had a strangulating grip on it; that it could not be reformed into an instrument of struggle in; the interests of the teachers. Readers of the Militant will recognize this thesis as one of the elements of the Stalinist trade union line. It is the A.F. of L. company union idea applied to the Teachers Union.
 
Errors of Left Groups
The consequences that have flowed from the false policies of these two groups have been ruinous for the Left wing and have not helped the union. Now after a fight of years the Left wing is in a worse position than it was and the administration is firmly in the saddle.
Even now they are more interested in preserving their factional differences and justifying themselves to their own members than they are in building a united Left wing. That is the task that the progressive teachers in the union face. They can, if they make the attempt, penetrate both groups with the idea of one united Left wing.
For this they need a program. Whatever program they work out cannot include the false policies and conceptions of the Stalinist and Lovestone trade union lines. The teachers need instruction in how to find their way to the trade union movement. The way to do it is not in the secret domination of the Left wing by factional cliques but in the open formulation of policies on the basis of trade union democracy. How can the Left wing fight the union administration which has destroyed trade union democracy if it violates it in its own house?
When the Left wing is united it can press the fight for a militant union representative of the interests of all the teachers in the system, steering toward the working class movement.
 



The recent flare-up of the army rank and file against the officers barricaded in the National Hotel in Havana weakened the government and strengthened the soldiers. The assault was carried out against the temporizing policy of the government with regard to the agents of the Machado terror and now the champions of De Cespedes. The speed and energy with which the soldiers attacked the officers following the latter’s provocation testified to their hatred of their former superiors and their dissatisfaction with the policy of the government.
The sniping from roof tops and windows and the innumerable miniature street battles which followed the battle of the National Hotel sharply emphasized the fact that large numbers of the population are armed. Following the overthrow of Machado the ABC systematically armed its members and sympathizers. The Student Directorate did the same. In the interior the workers armed themselves as best they could. In Cienfuegos the workers sacked the hardware stores and carried off arms and ammunition. Following the establishment of the Grau San Martin government and the rising tide of working class struggles the students organized the Caribbean Army, an armed auxiliary to the police and army. Today the armed detachments of students are being directed against the workers to recover from them the mills they have seized to enforce their demands for higher wages and better conditions.
 
Government Turns to Right
The sending of armed detachments against the workers and the forcible suppression of the Communist Party in Havana and other cities marks the end of the Martin government’s development to the left on the basis of the struggle against imperialism, and its evolution to the right out of fear of the workers and the pressure of the Cuban bourgeoisie and the American imperialists. This change of direction, which is characteristic of the whole course of the petty bourgeoisie and was to be foreseen, is inherent in the position of the petty bourgeoisie in Cuban society.
The social structure of Cuba is cast in the capitalist mold: bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie and the working class. But for the bourgeoisie it is a distorted one. The bourgeoisie is not master in its own house. The almost total concentration of the economic resources of the country in the hands of American capital leaves little room and very few avenues of development for the Cuban bourgeoisie except in the service of Yankee imperialism. Thus, Machado on the road to power became the vice-president of several American corporations in Cuba.
But the petty bourgeoisie cannot aspire even to vice-presidencies. The student in the university who studied law knew that nearly all of the legal practice of the country was in the hands of large American law firms. The colono, who rented land from the large American owned mills and corporations, on which he raised sugar cane, the only market for which is these same mills and corporations, was hopelessly enmeshed in the net of American property and finance. Across the road of development into big bourgeoisie in Cuba stands the American imperialist colossus.
 
The Impoverishment of the Petty Bourgeoisie
On the other hand, the crisis in sugar, which began years before the present world crisis of capitalism, impoverished not only the workers but also the petty bourgeoisie. To pay the interest and principal on Machado’s loans from Wall Street, his extravagant public works’ program, and his army, he levied insupportable taxes, which fell upon the petty bourgeoisie with crushing force. Out of their decreasing income the petty bourgeoisie had to pay the exorbitant rates of the American owned utility companies. In New York City, which has a high rate, the cost of domestic electricity is six and five cents per kilowatt hour. In Havana it is seventeen; in the interior it is as high as twenty. Altho they were equipped to use these necessities, whole towns are forced to do without gas and electricity.
Under the pressure of the increasing difficulties of his rule, Machado reduced the public services. All high schools were closed in 1932. This economy program was also extended to a lesser degree to the lower schools. Practically a whole generation was condemned to illiteracy. The appropriation for army mules was thirty-two cents a day; for hospital patients, before the hospitals ceased to function, twelve!
 
The Pressure of the Crisis
The merciless pressure of the crisis, the domination of the country’s life by American capitalism and the tyrannical rule of Machado drove the petty bourgeoisie on to the path of revolution. The same factors pushed the workers along the same road. All the efforts of the petty bourgeoisie to remove Machado were unavailing until the workers intervened with a general strike. The continuing struggles of the workers provided the Left petty bourgeoisie with their opportunity to remove the servile De Cespedes government.
But this victory and the failure of the workers to raise their struggle to the plane of the contest for state power placed the Left wing of the petty bourgeoisie in power. There, of course, they cannot long remain. Below, the workers refuse to be satisfied with programmatic promises which supplement pledges to the imperialist wolves that their loans and property will be respected. The workers are taking over mills and mines as guarantees of their demands for higher pay and better conditions, setting up workers’ committees to run them and here and there they are setting up Soviets and organizing a Red Guard. All this constitutes a potential threat to the whole capitalist-imperialist system in Cuba.
This threat has driven the petty bourgeoisie to the right, toward the American “mediators”. This is covered up by the protest that the workers are provoking armed intervention. The anti-imperialism of the petty bourgeoisie is not the revolutionary, international anti-capitalist program of the workers; it is the futile, nationalist, hodgepodge of the desperate middle class without a social program and without the resource and ability to guide the destinies of modern society.
In the first period following its assumption of governmental power the petty bourgeoisie made concessions to the workers. The arbitration of strikes which they instituted granted the workers’ demands. At this stage of the revolution the petty bourgeoisie saw in the workers allies against the imperialists, levers with which to force concessions for themselves.
But when the workers refused any longer to follow the leadership of the petty bourgeoisie and conducted independent struggles in their own interests the petty bourgeoisie became terrified at the rising spectre of the proletarian revolution. On the other hand, the swift development of the workers’ struggles and their increasingly revolutionary character frightened the bourgeoisie who, dissatisfied with the “liberalism” of the government, made and are making attempts at armed insurrection to overthrow the government of the petty bourgeoisie after which they hope to put down the workers. In this they are encouraged by American imperialism.
The fear of the bourgeoisie and the imperialist on the one hand, and the fear of the workers on the other, and the vacillations between these giants reflect the contradictory position of the Cuban petty bourgeoisie. Today, as was inevitable from the beginning, it is swinging to the right against the workers. That is the meaning of the shooting of the Communist demonstrators in Havana and in the interior. That is the meaning, of the sacking of the Left trade union center. That is the meaning of the organization of the Caribbean Army and the illegalization, in practice, of the Communist Party.
It remains to be seen whether the workers will not drive off the armed students who are moving against the seized mills and mines; and whether the workers, confronting the soldiers cannot win them over. What they need most for that is a correct program and leadership. The influence of Communism is growing. But the failure of the workers to put forward political demands signifies that the Communist Party, haltered by Stalinism, is not measuring up to the great tasks that the situation has thrust upon it.
 



By order of the arch-reactionary, Hoover, amid clouds of tear gas, “gently prodded by bayonets”, struck by the flats of sabers, the veterans encamped in Washington have been driven from their billets by infantry, cavalry, tanks and machine gun detachments. Tear gas bombs were hurled into the midst of women and children standing on the sidewalks, booing the misguided soldier’s. It was a mopping-up sortie reminiscent of world war days, say the capitalist reporters.
This incident, foreshadowing what capitalism holds in store for the future revolts of its wage slaves, followed a skirmish earlier in the day in which the enraged veterans drove off the police and Treasury agents who attempted to evict them from their makeshift homes. In this affray a veteran lost his life, a number of others were injured, and several policemen received as well as they gave.
For hundreds of thousands of workers all over the country the true nature of American democracy has been revealed. Before their very eyes the views of the Communists have been proved. Capitalism rules by force. It spares nobody.
The veterans have reaped the only reward their capitalist masters will give them. This is what they get for their defense of “innocent, bleeding Belgium.” This is their reward for making the “world safe for democracy”. The gas bombs they once hurled at equally misled German workers have now been hurled at them by “their own countrymen”. The bayonets which they once used to rip and slash the bodies of “enemy” soldiers have been applied to their own skins by men wearing the same uniforms they wore in the Argonne and Chateau-Thierry. What a bitter education these workers are getting under the driving force of the class struggle!
 
The Veterans’ Progress
How far they have come on the road to class consciousness can be seen from the fact that these are the men whom the capitalist class had organized into the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars as instruments to smash strikes and working class demonstrations. Now, having learned by their own experience what capitalism is, they will no longer allow themselves to be used for this kind of capitalist dirty work.
But they still have a long way to reach the ranks of the class conscious vanguard. They must learn that the fight for the bonus must be made a part of the class fight for relief from the crisis at the expense of the capitalist class and its government; that their fight must be made a part of a united working class fight embracing with employed and unemployed workers.
It is the task of the Communists to teach them. They must advance the correct slogans, and work in the ranks of the veterans to raise them to class consciousness. The Communists must support the fight for the bonus – as a special measure of relief for a special section of the working class. In this connection it must be noted that the Daily Worker has made a profound mistake in relegating the fight for unemployment insurance and relief to a position second to the bonus fight. If the fight for the bonus is to yield results in relief and class consciousness the correct relation between it and the broader fight for unemployment insurance must be observed.
 
Communist Opportunities
The Communists now have a splendid opportunity to take over the leadership of the bonus fight. Tn the crucial moment when the veterans needed leadership and direction their commander, Waters, turned out to be, as the Communists foretold, a coward and faker. The tide of battle swept him aside. The men are now leaderless. The prestige of the Workers’ Ex-Servicemen’s League will rise if it steps into the breach and leads. It has in this situation an opportunity to smash through the isolation into which its incorrect tactics led it. It can demonstrate that it is capable under Communist guidance, of leading not only isolated demonstrations of the vanguard, but the masses of the vets.
The Communists must rally the vets, draw for them the lessons of their fight for the bonus and the most recent actions of the Hoover starvation government, and raise the fight for the bonus to the higher’ plane of the general class fight for relief. If they will do this they will advance the vets toward class consciousness and raise the prestige of Communism in the eyes of the whole working class.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



The much-vaunted “ideological consolidation” imposed upon the Communist International by the Stalinist apparatus had for years been of a kind that went hand in hand with an organizational disintegration. The “consolidation” never took place around a straight central shaft of cohesive doctrine. Such a consolidation, absolutely necessary in the Communist movement, would have permitted the attraction of homogeneous elements in increasing number. What passes for revolutionary doctrine in the Stalinist camp, however, has formed a disjointed, eccentric, badly geared axis, put together out of odd scraps borrowed from every conceivable tendency in the working class movement. This is what accounts for the bumpy voyage on which the Stalinists have taken the Communist International, zig-zagging through the class struggle in accordance with the momentary effectiveness – not of the axis as a whole, but of this or that joint in it.
At each turn in the road, the Centrist apparatus has had to cast out elements now from the Eight, now from the Left. As its ideological baggage diminished, so also did those who carried it. The base of the bureaucracy in the International has steadily narrowed, so that nobody can say today who will be the representative spokesman of the apparatus tomorrow. The foreknowledge of their precarious position has not always helped the Stalinist functionaries to remain stable in their loyalties. In some cases, they have anticipated the inevitable and hastened the break with the apparatus, before the apparatus consummated its break (plus the attendant humiliations and petty preliminary persecutions) with them. This category includes a wide range of people – from Bessedovsky and Agabekov to J.T. Murphy of England and Paul Marion of France.
In the last few months alone, expulsions and near-expulsions have taken place in several countries. The official party press has either passed them over in silence or commented upon them with the maximum of obscurity. Each instance, however, sheds its own share of light upon the state of affairs in the Stalinist camp, the policies it has pursued and the manner in which it rules.
Almost a year ago, we commented extensively in the Militant upon the campaign begun in the French party against the so-called “Group” of Celor, Barbe, Lozeruy and others, who had only the day before been the leaders of the party. In this campaign to find a scapegoat for the stagnation and retrogression of the French party, the “Group” served admirably, for its spokesmen humbly acknowledged the justice of all the terrible accusations made against them. In one case at least, it now appears that there was method in this servility. The case is that of the principal leader of the “Group” himself, Celor. During the campaign a year ago, i was revealed that this group of leaders had associated itself without the slightest pretense of a platform, and had systematically and successfully occupied itself with taking over the whole party apparatus. It was further evident that Celor, who was a member of the ECCI, had been appointed leader of the party by none other than the central Stalin faction itself, which found in this clique (as it did in the Neumann clique in Germany) a thoroughly reliable agency. This gang of political bandits was uncovered by other, similarly virtuous bureaucrats, only when a sacrificial offering had to be thrown to the party ranks in order to put the quietus on the mounting discontentment.
A few weeks ago, it wag suddenly discovered that M. Celor was a police provocateur all the time! To our knowledge, this is the first police spy who ever penetrated as high as the Executive Committee of the Communist International. That the police send their agents into the Communist movement is a tribute to the fear which Bolshevism inspires in the hearts of the bourgeoisie. But that such agents can so easily reach the highest instances of the International, is not a tribute, but a striking commentary, on the internal regime established by the Stalinists. Celor came, so to speak, out of nowhere, like most of the figures who now adorn the Centrist household. The elementary tests to which a Communist is – rather, should be – submitted, were never put before him. He was given only one test for leadership : Was he sufficiently lacking in integrity, independence and knowledge to qualify him for the post of ever-ready servility and obedience to command from above? This test he passed with superb ease. As leader ex-machina, he had no concern about being checked up or controlled by that constant democratic interrelation between ranks and leadership. He could go his own way arbitrarily, with no fear from the “sheep” below, and none from the masters above – their support was automatic so long as his servility was unexhausted.
Need it be added that Celor fought intransigently against “counter-revolutionary Trotskyism”? It goes without saying. He probably did it with more real conviction than most bureaucrats, for his hatred of Trotsky and the Left Opposition sprang from the deep wells of a class antagonism: the bourgeoisie which employed him versus the revolutionary proletarian wing of Communism. But this too is no tribute to the Stalinists and their regime.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
In Germany, another pillar of the apparatus has – if not fallen, then at least been rudely disturbed. Out of a clear blue sky, the official party press in Germany has announced that Heinz Neumann was all along engaged in clandestine factional work against the Leninist Central Committee, its line and its leadership. What is more, the shortcomings, defects and errors made in the past (it appears that, after all, there were some made!), are to be ascribed to the work of Neumann.
The usual offensive has been opened up all along the line, not only in the German but in the international party press. The current issue of the Communist International (No. 17–18) contains an article by Piatnitsky which gives some idea of how heavy is the burden which the infallible bureaucracy is now shifting on to the shoulders of the latest scapegoat. The “line” in Germany for the last three or more years was held to be irreproachably “Leninist”, as were the leaders who conceived it and those who carried it into effect. The criticisms directed against the party policy in Germany by the Left Opposition – criticisms which each new day confirmed with telling accuracy – were denounced in unmeasured terms as “counter-revolutionary”. The theory of “social Fascism” ruled supreme, in all its worst aspects. But the accumulation of the terrific consequences of this policy has reached a height that can no longer be ignored. We now learn, therefore, that while the “general line” was correct, it was carried out in practise erroneously, from start to finish, and that the fault lies exclusively with yesterday’s aide-de-camp of Stalin, Heinz Neumann.
 
Who Is Heinz Neumann?
Neumann occupies a rather sinister place in the history of the last decade of the Comintern. He not only adjusted himself with bland ease to every leadership chosen by or imposed upon the party – Brandler, Fischer, Ewert, Thaelmann – but was himself the actual political leader of the German party since the Sixth World Congress of the Comintern. An adventurer out of nowhere, of that peculiar stripe represented by John Pepper, he was known in informed circles as the direct representative of Stalin in Western Europe. In fact, he was, together with Lominadze, the principal organizer of that notorious “Corridor Congress” during the Sixth C.I. Congress in 1928 which corralled the majority of the delegates for Stalin from under the very nose of the official leader, Bucharin.
A few weeks ago, without the faintest preliminary warning, Neumann – a Neumann group, in fact! – was suddenly attacked in the open by the central organ of the German party. It is discovered at a single blow that the “Bolshevik Central Committee” has had differences of opinion with Neumann on a series of fundamental questions for a period of close to four years now.
The “differences” concern no small questions. Neumann, reads the bill of particulars, sought to replace the slogan of the “Red United Front” with that of the “Red workers’ front” – although the indictment skips over the interesting question of wherein lay the distinction between the two. Further, Neumann is accused of “a lack of understanding of the importance of inner-trade union opposition work” – with the implication (entirely unwarranted, to be sure!) that the rest of the party leaders were not lacking in such an understanding. Moreover, he “coined the false formulation back in December 1930 concerning the Bruening government, according to which the Fascist dictatorship was already here”. That it was the Left Opposition which first ridiculed this preposterous identification of Bruening with Fascism, is of course not even whispered by the Central Committee which has all the time been engaged in denouncing (together with Neumann!) the Opposition as “social Fascist” for its standpoint. That Neumann’s contentions were idiotic is perfectly obvious – today, apparently, even to the Central Committee. But does the fact that the latter advanced the identical contentions in every one of its pronouncements, exempt it from the same charge?
Finally, Neumann is taxed with having sought to “replace the main strategic slogan of the conquest of the majority of the working class with the slogan of the people’s revolution”. Unluckily for the Central Committee and its Stalinist commanders, it is impossible to burn up the mountain of documents on this score which have been written in the last two years. The nationalist degeneration of the party was the common work of Neumann, Thaelmann, Manuilsky and Stalin. They jointly demanded the “national emancipation of Germany”; they jointly participated in the infamous Fascist referendum in Prussia; they were jointly responsible for the nationalist-anti-Semitic fraternization with the Lieutenant Scheringers, and more of the same.
The simple, incontestable fact is that Neumann is being made the goat for the second time: it happened once in 1927–1928, when he was made responsible for the made-to-order-in-Moscow putsch in Canton. The second time is now, when his narrow shoulders are being weighed down with all the crimes, blunders and stupidities of the central Stalinist apparatus in Germany which have set back the revolutionary movement in so dreadful a manner.
 
Whole Spanish Leadership Expelled
Neumann was given a comparatively light sentence. His character, or rather lack of it, makes it possible for him to adapt himself to the new circumstances. A shrug of the shoulders, a cynical grin, a statement of guilt – and a place is opened for him again in the apparatus. But the Neumanns of the Spanish party have not been let off so easily. No mere denunciation here. In this case we have the out-of-hand expulsion of nothing less than the whole party leadership!
The whole group in charge of the Spanish party from the days before the republican uprising down to yesterday, has been summarily expelled. In the text of the excommunication from Moscow, the ECCI declares that all four of the party’s most prominent leaders, Bullejos, Adame, Trilla and Vega, are “traitors to the Spanish revolution, to the Spanish Communist Party and to the Communist International”. As may be seen from these choice terms, it is a trifling matter ...
The whys and wherefores of the case, the Stalinist center contemptuously refrains from specifying. That Bullejos and Co. are guilty of many things is beyond dispute. But in our eyes, their greatest crime consists in having followed slavishly and without dissent the disastrous instructions of Stalin, Manuilsky, Kun and Co. At every stage in the development of the Spanish revolution, the Comintern laid the basis for the tragedy of errors of Communism in Spain. In this sense the loyalty of Bullejos cannot be questioned.
(By the way, the “traitor” Bullejos, like Celor in France, Neumann in Germany, Varski in Poland, was in the forefront of the struggle against the Left Opposition. He not only wrote a pamphlet several months ago to prove that the “Trotskyists” were the agents of counter-revolution, but on more than one occasion he threatened to exterminate the Spanish Opposition center with the aid of “strong” and “piercing” arguments ...)
If there is any doubt that the newly-expelled are simply scapegoats for Stalin, who must find some explanation for the calamity in Spain, it is enough to read the resolution of the Comintern published last May in the central theoretical organ of the Spanish party: “This leadership (i. e., the “traitors” Bullejos and Trilla) which has given numerous proofs of heroism in the revolutionary struggle, holds our confidence.” And again, in a resolution against the Right wing Maurin group, the Comintern expressed itself with regards to the Bullejos leadership in the following unmistakable terms: “The ECCI unreservedly approves the policy followed by the leadership of the Communist Party of Spain.” Unreservedly! Ah, what a supreme contempt the bureaucrats have for the mental faculties of the workers in the ranks, of their powers of memory, that they can denounce today as traitors whom they have fought all along, those very people whom they supported without reservations only yesterday!
The fate of Bullejos is shared by a product of that stinking swamp which bears the name of Communism in Austria and from which so many thousands of Austrian workers have recoiled into the arms of Austro-Marxism. The victim in this instance is none other than the party leader of yesterday, Karl Toman. Unfortunately, we know very little about his case, even less than about Bullejos’, but the reports inform us that while in Moscow, Toman was also expelled as a traitor. The thick wall of obscurity behind which these apparatus machinations take place is part and parcel of the whole Stalinist system.
 
“Traitors” and Scapegoats
In the best days of the Comintern, there were many traitors and turncoats to the revolution in the leadership of various parties. There was even the case of Dr. Paul Levi, for whom Lenin had such a high respect when he stood at the head of the German Communist Party. During the “March Action” in 1921, Levi stabbed the party and the embattled workers in the back. His action caused surprise and confusion to most of the Communists, although he had been slipping away from the Comintern prior to that event. But the settlement of accounts with Levi took place in the open, before the eyes of all, with the material available for study and decision. Levi parted with the Comintern because his views did not harmonize with those of the latter, because he refused to follow the path of Lenin with regard to Centrism in Italy or the situation in Germany.
Nowadays, the Stalinist system consists in finding “traitors” to serve as scapegoats for its own crimes and errors. It is not so much because they disagreed with Stalin that they are expelled or removed, but usually because they did not agree with the policy, did execute it as best those policies can be executed, or else because the confusion sewed in their own minds by the fantastic theories of Stalinism, disabled them from a sufficiently speedy re-orientation along a suddenly presented “new general line”.
The latter is the case, on the whole, with Varski, Kostrzeva, Brand and their group, who have just been expelled from the leadership of the Polish party and constituted a Right wing opposition. Varski felt more than at home during the whole period of the Right-Center bloc in the Comintern, the rule of Stalin-Bucharin from 1923 to 1928. He was the political genius who in 1927 greeted the reactionary Pilsudski coup d’état in Poland as the beginnings of – the “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry”! The Stalinist swing to ultra-Leftism in 1929 left this Right wing group quite disoriented. It continued to cling for some time to the apparatus. The constant turns of the apparatus wheel finally threw it off at an angle, in the direction to which it was always inclined: the Right opposition.
At the same time, if we are to believe the report of the Warsaw organ of the Bund, a Left Opposition group has been formed with considerable support throughout the industrial centers of Poland and with strong roots in the Left wing trade union movement. The lateness of the appearance of an Opposition group in Poland may serve to bring it on the political scene in much stronger form than in many other countries. But on this score, we must await more authoritative details from our comrades abroad.
The recent expulsions in the Comintern are inseparably associated with the just concluded 12th Plenum. In virtually every case, those removed were most prominently associated with yesterday’s ultra-Leftist and sectarian course. Their removal symbolizes the half-hearted turn to the Right which the 12th Plenum foreshadowed. We are apparently on the eve of one of those prolonged zigzags to the Right which will make more ludicrous than ever the superficial Brandlerist standpoint that the essence of Stalin is “Leftism” It is neither that nor is it “Rightism” as such. As the sum of its two principal periods – from 1923 to 1928 and from 1929 to date – indicate, Stalinism represents the politically parasitic faction of bureaucratic Centrism, with a system of inner-party management all its own. The recent expulsions are eloquent in their significance.
* * * *
We cannot refrain from adding a note on the recent expulsions in the Italian party over questions of policy which are clothed in total darkness, so far as the Stalinist press is concerned. Six comrades, Brightenti, Barioni, Drago, Sansane, La Camera and Gilodi, have been expelled from the party. In the Stalinist press, the names of the comrades are printed, together with the city each lives in and his home address! If this unprecedented act has any significance at all, it means that the comrades are being delivered into the hands of the police. That too is not in contradiction to the Stalinist system ...
 



Disgusted by the betrayals of the cynical fakers of the California State Federation of Labor and the A.F. of L., the impotence of well intentioned liberals and the futility of purely legal maneuvers, Tom Mooney addressed a ringing call to the working class of this country to unite in a fight for his liberation and the freedom of class war prisoners. Fourteen years in prison had not softened the militant fighter. The ideas and language of his call are revolutionary. They constituted the necessary spark to fan into flames again the smoldering resentment of the working class against perhaps the rawest frame-up of capitalist class justice. And they came at the time of the approach of the third year of a still deepening crisis, when their result in a militant working class movement would open up tremendous possibilities for the fight against the capitalist offensive and for relief.
In naming the organizations to the militant individuals and units of which he appealed, Mooney placed squarely upon their shoulders the responsibility of uniting in a movement for his release. In the list were all the Communist groups including the International Labor Defense. It was obvious, although Mooney did not say so, that he meant the I.L.D. and the C.P. to take the initiative in launching and organizing such a movement. Mooney’s pamphlet exposing the betrayals of Schauenberg and Co. who received the undivided support of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, and still do, left no doubt that he did not look to these gentry to build and lead a fighting movement. Nor could it be reasoned that he had any confidence in the I.W.W. futilitarians, or the other groups enumerated in his call, including the simon pure legal men of the socialist party leadership. Their record of incapacity, spinelessness and betrayal shouted too loudly against the supposition of their conducting a fight.
The organization to whom fell the task of issuing a call to build the movement was the I.L.D. On the fifth of September the Daily Worker issued a “Call for United Action”. Mooney left the I.L.D. no choice. He asked for a genuine united front. The I.L.D. called for United Front Conferences.
The united front projected by the call had two principal defects. The conferences were to be called – for the release of Tom Mooney and Warren Billings, the Harlan Miners and Scottsboro Negro boys, Imperial Valley strike leaders and other class war prisoners. As The Militant remarked on September 12, “It is obvious that a united front movement for Mooney would be recreant in its duty if it failed to conduct a struggle also for the other class war fighters. But in this specific Campaign, the whole point is missed by failing to concentrate the whole issue around Mooney as the outstanding symbol of the capitalist system of anti-working class frame-ups ...” But for the Stalinists bureaucratic complacency and prestige is all! The Mooney issue – could be buried by lumping it with half a dozen other issues!
The second mistake in the united front outlined by the call was its appeal not to organizations to join with the I.L.D., but to individuals: – “the rank and file members of the A.C.W. – the working class members of the socialist party, etc. – “ It was to be a recruiting drive disguised as a united front from below. They obstinately persisted in a masquerade which fools nobody!
On the negative side, there is much to record. The Opposition, pursuant to its policy of opposing [sic!] Mooney’s appeal (Militant, Sept. 5th), sent a delegation to the N.Y. united front conference. Despite the fact that the Communist League is mentioned by name in Mooney’s appeal as one of the organizations he wants to participate in a genuine united front, our delegation was ejected under threats of violence. In Minneapolis, St. Louis and Staunton and Belleville, Ill., where the I.L.D. organized no conference and where the Opposition was instrumental in setting them afoot, the I.L.D. pursued a policy of: either we control the conference or we smash it. In one way or another they wrecked all of these conferences.
This method of freeing Moouey has ruinous consequences for the Communist movement. Mooney’s cause will not die if the party does not take it up. The issue will become a plaything for all sorts of political fakers. Particularly dangerous are the bourgeois demagogues who use the issue to make political capital, for the pursuit of personal ambitions. From time to time the press records their pious hypocrisy. The latest to come to our attention is the report in the N.Y. Times of February 13 of resolutions demanding that “Governor Rolph pardon Thomas J. Mooney immediately”, introduced into the House of Representative by those despicable demagogues from New York State, La Guardia and Sirovich.
In the lull in the fight created by the inactivity of the Communists, the Molders’ Defense Committee, the I.W.W and others are busy propagating the illusion that a boycott of California goods can force Mooney’s rslease. When the itinerant peddler of confusion, Marcus Graham, of the I.W.W. can persuade a group of militant miners like the Staunton Miners’ Educational Body to unanimously adopt a resolution for a boycott of California products as a means of getting Mooney out of jail it is only because these fighting miners have been made easy prey by their confusion and disgust with the Joe Tasnes and Bill Geherts.
Finally it must be remembered that the last act in the Walker-Rolph publicity stunt has not yet been reached. Gov. Rolph, who has reserved judgment on Walker’s plea, is sitting back waiting to see what pressure the working class will bring to bear on him for Mooney’s release. His reply is due soon. If no working class pressure is forthcoming, he will find that Mooney’s release is not to be considered.
Working class pressure can force him to find the necessary legal pretext to pardon Mooney. The time is short in which to build a fighting working class movement. But it is not too late if we begin at once. This the I.L.D. should do. What is needed is a genuine united front, from which the Communists have nothing to lose and everything tc gain. For this united front every party member, every member of a party organization sould raise his voice.
 



What can be done by a revolutionary working class leader to develop class consciousness when the capitalist class places its press at his disposal was taught us by Marx – “as contributor on the leading Anglo-American newspaper, the New York Tribune, at which I have now been engaged for eight years –” (author’s preface to Critique of Political Economy); by Lenin on numerous occasions; and more recently by Trotsky, particularly in his statement in the Manchester Guardian, reprinted in part in the N.Y. Times of April 13, 1931, under the title “TROTSKY SAYS SOVIET POINTS WOULD PATH.” How a working class “leader” can misuse the same opportunity to sow confusion in the working class was demonstrated by Stalin in two interviews he gave to representatives of the New York Telegram and New York Times toward the end of 1930.
 
A Fatal Interview
Last week, Amter, faced with a choice between these methods, strove mightily to emulate his master, Stalin. It is true that Amter was not interviewed. He spoke over the radio. It is no less true that Amter is not Marx, nor Lenin, nor Trotsky. This he fully confirmed again by his speech.
The occasion of the broadcast was a dinner given by the Association for Better Citizenship, Inc.! attended and addressed in addition to Amter by Rudolph Spreckles, the financier, Chas. Solomon, of the Socialist Party, and Wickersham of the commission bearing his name. To this strange position had life brought Amter; from directing gangs to break up Opposition meetings, to speaking over the radio at a patriotic dinner together with financiers and a social Fascist! We do not wish to be misunderstood. We believe that it is correct to utilize such opportunities to speak to sections of the working class. We have nothing in common with those party supporters, misguided by Amter and Co., who call Trotsky a “counter revolutionary because he writes for the capitalist press”. We base our judgment of the speech or writing not upon the place of its appearance but upon its content. From this point of view Amter’s speech spelled confusion.
 
The Capitalist Solution
Spreckles, as his contribution to the Association’s program of “systematic enlightenment of better citizenship,” proposed, among other things, as a solution for the misery of the working class, a tax on short sales on the stock exchange, a tax on the export of capital to provide an unemployment insurance fund; and prohibition! Solomon gave a polite, innocuous and abstract exposition from the socialist point of view of the class struggle. It could have been given in toto ten years ago, so little relation did it have to the realties of the present international and national situation. Nor did Solomon offer any solution except a description of what Socialism is! Wickersham who followed Amter and was the last speaker launched into a eulogy of the physical grandeur of “our country”. As he was completing his lyric of patriotism the entire broadcast, having exhausted its allotted time, was cut off. We are therefore unable to comment on Wickersham’s proposals for a way out of the crisis.
Against the bankruptcy of Spreckles and the empty abstractions of Solomon, a Communist presentation would have stood out in the listening workers’ ears like a clarion call on a dark night. In our opinion Amter should have made a short statement of the extent and depth of the workers’ misery in the present crisis, followed by a brief explanation of its causes and a concise outline of the Communist solution. He should have mentioned the various capitalist attempts to solve their crises by wars (what about the war danger and the U.S.S.R.). And then he should have emphasized that the only .solution was an international proletarian revolution, that in preparation for it we must fight unitedly against the sweeping capitalistic offensive, for immediate demands such as the six-hour day, credits to the Soviet Union, unemployment insurance. His conclusion should have explained the role of the Communist party in this struggle for immediate demands today, and for the overthrow of capitalism tomorrow, and how it is distinguished from the socialist party.
 
Amter Fails Miserably
But this is precisely what Amter did not do. He began by attacking the diners. Having “vanquished” them, he called upon the unemployed workers to “join the Communist party which fights hunger.” Similarly he called upon the employed workers to join the Communist party to fight wage cuts’ and upon the Negro workers to join the C.P. to fight for social, political and economic equality. He denounced “Walker’s open, shameless submission to the bankers of Wall Street”. At this point be was indistinguishable from a Republican Party demagogue of the type of, let us say – congressman MacFadden. And so on and so forth he rambled without plan.
A non-Communist worker listening to Amter would have come away not a whit enlightened as to what Communism is. what the Communist party stands for, nor how it proposes to fight hunger, wage cuts, lynching, deportation. Nor would we have suspected that the American Communist Party is a brother section of the German. C.P., which is facing a critical historical moment, upon whose success or failure in uniting the masses against Fascism depended to a large extent his own fate. Neither would he have dreamed that a war is brewing, nor would he have been enlightened on how to fight the war danger.
To the objection that Amter could not in ten or twelve minutes give an exhaustive analysis of the entire world situation, we can reply: Marx, in writing the program of the First International was forced to present his ideas in such a manner that his conclusions, which for political reasons he could not include, would follow inevitably in the mind of the reader. But, as we have already pointed out – Amter is not Marx.
 



Almost a year ago, the party held a mass trial here in New York to show the workers – that “the Communist party will not tolerate any trace of white chauvinism within its ranks――”
The sacrificial lamb in that case was August Yokinen, a Finn, who had uttered expressions of anti-Negro bias. In a lynching atmosphere, the high priests, Hathaway and Moore, the prosecuting and defense attorneys, together offered up Yokinen to cover the failure of the party leadership to educate the party rank and file against anti-Negro prejudices. Yokinen was expelled. Immediately afterwards he was arrested by the vultures of the labor department and held for deportation. The party was forced to launch a movement to demand his release. Contrary to the expectations of Hathaway et al., this spectacle did not eradicate white chauvinism from the revolutionary movement. From time to time the Daily Worker has reported its manifestations.
The latest took place in N.T.W.I.U. A worker in the needle trades, Burns, has been accused of white chauvinism. A mass trial was ordered. It took place on Feb. 7th in the same hall in which Yokinen was read out of the party. In place of Hathaway as prosecuting attorney we had the notorious bureaucrat Ben Gold; in place of Moore, Alexander. The faces, the actors were different but the farce was the same. Gold spoke first. He made two points: he admitted, in anticipating the argument of the defense, that the leadership of the union was at fault in “not fighting insistently against white chauvinism”, but held it necessary to make an example of Burns to prove to the Negro masses that the union really means to unite the masses and wipe out white chauvinism. He asked for Burns’ expulsion from the union.
Alexander jesuitically argued that Burns was guilty but that his guilt was not as enormous nor as horrendous as Shylock-Gold had made it out to be. Alexander, following Moore’s line of a year before almost word for word, described Burns as a victim of capitalist class, ideology and of the leadership of the union which should have fought in the ranks of the union against “this poison”. He proposed in place of expulsion a period of probation in which Burns was to be assigned special work: in the coming strike he is to be in the forefront of the workers’ defense corps against the gangster attacks; he is to bring into the union an unstated number of Negro workers, and he is to sell a certain number of Liberators.
Then Burns took the floor to make a statement of denouncement. In Yokinen they had a meek lamb who agreed that he was all they said about him. But in Burns they caught a Tartar. Until he spoke, it was not clear what the specific charges against him were. It appears that Burns and a Negro organizer got into a personal dispute over a typewriter in the office of the union; that they had heated words, freely insulting each other which, by a process familiar to Stalinists, passed into blows!
With unconscious poetic justice Burns called Gold, Mr. Gold, accused him of discrimination in bringing only him to trial, criticized him and his fellow bureaucrats for not instructing him in what was white chauvinism and race hatred He also accused the Daily Worker of exaggerating his statements. It was remarkable that the hundreds of party members and sympathizers in the hall took this last charge as a matter of course. It was obvious that they were aware of the Daily’s policy of exaggeration.
Burns’ statement was really, though not intentionally, a terrific indictment of the bureaucracy in the union. Not all of Gold’s demagogy in rebuttal could cover this up. The blows Burns dealt were too telling. The workers’ jury brought in a verdict of guilty with a recommendation of probation with assigned tasks. Gold’s plea for expulsion was refused.
This is a good sign. It demonstrated that the Stalinists can’t always get away with such raw frame-ups. In our opinion, they should have brought in a recommendation to expel Gold from the union and along with him his fellow bureaucrats. Spectacles such as this do not and cannot eradicate racial prejudices. What is needed is, as the Militant remarked on March 1st, 1931, apropos of the Yokinen trial, “Education – an atmosphere free from demagogy, hypocrisy and incitement; an atmosphere created by teachers of the proletariat, not by terrorizers.”
 



On January 12, a number of the leading founders and spokesmen of the German Brandler group were expelled by the Brandler-Thalhelmer majority for their policy towards the newly-formed wing of the social democracy, the Socialist Labor party (S.A.P.) of Seydewitz and Co. The expelled leaders include such people as Walcher, Froelich, Koehler, Rose Wolfstein, Enderle, Karl Frank, Thomas and many others. The expulsions, which are tantamount to a split, mark a new stage in the development of the central and strongest section of the international Right wing faction.
The Walcher-Froelich group stood upon the ground of virtually liquidating the Brandler organization and merging with the social democratic Centrists grouped around Seydewitz. In other words, they planned to eliminate even the last nominal pretense to Communism which is still hung out on the signboard of the Brandler-Lovestone-Roy international. The dissidents have already held confidential meetings with the Seydewitz leaders and their formal entry into the Socialist. Labor party is merely a matter of arranging the details. In fact, by this writing, the marriage has probably already been consummated.
When the Right wing first took shape in the Communist International, the Bolshevik-Leninists constituting the Marxian section of Communism declared that the Right was a bridge to the social democracy. The Left Opposition made this affirmation at a time when the Right wing was in power, or at least shared the power with Centrism, in the highest instances of the Comintern and the Russian party. We made this characterization at the time when Bucharin was the principal theoretician of the Communist International, when Roy was one of its main spokesmen, when it was planned to put Brandler and Thalheimer back into the leadership of the German party, when the Right wing ran the American, Swedish, Alsatian and other parties. After the Sixth Congress, when the Right wing was expelled throughout the International, we repeated our characterization with increased emphasis and pointed out that it would not occupy for long a position between Communism and the counter-revolutionary social democracy. Our strictures aroused the hottest denials from the Brandlers and Lovestones. More than that, they treated our assertions with scorn and contempt, for were they not being made by the “Trotskyist counter-revolutionists”, who had “broken with Communism” and therefore deserved the expulsions which the Bucharins, Roys and Lovestones had organized against them? But time is replete with revenges, particularly for the Marxists who have such a powerful protector in the form of history against the calumny, the violence, the misrepresentation and the Philistinism of the Right wing liquidators.
The Right wing condescendingly explained to us that they could not share our “sectarian” point of view. They, you see, were for winning the masses, for going to the masses “as against” us. We retorted that they would never win the masses, certainly not for the proletarian revolution and Communism. Time has here again vindicated theoretical considerations. The Right Wingers have long ago started to “go to the masses” ... of the social democracy. In Czecho-Slovakia, the bulk of the much-advertised Right wing group promptly proceeded to shift its activity into the| ranks of the social democracy of the Czech republic. Shortly after its formation, the Brandler group yielded such leaders like Rosi Aschenbrenner, Xavier Buchs and many others to the ranks of the party of Wels, Noske and Scheidemann. Not long afterward, Messrs. Miller, Levitch & Co. quit the Lovestone group for the more fertile and “massy” fields of the social democratic “progressives” and worse, while the Lovestone group as a whole became positively thunderstruck with admiration for the “revolutionary, pro-Soviet” Militant faction in the American Socialist party.
Now, the numerous supporters of the Walcher-Froelich faction (and also a number of supporters of Brandler and Thalheimer, as their organ reports) have added to the list by joining the social democracy of the more despicable and cowardly and treacherous type, that is, of the “Left wing”.
Thus the Right wing produces the flowers for the social democratic bouquet. Each shading of the Right wing moves its bridges to the social democracy in its own particular way. Some rush forward to the party of treason, impatient at the failure of the promised “masses” to materialize; others pass lightly over to the “Left wing” of the social democracy still others capitulate quitely by going back to the Centrists through or by dropping out of working class politics entirely; and the rest oscillate feverishly with the winds, waiting for the most favorable opportunities, regretful that the impatient ones have reduced their bargaining power with those before whom they are prepared to capitulate in the end.
Lovestone only a few weeks ago wrote that the differences between Brandler and the minority were not so fundamental or serious. We want to be recorded in complete agreement with this thought. It is largely a difference over “stages”, over “tempo”. Patience is never unrewarded. Let us wait but a while. Who is bold enough to say that where Walcher or Bert Miller is today, Lovestone or Brandler will not be tomorrow?
 



Free Tom Mooney! Free Tom Mooney! shouted tens of thousands of workers in New York’s May Day parade. Free Tom Mooney! – with a spirit the rain could not dampen. One knew that all over the United States hundreds of thousands of his fellow, workers were shouting the same demand with the same spirit. It was the voice of the class conscious vanguard, the future troops of the revolution, demanding the freedom of the living symbol of their struggle against capitalism. One had only to hear the measured beat, the deep tone of their shouting to realize how profoundly stirred they were by the monumental hypocrisy and brazen impudence of that watch-dog of capitalism, his excellency, the governor of California, he, who “convinced” himself of Mooney’s guilt and refused to free him.
Free Tom Mooney! It was the response of the American working class to the impassioned cry of Mooney himself against this latest insulting verdict of capitalist class justice. Mooney’s letter of April 23 to Rolph says clearly that his place is in the ranks of this vanguard, in the front rank of the war against capitalism. Tom Mooney – has today grown to be a mighty oak, admittedly too dangerous to be at liberty during this desperate economic crisis, because he symbolizes the onward march of the revolutionary workers toward a better civilization – “You have continued in the role of your predecessors in making of me a symbol of the cause of labor. I accept the high honor you have conferred upon me with the greatest of humility. This service I will ungrudgingly render to my class, with the greatest of devotion, loyalty and fidelity. I give – gladly and willingly – my very life to the cause of the toilers all over the world, regardless of race, color, creed or nationality. I will never cease this holy struggle until every last instrument used in this dastardly frame-up is completely liquidated and a classless society will replace what now passes for civilization.” This is revolutionary talk.
Under the circumstances, for what better mandate to organize the movement to free Mooney could Communists ask? Mooney is ours even in his thinking. Will we take his mandate and mobilize the masses behind the vanguard? This depends now upon the leadership of the Communist Party.
The responsibility is theirs. The rank and file has already demonstrated its determination to fight. What is necessary now is to begin without delay a serious approach to the whole working class with the idea of setting them in motion for the freedom of Mooney. They must be approached in the first instance through their organizations.
We do not care how reactionary the leaders of the reformist organizations are, the cause of Mooney is dear to their rank and file. And our mandate gives us the right to be heard. If for the nonce the shouters of names, the Stalinists, will restrain their vocabulary of epithets and denunciation, will substitute for slander and abuse the simple proposal of a united front of working class organization on the sole issue of freeing Mooney, the Communists can and will succeed in winning the support of the workers. Of the possibilities which this would open up for the fight for relief and for Communist influence, we need not speak here.
The Stalinists insist nowadays upon being assured in advance of the leadership of any movement they enter. For example this is what they proposed to the Marine Workers’ Defense Committee. Failing this they make every attempt to smash the movement. They smashed the Mooney conferences in Staunton and Belleville, Illinois, last winter because they could not slander their way into the leadership. In Minneapolis and St. Louis – the same story.
Mooney has almost guaranteed that the Communists shall lead the movement for his freedom. What are the Stalinists waiting for? Do they want personal appointments written on the stationery of the Comintern and witnessed by a notary? What holds them back? What limits them to demonstrations of the vanguard and street runs?
They have reached an impasse. The masses, it is now clear even to them, are not their property and do not obey their beck and call. They must now go to the masses in their organizations and work with them as equals. For this they have every requisite in the objective situation and every help from Mooney. But for this they must throw overboard their fake united front from below and their ideological weapons of slander and abuse.
This turn is not easily made. There are the “counter-revolutionary” Trotskyites who have been agitating for this turn right along. They will lose face when the party rank and file sees that the “counter-revolutionists” were correct after all. Bureaucratic prestige is no small matter. It is not to be lightly thrown away.
The party rank and file can resolve this dilemma It can raise its voice through discussion and resolution. It can and must say that it demands the immediate calling of genuine united front conferences of all working class organizations on the sole issue of fighting for Mooney’s freedom.
For its part, the Left Opposition will continue to hammer home this theme. And when the conferences are convened, as in time they must, we will enter them to fight with the party rank and file for the freedom of Mooney, for the unity of the Communist vanguard and the advance of Communism.
 



NEW YORK, N.Y. – The strike conducted by Sign Writers’ Local 230 of the Brotherhood of Painters, Decorators and Paperhangers of America has ended in defeat for the workers. The union instead of renewing its agreement with the bosses which expired on March 30th was forced to grant a ten per cent cut. The rank and file of the union was persuaded by its bureaucratic leadership against its own interests to give the bosses the right to hire and fire and lay off at will. The union has also relinquished its control over overtime work. The bosses no longer need the union’s permission to order the workers to work longer than the eight hours which now constitute the working day. There is now no practical difference in essentials between the unionized and non-union shops.
The union bureaucrats succeeded in putting through a change in the agreement: the bosses agreed to allow helpers to do apprentices’ work and vice versa. This practically wipes out the difference between these workers. The helpers are a large majority of the workers in the trade. With unemployment at about sixty per cent, the bosses will give work to the helpers at the expense of the apprentices, satisfy temporarily and to some extent the dissatisfaction of the helpers, and enable the union officials to maintain their highly paid positions and the fiction that they serve the workers’ interests. It is an old trick. Only workers ignorant of the fathomless corruption and treachery of A.F. of L. bureaucrats could be taken in by so palpably treacherous a maneuver.
In a union controlled by the workers in their own interests the formal elimination of the difference between helpers and apprentices already accomplished in reality, would be made a progressive step. Wide awake class conscious workers would fight to make this step conditional upon the introduction of the six hour day without reduction in pay and upon the same wage scale for apprentices and helpers.
The strike failed principally because the bosses were able to keep their shops running full blast without any difficulty. Scabbing by unemployed open shop workers and by members of the union was prevalent. To add their treacherous bit the union bureaucrats fooled the workers into picketing – not the shops where the scab displays were made – but the Broadway moving picture theatres where some of the signs were displayed!
To consummate their treachery the bureaucrats called upon a representative of the district council of the Brotherhood to put over the wage cut. This professional betrayer with a face as white as a cheese mouthed phrases about militancy, fighting, the working class, ad nauseam. His conclusion was – a ten per cent cut! The workers harried by the fear of permanently losing their jobs by trying to maintain an ineffective strike, and bamboozled by the district council representative’s demagogy, voted without dissent for the cut and the elimination from the agreement of the clauses demanded by the bosses.
Against the future attacks which their present victory will embolden the bosses to make, the workers must prepare. They must seriously undertake a campaign to organize the trade. As a prerequisite condition for this they must drastically reduce the enormously high initiation fees which is $500 for helpers. (In our letter in The Militant of April 16th we used in this connection, the incorrect formulation: “―― they must abolish the initiation fees.”) The workers must propose the same wage scale for apprentices and helpers. The division into apprentices and helpers no longer corresponds to any real difference between them and serves only the interests of the bureaucrats by enabling them to play off the helpers against the apprentices or the other way around. The workers must also set up as one of their demands the six hour day with no reduction in pay. The six hour day is entirely practicable in the trade and can put back to work many workers now vainly looking for jobs.
These demands are the essentials of a program for which the workers can fight in resisting the attacks on the bosses. In trying to realize these demands they will have to fight the enemy in the union – the bureaucratic misleaders. This should not deter them. It is the road all workers in the A.F. of L. have to travel in fighting for their interests.
 



The decision of the United States Supreme Court reversing the decision of the lower courts and ordering new trials for seven of the Scottsboro boys has been justly hailed throughout the world as a victory for the victims, the entire working class and the fighting methods and prestige of Communism. What did the Supreme Court actually decide and what is the significance of its decision for the working class?
It must be remembered that the nine Scottsboro boys were framed on the fake charge of raping two notorious prostitutes, rushed through a farcical court procedure surrounded by a howling lynch mob and condemned to death before they had time to draw their breaths, so to speak. This legal burlesque is not unusual in the South. It is the “justice” meted out to our Negro class brothers. That is their share of democracy in the Republic, when the tiger deigns to play with its victims. Let a Negro farm laborer demand his wages – he is physically assaulted by his white boss; if he resists he is accused of rape and he is lynched. In its more merciful moments capitalism puts him through the paces of a masque which it calls a trial – before disposing of him.
 
Communists Prevented Lynching
Only the prompt and courageous action of the I.L.D. and the Communist party, in the face of a hurricane of vented a routine legal lynching. But the I.L.D. and the C.P. did more than merely provide a legal defense. They began to mobilize tens of thousands of workers, black and white, to demand the unconditional freedom of the nine boys. The Communists succeeded on the scale of the demonstrations and within the limits of this issue, in uniting the black and white workers. That is one of the happiest aspects of this struggle for the lives of nine members of our class. It is a long step forward toward the unity of the two races which is indispensable to the successful rising of the American proletariat.
The movement set afoot in this country found its echo abroad under the stimulus of the International Red Aid. Thousands of workers in the capitals of Europe demonstrated outside the consulates of the American capitalist colossus. In Chemnitz workers were shot down. Elsewhere police batons conducted an orchestra of capitalist repression against the international proletariat. The mother of one of the boys was hounded from France’s vassal states. Meetings arranged to hear her story of the Republic’s savage democracy were forbidden. The secretary of state stretched forth a long hand to stay the tide of working class protest. Like King Canute of old who tried to stay the tide he failed.
The Supreme Court decision is a recognition of this fact. It is a concession to the mass protest. In this sense it is a first victory. But at the same time it is a warning. The Supreme Court did not decide that the boys are innocent. It carefully avoided taking up this aspect of the case.
 
The Supreme Court Decision
The text of the decision states three grounds on which the lower courts’ verdicts were appealed; they were not given a fair, impartial and deliberate trial! (2) they were denied the right of counsel, with the accustomed incidents of consultation and opportunity of preparation for trial, and (3) they were tried before juries from which qualified members of their own race were systematically excluded.”
The text goes on to say: “The only one of the assignments which we shall consider is the second –; and it becomes unnecessary to discuss the facts of the case or the circumstances surrounding the prosecution –”. Cowardly decision!! To deal with the other two would bring these judicial fossils face to face with the real issues in the case. They would have to commit the Supreme Court and through it the capitalist class to an outright reactionary position resulting in the discreditment of this most sacred of the institutions of the capitalist class before the working class.
Or it would have had to decide in favor of the victims which would tremendously increase the prestige of Communism and working class activity generally. The only road it could “safely” take at the moment was the middle road of quibbling over legal technicalities. This it does most elegantly. It makes a parade of the learned justices’ erudition; it traces a devious course through certain aspects of the history of American law; it juggles with definitions in and amendments to the U.S. Constitution. And it arrives at the conclusion so obvious to all that the boys were not represented by counsel in the courtroom at Scottsboro.
The liberals are singing a hymn of praise to American institutions. They say that the Court has redeemed the prestige of capitalism. They prate eloquently of justice and fairness and fair play. They are confused to the roots of their thinking. And they are sowing contusion with a prodigal hand. The capitalist press is open wide to them now for this purpose. They are serving capitalism well.
Unfortunately a great many workers fall for this stuff. They have seen Hoover in action. They are familiar with the peaceful nature of their local capitalist institutions. But they still have faith in that solemn and august body of men who are chosen solely for their merit to sit in judgment on the laws enacted by congress and the states. To the extent that they believe this they will turn a deaf ear to the Communist analysis of this decision and reject the party’s call to action.
There is a growing number of class conscious workers who will not be fooled by this dubious maneuver of a capitalist class made cautious by a rising tide of working class protest. They will understand that the Supremo Court is a bulwark against any “left” deviations by legislative and executive branches of the government. They will see clearly that the battle must still be fought to its conclusion by the same fighting methods which have already resulted in one victory. Encouraged by this victory they will nevertheless see clearly the danger points ahead. They will remember that the retrial is scheduled for the same court under the same judge who first sentenced them to death. This will signify to them the necessity for an even greater protest movement on the part of a united working class.
 
For a Broad Movement!
These workers will look to the party to build and organize this movement. In this orientation they will be correct. The victory the party has already won gives it this right. Upon the basis of the movement already built the party will have to build a broad protest movement embracing the entire working class. The party must issue the call to build this movement. To date the party press confines itself to agitation. This is correct. But it is not enough.
The party must issue a call for united front conferences. The prestige it has won will give it the entry into organizations and a hearing before strata of the class which would otherwise be indifferent to its appeal. Workers imbued with confidence in the party because of its fight and its first victory will answer this call.
The united fronts must be genuine. They must be permeated with the spirit of working class democracy. No mechanical control! The workers suffering from the stifling control of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy will not stand for it here. And conversely this is the opportunity par excellence for the Communists to teach the workers what working class democracy really is. Let all participate and have freedom of discussion. What should the party fear? Time and the class struggle has given it the firmest position. To work!
 



NEW YORK, N.Y. Sign Writers’ Local 230 in New York of the Brotherhood of Painters, Decorators, and Paperhangers of America is a typical A.F. of L. craft union. Its administration is a graft-ridden, business agent-executive board regime. The business agent receives about $120 a week; the executive board members also receive salaries. A former business agent was expelled because of his open collusion with the bosses; he took money from them and winked at violations of union conditions like an owl which cannot see in the daytime. Such people have no interest in maintaining union wage scales and conditions. Their sole interest is in their weekly checks and in the graft they collect. The workers were aware of this but remained indifferent as long as work was steady. Now they are resentful but helpless and they do not as yet know what to do.
The local has about five hundred members. They are first, second, third, fourth and fifth year apprentices, helpers, mechanics and designers. For the privilege of being an apprentice a worker had to pay the union bureaucrats an initiation fee of from $5 to $50; a mechanic $150; a helper $500. The union controls about sixty small shops. The other four hundred shops are non-union. Many of the bosses of the union shops are members of the union.
The wage scale was as follows: for apprentices, from the first to fifth year: $3.15 to $11.50 a day; for helpers: $10.50; designers: $20.00 The helpers constitute a large majority of the workers in the trade.
Through one pretext or another this scale was undercut by the bosses without protest from the workers or the Union. The workers did not protest the undercutting of the wage scale because sixty per cent of them were unemployed and those at work were working part time. They were afraid to say [illegible]
This was the situation when the wage agreement with the bosses expired on March 30th. The union proposed to the bosses a renewal of the wage scale. This was nothing but a gesture as the scale was not being enforced. To allay the unrest of the rank and file the union bureaucrats proposed in addition to the renewal of the wage scale that helpers be permitted to do part of the apprentices’ work. This would enable the bosses to lay off some or all of their apprentices and increase the work of the helpers. It is the old A.F. of L. trick of playing off one section of workers against another. The union further proposed the introduction of split time at the “discretion of the union” and under the control of the union. The time cards of the workers were to be sent weekly to the union headquarters.
To this the bosses replied with proposals of their own. Of the sixty unionized shops some ten or fifteen do work for the moving picture chains: Loew, R.K.O.; Warner Bros., etc. These outfits would like to either employ non-union labor or union labor at open shop rates. Best of all they would like to smash the union. In the present situation they see their opportunity. They have taken the first step.
Upon their instigation the bosses rejected the terms of the union; they want the right to hire and lay-off and fire at will; they want to strike out from the agreement the clause requiring them to get the union’s permission for overtime work.
This is important to the shops doing theatrical work. The chains always shoot only by overtime work. The chains propose a 25% wage cut. These terms would reduce the union to a meaningless shell.
The union bureaucrats would have accepted these terms were it not for the dissatisfaction of the rank and file which forced a strike. The strike is now taking place. Picketing is being organized. Acid was thrown on a sign at the Astor Theatre. Twenty shops have settled on the union’s terms. But not the shops which get the moving picture chains’ orders. They are holding out.
The attempt of the chains to smash the union is reflected in the struggle inside the union. The workers in the shops which get the chains’ orders, who are a numerical minority in the union, are more steadily employed than the workers in the other union shops. With sixty per cent of the membership unemployed, this numerical minority almost alone carries the financial burden of the union on its hack. It is more outspoken and hostile to the bureaucracy. But the bureaucracy always manages to outvote it.
The rift between this minority and the bureaucrats supported by a majority of the membership came to a head with the expiration of the wage agreement and the exchange of terms. This theatrical show card minority anxious to continue working was opposed to the strike. It was and is willing to arbitrate with the idea of settling for a ten per cent wage cut. It has no interest in the strike.
It has called a secret meeting to discuss plans for the formation of a separate organization independent of local 230, and for a setlement on the basis of a ten per cent wage cut. This extremely short sighted policy will get these workers nowhere. If realized it will break the union, accomplish the aim of the chains and their own isolation, leaving them to the mercies of the powerful chains who will, of course, proceed to lower their living and working conditions even further through additional wage cuts, speed up and lay-offs.
In the ranks of the theatrical show card writers and in the union generally are several Left wing workers. These workers should immediately work out a program and present it to the union membership.
They must explain to the theatrical show card writers that they have embarked on a suicidal course both for themselves and the union as a whole. They must show their fellow workers that this is playing the game of the chains who alone will benefit from it. Against the split they must propose a fighting unity of the whole union against the chains and the bosses for concrete demands to be worked out by the membership.
To the union membership as a whole they must propose as an indispensable prerequisite for the fight against chains a fight against the bureaucracy in the union and its scheme of setting off one section of the workers against another. Instead of split time they must propose the wholly practicable slogan of the six hour day without reduction in pay. And to this they must add unemployment insurance at the expense of the bosses. They must also propose the elimination of the five categories of apprentices since the introduction of machinery and mechanical methods of production have largely eliminated the necessity for skilled use of the brush. Finally they must propose organization of the unorganized shops. As a prerequisite for this they must abolish the initiation fees.
 



The crisis is still deepening. It is enough to look at the latest Annalist (April 15) to find abundant evidence to that effect. The graphs show that pig iron and steel ingot production have fallen to new lows for the entire period since 1919. All the other indices of the country’s production are likewise moving downward.
The expected spring upturn has proved to be another disappointment to the Babsons and the people who still swallow their stuff. The economic messianism of Ford took the form of a machine gun fusillade.
The purveyors of bourgeois optimism now restrict their dope to more qualified formulations than they used formerly. Thus the New York Times of April 18:
“During the last week some officials expressed, with what has been described as ‘cautious optimism’, the view that the worst features of liquidation may be over and that a turn in the tide has come or soon will come, with a slow recovery from economic depression in this country. Expressions heard now are largely restricted to the belief that indicators point to a check in liquidation and that unless further adverse factors appear, a more hopeful outlook is justified.”
So speak the capitalist hessians of the pen. It is to throw dust in the eyes.
The authentic spokesmen of capitalism speaks in a more pessimistic vein. J.P. Jordan writing in the April 15 Annalist says, in Face the Facts:
“For two full years we all have hoped that the depression in business had spent its force. 1930 was bad; 1931 was worse, and now 1932 seems generally worse than 1931. But the most alarming feature right now is that there seem to be few signs that 1933 will be much better. If this is so, and there are many signs to point that way, it becomes most obvious – that further and deeper adjustments must be made …”
This is a truer picture of the perspective capitalism holds before itself.
And the remedy it proposes to apply – wage outs! That is the meaning of Jordan’s “further and deeper adjustments”. He urges capitalists everywhere to “right at the start let us dispose of the element of sentiment”. No doubt the capitalist class intends to launch a new wave of wage cuts. The forthcoming ten percent cut in the wages of the steel workers, announced recently, will be the first point of attack.
The workers must resist. That is the only way to prevent not only this attack on their living standards but the “further and deeper” onslaughts which will follow inevitably if this one is peaceably accepted by them. To the Communist party falls the duty of organizing this resistance and giving it leadership.
 



Two developments in the Scottsboro case within the past week testify to the protest it has aroused in the working class. The execution has been stayed to June 24 upon the appeal of the I.L.D. to the U.S. Supreme Court. No doubt the bourbon tiger still feels that its prey is secure. It feels that it can afford this small concession and expects that its judicial superior will confirm its finding.
The State Department has applied to the Governor for information about the case for transmission to U.S. consulates abroad. Unquestionably this is a reaction to the working class pressure abroad being brought to bear on the diplomatic representatives of dollar imperialism.
In the consciousness of the international working class the memories of the Sacco-Vanzetti and Mooney cases are still green. They do not need legal proofs of the innocence of the Scottsboro boys. The American frame-up system is familiar to them. In this case they see another attack on the international working class.
And they are protesting. They hold meetings and send cables of protest. The mother of one of the boys, Mrs. Wright, will tour Germany under the auspices of the International Red Aid to speak for all nine of the boys.
Will the U.S. Supreme Court confirm the decision of the Alabama Supreme Court? It may. It may reserve it. One thing is sure. Only an aroused working class movement can save these nine members of our class. Between now and June 24 the time is short. The small concessions the capitalist class has yielded must be a stimulus to yet greater activity. Our protest must be organized. Of this there is yet little sign. The I.L.D. is not doing it. The C.P. is not doing it. They limit themselves to calls for demonstrations in the Communist press.
This is not sufficient. Only a comparatively small number of workers read the Communist press. Only a small number respond to the party’s calls. The overwhelming bulk of the working class is still non-Communist. It must be approached thru the press it reads, thru the organizations it supports.
For this is required the tactic of the united front of working class organizations. This the party and the I.L.D. should take the lead in organizing. There is no other way to build a mass movement to free the Scottsboro boys.
 



The six-to-one decision of the Alabama Supreme Court upholding the death sentences of seven of the nine Scottsboro prisoners is a class verdict. It is necessary only briefly to review the case to prove this and to give the lie to the N.A.A.C.P. sabotagers, the socialists and their liberal supporters like the New Republic, all of whom have claimed that the verdict of guilty and sentence of death were the result of the hatred stirred up by the agitation of the Communists.
The nine Negro boys on their way to look for work were taken off a freight train and charged with stealing a ride. But, upon the subsequent discovery on the train of two white girls, the charge was changed forthwith to rape, which, in Alabama, is a capital crime.
The intention of the Southern bourbons to dispatch the boys with all possible expedition was clearly revealed by the arrangements made for and conduct of the trial. It was held on fair day in a court house surrounded by a lynch mob, held in check by promises from the militia that verdicts of guilty would be speedily forthcoming. The task of the prosecution was made easier by the collaboration of the N.A.A.C.P. “defense” lawyer who produced no witnesses and refused to ask for an acquittal. The trial required only three days. The verdict was guilty. The sentence was death by electrocution. The entire elapsed time between arrest and conviction was only fifteen days.
The decision of the Supreme Court upholds this verdict and sentence. It affirms that the trial was fair and impartial. It says that the militia which fraternized with the mob while it marched around the court house singing the Star Spangled Banner and stopping only to cheer the verdict of guilty “... was notice to everybody that the strong arm of the State was there to assure the accused of a lawful trial.”
The six robed and dignified justices found no ground for reversal in the speed of the trial, basing themselves on the precedent created in the speedy trial and execution of Czolgosz, the assassin of McKinley. It is true, they argue, that in the Scottsboro case, no one was assassinated (they intend to accomplish this en masse on May 13th); but, they say, “... we are of the opinion that some things may happen to one worse than death and if the evidence is to be believed one of these things happened to this defenseless woman, Victoria Price ...”
The verdict of the Supreme Court speaks the intention of the capitalist class to make a significant example of these boys: to warn the super-exploited, suppressed Negro masses of a similar fate for all who aspire to political, economic and social equality, and dare to struggle for it. It is the familiar answer of the capitalist class to all working class protest – the frame-up. The verdict is a class verdict. The case is a working class issue.
To this class verdict the working class must reply by a united, fighting, mass movement. The working class must close its ranks. It must say to the capitalist class that it will not permit nine of its members to be electrocuted. Through this case the white and black masses must begin to achieve the unity indispensable for the overthrow of capitalism.
The class verdict must be answered by a class fight.
For this the I.L.D. and C.P. must break through the shell of their isolation They must go to the masses with the proposal to unite on this one issue.
The logic of the situation leads with irresistible force to the tactic of the united front of working class organizations. Who refuses to see this understands nothing. The I.L.D. must appeal to all working class organizations regardless of political tendency for a united front on the one issue of the fight for the Scottsboro boys. Concretely, at the present stage. This should take the form of conferences, to work out systematic plans collectively.
The conferences, to serve this aim, cannot be replicas of the “united front” of the familiar Stalinist variety. They cannot be mechanically controlled. Presidiums and committees must be freely elected. Freedom of discussion and criticism must be the rule, not the exception.
Neither the prisoners nor the Communists, who alone can lead their fight, have anything to lose in such a united front. On the contrary, they have everything to gain. The cause of the prisoners, and with it the influence of the Communists, will reach masses of workers now inaccessible. In the fight the superiority of the Communist program will be demonstrated. The workers will see this for themselves: that is the only way they can learn it.
On the other hand, should the socialist and progressive leaders and their brethren of all shades and hues refuse to enter such a united front, they will stand exposed before their own rank and file, for what they are. In this way they can be made to reveal their true nature as misleaders who live on the division of the working class. In either case the Communists have nothing to lose, everything to gain.
Unfortunately the Centrist opportunists who have the leadership of the I.L.D. and the C.P. in their hands do not see this, do not understand anything. They are still obstinately playing with united fronts from “below”. At the time of this writing (Tuesday) they have not made any move to build a united working class movement. They have issued no call for conferences.
They have limited themselves to a call for a demonstration on April 6th. By all means let us have the demonstration. But also let us begin to build the working class movement without delay.
The execution has been set for May 13th. It may be postponed for a time because of the legal appeals. But even so there is not too much time. Mass pressure must be brought to bear on the Alabama Supreme Court, and, failing there, later on the U.S. Supreme Court. Mass pressure can give a weight to the legal appeal not contemplated by the judicial fossils of the juridical system.
Mass pressure can prevent a second Sacco-Vanzetti case, a second Mooney case. It must be organized. To this end we must work. The Stalinist policy of fulmination in the press, without a serious mobilization of the masses, will not avail. The comrades in the party should add their voices to that of the Left Opposition for the policy of a fighting united front.
 



The apathy which prevails in the Illinois coal fields has been lifted to some extent by the campaign under way to demand the release of Tom Mooney. For this issue, the miners are evincing a readiness to struggle. Conferences have been organized in Staunton and Belleville. Plans are being laid and pushed for conferences in other mining centers.
These conferences are largely the result of the efforts of local militants cooperating with the St. Louis branch of the Communist League of America (Opposition). The line of these conferences is based upon Mooney’s August 20 appeal and the Opposition’s endorsement of this appeal (Militant, 9-5-1931). It stresses the united front as the key to the problem of uniting the workers in a struggle to force Mooney’s release and the release of all class war prisoners.
The Opposition delegates fight resolutely in these conferences for this policy. All attempts to exclude the I.L.D., the C.P., and the party organizations are resisted by our delegates. On the other hand, our delegates, while supporting the party’s resolutions and themselves introducing resolutions against the Illinois criminal syndicalism law, are equally resolute in fighting the attempts of the Stalinists to divert the conferences along the lines of a fight against criminal syndicalism in general.
What has been the party’s policy in these conferences? Caught unawares by their organization, the Stalinists limited their participation to long-winded speeches and general attacks upon all non-Communists and especially against the “counter-revolutionary” Trotskyists. But this policy acted as boomerang. Their slander discredited only themselves and by contrast with the policy, sincerity and activity of our delegates, increased the prestige of the Opposition in the eyes of the miners. It goes without saying that we use the advantage which accrues to us to redeem from discreditment the ideas of Communism.
After several months of their futile policy, the Stalinists realized that more “decisive” measures were required to wreck the campaign and to undo what had already been accomplished. On Sunday, December 27, they descended on the second session of the Staunton conference en masse. They packed the conference with delegates mobilized from Springfield, East St. Louis, and even Chicago. On one pretext after another they interrupted the proceedings with irrelevant speeches and slander. The A.F. of L. delegates voted with their feet. Delegate after delegate left. The result is best expressed, perhaps in a letter from one of the local militants who has participated in all the struggles of the Illinois miners since before the war.
“It was either we control or we smash ... I don’t believe that more than one local remained in the meeting. I too left in disgust.” Why this militant and thousands more are not in the ranks of the Communist movement, and more specifically in the party, is all too clear.
The plan for protest meetings, which the conference’s Executive Committee worked out, was killed. The conference in Staunton is now a shed. The miners have turned their backs on it. Whether it can be revived is a question. The Opposition must and will attempt it. There is no other road except to condemn Mooney to lifelong imprisonment. The Opposition will continue to fight for a united front, with the I.L.D., the party and all Left wing organizations included. What will be the policy of the party? Will the party rank and file continue to tolerate this policy of slander and wreckage?
 



On February 25, 1931, 400,000 workers in the United States according to the Daily Worker demonstrated for Unemployment Insurance. Compared with the demonstration of the year before, this showed a great decline. The Daily Worker claims 1,250,000 workers in the March 6, 1930, demonstration. This tremendous decrease was hailed by Browder as an advance. (Daily Worker, March 6, 1931) On the basis of this “advance”, Browder on March 12, in the Daily Worker motivated a turn from the fight for Unemployment to a system of organized beggary.
This in part is what Browder wrote:
“Where the city authorities reject the demands for the relief of specific cases of starvation – the council must set up a food collection committee which will undertake food collections from the larger capitalists and corporations of the locality, particularly in those institutions where the unemployed were formerly at work. When the committee is unable to get food from the corporations and large capitalists they shall then begin to solicit small merchants and the petty bourgeoisie generally, calling upon these elements at the same time to join the Unemployed Council in demanding relief from the government treasuries and in demanding unemployment insurance nationally.”
This “fight” for relief reached its highest expression in a recent New York demonstration in which a worker carried a placard, reading: “We want more, not less relief.”
While the dwindling party supporters were struggling to carry out Browder’s directives, the fight for unemployment insurance was confined to resolutions passed at narrow, sectarian conferences, and to articles in the Daily Worker and other party organs. The masses no longer could be counted by the hundred thousands, not even by the schooled exaggerators who write editorials Against Exaggeration. They had disappeared from the struggle.
Browder’s strategy, as could have been foretold by a pioneer, ran its course without results. By the end of the summer of 1931 it was clear to all that competing with capitalist charities for pinch-penny doles could not advance the revolution. The fight for Unemployment Insurance had lapsed; the struggle tor relief was equally unsuccessful. The crisis was still deepening: the misery of the masses was greater and more widespread. Bourgeois demagogues were threatening to take over the leadership of the movement for relief and Unemployment Insurance. At this point, the party decide to revive the fight for Unemployment Insurance.
Its first assault on capitalist greed was the National Hunger March. This was organized around the slogans of a resolution adopted by the Executive Committee of the T.U.U.L. on October 3. On the basis of this document the revived fight for Unemployment Insurance is taking place. It is important to understand exactly what this resolution proposes with regard to unemployment. Has the party learned from its mistakes? Does it repudiate the opportunism of Browder and Co.?
If the party’s efforts to win Unemployment Insurance demonstrated anything, they demonstrated that the party could not unite the masses around the slogan of unemployment insurance alone. There is no question that Unemployment Insurance is what the masses need to alleviate their misery and to serve as a bulwark against strike-breaking. It is true that under certain conditions the workers will fight to Unemployment Insurance, but it is also true that the party failed to build a broad movement of employed and unemployed workers for it.
One reason, of course, is the stifling bureaucratic regime in the party and its organizations which drives away thousands of workers sympathetic to Communism. Bureaucracy played its part but it is not decisive. The basic reason is to be found in the illusions of the masses. The masses are not yet convinced that “prosperity” will not return. They still believe that the crisis will lift, bring in work for them. They do not understand that we, like England, will now be blessed with a permanent army of unemployed. The masses think in terms of work. Unemployment Insurance is predicated upon the permanent unemployment of large sections of the working class. For these reasons, the American workers are slow to fight for Unemployment Insurance.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
For us, it is axiomatic that we must continue to fight. What we must do, is to add to the slogans of Unemployment Insurance and relief those practical slogans which, while answering to the needs of the workers will appeal to them in terms of work. Such slogans exist. They are principally: the slogan of the Six Hour Day, Five Day Week with no reduction in pay and the slogan of large scale, long term credits to the Soviet Union. In addition to their applicability to the present condition of the working class both at home and abroad, which has been elaborated in the columns of the Militant and by comrade Trotsky, these slogans have precisely that quality which is so necessary in the present circumstances.
The Six Hour Day, Five Day Week, entirely possible with the high development of American industry is slowly winning the approval of sections of the American working class. It appears reasonable to them and a means of relieving unemployment, by cutting down the working day. and week and putting men to work. It is urged even by sections of the capitalist class. These gentlemen intend, of course, that the six hour day shall be accompanied by a corresponding cut in pay. We propose that there should be no wage cut. The workers will decide. If the party were to take up this slogan and launch a movement around it, it would penetrate all sections of the working class and stir them into motion to realize it.
The “work” aspect, so to speak, of the slogan of credits to the Soviet Union is no less valid. Increased trade relations with the Soviet Union as a result of a movement led by the party organized along the line elaborated by cemrade Trotsky in his pamphlet World Unemployment and the Five Year Plan, would result in concretizing the interest of the American workers for the socialist solution as expressed in the Soviet economy, and would alleviate unemployment here by opening factories now closed. For these slogans the workers will fight.
All these considerations together lead to the conclusion that the Six Hour Day should be the central slogan and that together, these three slogans constitute the essentials of a program on which the masses, both employed and unemployed can be united in a powerful movement. This is the program of the Opposition.
Unfortunately, the party does not see the problem in this light. The Dec. 3rd resolution of the T.U.U.L. Executive Committee affirms again that unemployment insurance must be the central slogan: “We must strive to organize the unemployed into the Unemployed Councils – with the demand for unemployment insurance in the center.” Although the demands for a seven hour day and trade relations with the Soviet Union are included they are not conceived as levers to unite the masses and set them in motion. This is obvious from the method laid down to overcome the separation of the “unemployed movement” from “the red union movement”.
This unity is to be affected as follows: “in order to abolish these weaknesses it is important during times of strikes to draw the unemployed into the strike committees, into the mass picket lines, – and on the other side, to place in specific shops concrete demands regarding the unemployed. For example, the re-hiring of laid-off workers, etc.” But what if there are no strikes; are the movements not to be united? On this question the resolution is silent.
It is apparent that the party still conceives the fight for unemployed insurance as a movement primarily of the unemployed. This is borne out by the organizational forms by which the resolution proposes to carry out the party program on unemployment. On this subject the resolution says, “The basic form of organization of the unemployed council is the neighborhood council, elected by the workers in the neighborhood, unemployment agencies, soup kitchens, etc.” This, no doubt, will be the purest form of the united front from below. There is no mention here of uniting the employed and unemployed. This makes a mockery of the resolution’s declaration that, “These organizations (of the unemployed) must be organized on the united front basis.” Nor is this distorted conception of the united front redeemed by adding at the very end of the section dealing with this question, the sentence, “All the unemployed councils have representatives of employed workers.” It is not explained in the resolution how the employed workers who have already signified their refusal to enter the existing mechanically controlled, narrow councils are to be brought into them.
The program of the Opposition proposes that the unemployed councils be genuine, broad united fronts consisting of representatives of organizations of workers of all political or no political tendencies, as well as unemployed workers from agencies, etc. This, of course, is possible upon the basis of a correct program and a regime of working class democracy in the councils. The Stalinist version is now too well known. It is anathema to workers in the A.F. of L. and out of it. On this score, the resolution is silent too. This silence is an ominous sign. It signifies that the policy of expulsion for holding non-Communist and anti-Stalinist views will continue. On such a basis there can be no united front.
It is plain that the party’s program on unemployment and the organizational forms it proposes are essentially the same as those with which it has failed to unite the masses for unemployment insurance. There is, therefore, no need to repudiate the opportunism of Browder and his former policy. On the contrary, it whitewashes them. “The present developments do not require a change in policy ――”
The Stalinists are preparing another defeat for the fight for unemployment insurance. The results will be disastrous. The despicable demagogy of the Pittsburgh Reverend, Cox, is a warning that if the Communists do not learn how to lead the fight for unemployment insurance, all sorts of riff-raff will divert movement into channels harmless to the capitalist class.
Against this danger and for the correct policy, the Opposition will continue to fight. For this, it has been created. It calls upon its comrades in the party to fight shoulder to shoulder with it for the six-hour day, unemployment insurance, credits to Soviet Union; for genuine united front unemployed councils; against bureaucracy, for working class democracy in the councils; for the unity of the Communist vanguard.
 



Three milestones mark the party’s course in its unemployment work since Browder, a little more than a year ago, turned the helm away from the fight for unemployment insurance and set the course for immediate relief, to the exclusion of every revolutionary demand. These are: Browder’s pronouncements in the Daily Worker of March 6 and 12, 1931, the TUUL NEC resolution adopted in Pittsburgh on October 3 and 4, 1931, and now the Proposed Draft Program of Fighting Methods and Organization Forms of the Unemployed Councils. These are the theoretical fruits of the course which has led into the opportunist swamp.
It will be remembered that February 25, 1931, marked the close of a year’s nationwide, fighting demonstrations for unemployment insurance under the leadership of the Communist party. February 25 marked a tremendous decline in the influence of the Communist party over the masses, insofar as its unemployment work was concerned. In the March 6th, 1930, demonstrations the party claimed a million and a quarter workers. In the February 25th, 1931, demonstrations it claimed only four hundred thousand. That both figures were grossly exaggerated goes without saying. But that the decline was great is equally true.
The great loss in influence, at a time when the crisis was deepening and the struggle against it should have been rising to greater heights and embracing broader masses of workers, presented the Stalinists with the necessity of making a turn. Marxists would, have begun with an examination of their past policies to find in them the cause of their failure. Not so the Stalinists. The cornerstone of their faith is the dogma that the line is correct. To doubt it is heresy.
To Browder was entrusted the ideological legerdemain of pronouncing a turn, yet absolving the previous line of any suspicion of error. This he sought to accomplish in a series of two articles in the Daily Worker (March 6 and 12, 1931), under the title: On the organization of Relief Work by Unemployed Councils.
 
The Turn
Browder called for the creation of food collection committees “to get food from the larger capitalists and corporations of the locality, particularly in those institutions where the unemployed were formerly at work.” Anticipating failure for this idiotic nonsense, Browder provided: “When the committee is unable to get food from the corporations and large capitalists, they shall then begin to solicit small merchants and petty bourgeoisie generally, calling upon these elements at the same time to join the Unemployed Council in demanding relief from the government treasuries and in demanding unemployment insurance nationally.”
Under the leadership of Browder and Co. the movement was plunged into systematic, organized beggary. It became a fish-wife haggling with the charities over pennies. The revolutionary link between the day-to-day, reform demands and the revolutionary goal was cast off like so much unnecessary ballast.
On the key questions of policy: of uniting the employed and unemployed workers, and working out broad organizational forms to include workers of all shades of opinion, regardless of their political affiliations; the success or failure to attain which is the measure of every unemployment program, Browder was silent. He let his readers infer that as with the line, so with its results in these essential questions.
“Two steps backward in order to make one step forward,” said a worker, misquoting Lenin. Browder’s directives were the first step backward on the road which has led inexorably to the opportunist swamp where the movement is bogged.
 
The TUUL NEC Resolution
Contrary to the Stalinists’ expectations the pursuit of this policy, the orientation of the movement on relief, the relegation of unemployment insurance to the background, the failure to organize a fighting movement for a shorter working day, for credits to the Soviet Union, did not see the unemployed councils “grow and stabilize themselves as powerful organizations.” They continued to be weak and ineffectual instruments embracing only unemployed workers, and only workers sympathetic to Communism. With the exception of Chicago and several other cities they took no deep root in the masses.
By October the failure of the new turn was apparent to all. Time had demonstrated its bankruptcy. Yet the T.U.U.L. NEC resolution of October 3rd and 4th affirmed the correctness of the line: “The present developments do not require a change in policy of the TUUL.”
That this whitewash was meant to apply to the unemployment policy as well as the trade union policy is evident from the text of the resolution. Our readers can find this monument of confusion and distortion in the flies of the Daily Worker. It was published as a supplement to the issue of November 11, 1931.
The unemployed and “red union” movements are conceived in this document as separate movements. This marks a retreat from the previous policy of the party which confined the unemployed councils to the organizational control of the TUUL. This is a necessary step toward establishing the correct base for a broad movement for unemployment relief.
But the party has made the division a formal one. In its resolution it posed the question of uniting the unemployed movement with the “red union” movement. This is fundamentally incorrect. It is not at all a question of uniting the two movements but of building one united movement of employed and unemployed workers. This must be a broad movement, much broader than the as yet weak “red union” movement. It must embrace, in the first place, the organized labor movement. This means the A.F. of L. unions.
In the question of the organizational forms the resolution made no advance over the party’s previous narrow conception of the united front as applied to the unemployed councils. The united front projected in the resolution is essentially a united front of unorganized, unemployed workers.
In one respect the resolution marked an advance over Browder’s directives. The resolution restored the fight for relief to a more nearly correct basis. It placed on the agenda again the tight for unemployment insurance. It made it the central slogan. It reaffirmed the seven hour day without motivating the demand by any reason or figures. And it added at the end of its program, the demand for “the development of trade relations with the Soviet Union, in order that the idle factories may work, fill the constantly growing demands of the successful construction of the workers’ government and its Five Year Plan.”
Around the slogans of the resolution the National Hunger March to Washington was organized. With this march and its repercussions the party resurrected the fight for unemployment insurance. In this sense the resolution marked a limping, half-step forward.
 
The Draft Program
With the termination of the Hunger March of last December the fight far unemployment insurance was again relegated to the background. And the flght for “more not less relief” as one placard in a demonstration announced, was more oriented on the road which led to the opportunist swamp.
It is now, in full swing headed toward the Relief March, scheduled for September 10. Its demands, slogans and organizational forms are incorporated in a Proposed Draft Program of Fighting Methods and Organization Forms of the Unemployed Councils – A Manual for Hunger Fighters. It is issued by the National Committee of the Unemployed Councils of the U.S.A.
It is understood that this is not a Communist program in the sense of, let us say, a party election program. It cannot be a statement of Communist aims and receive the endorsement of workers in the unemployed movement who are just awakening to class consciousness. But it must present Communist ideas in an elementary form so that when they are applied in the class struggle they become steps toward the final, inevitable goal. If the program fulfills this requirement it is a Communist document.
But this is precisely what the Draft Program is not. It is enough to glance at the section, The Typical Issues and Demands, to realize that it is not a Communist document. The first typical demand is concerned with cash relief; the second with flophouses; the third with breadlines and food-kitchens; the fourth with food for children; etc.
(Continued in Next Issue)
 



(Continued from last issue)
We do not mean to create the impression that it is incorrect to fight for these demands wherever they are issues. But by an almost exclusive concentration on these demands the larger objectives of the movement are lost sight of and these demands do not become steps leading toward the development of class consciousness and the raising of the struggle to a higher plane, but ends in themselves. They become reformist, opportunist demands. And they sow confusion in the minds of the workers by wiping out the essential differences between the revolutionary-Communist program, and the Socialist and other reformist programs.
This can best be seen from the text itself. The program is based on “– a recognition of the fact that those who own and control the wealth and government are willing to allow millions to suffer hunger and want in order that their great wealth shall not be drawn on for relief.” (Emphasis in the original) “The Unemployed Councils are the organs for the determined, uncompromising struggle against all who are responsible for and all who assist in imposing upon the workers the miseries that result from mass unemployment.” Again: “In the effort to safeguard the masses from the effects of unemployment the Unemployment Councils organize and conduct the daily struggle ...”
It is in keeping that such “theoretical” opportunism should find its counterpart in the schema of fighting methods. Under the heading, How to Formulate and Fight for Immediate Demands, there is to be found the following axiom of opportunism: “It should be obvious that if we constantly appear in a given relief agency to dispute over the contents of every basket – the authorities will soon find it more convenient and safer to grant the demand for cash relief or more adequate relief as the case may be.” (Emphasis in the original)
What working class content do these formulations and methods have? What is there in them to which a well-meaning, Christian clergyman cannot subscribe? Have the Stalinist authors of the program, like the Socialist Party, forgotten the class struggle? Who are the “all” who are responsible for mass unemployment? This is degeneration to liberalism. It makes of the occasional militant phraseology of the program a ghastly masquerade.
It is true that the program lists in its “basic” demands the “seven hour day without reduction in wages” which it does not motivate with figures or reason any more than did the T.U.U.L. resolution, and “recognition and unhampered trade relations with the Soviet Union”. But they are present as window dressing. They are not explained in the text of the program, nor is their connection with the fight for relief established. They do not outweigh the excessive weight laid on the fight for relief as an end in itself.
The result is that no basis is established by the program for drawing into the movement the Socialist and A.F. of L. workers without whom no broad movement can be built. And, consequently, no directives are issued by the program to accomplish this vital task. The program thus makes the same blunder made by the T.U.U.L resolution of last October. It is forced to present the two movements as separate, and it is forced to pose the question of uniting the two movements. Its solutions are a repetition of the solutions of the T.U.U.L. resolution which have been tested by time and found to be no solutions at all. In short the program does not advance us a single inch toward building one united movement of employed and unemployed.
But it does narrow the chasm separating the Communist relief program from the Wobbly charity-begging schemes and the Socialist reformist program dressed up in militant phrases. In this sense the program becomes not an instrument of clarity in the direction of class consciousness, but a vehicle of confusion.
This narrow conception of the unemployed movement is thus, of necessity carried over to the organizational forms worked out for the movement. The unemployed committee is established by the program as the basic form of unemployed movement. This is defined as an elected body to which is eligible “any worker ... regardless of any other opinion or affiliation who agrees with the program adopted in the meeting (of workers) where the election takes place ...” These unemployed committees are groups of “from three to fifteen workers who have been elected by a body of worker’s in any given place ...” The committees elect delegates to a larger territorial Unemployed Council.
This formulation seems to establish the basis of a united front. But it is only an appearance. There are some fatal limitations to this happy beginning. With no basis laid for drawing the Socialist and A.F. of L. workers into the movement the united fronts which the program projects must become united fronts of workers sympathetic to Communism, which is to say, no united fronts at all. More than this, because of the movement’s orientation on relief unemployed workers for the most part, are drawn into the movement and the united fronts will be, are composed of unemployed workers sympathetic to Communism. The united front which begins so happily in the program can, in practice, turn out to be nothing more than another party auxiliary good for useful work in demonstrations, etc.
What remains is another milestone on the road to the opportunist swamp. The program in practise cannot bring us closer to our revolutionary goal. It leads in another direction. It will not serve to develop class consciousness through struggle because the struggle, which it is conducting, is based on reformist premises. The program attempts to put a programmatic seal on the flight to opportunism. – It consummates the turn initiated by Browder last year. It is the second step backward.
 
One Step Forward
Against this opportunist course the Opposition has repeatedly warned. It has done more than that. It has offered a program in place of the ideological mess of porridge the Stalinists have served up. In its Open Letter to the C.C. of CPUSA, issued early in 1931, it enumerated six basic points of a Marxist program upon which to build a fighting working-class movement for relief.
It predicated it program on the absolutely correct assumption that the fight for relief must be a general class fight embracing both employed and unemployed workers. It rested its program on the obvious truth – for Marxists – that, for revolutionists, a relief program had to be linked up with the final revolutionary goal as a step toward that goal. As its third major premise it declared that the slogans of today had to prepare the movement for tomorrow and act as a bridge.
On this basis it placed in the forefront of its program the slogans of the six-hour day, five-day week with no reduction in pay; unemployment insurance at the expense of the capitalist class and its government: and long-term, large-scale credits to the Soviet Union. It called for a fighting movement around these central slogans and stated that such a movement could be built only on a genuine united front basis.
That this program was not accepted by the party everyone knows. That, however, did not make it incorrect. Today it is as correct as it was when issued. The party’s failure to build a movement around its program emphasizes the correctness of own program in a negative sense.
The class struggle will yet force the adoption of our program. But we cannot wait while unparalleled opportunities are being wasted by the Stalinists. It is time now to make a step forward.
The party should adopt our program now. It should begin by opening up a discussion in its ranks on the entir’e question of unemployment and the fight for relief. The discussion should be free. Party members seriously interested in learning from the Party’s failures and in building a movement for relief should raise their voices for such a discussion. They should also demand that the Left Opposition be given an opportunity to participate in the discussion and defend its program.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



With the rising tide of Fascism in Germany and the enormous crime being concocted in the Stalinist kitchens the Left Opposition has been struggling to discharge the great tasks imposed on it by the historic situation. The League has opened a national campaign of mass meetings in an attempt with the forces at its disposal to reach the masses of workers who are instinctively watching the development of the German situation with the greatest interest. We have printed and are distributing thirty-two thousand leaflets stating our position on the German situation.
 
Yorkville Meeting
In New York City we have increased the number of our street meetings in addition to our other activities. Recently we have broken into new territory where we have shown the face of the Left Opposition for the first time and delivered our message. In Yorkville which has a large German population we have held a number of successful meetings. The last one was attended by between three and four hundred workers. They listened attentively to the speakers’ analysis of the German situation, the unspeakable, despicably treacherous role of the degenerate social democracy, the fatal policy of the central committee of the German C.P., the cowardly and treacherous silence of the Stalinized Comintern, and what must be done if the workers are not to be deluged in a frightful blood bath.
They found nothing “counter-revolutionary” in what we said, asked a number of questions which revealed their intense interest in the German situation and their slowly growing grasp of the nature and role of the International Left. So systematic were they that when late-comers, party members on their way home from other meetings, tried to disrupt our meeting by heckling they warned the misguided party members to keep quiet and listen.
 
Brownsville Meeting
More recently we broke new territory in a section of Brooklyn, the outskirts of Brownsville. We spoke to an interested audience of about a hundred workers who appeared to be impressed by our position on the German situation, asked many questions and bought our literature.
Not all of our meetings have been as successful as the two just reported. Last Saturday, August 18, our meeting at Avenue A and Seventh Street was broken up by an organized gang of party members and members of the local Unemployed Council which is situated a few doors away. From the account which follows it can be seen that they were whipped into a lynching spirit by the party bureaucrats in retaliation for the powerful blows we have dealt them at the Anti-War Conference and in connection with the German situation. Not since the battles in the Labor Temple in the early days of the Opposition and the tours of comrade Cannon and Shachtman has an Opposition meeting been broken up with such premeditated and organized violence.
The meeting was one organized by us in our regular schedule of speaking activities. Comrades Milton, Carmody, Glee and Wynne attempted to open the meeting with comrade Milton on the speaker’s stand distributing our leaflet on the German situation. In a few minutes a crowd of more than one hundred workers gathered around the stand to listen to the speaker. Across the street a party bureaucrat mustered his misguided gang. Suddenly they rushed across to the stand, snatched our literature, hurled comrade Milton from the stand and overthrew it.
To the credit of some party members it must be said that they protested verbally against such gangsteristic tactics, and a few even attempted to assist our comrades physically. One Y.C.L.er said in the heat of his indignation that he was going to resign from the Y.C.L.
Our comrades retired to another corner with the platform to await help for which one comrade was sent. When all the comrades that could be mustered on short notice had assembled, a short meeting among themselves was held to organize the defense of the meeting. Our comrades then returned to the corner from which they had been driven, in a second attempt to hold the meeting.
They set up the platform unmolested amid an ominous silence. By this time the crowd has grown to more than five hundred workers. Our speaker mounted the platform while our comrades formed a ring around it. With the usual words of address, “comrades and fellow workers”, a tremendous boo arose from the Stalinists who surrounded the platform and the ring of our comrades around it.
For almost an hour this continued. Every time the speaker opened his mouth a tremendous boo arose. With the boos was growing a mingled chorus of threats and dirty epithets. Gradually the Stalinists who outnumbered us many times were working up the small stock of courage to the point at which they could attack the revolutionary representatives of Leninism.
Finally a Stalinist more frenzied than the rest rushed the platform only to be thrown back by the defense squad. The chorus of jeers and threats rose higher and the number of workers grew to almost a thousand. They looked on in amazement and confusion. It was obvious that they could see no reason why we should not speak.
A second time the Stalinist rushed and a second time he was repulsed. The Stalinist chorus rose still higher. No word the speaker uttered could be heard even by himself.
A third time the Stalinists rushed through a gap in our defense and before their assault the platform gave way. Like a pack of wolves waiting for their prey to be brought down the Stalinists closed in on us. Comrade Gordon was thrown face down to the ground by two Stalinists. A maniacal Stalinist female scratched comrade Beardslee’s face. Other comrades and some of our sympathizers received blows, marks of honor in the struggle for the ideas of revolutionary internationalism.
We defended ourselves as best we could. More than one Stalinist will remember us ruefully.
Some workers from the crowd rushed in to stop the fight and the Stalinists, disappointed in not rousing the workers to the same lynching mania, desisted.
With the announcement to the assembled workers and Stalinists that the Left Opposition would not be prevented from delivering its message to the working class by the Stalinists or by anyone we marched off in a body singing the Internationale.
What the thousand or more workers who were attracted to the scene witnessed, was a battle between two factions of the Communists initiated by the Stalinists. Instead of seeing the Communists everywhere in the front rank of the fight for free speech for every faction of the working class movement they saw the Stalinists break up a meeting of the Left Opposition before it had begun.
The League will return to this corner to explain to the workers the significance of what they saw last Saturday. And in so far as we are able we will redeem the prestige of Communism squandered so heedlessly by the Stalinist masters of the party. And we will explain to the workers what our position is on the German situation and why the Stalinists attempt to beat us up for speaking the truth about Hitler and about Stalin. We invite all party members and all workers who are interested In free speech for workers to attend our meetings and help us defend them against all attempts to break up our meetings.
 



Some figures on the decline in the foreign trade of the United States since the crisis set in, published in the New York Times of July 31, tell heavily in support of the slogan of the International Left for large scale, long term credits to the Soviet Union. According to the Times the decline in volume has been drastic. It arrives at this conclusion on the basis of the facts that the decline in the wholesale price level of commodities since June 1929, is 33.7 per cent; while the decline in value is 67.8 per cent.
“These heavy losses” says the Times, “amounting in several cases to more than 80 per cent, are not the result merely of a decline in prices, but also of a sharp contraction in volume.”
 
Machinery Decline
Among the commodities which the United States is exporting in diminishing quantities are plows, which declined from 105,958 in 1929 to 8,204; and grain harvesters, which declined from 11,871 to 213. In the first five months of 1929 the United States exported 60 million dollars of agricultural machinery; whereas in the first five months of 1932 this figure fell to four million seven hundred thousand. Similar figures obtain for industrial machinery. Included in this decline is a precipitate decline in Soviet purchases of agricultural and industrial machinery. In a statement issued by the Amtorg in October of last year the value of Soviet purchases was shown to have declined by 51 per cent.
But the years 1929–32 are the period of the great growth and expansion of Soviet industry; of the growth of its inter-relation with the world market. From August 1930 to June 1931, to take but one example, the Soviet Union doubled its exports to Italy and increased its imports sevenfold. So said Commissar of Foreign Trade, P. Rosengoltz, to a delegation of 32 Italian industrialists, who visited the Soviet Union in June a year ago.
What is the cause for the decline in the purchase of what the Soviet needs to build its growing industry? The Amtorg statement of last October says,
“The drastic decline in purchases is due to the lack of favorable credit facilities in this country as contrasted with long term credits extended to Soviet organizations by European countries.” (Our emphasis.)
Credits are what the Soviet Union needs, long-term credits. But the Stalinized Comintern, hamstrung by the fatal theory of socialism in one country, dares not call on the working masses to demand credits from their capitalist governments for the workers’ fatherland. It would be an open admission of the impossibility of building a socialist society in the Soviet Union with the efforts of the Soviet Union alone. And this admission Stalin cannot make.
He seeks to attain the same end – not through the class struggle; but by diplomatic maneuvers. That the Soviet Union has made diplomatic approaches to various capitalist governments for credits is no secret. The Times of July 15, 1931, reported the discussion between the Soviet delegation to Paris and the French negotiators in the following words: “The discussions center around a plan by which the Russians would obtain two to four year credits from France.”
In fact trade treaties have been signed. One was signed with Italy last June. Duranty reported it from Paris.
“The chief Soviet benefits from the trade agreement are credit for buying Italian machinery, aid from Italian specialists, use of the Italian merchant marine for shipping exports and a convenient market tor grain, oil and coal.” (N.Y. Times, June 20, 1931)
But, the Stalinists have argued, the Soviet Union gets its credits by treaty. What need is there of making a mass fight of it?!! As comrade Trotsky pointed out in his World Unemployment and the Five Year Plan, the interest of the workers all over the world in the Soviet Union and its socialist construction remains an abstraction unless it is concretized, in the present situation of world unemployment, by mobilizing the masses to fight for long term credits upon the basis of their understanding that the resulting orders would go some way toward relieving unemployment by opening up a number of factories.
In the United States it would mean that the index of employment in the agricultural machinery industry, for example, would rise from 22.1 at which it stood in June of this year. A similar rise would take place in every branch of industry with which the Soviet would place orders. An identical result would, be achieved in all capitalist countries in which the Soviet was able to place orders.
The volume of imports the Soviet would be able to command would be many times in excess of its present volume, including the volume embraced by its present trade treaties. The result in the construction of socialist industry is too apparent to need elaboration. As one result the volume of exports could be increased with a further increase in imports. So the whole cycle of imports and exports could be increased.
The prestige of the Soviet Union would be increased in the eyes of the workers by its ability to work out large scale plans pivoted on its export and import relations with the world market, and its ability to meet its obligations.
An organized fight for credits is a lever to set the masses in motion against their class enemies. It creates the basis for a united front with the socialist workers against their leaders should they, as is most likely, oppose the united front.
The opportunities such a struggle affords to Communism to appear before the class as the leader in the fight for relief, and the opportunities for class education are enormous. To pass them by and call the slogan counter-revolutionary, as the Stalinists have done, is not the least of their crimes.
The Stalinist idea of diplomatic maneuvering for credits without calling on the masses who are vitally interested in the question rests upon a lack of faith in the masses. But the masses, learning from the Left Opposition, will force the Comintern to place this slogan in the forefront of the fight for relief. In the United States the workers under the pressure of the deepening crisis will force the party to translate its paper turn of half a year ago into a real class fight for long-term, large scale credits to the Soviet Union.
 



The “conference” called by the Unemployed Council of New York under the direction of the Communist party at the Manhattan Lyceum, August 15, “to work out a plan to further advance the fight for immediate relief and unemployment insurance” was a pure brew of opportunism. From beginning to end it was saturated with the spirit of reformism. Every speech was devoted to the fakery of the relief agencies, the collusion of the city government with the real estate sharks and landlords, etc., etc.
In themselves these exposures are in order – provided they are linked up correctly with the revolutionary goal of the working class and the Communists. This was nowhere apparent. In fact its absence made it impossible to distinguish the ideological approach of the conference from a Left wing socialist meeting.
Winters, the reporter by appointment, worked himself into a minor heat over the “insult the city offered the unemployed by allowing the Board of Estimate to take a four month’s vacation.” He made an “analysis” of the failure of the unemployed movement to build organizationally, to build a stronger movement from which he deduced the necessity of building a movement strong enough to wring from them tens and hundreds of millions of dollars for relief.
 
Insurance Relegated
Even unemployment insurance was relegated to the background. It was mentioned only by way of obeisance to a discarded but still living god. Relief, any kind of relief, was the note of the conference. This is not a new development of the party’s efforts to build a movement or relief from the crisis. It is only the latest phase of the opportunist turn initiated a little more than a year ago by Browder in the Daily Worker of March 6 and 12.
The difference lies in the fact that this conference, as the reporter’s speech showed, had a programmatic character. The National Committee of the Unemployed Councils of the U.S.A. has issued a Proposed Draft Program of Fighting Methods and Organization Forms of the Unemployed Councils. Whereas before the party pursued its opportunistic way by twists and turns in the party press it is now definitely committed to a program opportunistic through and through. We will return to this program in the next issue. Time is needed to plough through the swamp and reduce it to its opportunist elements.
The conference was a model of bureaucratic machine control. It ran smoothly on all six cylinders of mechanical control and ideological oil. The conference was opened by Winters who in the name of the arrangement committee nominated Wiseman, organizer of the Unemployed Council. Attempts to make other nominations were ignored and Wiseman rode into the chairmanship on a wave of “ayes”. Wiseman introduced the main reporter, Winters, “who will speak for forty minutes”. Winters consumed an hour and a half of one of the hottest nights in memory.
He outlined the fakery of the relief agencies, the collusion of the city government with the landlords in evicting workers; he spoke much of “our” failure to embrace masses of workers but failed to explain its causes in the incorrect policy of the party. He also subscribed to the Stalinist article of faith, that the line is correct, benedictum sit, but the execution poor.
Winters reached the pinnacle of Stalinist theory and logic in explaining that the arrangement committee some time prior to the convening of the conference had changed the name of the demonstration on September 10 which the conference was called to organize, from “Bread Parade” to “Relief March”. The reason? Shades of Marx and Lenin! Said Winters: This is not to be just another demonstration limited to our members and sympathizers shouting the same slogan for relief and unemployment insurance. It is to be a march of workers already struggling for relief. We are going to indicate that we are going to carry on concrete struggles in every flop house ... The words and music are only too familiar to our readers. Winters’ little quirk did not make this sort of Stalinist pap any more palatable.
The tasks which Winters imposed on the movement were no whit different from those which the movement has been struggling to carry out. As these are contained in their entirety in the Draft Program of the Unemployed Councils we will deal with them next week. Here it is necessary to remark only that they did not advance us one step toward uniting the unemployed and employed, toward making a serious approach to the socialist workers and the workers in the A.F. of L. unions. In short Winters left us standing exactly where we were, marking time furiously in a circle from which the Winters, big and little, cannot lead us.
When Winters was through the floor was thrown open for discussion. The procedure was amazingly simple. The chairman announced that the floor was open for discussion and that the first speaker would be comrade so and so from the Gold Dust Lodge. When the comrade was through the chairman informed us that the way to get the floor was to hand a slip of paper bearing the name of the delegate and his organization – “the next speaker will be ...” It was beautifully simple. How these people fear and hate the Left Opposition!
It will help them nothing. From such bureaucratic stultification can come nothing but confusion. No serious worker can learn anything more about his problems from such spectacles, then he can from the Corpus Christi processions of the Roman Catholic Church. What the Stalinists must be made to realize is that the ideas of Marxian-Leninism cannot be stifled by bureaucratic machines in the Stalinist era any more than they were by the corrupt and degenerate social democratic bureaucracies in the days when the Leninist tactics of the Comintern under Lenin and Trotsky smashed their way through all obstacles.
We will yet throw down the wall that separates us from the party rank and file. We will, together with them, work out a genuine Leninist program for relief from the crisis. It will be a revolutionary program from which every vestige of opportunism will be rooted out.
 



With their dispersal following their forceful eviction from Johnstown, the worker-vets have rung down the curtain on the first act of the fight for the bonus. It is the close of the first act but it is not the final scene. The fight they put up against the iron fist of “democracy” was too dramatic, too fraught with forebodings of the treatment the capitalist class holds in store for its wage slaves for the working class to forget it.
Under the remorseless pressure of the steadily deepening crisis, goaded to action by the cynical indifference of “their” government to their misery, and still permeated by illusions about the institutions of democracy, the vets spontaneously marched on Washington from all parts of the country to demand their “back wages”. The outstanding aspect of that march was its spontaneity. It was not prepared for. It was not organized in advance. In this sense it may be said that the vets were thrown up by the flux of the class struggle.
 
Waters’ Leadership
During the six weeks they were encamped in Washington they tolerated the leadership of the Oregon cannery ex-superintendent who watched their fight with the police and their heroic resistance to the military from the side lines. This individual organized a military police which beat up the Reds, and worked with the secret service men to terrorize and intimidate the men. He conferred regularly with chief of police Glassford and together with him arranged for the segregation of the vets who followed the leadership of the Workers’ Ex-Servicemen’s League.
Under Waters’ leadership the fight assumed a narrow character, limiting itself to a demand for relief without any class content or class issues. No attempt was made by the vets to link up their fight with the broader fight for class relief led by the Communists. By this policy the vets were condemned to fight an isolated struggle without the active support of the masses of the working class who watched their fight with the greatest interest.
By all this the vets gave abundant evidence of their lack of class consciousness Perhaps this was to be expected. The average age of the vets was somewhere between thirty-five and forty. They had come through the years of “prosperity” with profound illusions about the “difference” of American capitalism from the old world imperialisms. They were deeply impregnated with the democratic nature of “our republic”.
The tactics of the Workers’ Ex-Servicemen’s League in denouncing everybody not a faithful follower of the one true Bolshevik, Stalin, alienated them from the masses of the vets and made their isolated demonstrations easy for the police to break up. They failed in their elementary Communist duty of raising the class consciousness of the vets. For this failure the vets and they have paid a heavy price.
The tactic of passive resistance which the vets pursued finally exhausted the little patience of the capitalist class. The armed forces of the government were called into play. First, the police proved unreliable – 1,200 of the 1,400 cops were themselves ex-servicemen!The sailors who were summoned next, notified their masters that they were “sea fighters”, and did not enlist to fight on land. The marines gave a similar answer.
The newspapers, hungry for sensational stories, spread the story far and wide in all its gory details. No item of the gruesome butchery was spared. The New York Evening Journal reporter said that he saw a vet who was lying prone, face to the ground stabbed in the back by a bayonet! No one can be mistaken about the job that was done in Washington by Hoover’s orders.
The working class will not soon forget what it learned from the bonus fight. The fight put up by the veterans will yet become one of the traditions of the revolutionary working class movement. The traditions of American democracy and legalism have become thinner in the minds of the workers. We are nearer to the day when they will snap. This we owe in part to the fight put up by our class brothers in Washington.
The capital which this fight has given us must become the special weapon of the Communists to advance the cause of the revolution. We must proceed by raising the class consciousness of the vets by linking up their fight with the fight for general class relief from the crisis at the expense of the capitalist class and its government. The national conference called by the Workers’ Ex-Servicemen’s League for the end of September must work out a program of accomplishing this task. We will support it with all the means at our disposal.
 



As the election campaign wears on toward its climax on election day the antics of the elephant, the cavortings of the donkey, and the flarings of the torch more clearly reveal the true nature of the three parties of capitalism as they swing into the final phase of their strategy. The “issues” they pounded so heavily in the earlier stages of the campaign have gone by the board as they scramble madly for votes.
Only a few months ago the Republican band-wagon was assuring the country that if the engineer was not measuring up to the publicity ballyhoo it was not his fault. He was the victim of circumstances over which no man or party could prevail. But a series of dramatic incidents in which the Communists did not play the least role brought out clearly the reactionary character of the administration and its shining light. The Hunger March of last December, the shootings of workers demonstrating for relief in Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, etc., focused attention on the vicious resistance of the capitalist class and its servant-engineer to the demands of the unemployed for relief. The nation-wide hunting down and deportation of foreign-born militants; the passage of the Dies Bill; the nation-wide terrorism against the bonus marchers culminating in the armed eviction of the bonuseers from Washington, make up a record of reaction too clear to be explained away as the result of circumstances. The Republican boosters are now prating that Hoover’s policies saved the country. That is the only shred of demagogy left them.
This blind alley into which life has forced the Wall Street elephant has given the Democrats a great opportunity. With windy demagogy they are parading themselves as progressives. They are appealing to the “liberal element of the community”. That is the line of Roosevelt’s speeches in Iowa, Wisconsin and Detroit.
 
The Donkey Brays
How well the donkey is braying this tune will, of course, be decided on Election Day. But this strategy is already paying dividends. The New York Times of October 3 reports A.F. Whitney, president of the Brotherhood of Railroad Trainmen, as saying: “I am supporting Governor Roosevelt because I believe his liberal views pertaining to the welfare of the masses will result in general prosperity.”
But it is not alone the petty bourgeois strata of the working class, the labor aristocracy, which are singing Roosevelt’s liberalism. Senators and congressmen, staunch and not-so-staunch supporters of the Republican machine in “normal” times, are coming out for Roosevelt. They are alarmed at the Leftward drift of the masses, awakening to class consciousness from the illusion nurtured by Hoover and company. A section of their political base, the petty bourgeoisie, is also moving to the Left under pressure of the crisis. These windbags must move along with them or be left behind. And, finally, they see the handwriting on the wall: Hoover and the Republican party are going to get a beating. These new prophets of liberalism have a keen eye for their political futures. They will lose nothing, they calculate, by climbing aboard the band-wagon now.
The indicated success of the Democrats in corralling the “liberal” vote has alarmed the socialist party. They have been making a bid for this vote themselves. In their campaign book just issued, they make it plain, according to the New York Times, that they do not advance any revolutionary objectives. They limit themselves to reforms within the limits of capitalism. Their New York state election program reeks with the same reformism. Mr. Fuess of the Republican party hails the socialist party as respectable. In the rush for votes the socialist party leans, not on the working class it claims to represent but whose interests it betrays, but strains itself to the right, to allure the petty bourgeoisie with its respectability.
 
Socialists and Liberals
To offset the threatened Democratic sweep of the “progressive” and ‘’liberal” vote the socialist party had undertaken a mobilization of the more “radical” liberals. Together with them it has organized the Committee of 100,000 to support the Thomas-Maurer Ticket. The chairman of this melange of philosophers, bishops, editors, and economists, is Paul Douglas, professor of economy in the University of Chicago. Among the vice-chairmen are John Dewey, chairman of the League for Independent Political Action; Morris Cohen, professor of philosophy in City College, New York; Oswald Garrison Villard, editor of the Nation; and His Grace, Bishop Francis J. McConnell. There are others. They are of the same stripe.
The organization of the Committee from the point of view of the socialist party is easy to understand. But what is the meaning of this combination from, the point of view of the committee? It does not stand for socialism or the social democracy. It has issued no statement endorsing the socialist party platform. It is not an auxiliary of the socialist party. It is not subject to it politically or ideologically.
On the contrary it is opposed to socialism. Sitting in Norman Thomas’ office on September 23, Paul Douglas issued a statement to the press, in which the New York Times reported him as “frankly conceding his doubts of the ultimate victory of socialism in the United States.” The committee is for a “third party” but it does not see it in the socialist party: “A large vote for Thomas and Maurer will consolidate sentiment for a new party ——”.
What is the game this band of confused intellectuals is playing? It wants to cajole a few reforms from the Hoovers. Said Douglas in the same statement: “A large vote for Thomas and Maurer ... will throw such a scare into the old parties that no matter which one wins they will make some concessions.” That is the extent of their progressiveness and liberalism!
But these people are also alarmed at the indicated success of the Democrats in capturing the “progressive” and “liberal” vote. They figure that if Roosevelt wins the election as a progressive, they themselves will have no leg to stand on as progressives. But if Hoover gets in this will be a repudiation of Roosevelt’s “liberalism” and will have them alone in the field as the “progressive” opposition That is the meaning of Douglas’ statements that: “I think that we can get more out of the election of Hoover with a big vote for Thomas, than out of the election of Roosevelt with a small vote for Thomas”; and: “We won’t get a Liberal-Conservative line-up till we smash the Democratic party.”
Because of their confusion, of their lack of a clear political program on a class basis, these people are brought to a pass in which they are forced to desire and to lend objective support to the reaction they ostensibly set out to fight.
To be sure we hold no brief for the donkey, any more than we do for the elephant or the socialist party. All three are the handmaidens of capitalism. Each party plays its role in the class struggle. The reactionary nature of the Hoover-Republican line is now clearly established for large sections of the masses and the petty bourgeoisie. The equally reactionary role of the Democratic remains to be established on a national scale. The treacherous nature of the socialist party leadership must also be established.
From every street corner, in every Communist organ the story of this unprincipled combination of the socialist party with the “Left” petty bourgeois intelligentsia must be told and retold.
 



(Continued from last issue)
The Stalinists, foreseeing that a serious attempt to seize power might precipitate intervention by the armed forces of the United States, came to the conclusion, at the same time that they prepared the “Insurrection”, that it was necessary to make efforts to avert intervention. Their ideas on this subject were first advanced in this country by Sinani in the December 1933 Communist. With the idea in abstracto, we have no disagreement. What is required, however is an examination to see whether the methods proposed do not com promise the principled position of the revolution. The seizure of power by the workers anywhere on the face of the earth today will be answered by world imperialism with political and economic support of the overthrown capitalists and if the world and domestic situations permit, attempts at armed suppression of the revolution. Russian and Siberian soil is fertilized with the blood and bones of thousands of workers who gave up their lives in defense of the Russian Revolution in the great civil war. As soon as the Spanish workers and peasants overthrew Alfonso and established the republic British warships rushed to Spanish waters. When the Austrian workers fought the Heimwehr on the barricades Italy and Czecho-Slovakia massed troops on the frontiers.
 
Necessity of Tactical Maneuvers
Realistic revolutionaries must take this danger into account in their program and prepare to meet it. The vital aspect of resistance to intervention in addition to the fight on domestic soil is the extension of the struggle to the soil of the imperialist country. Demonstrations, protest strikes, a broad mass movement in sympathy with the proletarian revolution abroad on the domestic soil of the attacking imperialists and in its vulnerable foreign markets, colonies, mandates, protectorates, can force a halt in the aggression, until the rest of the movement catches up with the outpost sufficiently to make its protest count. In the case of Cuba upon which is centered the eyes of the millions of Latin American workers oppressed by the same imperialist power, the United States the Cuban proletarian state will appeal to them for support and call on them to follow the example of the Cuban workers.
Now let us see how it stands with the Stalinists with respect to Cuba. According to Sinani (December 1933, Communist)
“— the Communist Party of Cuba considers it advisable for the workers’ and peasants’ government, if it should be formed, to enter into negotiations with the government of the U.S.A. on the conditions of nationalization of big foreign property, while not abandoning this nationalization, i.e., it allows the possibility of buying out this property ... the Communist Party of Cuba allows the possibility of retaining American ownership to some extent in the form of concessions, as to the conditions on which the property will be bought out (amount, forms and date of payment, etc.) negotiations will have to be carried out between the future revolutionary government of Cuba and the government of the United States.” (Our emphasis)
It Is clear from the underscored parts that the sense of this passage defines a MANEUVERING policy of the Communist Party AFTER it has state power. It is the more understandable when it is remembered that this was written, as the text itself clearly states, in the middle of September, that is, a short time before the Communist Party OSTENSIBLY had the perspective of seizing power.
 
A Retreat in Face of Imperialists
One thing is certain: had the workers seized power in Cuba at that or any other time in the period since the overthrow of Machado, they would have faced the problem of armed intervention by the United States. Or if they seize it in the future before we seize it here the Cuban workers will face that problem either from the U.S. or some other imperialist power. In that situation it would be entirely correct to draw the superior power into protracted negotiations over treaties, settlements, concessions, etc. while might and main were being expended to arouse the workers of Latin America and the United States to come to the assistance of the Cuban workers’ state. And, depending upon the situation and the relation of forces to grant concessions would be entirely correct and unavoidable. The alternatives would be voluntary surrender or armed struggle. Sinani’s explanation defines the limits of the concessions to be made: they proposed to make concessions up to the point of nationalization which they proposed to retain. Should this method fail the Communist Party, says Sinani, would “... organize a real nationwide armed resistance to the interventionists.”
All of this is correct. If we spend so much time on this point, it is not to heap praise on the Stalinists but in the interest of speaking out what is and of making our position clear. We have nothing in common with those ultra-leftists who regard any concession as a betrayal of the revolution and of Marxism. Were we the party in Cuba that is how we would present the question to the masses. Intransigence in principle does not preclude but makes necessary flexibility in tactics; the ability to maneuver within the framework of firmly established Marxist principles, that is the essence of Leninist strategy. The road of the ultra-leftists leads to sectarianism.
Sinani’s position as we have given it above, we repeat is correct If the matter rested there, if thai were all that were involved, we might conclude that the Stalinists had learned from the events of August and were beginning to steer a revolutionary course.
But that was not the case. The idea of averting intervention as formulated by the Stalinists has two aspects: the policy of maneuvering AFTER the seizure of power – which we have already discussed; and the policy of capitulating to American imperialism and the policy of NOT SEIZING POWER.
In Sinani’s explanation there are three main points: “— the C.P. of Cuba tries to direct the chief blow of the revolutionary masses above all against the local Cuban ruling classes”; “— the Communist Party considers it inadvisable for the workers to seize the American enterprises, and puts forward the slogan of workers’ control carried out through factory committees (if there are revolutionary conditions) which can secure the satisfaction of the demands of the workers”; “— the Communist Party considers it inadvisable to force ahead the seizure of plantations belonging to American capital, and fights above all for considerable reductions of the rent of this land —.”
 
Who Are the Owners of Cuba?
In China the Stalinists tried in vain and with disastrous consequences to make fundamental distinctions, between the native bourgeoisie and the foreign imperialists and attached themselves as a tail to the former. In Cuba they repeat the same treachery but they want to direct their blows against the native bourgeoisie and lie down before the imperialists. Who are the Cuban ruling classes? What is their role in Cuban economy and society? Under the oppressive heel of American imperialism Cuban capitalism had been unable to develop its own finance capitalist class. Almost the entire banking of the island is done by three American and one Canadian bank and their branches. The railroads, sugar plantations, telephone, electric, gas and ice industries, mines, docks shipping, street cars, buses, building and other construction; every large and important industry is owned by American capital or leased by it. A small share is in the hands of British capital. The Cuban capitalists have minor shares. They are the vice-presidents of American firms. They wait on the pleasure and orders of the Chase National and the National City Bank. They beg favors from the House of Morgan and the Royal Bank of Canada. They are perhaps the most helpless and least important bourgeoisie in the world. To conduct a revolutionary struggle against them and not against the American interests is first of all a total impossibility, and secondly, its pronouncement is a plain statement of capitulation.
 
Surrendering the Struggle
When the C.P. says it considers it inadvisable to seize American enterprises it says that it will not touch EIGHTY PERCENT OF THE ECONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF THE COUNTRY. Let us consider the sugar industry. Almost ninety percent of it is in the hands of American capital. Hundreds of thousands of acres of plantations are owned outright by American capital. Hundreds of thousands more are leased by it through banking arrangements which give it virtual ownership On these vast expanses, the largest of their kind in the capitalist world, live whole cities and their working class populations. For work and bread, for light and gas and ice they are dependent on the equipment of the plantations. If the workers are not to seize these plantations when he general situation demands it and other workers are seizing the isolated plantations owned by Cuban capital it means that they can conduct no struggle at all.
(Continued in next issue)
 



Part I

Part II

Part III
* * *
Note by ETOL
It would appear that Part III was never published.
 



A book – a biography no less than a novel or a play – like a building must be constructed according to a plan and definite rules. The first law of biography is to tell the truth as you see it and understand it.
That is not the basis of Fox’s biography of Lenin, nor is the book informed with the spirit of truth or even a respect for accuracy. Fox is no disciple of Diogenes. He lies about Lenin, about Trotsky, yea, about Stalin. In his biography all three appear like the caricatures in the mirrors at Coney Island: Lenin is seen as in a mist, suspiciously god-like; Trotsky is the Evil One; Stalin is the Bolshevik angel Gabriel of the Russian Revolution.
The truth is – Ralph Fox is a Stalinist, a leading member of the British Communist Party, a product and defender of the system of lies, slander, terror and defeat which has entered into history under the name of Stalinism. His work is written from that bias in support of its political needs.
But after all the thing has the form of a biography and must be judged as one. Let us examine its plan, first with regard to Lenin. If you have the patience to wade through its lies and distortions you will find the author’s thesis explicitly and precisely stated on page 309. Lenin “... had knowledge, intellectual power, vision; the power of swift decision and decisive action; courage beyond the normal; ...”
 
False Picture of Lenin
It is true: Lenin had courage, intellectual power, knowledge. But the possession of these qualities did not by themselves distinguish him from thousands of men in the world’s history, nor yet from, hundreds of revolutionary leaders. Nor does Fox allow for a peculiar combination of these qualities of Lenin which could conceivably explain his greatness.
Fox himself must have felt the shortcoming of his explanation for he attempts to add in the same sentence quoted above, precisely that quality which, in his opinion, distinguished Lenin from all men in all the years of the world’s recorded history, and explains his greatness: “... but yet the most striking thing in his whole character is that he was a man like other men”. Here is wisdom! Lenin was great because he was not!
But it is not a laughing matter. For this stupidity serves Fox as a means of misrepresenting Lenin and all that he stood for. It would take a volume equal in size to Fox’s lamentable work to set aright the errors and lies he encompasses in 313 pages.
Suffice it to say that on this basis Fox has no need to explain Lenin in relation to the epoch in which he lived, the conditions in which he worked, and the impression he made on the world and the movement. For the explanation lies entirely in Lenin himself. Thus Fox can entirely neglect the question of internationalism so decisive for Lenin. A sentence or two for the Zimmerwald and Kienthal conferences and not a word about the first four Congresses of the C.I.! So it is with Lenin’s fundamental analysis of the post-war epoch of capitalism as one of wars and revolutions. There is very little discussion of it so that it is impossible for Fox to illuminate Lenin’s historic struggle against the Second International which culminated in the founding of the Third.
 
No Word of Lenin’s Ideas
As a result there is not a word – literally not a word – about Lenin’s conception of a revolutionary communist party as a centralized, sternly disciplined organization based on a democratic, inner life. How could anyone with the knowledge of what a Stalinist party is like today discuss Lenin’s conception of what a vanguard party should be!
What results is that Fox, looking at Lenin through the colored glass of Stalin’s embalmment of Leninism, makes a mystic out of a great, human, revolutionary leader. Read the passages in which assassins are turned from the execution of their foul designs by some mysterious force in Lenin which transcends all human understanding and “explains better than a thousand political thesis what was happening in Russia”.
If Fox is forced to exercise some restraint in his treatment of Lenin, the current needs of Stalinism give him carte blanche to heap abuse and lies on one of the great figures of the revolutionary movement of the modern proletariat. In his treatment of Trotsky Fox reveals himself as a literary assassin: Trotsky underestimated the peasantry; he agitated for peace during the war; he patronized Lenin; he was wrong in the revolution of 1905; he was a leader of the Liquidators; he was responsible for the defeat of the Finnish revolution; he was only a figure head in the armed insurrection of October; he bungled the military direction of the civil war; he was partly responsible for Lenin’s death; and so on and so forth.
And all this structure of lies rests on a thesis, if you please, which the author is not ashamed to advance as the solemn truth: “Trotsky’s whole political life and outlook were colored by the outlook of those petty-bourgeois elements in Russia whom history had forced on to the revolutionary stage”. Let us put a cross over the slander and pass on.
Fox advances no explicit thesis about Stalin. But there is one. Let us put together what he says about his master: Stalin really organized the insurrection in October 1917; it is implied that he saved the day for Lenin in April when “he threw the great weight of his authority behind the theses (on bourgeois democracy) presented by Lenin”; Lenin turned Stalin “into a kind of specialist for saving the situation at desperate moments on almost every front. Indeed Stalin himself wrote to Lenin that he was being turned ‘into a specialist for cleaning the stables of the war department’”!
Enough! Enough! The major thesis of the hook should now be clear: Lenin was a demi-god; Stalin is his flesh-and-blood continuator. Trotsky’s record and’ activity challenge the whole, false conception. Trotsky must be destroyed even if it is necessary to rewrite history, slander Trotsky, lie about Stalin, deify Lenin.
History and truth, like murder, cannot be long concealed. They must make their way through all obstacles into the thinking of the masses. They are doing it now. And as they do Stalinism and its prostituted servitors are fast becoming an abomination in the labor movement.
 



In Cuba in the summer of 1933 there were only two serious organized political working class forces: The Communist Party (Stalinists) and the Bolshevik-Leninists. Our section was not quite two years old, and, at that time, still committed to the orientation of reforming the C.I. and the C.P. of Cuba, and was a comparatively small organization. Its greatest strength lay in its connections with the trade union movement. It wielded great and almost decisive influence in the Havana Federation of Labor composed of thirty trade unions in which anarcho-syndicalists were also influential. It was a leading organization in the general strike.
But in size, prestige, and influence it was weaker than the Communist Party which had a wider and more powerful organizational structure and base. In its trade union center, the C.N.O.C., National Confederation of Cuban Workers, were thirty-five unions. The C.P. had auxiliaries and peripheral organizations embracing thousands of workers. If it was not, as it claimed, the leader, it was the outstanding organized political force iu the working class. On its record and in its policy, therefore, are to be sought the reasons for the failure of the workers to advance toward their liberation, and for their set-back at the hands of Mendieta.
 
Stalinists Come to Aid of Class Enemy
One the ninth of August, two days before Machado fell, when the general strike had reached its seventh day, the Executive of the C.N.O.C. (the Cuban Stalinist T.U.U.L., section of the R.I.L.U.) and the Political Bureau of the Communist Party issued a manifesto in which they said that “... Machado cannot be overthrown by strikes” and that the Labor Federation of Havana (trade union center, at that time under the leadership of anarcho-syndicalist elements and the Bolshevik-Leninists) “was leading the workers to massacre”.
Let no one think that the view expressed here was only a question of evaluating the situation and working out a strategic line of struggle. No! although that in itself were enough to confuse the workers at the decisive moment and demoralize them, disrupting their struggle and doing yeoman’s work for the class enemy. The manifesto was the “ideological” motivation for a treacherous act of strikebreaking. The Stalinists called on the workers to go back to work!
They themselves admit it. In one of the resolutions prepared for the Fourth National Labor Unity Congress of the C.N.O.C. held in Havana in January, 1934 they say:
“The National Confederation of Labor of Cuba, failing to see and apply the experience acquired in so many years’ of strike struggles, which showed in every strike that all economic demands have their profound political content – drew a false analysis of the content of the general strike ... The false appraisal which was a grave error (!) gave as a natural ( !) immediate, consequence, a second, graver (!) error, which consisted in the belief that the workers of each industry, once their demands were obtained, should return to work, and telling the workers that they should not be moved by the slogan of continuing the strike, when in reality the masses, who realized clearly the political content of the strike, were determined to continue it.” (Quoted from the January 12 Manifesto of the General Union of Commercial Employees of Cuba, an affiliate of the Havana Federation of Labor, to the Fourth Congress of the C.N.O.C. – Our emphasis throughout.)
 
Daily Workers Gives Assistance
Fatal admissions! The Stalinists claim the authority of Marx and Lenin! They call themselves the vanguard of the working class, yet they cannot recognize the political content of a general strike (!!), they are so obtuse with bureaucratic conceit they do not know what the masses want in the fire of the revolution itself!!
But it is not a question of stupidity alone. The Manifesto of the Commercial Employees Union charges: “What the Confederation does not say is precisely that knowing the profound political content of the movement that was developing, it believed in its own miserable concept of the movement, that it was necessary to have Machado remain in power in order for them to continue to enjoy illegality” – that is, maintain the appearance of being illegal.
There is the ugly story of how the epigones sold out the general strike iu Cuba. Let us see how their American brothers-iu-shame covered up the deed. On August 21 the Daily Worker reported:
“Havana, August 14 (By Mail). At noon today the bus and tramway workers returned to work, having won all their demands. With them went back the barbers, bakers, foodworkers, railway workers, etc. However, the shoe plants, textile factories and many others remained out, firmly holding out for their demands. The decision to go back to work was reached last night at 9:15 at a packed meeting of over 700 bus workers in the Trade Union Center of the C.N.O.C.”
It is clear that the Stalinists were sending men back to work.
 
Lying Out of the Whole Cloth
But this report contradicts one which appeared in the Daily nine days before, on August 12: “Havana, August 11. – The yellow union leaders, to help Welles and Machado, have called on the bus workers” (note: the bus workers) “and street car workers to return to work”!! On the 14th the same story: “Just before Machado flew Cuba the yellow trade union leaders in his pay attempted to call a halt to the general strike.”
On the 15th the Daily tried to make it appear that the C.N.O.C. was standing firm against the strike breaking of the “yellow” trade union leaders:
“The leaders of the transport workers, and especially those of the Railway Brotherhood, had already attempted to break the strike without asking any concessions. The representatives of the revolutionary C.N.O.C. held fast to their demands ...”
And finally in the same dispatch printed on the 21st which announced the meeting in the trade union center, of the C.N.O.C.:
“... 50 young bus workers signed application cards for the Y.C.L. This was the reply of the workers to the scabby statement of the reformist Havana Federation of Labor leaders headed by the renegade Junco that the leaders of the C.N.O.C. were strike-breakers because the accepted the concessions of Machado.” (Our emphasis)
By their own words they stand condemned! Yellow trade union leaders indeed! It is all lies, fraud, treachery!
 
The “Insurrection” of September 29
Emboldened by the valor and revolutionary ardor of the masses, who, a mouth later, overthrew De Cespedes, the Stalinist adventurers declared for the armed insurrection and set the date for September 29, the day of the arrival of Mella’s ashes from Mexico. Here ultimatism reached its greatest and at the same time its most tragically absurd height. True that Grau’s regime was unstable, under fire from the American imperialists; true that the Cuban bourgeoisie were planning counter-revolutionary coups; true that the masses were pressing it from below to carry out its demagogic, anti-imperialist and democratic pronouncements.
But the influence of the Stalinist Party which was to carry through the insurrection did not extend to the majority of the workers. In fact, following the August strikebreaking, entire unions were freeing themselves from Stalinist influence. The organs for the preparation of the insurrection and the seizure of power, the Soviets, did not exist on a national scale nor was the Stalinist party the dominant influence in those scattered Soviets which did exist. And the army, decisive factor, in the civil war, had given no demonstration of its sympathy for the Communist Party. In terms of the seizure of power by the working class, it was an unknown quantity. In Russia the Bolsheviks tested the Petrograd garrison before the insurrection when the Soviets countermanded the order of the Provisional Government sending two thirds of the garrison to the front. They were rooted in the soldiers’ Soviets and committees. The Cuban Stalinists’ connection with the armed forces was not great. Sinnani reported that two weeks before the “insurrection” the army was only beginning to pass over to the side of the workers.
 
Not an Insurrection But a Putch
In reality the events of the 20th of September were not an insurrection but a putch on the order, if not on the scale, of Canton. Scores of workers gave up their lives as a sacrifice to Stalinist criminal adventurism. The soldiers began to turn against the workers and Grau gained time and strength.
Panic seized the impotent! For twenty days the Stalinists called on the workers to come out in a general strike! The Manifesto of the General Union of Commercial Employees says: “Nobody paid any attention to their tearful entreaties.”
(Continue to Next Issue)
 



The signal for working class struggle sounded by the general strike of New York hotel workers has found a stirring response in the strike of the New York taxi drivers. Already in the first week of its stormy career it has given the working class of New York and the country an inspiring demonstration of working class militancy. In its staccato language of speed, action, and solidarity can be heard the authentic voice of the proletariat. Consider it! Here were men horribly exploited, unorganized, a prey of politicians, racketeers and crooks, without traditions of trade union struggle or even the most elementary understanding of the class struggle. Notwithstanding, within a week, in the fire of struggle, they forged a union which embraces almost half the drivers in the industry.
The basis for the strike is to be found in the miserable conditions of the taxi drivers: a weekly average wage of ten to twelve dollars; twelve hour shifts and more; some men worked the “Coolie” shift – twenty-four hours a day, sleeping at the wheel; failure to bring in a minimum resulting in discharge; the black list; and, finally, the five cent tax cutting into their tips.
The strike received a certain stimulus from LaGuardia, when he offered not to appeal the decision of the Supreme Court of New York declaring the five-cent tax on all rides illegal, if the cab company owners would turn over to the men all the tax money collected up to the time of the court’s decision and held in escrow pending the decision. The companies refused LaGuardia’s offer and made a substitute offer of only forty percent. The men felt that all of the money belonged to them as the tax really came out of their tips. In their view LaGuardia was with them and the companies against them.
When LaGuardia saw the torrent he attempted to unload responsibility before his own bourgeois and petty bourgeois supporters and hamstring the movement. He advised the men to affiliate with the A.F. of L. and made efforts to secure the intervention of Green himself. As a result of his “help” Gailbraith of the A.F. of L. Philadelphia Taximen’s Union was sent to New York as general organizer of the strike.
At the same time LaGuardia called in Morris L. Ernst of the American Civil Liberties Union to act as mediator. Ernst arranged a number of meetings. The fruit of his efforts was a “settlement” which said nothing about the recognition of the union, minimum wages or maximum hours. In addition the proposed distribution of the accumulated tax money was unsatisfactory. The men voted down this “settlement” and demonstrated what they thought of it on the streets against the scab drivers.
But the nub of the boss strategy was the attempt to use the independents to divide the ranks. An Independent is the owner-driver of one cab. The five-cent tax question did not affect them as it went into their pockets. They are likewise indifferent to the hours and wage question. In short they are petty bourgeois individualists. Consequently they were and are eager to reap the harvest of fares that they saw when the company drivers went on strike. Terminals and piers reserved to the company cabs by contract were now inviting them to come in and render “service to the public”. The independents offered to pay two dollars apiece a day into the treasury of the union if the union would agree to their working.
But the strikers saw through this scheme. They realized that if the independents were out on the streets that would be a powerful lever in the hands of the bosses to break the strike. They sacrificed the money and voted for “no cabs on the streets.” And forthwith they repaired to the streets to translate the vote into reality.
It is not clear exactly how the Socialist Panken got into the strike and how he became one of its spokesmen. But one thing is certain; he is a partner to the latest perfidious sell-out arranged by LaGuardia, Ernst and some people on the Committee of Thirteen which conducted the negotiations for the strikers. The terms of the sell-out are the worst imaginable. The question of union recognition which has became the crucial one in the strike is not even mentioned. The wages and hours question is ignored. The accumulated tax money is referred to the future for distribution. The men get absolutely nothing.
Before this maneuver was put over on the men they tried to spread the strike to other sectors of transportation. They chose the bus drivers and conductors of the Fifth Ave. buses as the point of attack.
The strike has already recorded positive gains for the taxi men and the entire labor movement. It stiffened the morale of the hotel strikers, and it has helped their strike to the extent that it has made it difficult for most and impossible for some diners to reach the hotels. It has set an inspiring example of working class militancy and will undoubtedly be an impetus to other workers to struggle against their intolerable conditions. And what is of paramount importance for the taxi drivers; win or lose they will come out of this strike with a union. We are also sure of another thing. This strike of the taxi drivers will not be the last.
 



In the era of the “third period” the united front policy of the Stalinized Comintern was the united front from below. Reduced to it concrete meaning this policy was a call to the workers in the Socialist parties and the reformist and Right wing unions to leave their organizations, leave their leadership, and enter into joint action with the Stalinists under the leadership of the latter on a program determined in advance by them. The theoretical sugar-coating with which the Stalinists dressed up their conceptions did not for one minute alter their ultimatistic and disruptive nature.
On March 6, 1933 when the situation was already lost in Germany and Fascism was decimating the organized working class the Comintern issued a call to the Second International for a united front of organizations, repudiating on its face the united front from below. Forthwith the journalistic hacks of the Stalinist apparatus set out to prove that the line of the C.I. manifesto was the only correct line, that this was always the line, that any other was counter-revolutionary.
On May 1 the C.I. issued another manifesto reverting back to the united front from below. The same writers wriggled like worms. The united front from organization to organization had unmistakably demonstrated its superiority in the question of the Chicago relief demonstration, the New York May Day parade, the Mooney movement and the united front with the Socialist locals on the West coast. The people who had seen its fruits struggled against abandoning this policy. No doubt heavy pressure from Moscow was instrumental in forcing the recalcitrants to accept the infallible line.
The theses of the Thirteenth Plenum affirmed again the united front from below: “The 13th Plenum of the E.C.C.I. calls upon all Sections of the C.I. persistently to fight for the realization of a united militant front with the social-democratic workers in spite of and against the will of the treacherous leaders of social-democracy.” And the sub-head under which this appears is: “C. Against Social-Democracy and For a United Front from Below.”
That is the policy now. But within this same FORM a change has taken place. Two outstanding events demonstrate this clearly. In the New York Hotel Strike after many appeals for unity of the Stalinist paper union with the A.F.W. the Stalinists put their new united front from below policy to work. They called upon all the strikers to strike under the leadership of the A.F.W. And under this slogan they invaded the A.F.W. The line they pursued there was no less disruptive than it was formerly when they were outside.
In the Madison Square Garden protest the Stalinists, who were not invited, came down in the name of unity to make a united front from below. Under the direct incitement of the Party leaders they conducted themselves as Fascists do at workers meetings.
Their united front is a maneuver to transfer their disruption from the outside to the inside. In this way they want to cover up their weakness and bankruptcy.
Essentially the policy is the same: disruption of all organizations and movements not controlled by the C.P. in the name of and under the slogan of unity.
The appeal of the Daily Worker of February 18 to the Socialist Party for a united front is an attempt to cover up the Stalinists’ entirely unjustifiable conduct at the Madison Square Garden protest. It means nothing. And it does not signify a change in the united front policy of the Communist Party.
The recent united front maneuvers of the Stalinists have given rise to much confusion on the part of workers who thought that the Stalinists unlike the leopard could change their spots. They thought the Stalinists, cognizant of their weakness, had finally come round to seriously promote unity in the workers’ rank. The course of the Stalinists in the Hotel Strike and in the Madison Square Garden protest should show them that it is only a tactical shift within the framework of the old strategy; and that its essence is still the same: disruption.
 



The Cuban revolution, is now on the defensive. The grandiose sweep of the workers which drove Mach-ado out of the seat of power, hurtled De Cespedes into the abyss and unwisely tolerated Grau is now retreating before Mendieta and Batista, that is to say, before the Cuban servants of American imperialism. Not the workers, but the imperialist-bourgeois reaction ousted Grau and replaced his vacillating regime with the black puppet act of Mendieta-Batista. Mendieta was far from the bourgeoisie’s ideal of a “strong man to deal with the situation”, that is put down the workers with blood and iron. He began by returning the electric company plant to its owners and sending soldiers to force them to work. The workers responded with a hunger strike. Other workers threatened to come out in sympathy. Mendieta decreed all strikes illegal in the light, water, telephone, telegraph and other services. The workers responded by calling strikes for the seventh of February. A general strike began to loom up. Already on the third of February Mendieta declared that the problem created by the return of the electric plant and the strike “might contribute to the fall” of his government.
 
Advance of Reaction
But there was no party to give leadership to the workers and the favorable moment passed. Step by step the reaction has advanced with the harvest driving the workers at the point of the bayonet and persecuting their organizations. Thus the Havana Federation of Labor which was under the joint influence of anarcho-syndicalists and the Bolshevik-Leninists passed over to the side of the latter and was illegalized by Mendieta. Other organizations too have suffered a like fate.
But the question is not yet settled. No decisive battles have been fought. The apparent strength of the bourgeoisie is two parts the failure of the workers to advance on the road of decisive struggles and two parts the armed might oi the United States military forces Mendieta has not solved a single one of the grave economic, social and political problems of the country. The quota assigned to Cuban sugar for export to its chief market, the United States, is still a little more than one third of the productive capacity of the island’s crops and its INDUSTRIAL-TECHNICAL organization.
No progress has been made In liquidating the huge surplus in storage in Cuba of one million tons; approximately ONE HALF OF THE QUOTA FOR THE CURRENT CROP. No moratorium on the staggering debts to the Wall Street banks has been declared; no reduction in them, despite optimistic White House pronouncements, has been put on the agenda of current problems. The approach of the end of the harvest means that tens of ;housands of workers will again be thrown out of the process of production with no prospect whatever of working again until the late fall of the year! The convocation of the Constituent Assembly has been postponed untl some time before the end of the year, the exact date has not been set. And the liberties of the workers and their organizations have been curtailed.
 
Perspective of Struggles
The approach of the end of the harvest raises the perspective of further struggles by the workers. Already there are signs of the coming storms. Like the gusts that precede the gale the students are now again in the center of the stage protesting against abuses. Tomorrow they will be followed by the workers who will give a deeper social tone to the music of the class struggle. Strikes are again beginning to plague the government. We have already seen with what Caribbean speed and fury these storms come up. Mendieta hopes to lull the storm by a few “reforms” which settle nothing and by the extradition and trial of Machado!
What course will the workers’ struggles take? Will they confine themselves to the demands for the improvement of conditions, the shortening of hours, increases in wages, the discharge of an offensive police official? Or will they take place under political slogans? Will the workers demand nationalization and control That depends on whether the workers assimilate the lessons of the past period’. And that in turn on whether there is a vanguard capable of helping them learn. From this point of view the situation is promising. The influence of Stalinism has been weakened both ideologically and organizationally by its adventuristic-treacherous course; the influence of the Bolshevik-Leninists is increasing.
 
Democratic Demands
If today it is necessary – and it is necessary – to advance slogans for democratic demands, that does not yet by itself indicate within what framework these demands shall be put forth. In other words, what is the perspective? We have nothing in common with the craven grovellers before American Imperialism – the Stalinists – who want to struggle for “municipal power”, and who promise not to attack American property. In our opinion the revolution will traverse the ground from which it retreated with great speed and arrive quickly at the decisive questions. There will be no escaping the problem of state power. Failure to seize it will mean, not the step-by-step reaction of Mendieta, but the bloody heel of military dictatorship.
Whether the workers will be able to maintain power is another question. No one can give an answer to that question now. That depends on many things; principally on the. world situation. If we are to assume the victorious sweep of Fascist reaction over Europe with the strengthening of reaction in the Western hemisphere then the doom of the Cuban workers’ state would be pronounced. But if, on the contrary, we envisage a victory in France where the workers can take power, with the incalculable advantages for the labor and revolutionary movements everywhere that must ensue, then we can hold forth a more encouraging perspective for the Cuban revolution.
 
Situation in U.S.
More immediate to the resolution of the issue is the factor of the internal situation in the United States. The great wave of strikes which are impending in this country will not be without its effect on the Cuban workers. No one can foretell how far the strikes will go in weakening the imperialist colossus. But there is no mistaking the rumbling of the volcano which may burst with tremendous shocks to capitalist terrain. Will they develop in a revolutionary direction? Will we succeed in arousing the workers of Latin America? On the answer to that question which will be given in the fire of the class struggle and in which we must have an influence we will have our answer to the question of whether the Cuban workers who may seize power will be able to hold it. We are not clairvoyants but we reject with contempt the “perspectives” of those “revolutionists” who see only the strength of American imperialism already rotting with gangrene.
In Cuba as everywhere the fate ot the workers, of the entire population, of culture, and possibly, of civilization itself, depends on our success or failure in building the Fourth International. Let us hope that the Bolshevik-Leninists of Cuba at the head of the masses will go forward to victory.
 



The Johnson Bill barring the purchase or sale in this country of bonds or securities of governments in default ou their debts to the government of the United States has been interpreted by the Attorney General as including the Soviet Union in the category of defaulters because of the traditional refusal of the Soviet to pay the loans made to the Czarist and Kerensky governments. The ruling will make it difficult for the Soviet to get credits here for the purchase of machinery and necessary materials.
The United States knows it will never get even the better part of the colossal sums its rivals owe it under the head of war debts. To pay them is a sheer impossibility. Roosevelt is trying to put a squeeze on them to get better trade terms, to force down the enormous tariff walls which impede the flow of exports from the U.S.
 
Purpose of the Loans
With the Soviet Union the question stands somewhat differently. The loans to the Czar were used for the brutal suppression of the workers and peasants. The loans to Kerensky were a mite of the golden flood the U.S. poured into the treasuries of the Allies of whom it considered Russia one, to beat German imperialism to its knees. The Bolsheviks served notice before they came to power that they would repudiate! the loans and they kept their word. Moreover against these claims which the United States makes against the Soviet there stands for settlement the costs, insofar as they can be calculated, of the invasion of the territory of the U.S.S.R., by the allied imperialists, including the U.S., the murder of peaceful workers and peasants, the pillage of crops and livestock, the devastation of cities and towns, the destruction of railroads – the immense havoc wrought by the attempt to satisfy the rapacious hunger of insatiate capitalism for the Soviet market.
 
The Russian Market
The appetite of the U.S. profit-makers has not decreased with the years. On the contrary, it has grown apace as its difficulties in getting markets multiplied. The crisis has whetted it now to the keenness of a razor-edge. Every market is doubly, triply, ten times as important as it was. Among the markets of the world the land that runs eastward from the Polish border to the Pacific Ocean and southward from the Arctic Circle to China, India, Persia, Turkey and the Black Sea is certainly not the least.
What it can mean to Wall Street which is rising from a sick bed to smite the world can be seen in the Commerce Department’s foreign trade figures for March. Exports to the Soviet Union which can absorb – on favorable credit terms according to Litvinov’s figures at the London Economic Conference – one billion dollars in machinery, materials and the products of light industry, were less than a million dollars, a little more than one half of one percent of the total export for the month. Compare this with the export to little Cuba, wracked by a social and economic crisis – about four and a half million dollars, four times as much!
 
Soviet Union Needs Credit
What trade would mean to the Soviet Union should be obvious from Litvinov’s figures alone. The Militant has discussed the question many times. Here let us note from Litvinov’s figures to what extent the Soviet Union’s dependence on the world market has grown with its economic successes and what demands on the market its further progress makes necessary. Notwithstanding, imports from Russia to the United States in March according to the Commerce Department were also less than one million dollars while from Cuba the U.S. imported more than two and a half times that amount.
Why doesn’t the Soviet Union buy more, the U.S. export more? The Soviet Union has explained again and again that it will buy plentifully up to the hilt, if it gets favorable credit terms. Despite all the treaties signed by Stalin and diplomatic approaches to capitalist governments the Soviet has been unable to get credits on the scale required.
Until now the United States has discouraged trade with the Soviet Union. Its policy was motivated by fear of the October Revolution and the hope of preventing its growth economically and consequently in the military sphere as well, by withholding from it what it required most – machinery. To a large extent they failed. Despite the capitalist blockade and the false course of Stalinism the Soviet Union achieved gigantic and historic successes.
Now the American imperialists are vitally concerned with the Far Eastern market. In the Soviet Union’s strength they see a check to Japan. They are not averse to lend a cautious hand in strengthening the Soviet Union a little – on their terms. And, if they can get it they want the Soviet market for themselves.
 
Pressure on Soviet Union
Trade and credits are the subject of the discussions taking place in Moscow now between Bullitt and Soviet officials. The ruling of the Attorney General is to put pressure on the Soviet Union. It is an act of aggression characteristic of the strategy and methods of the world’s dominant capitalist power. It gives the lie direct to the Stalinists and their Lovestoneite apologists who maintained in the face of what the world saw to be untrue, that the U.S. was forced to grant recognition because of its desperate internal situation.
What the U.S. demands, what the Soviet Union offers we do not know. The discussions are taking place according to the best rules of Stalinist-capitalist diplomacy – in the dark. No word has leaked out. That is what fills us with misgiving.
 
Fight for Soviet Credits!
Five years ago the internationalist Communists proposed to the Comintern that it mobilize the masses of the capitalist countries to bring pressure on the capitalist governments to grant the credits, by this means to assist the Russian workers in building up the economy of the country and to relieve their own situation through the employment trade with Russia would create. The C.I. – think of it! – denounced the idea as counter-revolutionary and went hat in hand to the capitalist governments.
Today the C.I. which has no real existence cannot mobilize the masses for a revolutionary struggle to assist the Soviet Union. The Marxists must do it without and against the C.I. That is the duty of the League and all those working class organizations which really mean to defend the Soviet Union, and especially of those which declare for the revolution internationally and in the U.S.
 



One of the innovations of the Stalinists is the creation of the only underground trade union organization in the country, the Education Workers League. It was designed early in 1931 by the architects of the third-period trade union strategy to organize the workers in the field of education – principally the public school teachers – into revolutionary unions. It goes without saying that it drew organizational and ideological inspiration from the T.U.U.L. to which it is affiliated. And not alone the T.U.U.L. The E.W.L. is the American section of the Education Workers International, which is affiliated to the Red International of Labor Unions.
In the three years of its existence, the conditions of the teachers in the U.S. have been worsened. Pay cuts have been universal. Every one is familiar with the plight of the Chicago teachers who at one time were not paid for nearly a year and whose pay is still many months in arrears. Curricula have been cut. School terms and the school day have been shortened. In many states hundreds of schools have been closed. It is estimated that 2,000,000 children have been thrown out of school in this way; and that this economy cost 200,000 teachers their jobs. This entire economy program is going forward under the whip of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
 
No Influence on Teachers’ Movement
The teachers have offered very little resistance. There have been scattered protests, small and ineffectual strikes, and other spontaneous manifestations of discontent. Most significant of all these struggles were the Chicago demonstrations which won a small measure of temporary relief. But the E.W.L. has not played any role in these isolated struggles. In so far as a national trade union center is concerned it is as non-existent as the other paper organizations created by the Stalinists.
Only in one place has the E.W.L. any existence. It made its debut in New York City where the conditions were guaranteed to demonstrate the utter absurdity of the attempt to build a “revolutionary” trade union of teachers. The 36,000 New York City teachers in 1931 were secure in their positions and were as yet unaffected by wage cuts and the other means by which capitalist economy was lowering the standard of living of the teachers throughout the nation. On the contrary, the teachers’ wages, fixed by law, were appreciating with the fall of the price level.
Moreover the teachers were subjected to the notoriously reactionary regime of the Board of Education. Activity in the revolutionary or Left wing labor movement constitutes grounds for dismissal from the school system. Teachers are persecuted for protesting against unsanitary conditions in the schools or for criticizing their superiors or the administration of the system.
 
“Union” Goes Underground
Even the Stalinists realized that to call upon the teachers openly to join a “revolutionary union” would cost some of those who responded their jobs, persecution for others and iii general reign of terror and redbaiting against all progressive elements. The Stalinists boldly seized both horns of the dilemma and solved the problem by going underground.
From the depths of its underground the E.W.L. built legal covers for its “revolutionary” activity. It has not built a union – although it still entertains fond visions of doing so – but is succeeded in adding several organizations to the more than seventy that cluttered’ up the local movement.
 
Fights Teachers’ Union
In all of these organizations its central aim has been to discredit the Teachers Union and develop the others as bases for its new union. In a word the E.W.L. aped the policy of the T.U.U.L. If it has not built a union it can point with pride lo a great achievement: its policy has been instrumental in diverting hundreds of employed and unemployed teachers awakening to the necessity of resistance into organizational channels separate from the union and hostile to it. It can inscribe on itis banner at least half the responsibility for the perpetuation of the division between the organized employed and unemployed, and also for the division among the advanced teachers in the organized employed movement.
The experience of three years demonstrates that there is neither a need nor a basis for this caricature of a union. On the contrary, it is an obstacle to the growth and unity of the teachers movement. It is a reactionary influence.
 



The second general strike of the New York taxi drivers has ended in a second defeat for the workers and a victory for the bosses and reaction. None of the demands put forward by the Taxi Drivers Union has been won. The collapse of the strike – that is what it was – coming on top of the betrayal of the auto workers, has strengthened the chances of the company union which the auto bosses are seeking to foist on the taxi drivers here in New York.
The strike was defeated by the combined forces of the companies who imported gangsters from Chicago to supplement the home supply, the police who drove scab cars and rode in them to provoke attacks by pickets, the yellow press which tried to frame up bombings on the union, the Mayor and his mediators, the NRA doves of peace, Mrs. Herrick and Golden, the Socialist Party which sabotaged the strike and went in for a vicious red-baiting campaign in the union, and the mistakes of the leadership.
 
Politics in the Strike
On every one of these points there is much to say; from each lessons to be drawn for the future strikes of the taxi workers and the workers movement as a whole. Because of the limitation of space we want to confine ourself here to one outstanding point of this remarkable strike: the extraordinary political nature of the situation in the union and its relation to the strike
For years the New York taxi drivers have been the prey of racketeers and bourgeois politicians. The thinking of many of them stood closer to that of the underworld and the cop than it did to that of the working class movement. That they have now made great strides toward thinking and acting like militant workers is an enormous plus for them as well as for the whole movement. Our hand is extended to them in fraternal solidarity for common struggle against the common enemy.
When LaGuardia was campaigning for the mayoralty he sent his agents into the ranks of the taxi drivers to line up their vote for his new deal. Through Gandall, he built an organization which served him well in the campaign. It was one of the four organizations which later merged to constitute the present union. Gandall became the leader of the first general strike in February.
Bloc with Stalinists Following the scuttling of the first strike by Panken and Ernst a struggle developed in the union. The Stalinists who came into the union through the merger of their paper Taxi Workers Union, formed a bloc with Orner and Green of the Workers Socialist Party, a group of former members and sympathizers of the Socialist Party of Great Britain. Joe Gilbert became an organizer and leader of the second strike. In this fight the bloc received, at least, objective support from the Tammany elements in the union who had their own axe to grind against LaGuardia. Gandall was dislodged from leadership. Orner became president of the Manhattan local, the largest and most important of the three units of the union. The Bronx and Brooklyn locals remained under the influence of the Socialist Party elements.
While the strike was in the ascendant all forces with the exception of the Socialists in the Bronx and Brooklyn locals worked to push the strike forward. Orner, without organizational strength outside of the union to throw behind the strike, and involved in the bloc with the Stalinists, had to lean on the latter for support. The Stalinists tried to rally outside forces behind the strike but succeeded only in giving another demonstration of their isolation from the main stream of the labor movement. Their united front conference of working class organizations to support and spread the strike was the usual mass meeting of Stalinist outfits and friends.
 
Tammany and the Socialists
Tammany tried to use the strike as a club against LaGuardia. The present Grand Jury investigation into the “failure of the municipal government and the police to protect life and property” is inspired by Tammany.
The Socialists tried to make factional capital of the strike in the union by inciting the workers against Communism and the Stalinists whom they represent to the workers as Communists. Because of the popularity of Orner and the strong Orner-Stalinist bloc in the leadership they were forced to carry on their agitation against the leadership in the middle of the strike by an undercover campaign.
All of these forces working through the strike and the union produced a POLITICAL situation In New York of great importance to all future strikes. In fact with the publication by the companies of full page ads in the capitalist press and the replies of LaGuardia attacking the companies the strike became a major political issue in New York City.
 
Contradictions Come Out
The contradictions in the union did not appear in their full importance until the strike reached its peak and stopped growing. When it landed in the bog of capitalist politics the impact of the strikebreaking efforts of all the capitalist agencies caused the political lines in the union to be drawn very sharply. In the main the line was drawn over the issue of radicalism and its responsibility for the difficult position of the strike. First honors in the reactionary business of red-baiting go to the Socialist Party which seized on this moment to take its undercover campaign into the open. Under its guiding hand the Bronx local passed a motion calling for a fight against Communist influence in the union. Gilbert was dropped from his leading position and a Tammany lawyer took his place in the negotiations at City Hall. Orner’s popularity saved him from a similar fate.
The collapse of the strike gave a great stimulus to the centrifugal forces in the union working through the political contradictions. The union now hangs by a thread. The influence of the Communist Party is almost nil and that is a good thing. But the influence of the Socialist and Democratic parties has increased and that is a bad thing.
 
Future Lines
The solution lies on the road of building a broad left wing of all progressive elements in the union. The task of building a left wing in this union is a part of the larger problem of building a new left wing in the trade union movement. That is a task of the new party. The Communist League can make a beginning now.
The taxi strike was of the utmost importance for the labor movement. Had it been successful it could have given a great impetus to the struggle against company unionism, and encouraged the workers in the gigantic transportation industry in New York to organize and struggle for the betterment of their conditions.
As the situation stands now it is without positive gains. The two strikes will enter into the annals of the working class as splendid demonstrations of working class militancy. And if the union survives, even without recognition, it will be an important toe-hold for the labor movement in one of the most important domains of Wall Street’s vast empire.
 



On January 15 Grau resigned as provisional president of Cuba. He was succeeded by Hevia, formerly one of the representatives of the Nationalist party in the Revolutionary Junta in Miami, and secretary of agriculture in the Grau cabinet. Hevia occupied the seat of power for only thirty hours. He resigned and was succeeded by Colonel Carlos Mendieta, who is the present incumbent of the presidential office.
Mendieta is the leader of the Nationalist Party which does not differ essentially from the liberal Party of Machado. Inasmuch as Mendieta was selected by a conference of representatives of all the bourgeois and revolutionary petty bourgeois factions, in which the hand of Caffery can be seen, the new regime constitutes a development of the Cuban situation, to the right. As first announced Mendieta’s cabinet – four members of the Nationalist Party, two of Menocal’s party, outrightly reactionary, three members of the ABC and two without party affiliations – has the same rightist stamp.
 
Workers Oppose Mendieta
The workers are reported to be opposed to Mendieta and his cabinet but there is no serious struggle against him yet. Guiteras, Grau’s Secretary of the Interior, who evidently had presidential ambitious attempted to stay the swing to the right and elevate himself to power. He threatened a general strike and has actually succeeded in calling out the Railway Workers Brotherhood, affiliated to the Pan-American Federation of Labor, a creature of the American Federation of Labor.
Washington has already granted recognition to Mendieta. Apparently it is Roosevelt’s purpose to strengthen Mendieta, as he hoped to strengthen De Cespedes. But, as yet, there is no indication that Mendieta will be more successful than Grau in dealing with the extremely delicate and complicated problems of Cuban politics and economy.
In trying to, balance himself on the tight-rope of compromise between American imperialism and the Cuban proletariat Grau fell into the abyss. All his complicated maneuvers did not advance the solution of the problems of Cuban society an inch. Mendieta is setting out to accomplish what the petty bourgeoisie could not do. In our opinion he will be as little successful. Although he has made no announcement of his government’s program his task is dictated to him by the situation and his imperialist masters. It is to harvest the crop.
 
Cuban Sugar Problem
That is now the vital question for the American imperialists and their Cuban bourgeois subalterns. Cuba is equipped to raise and grind between five and six million tons of sugar a year. In 1924–25 the crop was five and a half million tons; in 1928 it was five and a fifth million tons and more than four million were exported. Under the Chadbourne restriction plan the crop for 1932–33 was set at two million tons with only one half destined for export. In these figures is contained the story of the frightful misery of the Cuban masses.
Cuban sugar has to compete in the United States, its chief export market, with cane sugar from Porto Rico, the Philippines, and with beet sugar from the Western states. Quotas are assigned to each external source of supply. Conferences to establish the quotas between the beet growers of the Western states and the Secretary of Agriculture are being held now.
 
Deadline For Harvest
The second or third week in January is the deadline for beginning the harvest if the cane is to be cut and ground in time. Delay in getting the harvest under way may mean an even smaller quota for Cuba than the 1932–33 figure with corresponding increases in the quotas of Cuba’s competitors. Failure to harvest the crop will mean no taxes for the government; an empty treasury, inability to pay the principal and interest on loans, still more drastic cuts in the public services, difficulty with the army over wages, etc., etc.
Grau’s failure to make even a beginning in establishing conditions for a harvest profitable to the American and Cuban owners explains why ho made his exit at this time. It is Mendieta’s assigned task to drive the workers off the plantations they have seized, and recover for the capitalists the ground they have lost to the workers through the strikes for higher wages and better conditions.
Before Meudieta can harvest the crop he will have to come to grips with the workers. In the period following Machado’s fall they have made some improvement in their economic position, extended their organizations and repossessed themselves of a spirit of confidence in their ability to struggle against the enemy. In fact they have reached a point where they can threaten the entire social system. And they have given ample evidence of the fact that they can and will fight. They arp not likely to surrender their hard-won gains without a struggle Such is their temper that they strike at a moment’s notice. On hearing a report that Mendieta intended to return to their American owners the property of Morgan’s Cuban Electric Company, seized by Grau’s government, the workers struck.
So far is Mendieta from being the bourgeoisie’s ideal of a strong man that he forced the company’s officials to agree to a committee to settle the differences between the company and the workers. Mendieta has proclaimed the postponing of the Constituent Assembly from April 22 to a future, undetermined date. That is likewise a sign of weakness.
 
High Mark of Struggle ...
The high water mark of the workers’ struggles was reached in the strike of the electrical workers of the Cuban Electric Company just before Grau fell. The company refused the workers’ demand and they struck. The Grau government seized the property. But the workers ran the plant. Here was realized on a microscopic scale the first stage of the Cuban proletarian revolution – nationalization of industry under workers control of production.
The formation of a right government means that the tide has begun to set in against the workers. But it is not yet too late to advance on the road to nationalization. No decisive battles have been fought. The workers are undefeated. But this is practically their last opportunity in the present period. The government is weak. To harvest the crop it needs class peace. Moreover it has made a public demonstration of its weakness. Now is the time to hit it hard. Preparations should be set on foot for the general strike for nationalization of industry under workers’ control of production. The demand should be raised for the immediate convocation of the Constituent Assembly. At the same time the Soviets should be organized in the towns and on the plantations.
The Cuban Revolution vitally concerns the proletariat of the whole world. The Cuban workers need support and assistance. The silence of the Communist International is nothing short of a betrayal. Moreover, the Communist parties outside of Cuba cannot mobilize the workers against American imperialism.
That is our task as revolutionists and internationalists. Together with all those workers’ organizations which are willing we must begin the organization of the movement to demand Hands Off Cuba!
 



The Socialist Party has issued a five-point program for recovery from the crisis: reduction of interest on all indebtedness; reduction of the capital structure of all business and utilities affected with a public interest (are there any that aren’t?); a capital levy; a steep increase in inheritance taxes; the issuance of currency to finance the public works program.
It is clear at one glance that this program offers no threat to the capitalist system. On the contrary, it is designed as its name indicates, to HELP THE CAPITALISTS RECOVER FROM THE CRISIS. That is also the aim of the official political parties of the capitalist class, and of all the government agencies including the vast network of the governmental agencies including the vast network of the recovery administrations.
Let us take a closer look at the program. Point one calls tor a reduction on all indebtedness including farm mortgages to 2 or 2½%. Whom will this benefit? According to the December bulletin of the National City Bank – “the chief debtors are governments, corporations and credit institutions.” “It is plain from the figures of the Twentieth Century Fund, Inc., that the overwhelming bulk of the debts are owed by corporations or by persons falling within the rich or well-to-do income groups, and not by the poor.” The Socialist Party recovery program would cut down the interest the banks pay on workers’ savings, afford them some relief in connection with mortgages and lift a tremendous load from the shoulders of the capitalist class.
Point four calls for “a steep increase in inheritance taxes”. What does the Socialist Party recovery program propose to do with this money? Use it for unemployment insurance? No, “– the proceeds – would be used for the retirement of government bonds”!
Point five calls for the issuance of currency to finance the Public Works program. Inasmuch as this runs into billions of dollars, point five is tantamount to outright, unlimited currency inflation. What this means for workers is well known – drastic cuts in real wages through soaring prices.
The Socialist party has the brass to say in its statement accompanying its recovery program that it is against currency inflation. It explains the contradiction on the all-too-familiar philosophy of the lesser evil. To finance its Public Works program the government issues bonds on which it has to pay interest. The Socialist Party wants to save the capitalist government about four million dollars in interest. Instead of selling bonds, says the S.P., run the printing presses. It is true this in inflation but it is justified by “– other inflationary measures already undertaken.”
Not only is the S.P. recovery program designed to help the capitalists get out of the crisis, but it is aiming squarely at the workers.
For a proletarian, revolutionary party every difficulty of the capitalist class is an opportunity to press forward for its overthrow. The revolutionists fight to ameliorate the conditions of the workers but not to help the capitalist system to “recover”. The periodic crises of capitalism create objective conditions favorable for the mass movements of the workers to develop to higher political levels until at last they reach the plane of the revolutionary situation and the overthrow of the capitalist system. The only recovery program the party of the proletarian revolution puts forth is the program of the proletarian dictatorship and planned economy under it.
 



The course pursued in. the past period by the party in its work among the unemployed is rich in instructive material. A survey of a number of its outstanding features will be of help to the movement in orientating itself in the future.
At the beginning of the struggle for the unemployed stood the philosophy of the “third period” which though dead, revisits our press from time to time. When the crisis came, the American “theoreticians” came forward and from the bastard philosophy of the “third period” fished out as a basis for the party’s work The absurd contention of a wide-spread, deep-going radicalization of the American working class. They were followed by the “tacticians” and from the above premise were made the following deductions about unemployment:
 
The Stalinist Analysis
In a period of such radicalization, the workers are ready for action on the political plane and those whose misery is greatest, the unemployed, on the highest political plane. The lever which can set them immediately into motion on this plane is the issue of unemployment insurance. This will be the central slogan of our unemployment work, the fight for unemployment insurance from the city, state and national governments. With the workers ready for action on this plane, it is unnecessary to win influence over them by patient, day-to-day, elementary educational and organizational work in proletarian neighborhoods, among the broad masses of workers of heterogeneous races, trades and varying degrees of political development. We can plant our banners almost anywhere and the workers will rally around them. We have only to call and the “radicalized” workers will come. The greater their misery, the prompter will be their response to our summons and the more “radicalized” they will be. We can recruit them from breadlines flophouses, relief agencies, etc. The workers will come but they are unorganized; we must be ready for them.
In the equatorial jungles of Guiana, there are trees whose upper branches, closely pressed by the surrounding vegetation, send down air-roots which dangle above ground, swaying in the air currents. After this model the party organized its unemployed apparatus. Before it numbered a hundred unemployed workers under its influence in the fight for unemployment insurance, it established a National Unemployment Council which today, like the “third period” and other inventions, is a sensitive memory. From this center, it sent down instructions to the party and appeals to the masses to organize into district unemployed councils on the basis of the fight for unemployment insurance. Such was the air-root procedure.
Nor were these councils deliberately located in proletarian neighborhoods, whereupon the application of correct policies and tactics, they could have taken root and grown into a genuine mass movement. They were established on the principle of organizational convenience. For the most part they are located in the headquarters of party organizations a few of which are situated in working class residential neighborhoods, and the greater number of which are not. At the same time, the party was mobilized, the cadres were sent into the councils and from there to the breadlines and flophouses to recruit “radicalized” workers to fight for unemployment insurance.
The strategy of this fight was of necessity derived from the untrue estimate of a wide-spread, deep-going radicalization of the masses. It had, therefore, the impossible task of producing results commensurate with that estimate. Any attempt to do so would inevitably reveal the contradiction between the estimate of such a radicalization and the results possible in such a period, and the party’s feeble influence over the masses and consequent failure to produce such results. Such failure would result in loss of prestige and influence of Communism over the masses. Moreover the strategy was to be applied at that stage of the crisis when it was descending swiftly to even lower depths. The contradiction between estimate and results would therefore be emphasized sharply and more quickly revealed. This factor imposed on the strategy to be used the task of producing quick results.
 
The Party’s Demonstrations
The strategy used against this impending and, under the circumstances, inescapable disaster sought to hide this contradiction. Action on the political plane made the attempt possible. For quick results the party decided on demonstrations. To hide the feebleness of its influence, the party, made the demonstrations spectacular and highly exaggerated the numbers who attended.
There was a third tactic by which the party sought to escape the consequences of its false estimate and incorrect policies. From demonstrations against municipal governments, the party leaped over the state governments and demonstrated against the federal government on February 10. It was repulsed. It recoiled and demonstrated – is still demonstrating – in isolated, unco-ordinated hunger marches against state governments. This strategy is manifestly incorrect. From demonstrations against city governments, the movement should have risen with the increasing depth of the crisis, misery of the masses growing organizational strength, to a higher political plane, in demonstrations against state governments. And as these factor grew apace, the movement should have been brought to a climax in a tremendous demonstration against the national government.
But this is precisely what the party could not afford to do. It would have been to reveal in a harsh light the feebleness of its influence, the ineffectualness of its spectacular campaign and as a conclusion, the falsity and absurdity of its estimate. Yet this essentially correct strategy which the party did not follow is claimed for it by Wagenknecht in the March 26, 1931 issue of the Inprecorr. In his article The Struggle Against Unemployment in the U.S.A., he deliberately creates the impression, by inference, that this was the strategy followed by the party.
This strategy has not been discussed in the party press. All articles of criticism and evaluation ignore it. Why? Is it because the party considers this strategy manifestly correct? Then why does Wagenknecht try to create the impression that another strategy was used? Or is there something to conceal, some weakness in it known to the leadership which discussion would reveal? Are they not silent, rather, because, foreseeing failure for the fight for unemployment insurance on the basis on which it was conducted they arranged this strategy to provide a back door out of which to draw the body of the movement they almost wrecked? What other explanation is there?
This program of demonstrations covered more than a year, during which the roots sent down from the national center took no. hold in the masses and are today still swayed by whatever bureaucratic current blows.
The result in terms of relief and unemployment insurance is almost zero. The party claiming one million unemployed in New York City points with pride to the million dollars appropriated by the city for unemployment relief, following its October 16 demonstration. Yet, Wagenknecht, writing in the Daily Worker on March 7, 1931, can say: “We fail to take cognizance of our achievements!” Other achievements in this direction even of the same microscopic nature there are none.
 
The Decline of Support
Politically, the party can justly claim one victory. By its demonstrations and agitation it forced the issue of unemployment and its magnitude upon the consciousness of all classes. Otherwise, the year represents a minus. On March 6, 1930, the party claimed it mobilized a million and a quarter workers in its demonstrations for unemployment insurance, etc.; in its February 25, 1931, demonstrations for essentially the same demands it can claim only four hundred thousand. Both figures, of course, are highly exaggerated arid intended for Moscow consumption. Incredible as it may seem, this tremendous loss in influence is made to prove the very opposite. Earl Browder, in the Daily Worker of March 6, 1931, says: “Superficial examination can easily make a case to show that the movement has declined since March 6 of last year ... But we must look beneath the surface, examine the realities and judge the quality, the fighting power of the movement. Such an examination must, with all allowances for serious weaknesses in the movement, register a decisive advance in the year.” So! A loss of sixty-seven percent in revolutionary capital is now offered to us as a “decisive advance”!
Nor has the party succeeded, as it claims in expansive moments, in disillusioning the American masses about the willingness of American capitalism to relieve their misery. This is a curious and interesting point. To some extent the party has demonstrated the anti-working class nature of police, courts and municipal and state governments and their relief agencies. To a larger extent this disillusionment has been the simple result of workers putting two and two together. But neither the party nor events have removed that basic
illusion of the workers that the crisis is only temporary that they have only to hang on and weather the storm – “prosperity” will return. Until the party grasps this, it will never be able to understand why the members of its Unemployed Councils, men, many of them, with no economic resources whatsoever, who eat on breadlines, have no homes and sleep in flophouses, are not only not militant but apathetic. And until the party attacks and, with the help of events, destroys this illusion, it will call, in its unemployed Councils, upon dwindling memberships for its spectacular demonstrations and sorties against breadlines and relief agencies.
* * *
(Note: This article, written by a comrade of the Left Opposition who is very active in the work of the New York Unemployed Councils, is to be followed by others in coming issues. The next articles will deal with other phases of the problem: the condition of the Unemployed Councils, the turn. in the party’s policies etc., etc. – Ed.)
 



In more than a year the party has not developed out of the rank and file of its unemployed councils a single leader of even secondary caliber, certainly not one of real stature. To expect the latter is to ask the mouse to bring forth a mountain. But the mountain has brought forth mice in plenty. The party has developed in the apparatus of its unemployed councils a host of little functionaries, petty careerists, badly trained ideologically and politically. It is enough to participate in one or two demonstrations, play a more or less prominent role, subscribe without reservations to the party line, obey orders, heap abuse and slander on the “renegades” – to be assured of some little position in the apparatus and sit on the platform when Foster debates Muste.
Originally, too, the party can show only a minus for its unemployment work. The unemployed councils are largely paper organizations. Workers joined, attended a demonstration or two, listened to general demands unconnected with their local, most immediate needs and drifted away. Or their attendance, at best, even now is irregular. This is due to the fact that they have been recruited from the breadlines and must arrange their time by that of the breadlines or other relief agencies at large distances from their homes. This source of the councils’ membership explains why there are almost no working class women and children in them.
Because of this floating membership and irregular attendance, it is necessary to hold business meetings every day to organize each day’s work. It is impossible to organize the details of work more than one day in advance. A worker who will distribute leaflets on Monday cannot be counted on in advance to do it again on Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. This applies as well to party members assigned to the councils, who are frequently shifted about from one council to another council or party organization or activity. This day-to-day organization of each day’s business results in a terrible monotony of mechanical business routine. More hours are spent each day in indoor business meetings than in actual work. This further discourages the workers from attending the meetings regularly.
The floating membership and irregular attendance make it necessary for a small group, usually party members and apparatus functionaries, to carry on the work. Small as it is, the work is too much for the working nucleus, who protest and complain about the inactivity of the membership. This results in sporadic “discussions”, futile paper plans to activize the general memberships and in a deepening chasm between the “active” and the “inactive” members.
A general looseness pervades the inner organizational work of the councils. Motions are passed and promptly forgotten. A motion initiating socialist competition among the councils in their organization of tenant’s leagues, is passed unanimously by an executive body and never heard about again. Motions calling for reports on finances, on the sale of literature, etc., are passed and result in nothing. Committees and delegations are elected, do not work, make no reports and are not brought to account. Small sums are continuously stolen by unemployed workers. Efforts at elementary workers’ education are as irregular as the attendance of the rank and file. A course in public speaking by Brodsky is dropped when half completed without explanation given or demanded. The ideological level of the “education” is unbelievably low. Thus Johnstone on the unemployment program of the I.W.W.: “The program of the Trotskyists, as I will show, differs only by a hair’s breadth from the program of the I.W.W.”
The external activities of the councils suffer from the same looseness. The distribution of leaflets is unsystematic and haphazard. Some workers throw them away. What tenants’ league work is done is equally unsystematic and haphazard. Meetings with house committees are not followed up. No minutes of these meetings are kept. No further steps are taken to spread the organization to neighboring houses. In restoring the furniture of evicted workers, the council proceeds to the scene of the eviction without leadership, etc., etc.
No adequate technique has been devised for fighting evictions. The procedure in vogue at present can be compared only to fire fighting. An eviction is reported to a council. The council is mobilized and proceeds to the scene. If it outnumbers the police ten to one the furniture is restored. Obviously this is a ridiculous procedure. Should the councils be able, from the point of view of time, numbers and other factors – which they are not – to restore the furniture of every evicted worker, they would be reduced to a society for restoring evicted furniture. But in that case, the police and the municipal governments would be more than equal to the problem. Their organization is as yet stronger, more mobile, better disciplined and trained. In New York City, one or two patrolmen in a position to summon more, are stationed at the scene of every eviction in the neighborhoods where the councils are known to function.
 



ST. LOUIS – On Tuesday, December 15, comrade Arne Swabeck spoke in Staunton to an interested audience of 40 miners on the subject of Unemployment, the 6 hour day and the Communists. The miners listened attentively to comrade Swabeck’s explanation of the causes of the present and past crises, the impossibility of a solution under capitalism and the need for the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism and for a militant working class and Communist Party toward this end. The immediate demands of the six hour day, unemployment insurance, long-term credits to the. Soviet Union, etc., were discussed in relation to the ultimate goal.
Questions and discussion took place, and the Stalinists who took the floor were repudiated for their slanders by a miner who said that the workers resented the official party’s “splitting tactics”.
 
In St. Louis
The St. Louis meeting on the same subject was even more successful. The audience of workers, party members and sympathizers numbered about 150. The attempts of the Stalinists were even feebler than in Staunton. By their clumsy attacks on the Left Opposition, they were placed in the ridiculous position which discredited them. Comrade Swabeck spoke for Communism, the American C.P., the Comintern and the Soviet Union and the platform of the Communist League of America (Left Opposition). When the Stalinists attacked what comrade Swabeck said with slander against comrade Trotsky, the workers placed them in the same category with a “scissor-bill” who openly and vehemently defended capitalism. These incidents enabled comrade Swabeck to make even clearer to the workers and party members and sympathizers present the position of the Left Opposition toward the Party.
A large batch of the Militant and literature were sold. A number of party members have taken the first correct step by beginning to study the issues in dispute between Stalinism and the Left Opposition. We will continue our work to win the Party members to the platform of the Left Opposition and for the unity of the Communist vanguard.
 



It is not customary or seemly to write anniversary articles about the living but we feel that under the circumstances our readers will understand; and to understand, says de Stael, is to forgive. It is September 1931 and in these lines we shall engage to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Jay Lovestone’s conversion from counter-revolutionary Trotskyism to Stalinism. The fact that Lovestone, ten years ago, was a “Trotskyist” – we hasten to explain to the wondering reader – is adequate justification for a memorial notice today.
The last few issues of Lovestone’s paper, the Revolutionary Age, have been publishing a series of articles on The Soviet Union and Its Bourgeois Critics: Building Socialism in U.S.S.R., in which Lovestone makes a moving attempt to appear as the defender of Stalin ... against Walter Duranty. The occasion for this ardent and touching defense was a series of articles by Duranty in the New York Times, in which he argued that Leninism had been replaced in the Soviet Union by Stalinism, which has subordinated or cast aside the perspective of international revolution in favor of the “practical reality” of national socialism. The Lovestone defense consists of an argument that Stalinism does not exist; if it does, it is merely a legitimate repetition and continuation of Leninism itself. It is not Stalin, you are given to understand, who invented the theory and practise of “socialism in one country”, but Lenin himself. The only opponent of this theory is Trotsky.
“The Russian workers have seized political power,” Lovestone announces “What shall they do with their power within the Soviet Union? This is no abstract question. To play with the state power is to play with fire. The question of constructing socialism in the Soviet Union should never be treated abstractly. What shall the Soviet proletariat do in the Soviet Union except build socialism?”
[Is this not a positively annihilating question? They might build a system of barbarism. And they might build up a feudal society. But they do neither. In spite of the Trotskyists, the Russian workers have decided to build socialism!]
“For what other purpose shall they use their state power in the Soviet Union except for constructing socialism there? Let the critics of the Soviet Union – bourgeois and otherwise [“otherwise” means ... Trotskyists] – tell us what should the Soviet workers build in the Soviet Union except socialism.” (Rev. Age, 8-22-1931.)
We assume this means that the Opposition is in favor of the Russian workers building capitalism, or feudalism, or nothing at all. If such unrefined idiocy were so, Lovestone has already won the first victory. But let us pass this by out of kindness, and read further:
“It was at the Fifteenth Party Congress in December 1927, that Bucharin speaking for the Congress, administered the most crushing ideological defeat to Trotskyism on this viewpoint. If the C.P.S.U. were not correct in concluding that the Soviet proletariat was capable of overcoming fully all bourgeois elements within its country, that is, of building a socialist society, then, it would really have no reason for maintaining power”. (Ibid.)
The line of division is clear: “Leninism” (à la Lovestone) declares that the Russian proletariat, by itself, is capable of the successful construction of a national socialist society. “Trotskyism” declares that this can be done only with the “state aid” of the revolutionary proletariat of a number of other countries. If this is the line of division, we are now in a position to look back at The Communist, official organ of the Communist Party of America (the underground C.P. of a decade ago) Vol. 1 No. 3, for September 1921, where we read an article by Roger B. Nelson, entitled Russia’s Hour of Need:
“Our speakers and agitators should utilize the movement for the relief of Soviet Russia for specific purposes. Bat at no time must we compromise the class character of our campaign for immediate results. Any other policy would in the end do more harm than good to the starving workers of Russia ... We must bring to light the fact that no successful revolution can be accomplished in ANY ONE COUNTRY without the assistance of the international proletariat.”
Who is this counter-revolutionary Trotskyist who smuggled his anti-Leninist views into the official organ of the Communist Party of America under the guise of a famine relief article? As we have said, it was Roger B. Nelson. And who is Roger B. Nelson? He is, or was – it is not much of a secret today – Jay Lovestone, yes, the same Jay Lovestone whom we quoted above. And if the revolution could not be accomplished successfully in “any one country” by the forces of the proletariat of that country alone, why did not Lovestone, in September 1921, tell the Russian workers – in line with his arguments of September 1931 – that they “have no reason for maintaining power”?
But is it not possible that this was a momentary “Trotskyist” aberration of one individual? Let us look further in the same issue of The Communist, and on page five we find an article The Third Congress written by “James A. Marshall, Delegate Communist Party of America” who, after speaking of “Lenin, Trotsky and other irreproachable leaders” (he changed his mind about that later), writes:
“Soviet Russia cannot exist as an isolated state within a capitalist world.” [Name of a name! Trotsky was expelled for saying no more than that! ] “This is the problem. Two solutions are possible. One puts the burden of the action upon the revolutionary working class outside of Russia. The other must be carried out by the workers of Russia. The first is the overthrow of capitalism in the countries of Europe or America, and the establishment of a proletarian dictatorship there. The other is a method to break the deadly economic isolation of Russia. It waited until it could wait no longer.” [Why did it have to wait if Lenin “in 1915” said that they need fear no isolation because they could build socialism with their own forces?] “It now proposes to break the unbearable economic isolation. The concessions policy is one of the methods of doing it.”
And who is this Trotskyist No. 2? Is he Cannon or Swabeck? No. At the risk of producing the rupture of a blood vessel, we must point out that James A. Marshall was and is Lovestone’s bosom friend of yesterday – Max Bedacht, member of the Political Bureau of the party today and professional Trotsky killer.
But perhaps we have before us only two individual aberrations? Not at all. In The Communist, official organ of the United Communist Party of America (both Lovestone and Bedacht were members of its Central Committee), No. 5, for August 15, 1920, we read the following official pronouncement, presumably representing the standpoint of the whole party, unless Lovestone’s and Bedacht’s protests were concealed by the other “Trotskyists”:
“The Soviets will realize that the theoretical deduction from the facts of the struggle between capitalism and communism, that a proletarian state cannot exist in a capitalist world, must be followed in practise and that Soviet Russia can only preserve itself by developing the Russian revolution into the world revolution. Soviet Russia will stand or fall as the revolution in that country becomes, or does not become the world revolution.”
Cannot even exist! Can only preserve itself! But what about building up a complete national socialist society with their own forces, without “developing the Russian revolution into the world revolution”? Where was Stalin to put the quietus on such arrant Trotskyism? Where was Bucharin? Where was Bedacht? And Lovestone? The horrible truth is that they were all, all, “Trotskyists” in those days ...
* * * *
There is no exact record of when Lovestone was converted. He may tell us some day what caused him to see the light and when. But we doubt it. He appears to be too busy dividing his tongue between Stalin’s boots in Moscow and Muste’s in the United States.
 



The heaviest blows we have dealt the Right wing have been our attacks upon its fundamental position: national socialism, the theory from which most of its current anti-Communist conceptions are drawn. It has not been difficult to point out that the banner under which the united forces of Stalin and Bucharin led the reactionary crusade against the Left Opposition (“Trotskyites”) – the banner of socialism in one country – inevitably led to the splitting of this united bloc and the departure of its Right flank from the ranks of Communism. Giving Lovestone, Brandler, Jilek and Co. their due, we have pointed out also that it is they and not the Stalinists who are correct, insofar as it is a matter between the two of them, in the question of “exceptionallsm”. That is, Lovestone contends that if Stalin may erect an “exceptionalist” theory for Russia (“we will complete a socialist society by ourselves”), then Lovestone is permitted to erect an “exceptionalist” theory for America. From the point of view of the theory of socialism in one country Lovestone and not Stalin is correct; but from the point of View of elementary Marxism, of revolutionary internationalism, they are both wrong.
 
The Impotence of Centrism
The reason why the official Party (the Stalinists) argument against Lovestone have always limped and halted is that they have been unable to show the workers who went with the Right wing what was fundamentally wrong with the latter: to do that would have meant the exposure of the anti-Marxist roots of Centrism itself! The Centrists have thus enabled the Right wingers to shift the whole content of this historical struggle on to the secondary and tertiary questions, where in many instances the Right wing adopts a position which, in appearance, is more correct than the fabulous idiocies of the Party chieftains. Only by re-establishing the basis of the dispute upon the questions of principle, and proceeding from these questions to those that flow from them, can the bankruptcy of the international Right wing be demonstrated. But such a fight leaves the Centrist helpless, for he is only a person who has not developed to the logical conclusions of the Right winger; his only weapon, therefore, is organizational manipulation and terror. The burden of the fight against the Right wing continues to rest upon the Left Opposition.
It is when the Right wing attempts to answer our unanswerable argumentation that it shows how well the Left wing has acquitted itself in this struggle. It flounders, it evades, it swindles ,it is demagogic, and above all, in its profound hatred for the genuine Left it exposes its own petty bourgeois philistine character. As good an example as any is furnished by the Revolutionary Age and its latest article, Whither Trotskyism? by Will Herberg (No. 12). We will pass over the amusing fact that this same question was answered by the same Herberg only a few months ago when he “proved” that we had quite thoroughly “disintegrated” and that there should therefore be no reason to waste space in flaying a dead dog. We will rather take up the washed trivialities that pass for Marxism in the Right wing camp and properly identify them as a political tendency.
According to Herberg, “Eager sectarianism is the very essence of Trotskyism ... Trotsky himself welcomes the sectarianism that is the essence of his system. ‘To be a “sectarian” today,’ he declares, is an honor for every real revolutionary!’” This would be a somewhat “damaging” quotation if not for three facts which are as well known to Herberg as they are to us.

The sentence is taken from its context, and refers not to a political party: (the Communist Party), but to a faction within that Party.
 
The word sectarian is put within quotation marks, as a scornful comment upon the term by which we are designated by the Right wing groups which, as everyone surely knows, are mass organisations embracing millions of workers ...
 
The sentence quoted by Herberg from Trotsky read in the original (see the Militant, October 1, 1929): “To be at present a ‘sectarian’ of revolutionary Marxism in the eyes of philistines, of snivellers, of shallow minds, is the greatest honor for a real revolutionary.”

One need not have gone through a college course in psychology to perceive why Herberg so diligently omitted quoting the whole sentence. He knows but too well, our friend Herberg, who is meant by Trotsky when he says “philistines, snivellers and shallow minds.” Literary forgeries of this type are considered good form in the Right wing camp, where for years charlatanry bluff and swindle were the principal weapons in the campaign agatast “Trotskyism”. Naive people that we are, we still think these methods contemptible, no matter what “period” they are practiced in.
 
The Real Sectarians
But since we are speaking of sectarianism, let us establish again who practices it: It is the Right wing in every country, for they have cut themselves off from the international revolutionary movement and turned their backs upon the Russian revolution. By these steps they have doomed themselves to the life of national sects. They are following in the footsteps, not of the Hillquits and Oneals of today who are open Right wing socialists, but of the Hillquits and Oneals of yesterday who still employed “revolutionary” phrases about Russia and internationalism, and even the dictatorship of the proletariat, in order to retain the Left wing workers in the Socialist Party.
Here are four documents: Herberg’s article. A statement On the Situation in the C.P.S.U. (Revolutionary Age, Number 11). From Marx to Lenin by Morris Hillquit (1921). A debate between James Oneal and Robert Minor (1921). Space unfortunately prevents us from making comparisons at length but sufficient parallels can be drawn between the Hillquits and Oneals of yesterday and the Lovestones of today to show how close is the ideological rapproachment. And, unlike Herberg, we will quote literally. Emphasis everywhere is our own, done to indicate significant similarities between the old and the ... new.
“First I want to say that I am unreservedly in support of the revolutionary government established by the workers and peasants of Russia, and that I believe that those who call themselves Socialists and don’t give that support, who in any way approve of the intervention on the part of the international imperialists, automatically takes himself out of the socialist classification, and no one has spoken more frequently than I have in behalf of the Russian workers and peasants to work out their own problems and to establish their own regime without interference on the part of anyone throughout the world ... I want to say however that support of a social revolution in Russia, or in the Argentine, or in China or Japan, or anywhere else in the world, does not necessarily carry with it the support of a particular international organization, of which the Russian workers and Communists are merely only one section. I want to make that distinction clear.” (Oneal)
“The Soviet workers do not want war. Thy want peace in order to be able to carry through the gigantic plans of Socialist construction ... We American workers and the workers of the whole world, must close our ranks and stand by the U.S.S.R. and defend it against the blows of world imperialism! ... But (Oneal’a “but”!) precisely because of this gap the crisis is not manifested in the same form in the C.P.S.U. as in the capitalist countries: neither the political issues nor the fractional groupings are the same, in no sense is the international opposition (i.e. Right opposition) movement based upon the issues or groupings in the C.P.S.U. nor does it find its counterpart in any of these groupings.” (Lovestone)
“Now, what is the character of the so-called Communist movement in the United States? It is solely and almost exclusively a movement that lives by reflection from Russia.” (Oneal)
“An international tendency of Communism that makes its basis of concentration not the general living issues of international (and national) class struggle but issues – many of them outlived – of differences in the Soviet Party is condemned to ultimate sectarianism. This is just what Trotskyism does. The concentration of Trotskyist forces on a world scale takes place primarily on the issues of Soviet policy in which Trotsky differed sharply with the leadership of the C.P.S.U.” (Herberg)
 
A Couple of Exceptionalists
“I don’t believe that an international organization of the working class calling itself socialist, claiming to represent the best) of Marxian thought, can direct the policies and methods of the workers in all countries of the world, regardless of the particular historical conditions that prevail in each and everyone of these countries. The development of human institutions and thought is by no means a uniform thing.” (Oneal the exceptionalist!)
“Trotsky, like Stalin, proceeds along the line of mobilization of the international movement for the program of a fraction of the C.P.S.U. – this is his ‘internationalism’! Trotsky, like Stalin, cares not a whit about the specific conditions in the various countries and brands as ‘opportunism’ the attempt to apply and adapt the general line to these conditions.” (Herberg)
“All Socialists who fail to subscribe to every article of the neo-Communist creed are branded as ‘traitors’ and ‘agents of the capitalist class’ and parties desiring to affiliate with the Communist International are warned of the necessity of a ‘complete and absolute rupture with reformism, and the policy of the “centrists”’ and of advocating such a rupture ‘among the widest circles of the Party membership’.” (Hillquit)
“These question form a closed system of dogma without any regard to their actuality or to their present relation to the vital questions of the revolutionary movement ... Trotsky, like Stalin, issues his Open Letters to serve as a basis for the separation of the sheep from the goats, the ‘loyalties’ from the ‘renegades’.” (Herberg)
“We are not phrase-mongers nor obedient rubber-stamps.” (Lovestone)
A startling and significant similarity! Both sets of quotations exude the same overpowering odor of national fever and contempt of anything but the most harmless and least obligatory internationalism. Both of them wallow in their provincial independence. In 1921, Hillquit and Oneal were proud of the fact that they were not a tail of any “faction” of the Russian Socialists (Mensheviks or Bolsheviks); in actuality, as everyone knows, they were for the Mensheviks who represented the class interests of the counter-revolution. In 1930 Lovestone and Brandler are equally proud not to be the “tail” to any “faction” of the Russian “Communists”; in actuality, to the extent that the Russian revolution interests them, they share the political viewpoint of the Right wing (Bucharin) which reprsents the class interests of the Thermidorian counter-revolution.
More than 12 years after the Bolshevik uprising, Lovestone dares to express his official, formal viewpoint of Russia thus: “On the various questions at issue – question of tempo or methods – we cannot, as a group, express a definitive opinion because we have not the material upon which such an opinion can be based”! Under cover of “refusing to be a tail to a Russian faction” and a pretended ignorance of what is going on in Russia (twelve years after the October!) Lovestone has turned his back on the Russian revolution.
 
Nationalism and Internationalism
Hillquit and Oneal tried to separate the estimate of the class forces in the Russian revolution from an estimate of the world revolutionary situation and from the tactics and strategy to be pursued by the socialist movement – not only internationally, but also nationally. Lovestone does the same thing, and that is where the analogy fits.
The Left Opposition is “not a tail” to a “Russian faction”; it is an advocate of the revolutionary principles which formed the foundation of the Russian revolution and are now embodied in the Russian Bolshevik Opposition. Lovestone separates the “Russian question” and the theory of “socialism in one country” from the estimate of the world situation and the course the American Marxists must follow in the United States. For us, all these questions are inextricably combined. Trotsky proceeds from an estimate of international economy and politics to an estimate of the national (Russian, let us say) situation. Stalin does precisely the opposite. We outline our course in the United States on the basis of its place in the world revolutionary movement Lovestone starts the other way around. We remain revolutionary internationalists. The Right wing is slipping back to a sort of Left wing Hillquitism of the 1921 style.
 



The National Miners Union has passed like a ghost in the night. After many long months of concentrated bluff in the official Party press about the thousands and tens of thousands of miners who were following the leadership of the N.M.U., about the strikes and demonstrations it was leading, the bubble of bluff has collapsed of internal vacuum. At the “convention” in Pittsburgh of a few dozen miners, representing very little more than themselves, the N.M.U. was quietly interred.
Characteristic of the whole policy of the swindlers now dominating the Party was the manner in which the affair was carried out. To this day, the Daily Worker, which mentioned the convention only casually, has not said a single word about the fact that the N.M.U. no longer exists. Its first and last report on the meeting (a few lines in one issue) says nothing about it. The whole procedure was typically bureaucratic, conducted behind the scenes, without the workers knowing what was going to be done, or, in this case, even being informed about what was done.
 
How the Retreat is Covered Up
Equally characteristic of the Party bureaucracy is the manner in which this mortifying retreat has been covered up so that! it may be proclaimed as “another step forward for the T.U.U.L.” In place of the quietly cremated N.M.U., a brand new (but no less weak) organization has been formed, in the same dark hour of the night at which the funeral took place: The Mine, Oil and Smelter Workers Industrial Union!
We won’t speak of the “mine workers” in this “new union”. But where are the oil workers in it, or the smelter workers? The answer is that they are not in it, and assuming that the Browders and Bedachts continue to ruin the Party’s trade union work, there are good grounds to add that they will not be in it. The M.O.S.W.I.U. was formed bureaucratically. No agitation for it among the workers was carried on; there was no preliminary preparation for it among them; there was no official announcement that the N.M.U. was dissolved, or the reasons for it given.
None of this however interests the collective Browders in the slightest. They organize and disorganize unions with the magician’s wand of the “third period”. What they bring to a tenuous life one day, they kill off the very next. That they discredit the Communist movement, and the movement for organizing the unorganized into new unions, in the process, is of even less concern to them.
There was no good reason for the debacle of the N.M.U. It started off with excellent prospects of growth and authority among the American coal miners. It was strangled by Stalinist arbitrariness and bluff. Capable Left wing and Communist workers who dared to disagree with the crudely false policies of the Stalinist clique running the Party and the N.M.U., were immediately removed from office and expelled from the union. The narrowest, most sectarian policy of isolation was foisted upon the union without ever asking the membership.
No serious attempt was made to organize the unorganized miners: talk and headlines in the Daily Worker were substituted for genuine activity. No serious attempt was made to approach and win over the workers in the Lewis or in the Fishwick-Howat unions: the former were simply labelled “fascist” and the latter “social-fascist”, which was taken to mean that the N.M.U. was absolved from the need of working to win them over.
 
Bluff and Adventurism
In place of competent workers, incompetent and factional hacks were appointed from above – never selected by the miners. The official organ of the union, was allowed to die, although the Daily Worker continued to speak without cease about the steady advances being made. Unprecedented bluff was made the order of the day, interspersed with light-hearted adventures like the ill-fated Illinois “mass strike”.
A creeping paralysis seized the organization. A movement like the one that broke out in Pittston, with thousands of miners involved, passed by without the N.M.U. influencing it in the slightest (which did not prevent the Daily Worker from publishing the most monstrous falsehoods about the “N.M.U. leading the miners in a strike against unemployment”!). The policies of the Party entirely demoralized the already weakened trade union center at Pittsburgh, so that the whole last period passed by without a single union official working in the national office. While the bluff campaign about “advances” was going on in the official press, a young stenographer was the sole and single director of the fate of the N.M.U. in Pittsburgh!
The “convention” assembled with the hand of death already heavy on it. There was not a single Left wing miners’ leader present even to make the report to the delegates: a new precedent was set by having W.F. Dunne, of the T.U.U.L., make the official report on the situation and the tasks of the union! The W.I.R. was more prominently in the fore in every phase of the work there than the N.M.U. as such.
 
Our Policy and Browder’s Tested
When the Communist League (Opposition), in its statement on the problems of the Left wing in the mining industry, proposed a serious, and not a fake, campaign of organizing the unorganized miners, and at the same time building a Left wing inside the Fishwick-Howat union in Illinois and the Lewis union in the anthracite, the Party leadership shouted themselves blue in the face with their dreary vilification of our group and its program. We warned the Communist and Left wing workers against the Stalinist policy in the miners’ movement. The Stalinists confidently boasted of the correctness of their “line”. The latter has had its test. The test has cost the Left wing miners’ movement! many harsh blows. It has already killed the N.M.U. – nothing less. The wreck cannot be made whole again by the cheap, mechanical artifices of forming chemically pure “new” unions on paper for the edification of Moscow archivists. The evil must be cut down at the root. And at the root lies the malicious religion of “social fascism” and the “third period”. The future will be replete with debacles similar to the one that just culminated in Pittsburgh until the Communist workers throw overboard these concepts and those who conceived them.
 

