Liberation and the Comintern in Lenin



Larry Stewart Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Black Liberation and the Comintern in Lenin
By Larry Stewart
This article was originally written as part of Permanent Revolution and Black Liberation in the U.S., which Larry Stewart was still working on when he died in November 1984. George Breitman  divided it into two separate articles when he edited the unfinished manuscript after Stewart’s death. This first was published in Bulletin in Defense of Marxism No. 17, April 1985.
More than any other person, Leon Trotsky shaped the SWP’s  thinking about the nature of the Black struggle in the U.S. Despite his considerable influence and prestige among us, he wasn’t able to accomplish this all at once.
In 1933, when Trotsky was exiled in Turkey, he tried to convince the leaders of  our movement that they should support the right of self-determination for Blacks in this country.  But they didn’t understand his arguments and they didn’t agree .
It was not until 1939, when Trotsky was living in Mexico, that he persuaded us  of the progressive character of Black nationalism and helped the SWP to adopt  our first resolution having a fully Leninist approach to self-determination. (Both episodes are documented in Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and  Self-Determination, Pathfinder Press, 1978.)
This, plus the development of the Black struggle itself and the lessons we learned from that during the next 30 years, enabled us to work out our policy of “combined revolution” An application of Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution to a particular American reality, this policy combines the democratic struggle of Blacks against racism with the workers’ struggle against capitalism. For a long time it gave the SWP a definite theoretical and practical advantage over all other tendencies in the radical movement
But now the Barnes group in the SWP leadership has set itself the goal of fusion with the Castroist  current and puts this goal ahead of everything else. It has repudiated the policy of permanent revolution (without explaining what effect that repudiation has on the policy of combined revolution) and it is trying in other ways to indicate that the SWP should no longer be considered “Trotskyist.”
One of the ways of doing this is to demote Trotsky from the highest level of revolutionary  authority and stature, next to Lenin, to a secondary level, alongside Zinoviev, Radek , Bukharin, etc.
Demoting Trotsky doesn’t necessarily involve belittling him directly or denying that he was a good revolutionary (except with regard to permanent revolution, political revolution, etc.). Often it only involves assertions or hints that when Trotsky was doing certain good things, these were not exceptional contributions because he was only acting in accord with decisions made by the Communist International in Lenin’s time.
Efforts along this line are being made by the Barnes group especially in relation to Trotsky’s views and record on the U.S. Black struggle. They can’t attack him on these matters - yet -but they can and do try to whittle down his place in the history of our party’s long fight to achieve a correct policy and correct practice in that struggle.
Here, for example, is what Jack Barnes said in his most famous speech (“Their Trotsky and Ours,” Dec. 31, 1982) when he was listing the things Trotsky had done in the 1930s that Barnes approved: “Trotsky also carried on the Comintern’s  work of educating revolutionists in the United States about the centrality of the struggle for Black self-determination and of the vanguard role of Black workers in the class struggle.”
New International, Fall  1983, p.58.
Carrying on the Comintern’s  work - how can anyone object to Barnes saying that? What’s wrong with putting Trotsky’s contributions in their historic context? Nothing at all, if the Comintern’s  work is assessed correctly and if Trotsky only continued it and did not add to it significantly.
Operation-Cut-Trotsky-Down-to-Size started two days after the SWP’s  August 1981 convention, at an expanded meeting of the Political Committee where the Barnes group introduced a new educational-reorientation program focused on carefully selected portions of Lenin’s writings. Two reading lists were introduced to show SWP members what to read. The second, entitled “Reading List on the Communist International Under Lenin,” is relevant here because of its last section, which we are reprinting from Party Organizer, Vol.6, No. 1, April 1982, p. 3:
The Black struggle, Lenin on the United States, New World Publishers, pp. 123-131 and pp. 303-306; Progress Publishers, pp. 124-132 and 301-304 (also in Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 22, p. 24-31; Vol. 23, pp. 271-273).
 In 1915 m his study of agriculture in the United States, Lenin took up the question of Black oppression. In early 1917 in an article on the national question inside the advanced capitalist countries Lenin says that Blacks, “should be classed as an oppressed nation....” 
The National Liberation Movement in the East, Lenin, p. 272.
 In the “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and Colonial Questions”  presented  to the second congress Blacks are again characterized by Lenin as an oppressed nation.
The Second Congress of the Communist International, Vol. I, pp. 120-124.
 In his remarks at the second congress on the Black struggle in the United    States John Reed argues that the key question facing Blacks is class exploitation rather than national oppression.
Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos, “The Black Question,” pp.328-331 (Also in The Communist International Documents 1919-1943, Degras , Vol. I, pp. 398-401).
This resolution, adopted at the fourth congress, took up the struggle of Blacks in Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America, and the United States.
First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol. II, Trotsky, “A Letter to Claude McKay,” pp. 354-356.
Lenin was the greatest revolutionary that the human race has produced so far. His teachings and example are precious and irreplaceable for revolutionaries of our time. As a Pathfinder Press note puts it, he “restored Marxism as the theory and practice of  revolution in the imperialist epoch after it had been debased by the opportunists, revisionists, and fatalists of the Second International.” Where would we be today if he had not been on the scene then?
But Lenin was only one man, with limited time and capacity. He could not solve all problems for his and later generations. He did make very valuable contributions to the revolutionary comprehension of the far-off U.S. Black struggle, but he did not have the time or opportunity to study the question deeply, and it would be foolish of us to expect or pretend otherwise.
First of all, Lenin’s comments on the Black struggle in the U.S. are quite brief, and are usually made in the course of broader discussion of other questions. Because of their brevity, almost anyone can look them all up in a few hours if you have access to a good library.
The library I went to has the 45 volumes of the latest English translation of Lenin’s Collected Works plus a two-volume index, all published in Moscow. In the subject index you can find all the places where Lenin ever mentioned Negroes, slaves, Africans, etc. It doesn’t take long because there are only 30 to 40 such places. Most of the references are quite insignificant -- sometimes only a word or a sentence. Some are very important and suggestive, despite their brevity.
“Lenin took up the question of Black oppression” in his 1915 study of U.S. agriculture, the SWP reading list says. Yes, but unfortunately only in passing. In this 85-page pamphlet he said:
 
There is no need to elaborate on the degraded social status of the Negroes; the American bourgeoisie is in no way better in this respect than the bourgeoisie of any other country. Having “freed” the Negroes, it took good care, under “free,” republican-democratic capitalism, to restore everything possible and impossible for the most shameless and despicable oppression of the Negroes.
Later in the pamphlet he refers to “the existence of still-unparcelled slaveholding plantations in the South, with its downtrodden and oppressed Negro population...”
Collected Works, Vol.2, pp. 24-5 and 89
These passages show that in 1915 Lenin unquestionably considered U.S. Blacks to be oppressed, but they say nothing about the specific nature of that oppression. It would have been difficult for most people reading that pamphlet in 1915 to conclude that Lenin was referring to national oppression.
That is not the case with the next excerpt in the SWP reading list, a 1917 passage saying that Blacks “should be classed as an oppressed nation....” A part of a paragraph about the national composition of the U.S. and Japan, in a pamphlet entitled “Statistics and Sociology,” here is the passage in its entirety:
In the United States, the Negroes (and also the Mulattos and Indians) account for only 11.1 per cent [of the total population.] They should be classed as an oppressed nation, for the equality won in the Civil War of 1861-65 and guaranteed by the Constitution of the republic was in many respects increasingly curtailed in the chief Negro areas (the South) in connection with the transition from the progressive, pre-monopoly capitalism of 1860-70 to the reactionary, monopoly capitalism (imperialism) of the new era, which in America was especially sharply etched out by the Spanish-American imperialist war of 1898 (i.e., a war between two robbers over the division of the booty)
Collected Works, Vol. 23, pp. 275-6
This is very good, despite its brevity, anybody reading it in 1917 could have seen what Lenin’s essential position was on the national oppression of U.S. Blacks.
But it did not have this effect on anybody because nobody else read this pamphlet in 1917 or many years after that. As the SWP reading list neglects to mention, Lenin started this pamphlet in January 1917 but never finished it; the Russian revolution broke out a few weeks later, and his new tasks prevented completion of the pamphlet. So no one else saw it at the time, and in fact it was not published, even in its unfinished form, until 1935, 11 years after his death.
This means that nobody m the Comintern “under Lenin” could possibly have been influenced or educated by the contents of “Statistics and Sociology” It shows what Lenin thought, but not what the Comintern thought.
Now we come to the third and last Lenin citation on the reading list – the “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and Colonial Questions,” which Lenin wrote for the Comintern’s  second congress in 1920 Thesis 11 said, in part:
It is also necessary that all Communist parties should render direct aid to the revolutionary movements among the dependent and underprivileged nations (for example, Ireland, the American Negroes, etc.) and in the colonies.
Collected Works, Vol.  31, p. 148.
The reading list says, correctly, that in that passage “Blacks are again characterized by Lenin as an oppressed nation.” And since Lenin’s theses were written for a Comintern congress, a reader might conclude that the Comintern shared Lenin’s view, especially since the reading list has nothing to say about this.
But such a conclusion would be altogether wrong. After discussing Lenin’s draft theses at the congress, the delegates amended them, and the reference to Ireland and the American Negroes was deleted from the final draft, which now says:
It is also necessary... to give direct support to the revolutionary movements in dependent nations and those deprived of their rights, through the Communist Parties of the countries in question. The Second Congress of the Communist International, New Park Publications, 1977, Vol. 1, p. 180.
Why this deletion was made the delegates were not told and we do not know. Perhaps it was because some delegates were opposed to including U.S. Blacks among dependent nations and nations deprived of their rights. John Reed (see the fourth item on the SWP reading list) was not speaking for himself alone when he stressed the class aspects of the struggle over its national aspects; and nobody at the congress got up to rebut his one-sided position.
We don’t know why the deletion was made and it’s not too important, except for one thing: not only at the second congress but at all the other congresses held in Lenin’s lifetime (the third and fourth), the Comintern failed to endorse Lenin’s position that U.S. Blacks are an oppressed nation or nationality.
That position was never adopted by the Comintern until 1928, four years after Lenin died, when the Comintern was being strangled by the Stalinist bureaucracy. Until then, the Comintern and the CP in this country rejected the right of self-determination for U.S. Blacks and wrongly counterposed class struggle to national struggle, instead of dialectically combining them.
The fifth item on the reading list says that the Comintern’s  fourth congress in 1922 adopted “The Black Question,” a resolution that “took up the struggle of Blacks in Africa, the Caribbean, Latin America, and the United States.” It took them up all right but its main emphasis was on class and democratic demands (“for the racial equality of blacks and whites, for equal wages and equal social and political rights,” campaigns to force the unions to admit Blacks, etc.). There was nothing in the resolution about the national oppression of U.S. Blacks or anything else that John Reed would have objected to.
For what I have written above I may be accused of hostility to the Comintern. There wouldn’t be an iota of truth in such a charge. The Comintern in Lenin’s time was the most revolutionary organization the world had ever seen. It blazed many of the paths we are following now and will follow until capitalism is banished from this globe.
Its greatest contribution to the U.S. Black struggle was not in charting a correct or complete program for it but in re-educating U S and other communists to “shake off their unspoken prejudices, pay attention to the special problems and grievances of the American Negroes, go to work among them, and champion their cause in the white community” (James P. Cannon, quoted in Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination, pp. 10-11) Its “harsh” and’ insistent” work along this line was by itself sufficient cause for us to remember the Comintern in Lenin’s time with the highest respect and appreciation.
But the Comintern had weak sides as well as strong ones. It was fallible and it made mistakes. Alongside some of its most inspiring achievements, it unconsciously carried over some harmful notions and practices inherited from the Second International; or it sometimes reacted to opportunism with corrections that were warped by ultraleftism.
This may come as a shock to SWP members who have been disoriented by the Barnes group’s recent campaign to set the Comintern and its documents on a pedestal, and to “justify” its current revisions and theoretical retrogressions with poorly read and poorly assimilated citations from Comintern documents of Lenin’s time
The first four congresses of the Comintern are foundation stones of the Fourth International and the SWP We could not exist, we could not be what we are, without the theoretical and political tools we inherited from them But because the Comintern was not infallible, because many things m the world have changed since Lenin’s time, we cannot find all the answers to today’s problems in those documents, and must learn to use the method they used rather than swallow every formulation they contain
I am not an authority on Comintern literature, but what I have read of its treatment of the Black struggle, the trade unions, and women’s liberation convinces me that while most of this literature was valid and progressive at that time, it also contains false starts and errors that can do us big damage today if we do not read it critically— the way Lenin encouraged us to do, the way the Barnes group discourages us from doing
The SWP reading list does not summarize or explain its sixth and last item, Trotsky’s 1923 “Letter to Claude McKay,” a Black intellectual who had been an observer at the fourth congress In it Trotsky said that revolutionary work among Blacks “is not to be carried out in a spirit of Negro chauvinism, which would then merely form a counterpart of white chauvinism -but in a spirit of solidarity of all exploited without consideration of color .”  Reprinted in Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination, p. 81.
Perhaps it was included to show that in 1923 Trotsky had not yet recognized the national aspects of the Black struggle. If that was the reason, it should simultaneously have been noted that in this respect Trotsky was acting in accord with the Comintern line of that time.
In 1928, the now Stalinized Comintern changed its position on U.S. Blacks and pronounced them an oppressed nation, but they did it in a typically bureaucratic
and  ultimatistic  way that made a caricature of Lenin’s position.
After that, Trotsky stopped “carrying on” the previous Comintern line, but he also rejected the new Comintern caricature, and began to mobilize support for Lenin’s policy, which was different from both the original Comintern position and the distortion introduced in 1928.
Trotsky didn’t merely continue the Comintern’s  work in the 1930s -- he revived Lenin’s policy on U.S. Blacks and helped to make it part of the program of the SWP and the F!, which it had never been in either the Leninist Comintern or the Stalinized Comintern maintain that it is necessary to recognize this fact, not in order to defend Trotsky’s personal stature, but because the full value and richness of the SWP’s  combined revolution policy get lost or downgraded if you think it is only a continuation of the Comintern’s  policy.
Trotsky added new things, and after him the SWP did too. Jack Barnes, in the days before he lost confidence in the future of the SWP except as part of the Castroist  current, was not afraid to give credit publicly to Trotsky for adding to Lenin. In a political report to the SWP National Committee in February 1970, Barnes said:
What Trotsky began grappling with, what he saw....in the Black struggles   in the United States was a national struggle with characteristics that Lenin had not dealt with....
Trotsky-- in his discussions with his American comrades...—stressed the lessons learned from the Bolsheviks on the national question, but also added some things that were new...
Towards an American Socialist Revolution, Pathfinder Press, 1971, pp. 198-9. 
 
As an appendix we are reprinting below substantial excerpts from that report by Barnes in 1970. We do so for two reasons:
1. Because it substantiates our claim that Trotsky’s additions to our theory of the Black struggle were universally acknowledged in our party prior to the recently adopted pro-Castroist reorientation.
2. Because it is an eloquent example of the SWP’s  creative additions to our theory of “some things that were new” -- additions that occurred in the days when our party was unshakably rooted in the policy of permanent revolution and combined revolution.

Larry Stewart Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page



ent Revolution and Black Liberation in the U



Larry Stewart Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Permanent Revolution and Black Liberation in the U.S.
By Larry Stewart

Larry Stewart was still working on this article when he died in November1984. His notes were edited by George Breitman, with whom he collaborated throughout his 45 years of activity in the Marxist, Black and labor movements.

Jack Barnes and his group in the SWP leadership decided, before the party’s August 1981 convention, that the SWP should junk the theory of permanent revolution and other aspects of the traditional Trotskyist program that are repugnant to Fidel Castro and the current he represents. But instead of saying this openly at the convention and letting the delegates decide what to do about it, the Barnes group denied that they had any intention of changing the party’s position on permanent revolution, and waited until two days after the convention before taking the first open steps to disassociate themselves from Trotskyism and principal parts of the SWP program.
This was done in a one-step-at-a-time fashion during the next 17 months, partly in the party’s public press and partly through an internal re-education program centered around carefully selected writings of Lenin. When some party members asked for an internal literary discussion to discuss changes of such magnitude before they were made publicly, they were assailed as disrupters, factionalists, and petty-bourgeois capitulators to the pressures of capitalism, and they were warned they would be expelled if they tried to organize any unauthorized discussion.
But finally, on December 31, 1982, in a speech at a Young Socialist Alliance convention in Chicago, Jack Barnes dropped the other shoe with a public declaration that the theory of permanent revolution must be “discarded.”
When opponents of this position protested such a public change without approval by any SWP convention, or even any discussion by the membership, they were told they would be able to discuss the Barnes speech during the next pre-convention discussion period (then slated for the summer of 1983) and that they were prohibited from discussing it before then. But the Barnes group postponed the convention until August 1984, and in the meantime used phony charges to expel each and every member who they thought might object in the pre-convention discussion to the rejection of permanent revolution.
In this way the members of the SWP were deprived of their democratic right to hear a two-sided discussion of the correctness or incorrectness of the program and policies that have guided the SWP and FI since they were founded in 1938. And that is why I and other advocates of permanent revolution never had a chance inside the SWP to explain what we thought was wrong and dangerous in the Barnes position (printed in the Fall 1983 New International under the title “Their Trotsky and Ours: Communist Continuity Today”).
Other expelled members and some members of the FI outside of the U.S. have written effective replies to Barnes. It is not my intention here to repeat their arguments, which the Barnes group has never bothered to answer. All I want to raise are some questions about a single aspect of the new position which I haven’t seen discussed by others and which would have raised inside the SWP if I hadn’t been expelled

   What Barnes Claims
To buttress his position that our movement must “discard” the theory or strategy of permanent revolution, Barnes painted a very negative picture of the effects it has had on our movement since 1928
“Especially m relation to the class struggle m the oppressed nations,” and “especially in this hemisphere since 1959,” he said in the NI article, the weaknesses in Trotsky’s theory have opened the door to “leftist biases and sectarian political errors” He doesn’t prove that such errors result from adherence to permanent revolution, he only asserts that they do For more than a century all kinds of stupid and criminal things have been done by people who call themselves and consider themselves to be Marxists. Barnes wouldn’t propose discarding Marxism on that basis, so how can he pretend it is valid to discard

  permanent revolution merely because errors or sins are committed by people who think or say they stand for that strategy
Permanent revolution, Barnes continued, has nothing to offer us and in fact can only be an “obstacle” It “does not contribute today to arming either ourselves or other revolutionists to lead the working class and its allies to take power and use that power to advance the world socialist revolution.” It is an obstacle to “reknitting our political continuity with Marx, Engels, Lenin, and the first four congresses of the Communist International” It has been an obstacle in our movement to “an objective reading of the masters of Marxism, in particular the writings of Lenin” It will be an obstacle to “our own progress toward a deeper integration into the organizations and struggles of the working class and its oppressed and exploited allies”
If these claims are true, or even only half-true, why did it take Barnes and his group more than 20 years to discover them? Can it be that he is distorting not only the real meaning of permanent revolution but also its effects on our movement?

   Beneficial Effects
It certainly can. As most SWP members in the 1960s could testify, permanent revolution has had highly beneficial effects on the SWP and was a major source of its strength and attractiveness in the 1960s, when Barnes was recruited The two issues that won most of the new members to the SWP at that time – the Cuban revolution and the Black struggle in this country—were both linked inextricably to the strategy of permanent revolution, in reality and in the minds of SWP members, new and old.
Contrary to Barnes’ implications (about “this hemisphere” and “since 1959”), the SWP played a thoroughly revolutionary role in relation to the Cuban revolution, in its practice as well as in its theory. In fact, it was this combination of the SWP’s correct practice and correct theory regarding the Cuban revolution that drew Barnes and others like him to Marxism in the first place.
Until a few years ago nobody in the SWP questioned the link between permanent revolution and the SWP’s position on Cuba. As recently as 1978, Barnes took the initiative in collecting Joseph Hansen’s writings on Cuba in book form as Dynamics of the Cuban Revolution. From start to finish that book is an exposition and defense of Trotsky’s theory, which Hansen held had been fully confirmed by the Cuban experience. It is a book that cries out against the new positions of the Barnes group since 1979, when Hansen died. Whatever “weaknesses” they now profess to see in permanent revolution, the SWP’s record on Cuba is evidence of the healthy and fruitful effects it had for decades in “arming take power.”

  Place in Our Movement
Barnes pretends to review the ways in which permanent revolution “has actually been used by us” since 1928; he even specifies the number of ways (three). One of these ways he pronounces harmless, but unnecessary, and the other two he condemns as harmful. Despite his attempt to seem objective, what the uninformed reader will “actually” get from this is a misleading concept of the place and centrality of permanent revolution in the life and thought of our movement. I will try to demonstrate this through the SWP’s relation to the Black struggle in the U.S. I am compelled to do this because Barnes completely ignores the connection between the SWP’s position on Black liberation and permanent revolution—a connection that happens to be a major hallmark of the SWP since its foundation.
The Black struggle presents a challenge and test for every organization seeking to play a revolutionary role in this country. The way in which the SWP responded was always a source of pride and inspiration to its members, white as well as Black. Barnes and most of his generation in the SWP acknowledged and reflected these feelings hundreds of times in the 1960s and 70s. A thick book could be filled with their statements and writings on the SWP’s special and unique understanding of the Black struggle and its dynamics.
As a matter of fact, the SWP’s position was so exceptional that it was given a special name: “combined revolution” (or “combined character” of the coming American revolution). This name was coined in 1969, in preparation for the SWP’s 23rd national convention, where Barnes and members of his generation first assumed political leader ship status in our party.“Combined revolution” was not a new concept in the SWP in the 1960s. It referred to the combination of the Black struggle against racist oppression and for self-determination with the workers’ struggle against capitalist exploitation and for socialism, and said that this combination was indispensable for the victory of both these struggles. This idea was adopted at the SWP’s 1963 convention (in the resolution called “Freedom Now”). What it got at the 1969 convention was a new and more effective expression, thanks to the development of Black nationalism and the rich experience of the entire decade.
But the lineage or continuity of the combined revolution idea goes back further than 1963. It goes back to the 1930s and Leon Trotsky, who introduced it to our movement at a time when we had a correct understanding of the class character of the Black struggle but an incorrect understanding of its national character. And the name used then for the idea of combining the democratic struggles of the Blacks with the anticapitalist struggles of the workers was—permanent revolution.
The first one who seems to have said that Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution was applicable to the Black struggle in this country was Albert Weisbord, an ex-CP member briefly on the fringes of the Left Opposition. When Trotsky was told about this at a discussion on self-determination in 1933, he said, “Weisbord is correct in a certain sense that the self-determination of the Negroes belongs to the question of the permanent revolution in America.” (Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination Pathfinder Press 1978 p 25)
 Trotsky reiterated this thought in 1939 during a discussion with members of the newly founded SWP, and the party itself, in a 1939 convention resolution influenced by Trotsky’s views, said: “The SWP must recognize that its attitude to the Negro question is crucial for its future development. Hitherto the party has been based mainly on privileged workers and groups of isolated intellectuals. Unless it can find its way to the great masses of the underprivileged, of whom the Negroes constitute so important a section, the broad perspectives of the permanent revolution will remain only a fiction and the party is bound to degenerate.” (The Founding of the Socialist Workers Party, Monad Press, 1982, p.357)
If combined revolution is permanent revolution applied to a particular problem, was a new name really needed? Why not continue to call it by its original name? My personal opinion is that the new name was better than the old—it made it easier for us to communicate the idea to people we wanted to introduce it to. Also, every generation has the right to its own terminology and vocabulary. When I was young, we used to speak of “Negroes” and “colored people,” but later generations prefer other names. If young revolutionaries in the 1960s and 70s felt more comfortable with their own name for the revolutionary strategy based on the necessity to combine democratic and socialist tasks and struggles, there was nothing wrong with that. The important thing was the political content behind the names, which was essentially the same in both cases.
This is not just my opinion, it was the opinion of the whole party. The main political resolution adopted by the 1969 convention contained an excellent presentation of the combined revolution concept. I will quote a few passages from it to illustrate how its content and language were mterchangeable with those used in our writings about permanent revolution: 
The movement for Black liberation is a complex and contradictory fusion of two explosive trends. One is an irrepressible and powerful democratic thrust for self-determination as a distinctive national minority. This is combined with a proletarian struggle against the capitalist rulers. All those who fail to understand the dual character of the Afro-American movement and combined characteristics of the coming American revolution are bound to go astray in comprehending its development and orienting correctly toward it.
The problem of winning full democratic rights and national emancipation for Black Americans is a task that was unsolved by the American bourgeois revolutionists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and has been handed down for solution to the socialist revolution of the twentieth century....
 The Afro-American struggle for liberation is the most formidable expression of the logic of permanent revolution in American life today. It has begun on the basis of a fight for national emancipation. But this democratic objective cannot be obtained except through all-out combat against the entire capitalist system, which holds down the Black masses for its own profiteering reasons. Thus, regardless of the prevailing ideas of its participants, the thrust toward national liberation inexorably tends to merge with the broader class struggle against capitalist domination....
 The combined character of the mass Afro-American movement to gain power to have control over their own future precludes any separation of stages in the struggle for its nationalist demands and socialist objectives. There cannot first be a successfully concluded struggle for national independence and democratic rights and afterwards a struggle for social liberation. The two must be indissolubly combined and will, in fact, reciprocally reinforce each other. The nationalist demands must be tied in with working-class demands in order to obtain either.
Towards an American Socialist Revolution, Pathfinder Press, 1970, pp. 164-6. (My emphasis-- LS.)
What Barnes Said in 1969 
At that 1969 convention Jack Barnes was the Political Committee reporter in behalf of the political resolution, and he did a good job in presenting its main lines, especially on the Black struggle. Among other things, he said:
The basic characteristic of the Afro-American struggle is the struggle by an oppressed nationality for self-determination: the struggle to accomplish the historically deferred tasks that the American bourgeoisie proved incapable of accomplishing in their second revolution and that they turned away from as the United States became an imperialist power....
The alliance between the struggle by the Afro-Americans and the other oppressed national minorities or nationalities in this country and the struggle of the workers is the key to the success of the American revolution.. . .
It is basically a question not of morality but of necessity. If there is no alliance, the American revolution will be impossible....
 The third American revolution will have a combined character. It will be a workers’ struggle for power and a struggle by the oppressed nationalities for liberation and for self-determination. It will be a struggle that only a workers’ government established in the United States will be able to bring to a successful conclusion. And through it, not only will all the democratic rights of the oppressed minorities and nationalities finally be brought into being and guaranteed, but also the proletarian demands of the workers of all sections of the country will be met. The problem that
has bothered, confused and stood somewhat in the way of American radicalism for many, many years (and outside of our movement it still does) is clearly seeing the independent character of the Afro-American struggle for self-determination and the combined character of the coming struggle for power in the United States.
 This struggle is the dearest manifestation in the United States of the permanent revolution. By this we mean that there will be no division of this struggle into separate stages; there will be no middle solution. There will be no solution to the national democratic demands of the Black masses apart from the solution of the exploitation by capitalism of the workers themselves. The revolution will be combined, or it will not take place....
 This key question of the American revolution is one that is hopeless to solve without the tools of Marxism-Leninism-Trotskyism and the experience of the last period as revolutionists.
Towards an American Socialist Revolution, Pathfinder Press, 1970 pp. 143-5. (My emphasis —LS.)

   Two Witnesses
If I had room, I could cite dozens of other quotations by members and supporters of the Barnes group showing that until recently they considered combined revolution to be an application or manifestation or expression of the logic of permanent revolution and that they consistently interpreted and explained combined revolution along the lines that Trotsky had done with permanent revolution. But I think it will be adequate to submit the testimony of just two people whom I have not quoted up to now.

  One is George Novack, who was interested in the Black struggle ever since he joined our party in the 1930s and who participated in the writing or editing of most of the SWP’s major resolutions on Black liberation. In 1971, he gave lectures on the Transitional Program at Oberlin, in the course of which he traced the development of the SWP’s assessment of the successive stages of Black nationalism from the 1950s to the 1970s and its theoretical analysis of its motive forces, principal features and aims:

   They [American Trotskyistsl were greatly aided in this task by the method of Marxism, the positions worked out by Lenin and the Bolsheviks on the national question m our era, and by the acute previsions of Trotsky contained m the pamphlet Leon Trotsky on Black Nationalism and Self-Determination”
 We can claim a certain amount of success m this theoretical-political work It is widely recognized in radical circles, black and white, that the Socialist Workers Party outstnpped all other tendencies in grasping the importance of black nationalism”
  All this indicates the capacity of our cadres to recognize what is new in a mass ferment and adjust our views, strategy, and tactics accordingly. That would not have been possible without the aid of the theory of the permanent revolution and the law of uneven and combined development taken from Trotsky’s teachings.
--The Transitional Program for Socialist Revolution, Pathfinder Press, 1977, pp. 43-4. (My emphasis --L.S.)
The second witness I will cite is Gus Horowitz, who is no longer a member of the SWP. In the late 1960s and 70s he was a leader of the party’s educational and publishing work, assigned among other things to promoting understanding and literature about the national question.
Between the 1969 and 1974 world congresses of the Fl, sharp factional debates took place in our International over a great many political and theoretical issues. One of these was about the national question and its application in imperialist countries. Ernest Mandel, a leading member of the United Secretariat, said in a criticism of SWP positions in 1973: “The whole notion of applying the formula of permanent revolution to imperialist countries is extremely dubious in the best of cases. It can only be done with the utmost circumspection, and in the form of an analogy.” International Internal Discussion Bulletin, Vol. 10, No.4,4/73, p.34
The SWP leadership assigned Horowitz to rebut Mandel. I don’t know what either Mandel or Horowitz thinks about this question today, but here is what Horowitz said on behalf of the SWP leadership in 1973:

   Circumspection is always desirable, of course, but Comrade [Mandel] is simply wrong The permanent revolution can indeed be applied to the advanced capitalist countries, and the Trotskyist movement has been doing so for a long time (particularly in regard to the national question). And a revolutionist in Canada, in Spain, or in Ireland who does not know how to apply it will be in deep trouble....
Trotsky developed the theory of permanent revolution, an extension of the Marxist understanding of the law of uneven and combined development, in relation to the problems of the Russian revolution. The specific features of that situation were quite different than, say, the problems of the revolution in Black Africa today. But using the method of the permanent revolution, we can apply it there . The problems of the revolution in advanced capitalist countries are much more different, but it remains essential for Marxists to tackle the problems there that stem from uneven and combined development — for example, the still-existing uncompleted national tasks in the framework of an advanced capitalist economy. That is why the revolution in Canada, for example, will most likely be a combined revolution—combining the Qubuecois national independence struggle with the proletarian socialist revolution in Quebec and in all of Canada. IIDB. VoL. 10, No. 10, 7/73, p. 7. (My emphasis —L.S.)
 

  Another Change?
Barnes, as i have noted, alleged that he was reviewing the different ways we have used the concept of permanent revolution since 1928. Why then did he omit all the material showing the numerous links between permanent revolution and the SWP’s position on Black liberation in the U.S.?
It wasn’t because he was unaware of this material. And it wasn’t because he was ignorant about the weight and centrality of combined revolution in the SWP’s total program. So what was the reason?
Thus far, I am unable to offer an answer. But I am very concerned about the Barnes omissions on this point whatever the answer may be. Because it seems to me that they place a question mark over the party’s hard-won and precious analysis and program for the Black struggle. Is the Barnes group preparing to change that too?
I am not saying that they are preparing to do so, I am asking—are they preparing? If raising such a question gives the impression that I am “too suspicious,” I must have got that way as a result of recent party history. If anybody had told me five years ago that the SWP leadership would repudiate permanent revolution, and would do it in such a dishonest and undemocratic way, I would have considered the teller a nut of some kind. The Barnes group committed those offenses against proletarian politics and morality without ever announcing in advance what they were up to. That is why my question is in order now, before it may be too late. At the very least, the Barnes group should be watched closely and pressured to disclose their real aims whenever they are ambiguous or diplomatically silent.
The question I ask is not based only on the omissions by Barnes. Even more it is induced by things the SWP leadership has been saying and doing (or not saying and not doing) in relation to the Black struggle itself during the last three or four years. To discuss this adequately will take another article, but I will mention aspects of the problem because it is part of the background to my question about whether the party’s position on the Black struggle is being changed without discussion.
It is obvious, first of all, that the Black struggle no longer receives the kind or amount of attention—politically, theoretically, practically, educationally – that it used to command in the SWP. It is not the central question it used to be for the party. The level of writing on the subject, which used to be one of our chief assets, is now embarrassingly low. New members get more of agitation than of education in the ideas of combined revolution. They are encouraged to talk to each other rather than trained how to participate effectively in the Black movement.
It has been several years since party resolutions have made any serious analysis of the Black community and the trends in it or provided any guide to action for our Black cadres. The exception is in relation to the National Black Independent Political Party, a very small group that tried to establish a new political pole in the Black community.
It was correct for us to join NBIPP, explore its potential, and aid in its development toward independent politics. But within a year it was absolutely clear that NBIPP was incapable of playing any serious role in the community, that its leaders were leaning toward the Black Democrats, that they were energetic only about expelling Marxists, and that most of the founding members had quit. NBIPP not only never led a single action among Blacks anywhere in the country, but it was incapable of even producing any literature to educate anybody about politics. Some of its leaders found their way to Jesse Jackson in the Democratic Party, and through Jackson to Mondale. After several years it

  remains a tiny sect, self-isolated and unknown in the community.
Yet the SWP leadership persists in shutting its eyes to this reality and continues to view this hopeless shell as the center of the Black struggle, devoting more time and attention to it than to all other Black forces and trends. And whenever questions arise about NBIPP’s viability, it defends this obtuseness by pointing to, praising and reprinting the radical-sounding sections of the charter that NBIPP adopted when it was founded. Nobody else in NBIPP ever considered the anticapitalist and anti-imperialist paragraphs in the charter as anything but rhetoric, and NBIPP itself never even printed the charter.* But the

  SWP leaders were obsessed by what I can only call “charter fetishism” and invoked it to ward off facing reality.

  *  This was true at the time Stewart died, in November 1984. Since then, a split in NBIPP, following the witchhunt of SWP members and sympathizers, resulted in the emergence of two factions, each calling itself NBIPP. One of these published the 4-year-old charter
All this is a sign of acute disorientation on the part of the Barnes group. They could not commit such errors if their thinking about the Black struggle was still firmly rooted in combined revolution. This reinforces, for me, the urgency of my question, and the need for the whole SWP membership to seek an unambiguous answer:
Does the repudiation of permanent revolution signify or imply any alteration in the SWP’s theory and practice of combined revolution?

Larry Stewart Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page



