n Sullivan: Review - Jeff Fellow, "Revolting Scotland" (1993)



John Sullivan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

John Sullivan
Review: Jeff Fellow, Revolting Scotland
(1993)

From Revolutionary History, Vol. 5 No. 1, 1993.
Prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

Jeff Fellow
Revolting Scotland
Luath Press, Barr 1992, pp. 127, £5.95
This radical cartoon history attempts to present the real history of Scotland, which has been obscured by kitsch tartan images produced for tourists. The illustrations are well drawn in a bold, simple style. However, the historical content is not up to the standard of the graphics. Like individuals searching for noble forebears, Scots nationalists have to construct an ancestry from the materials at hand. As Scots history, tartans and customs were invented, mainly by Englishmen, to please the tourists, Fallow has a hard job to create a radical myth in opposition to the tacky version peddled by a Scottish arts establishment dominated, so we are told, by English administrators.
The Scottish people are urged to rise, reclaim their revolutionary tradition, and demand ... a Scottish Assembly, control of defence policy, and an end to the importation of the cheap tartan goods which are ruining native craft-workers. The problem with trying to restore Scottish life and culture, cleansed of the grotesque tartanry the author describes, is the doubt that anything actually exists beneath the tacky commercialism. Fallow, wisely, does not challenge the myths about the 1745 Rising and highland dress. His alternative culture seems utopian, genteel, and, dare it be said, terribly English.
 



Am I the only one to be puzzled by John Williams’ article A Holistic Socialist Vision, in New Interventions, Vol. 7 No. 3? He argues for a programme of feminist eco-socialism which will be ‘one strand in the tapestry of agendas that a holistic socialist supra-national Europe could implement within its domain’. Is recycling agendas his alternative to basket weaving? If he has enough to cover a reasonably-sized wall, he must have led a terribly boring life.
Insofar as I understand him, Williams is arguing that a European Union superstate would be able to combine Green and socialist objectives. As this is probably now the majority view on the left, it might be useful to examine the history and theory of the Green movement. Let’s start with National Socialism, the most serious attempt so far to implement a Green programme, before going on to examine contemporary movements. A community of people living at one with nature was absolutely central to the Nazi vision. They thought that society had been ruined by the Enlightenment, whose main instrument had been the Jews. For radical nature-worshippers, there can, of course, be no sharp distinction between humans and other creatures, so they were necessarily hostile to the Mosaic law which does make such distinctions. When Nazi ideologues attacked attempts to master nature, they sounded like hippies. Hitler alleged that men seemed intent on destroying themselves by eating meat, and were ‘alone among living creatures in trying to deny the laws of nature’. The Nazis tended to be animal lovers. For example, Rudolf Höss, the commandant of Auschwitz, described how, when stressed out by the pressure of work: ‘I would mount my horse and ride, until I had chased the terrible picture away. Often at night, I would walk through the stables and seek relief among my beloved animals.’ For Himmler, getting rid of the Jews was equivalent to a creature delousing itself: ‘As far as anti-Semitism is concerned, it is exactly the same as with delousing. It is a matter of cleanliness ...’ More recently, Rudolf Bahro, the former East European dissident, believed that Germans needed a new Adolf to lead them to a Green future.
The deep Greens, sometimes known as deep ecologists, to distinguish them from the timid reformists in the Green parties, call for the world’s population to be reduced, although the favoured weapon is no longer gas chambers, but the withholding of health care. There are a number of such tendencies, the best known of which, Gaia, sees the planet as a living creature intent on preserving life: ‘If humans stand in the way, they will be eliminated.’ Inevitably, such a tendency is completely uninterested in the divisions within humanity. Those with power, stockbrokers, bankers and generals, are no more guilty than the poor in the Third World or in the inner cities. It is hard luck that the poor will suffer most from the proposed Green solutions, but perhaps that is a law of nature.
Another such tendency, Earth First, maintains that there should be no special privileges for humans. Although all humans are guilty of damaging the planet, there seems to be a special dislike of the ‘genetically-impoverished’ black or brown people, and, once again, the poor. Aids is sometimes seen as nature’s population control device, and starvation is seen as the solution to Ethiopia’s problems. Inevitably, such positions are held by theorists who do not create a mass organisation. For a middle ground between those unpleasant people and the man at the bottle bank, or the readers of Red Pepper, you must go to the dippy New Age types and eco-feminists, who are in the centre of Williams’ holistic tapestry.
Moving on to the Green mainstream, we find a jumble of largely unexamined dogmas, myths and magical beliefs, the most important of which is Malthusianism, which holds that, as the earth has limited resources, humanity must cut back on its consumption and, especially, on its numbers. The intellectual provenance of the theory is not always acknowledged. Latter-day Malthusians tend to speak about ‘sustainability’ and ‘carrying capacity’.
Greens try to convince us that we face imminent catastrophe. In reality, their beliefs are an example of a moral panic, similar to the fears about Mods and Rockers, rottweilers, Aids, global warming, additives in food and Satanic abuse. These rise and fade, to be replaced by new panics. They reflect a general unease, rather than rational fears based on evidence. Conservative Greens long for a lost rural Arcadia. In contrast, people who have experienced rural life are glad that they managed to escape to the cities.
Most Greens are attracted to the prospect of individual transformation, because it avoids the need for revolution, conflict or collective action. It’s enough to change our diet. Understandably, this is a popular view, as it is easier to exercise our jaws than our brains. Have a glance at the number of books on magic cures in bookshops. We can laugh, but we should remember that these illusory remedies are a product of real pain. Anti-consumerism appeals to the downwardly mobile. If you can’t afford the standard of living your parents have, it helps if you can despise their unspiritual materialism.
Malthus’ view that the limited possibilities of increasing food production set natural limits on population was spectacularly wrong. Food production has exceeded the limits he outlined many times over. Each new generation of Malthusians claims he will be proved right soon.
The dominant tendency in the Green ideology and the core of Williams’ eco-feminist holism is the distrust of reason. The horrors of our century are blamed on technology, not on the political uses to which it has been put. For Martin Heidegger, the Nazi’s leading philosopher, and a passionate Green, there is no difference between people working in mechanised farming and those running an extermination camp.
In Britain, the Green Party has been more moderate than the sectional movements, such as Greenpeace or Friends of the Earth, probably because, like most political parties, it is an alliance of diverse ideological tendencies. It has been less important for the Green movement than the social democratic parties have been for the labour movement. It is difficult to place it on the political spectrum, as many Greens see politics dominated by human concerns and class conflict as irrelevant. The general impression is that the Green voters come somewhere between Labour and Lib Dem. The fascist tendencies which are significant on the animal rights scene are hardly in evidence in the party. The Green Party’s distinctiveness consists of an even greater concentration on media attention than mainstream parties, and, following logically from that, a big concentration on personalities. The media do not like ideas, but they liked Jonathan Porrit, Sarah Fergusson and David Icke.
It’s hard to say what a Green party with power would do. In Germany, some Greens seemed happy in coalitions with the Social Democrats, but others were not. I would predict that authoritarian Green tendencies (compulsory restriction on breeding) would be downplayed, but a Green party would be as tough as the mainstream parties on immigrants and refugees.
There would be tax changes (the Greens supported the imposition of VAT on fuel), and support for Blair’s authoritarian communitarianism, workfare, etc. There would certainly be petty attempts to regulate lifestyle and personal habits. Right-wing governments will find lots of this useful, particularly the preaching against growth, and the pious attacks on materialism. The Greens want a radically different world, but in the meantime they will settle for cycle lanes and a higher tax on fuel.
So, no more road building, lots of draconian controls on private conduct, whilst the ruling class continue to rule. Very much like New Labour. If the Green Party was a force and Blair needed their votes, there would be an alliance tomorrow. If a New Labour/Green alliance is within the bounds of possibility, a Red/Green alliance seems a very strange idea indeed. Socialists once prided themselves as being the heirs of the Enlightenment, inheriting the best aspects of bourgeois culture, science, progress and secularism. So why take on board Malthus, obscurantist religion, irrationalism and the cult of poverty? Part of the answer is the belief that the more planks you have on your platform, the more people will be able to stand on it. This is true of a physical platform, but not of a political one. If you support Catholics/Serbs/smokers, you will annoy Protestants/Croats/non-smokers. Support from the Greens means antagonising workers, pensioners, atheists and what used to be seen as the forces of progress. Once labour movement activists realise that Arthur Scargill ran a long-term inmate of Greenham Common as a parliamentary candidate, his party will be over.
However, sectional Green movements such as Greenpeace are more popular than the strictly political ones. Socialists used to sing ‘No saviours from on high deliver’, but Greenpeace makes the IRA seem democratic. The supporters send their cheques, and the heroes save the world.
Those who want more involvement and a friendly lifestyle will turn to Friends of the Earth, a variation on ordinary suburban madness, where worried people scrutinise the labels in supermarkets, and talk about double glazing and the Neighbourhood Watch. The more radical fringe can live in tepees, grow organic vegetables, drink their own urine, and retreat from the world. Socialists are tolerant of such people, just as we are of train-spotters. We agree that the world is full of horrors, or we would not want to change it. Opposing irrationality is a precondition to such change.
Anti-road protesters, the Green flavour of the month, are a mixture of local residents (Nimbies) and New Age or anarchist protesters. Ordinary people cannot see this as anything but entertainment, some of it, admittedly, of high quality. It is tragic that socialist groups such as the Socialist Party (formerly Militant) appear to believe that such antics have a place in revolutionary politics.
The ‘Red/Green dialogue’ is really a monologue, as most Greens are not interested in socialism. There are different political emphases amongst them, but they are no more important than they would be to musicians or football fans. Solutions to the problems of waste, pollution and traffic congestion require scientific, not religious, remedies.
The most common left assessment of the Greens is summed up in the complaint of Workers News that ‘the Greens are not prepared to take their analysis to its logical conclusion’, in that they propose class-collaborationist solutions, yet expect the capitalists to act against their own material interests. Surely the thought of the Greens being able to proceed to the logical conclusion of their doctrine is terrifying. Socialists should stop regarding them as potential allies. Anyone who thinks we should liquidate our movement into the Greens is a few agendas short of a tapestry.

Reading
Murray Bookchin, Re-Enchanting Humanity.
Robert Pois, National Socialism and the Religion of Nature.
Janet Biehl and Peter Staudenmaier, Ecofascism.
Alison Costello, The Ecology of Green Failure, Analysis, No. 1.
 



Andrew Charles Durgan
BOC 1930–1936, El Bloque Obrero y Campesino
Laertes, Barcelona 1996, pp. 616
Andrew Durgan’s book is the first documented history of the group which merged with the Trotskyist Izquierda Comunista (IC) in 1935 to form the Partido Obrero de Unificación Marxista (POUM), which suffered such bloody repression from the Stalinists during the Spanish Revolution. Stalinists saw the POUM as Trotskyist, and therefore an agent of the Nazis. The fact that Andreu Nin, the POUM’s best-known leader until his murder in 1937, had been a member of the IC made the Trotskyist label plausible. Trotsky, on the other hand, was highly critical of the POUM, and most Trotskyists have seen the POUM as naively sleep-walking to destruction because of its illusions in the Popular Front.
The POUM’s own attempts at historical explanation have been disappointing, so Durgan’s book is welcome. The BOC emerged from the Spanish Communist Party (PCE) because of disagreements over the party’s policy in Spain. Its supporters were unconcerned about Stalin’s counter-revolution in Russia. To Joaquín Maurín, the outstanding Catalan leader, and the majority of activists, it seemed that the Spanish party’s leadership, not the Russian one, was to blame for the PCE’s failure. The difficulties of working under the Primo de Rivera dictatorship were compounded by frequent purges of the leadership, and a lunatic ultra-left line. The Catalan members, mainly recruited from the anarcho-syndicalist CNT, were hardly integrated into the party when the dictatorship was installed in 1923. The PCE’s Catalan and Balearic Federation (FCC-B), forced to act on its own initiative, hoped that the Communist International would recognise it, remove the PCE’s sectarian leaders, and recreate a unified Spanish Communist Party. When the Communist International ignored its pleas, the FCC-B fused with a tiny group, the PCP, and became independent.
A major reason for dissension within the PCE was the vastly different conditions in Catalonia and the rest of Spain. The Socialist Party (PSOE) and its associated trade union, the UGT, were dominant in most of the country, but in Catalonia the CNT was much stronger. In addition, those Catalan workers who were not convinced by the CNT’s call to abstain in the elections tended to vote for the left nationalist ERC. In the first elections under the Republic in June 1931, Maurín, impressed by the ERC’s sweeping victory, persuaded the BOC to change its demand from the right to national self-determination to support the call for independence. When this demand was extended to include Andalusia, an area with no tradition of nationalism, it provoked hostility from most of the left.
The unresolved differences on the national question provoked continual disputes within the BOC’s own ranks, but it would be quite wrong to see the group as merely a camp follower of the nationalists. Maurín thought that the bourgeoisie could never achieve self-determination for Catalonia, but that it was necessary to support the nationalists to the extent that they fought for it. Marxists should try to win over activists from the ERC, just as they did from the PSOE elsewhere in Spain. The BOC had considerable success in this, but it was a two-way traffic, as many of its leading members ended up in the ERC.
In the summer of 1931 the BOC had hoped that the militant FAI tendency within the CNT could be won to Bolshevism, and lead the CNT to take power. Maurín claimed that only fossilised Marxists could fail to see the CNT’s revolutionary potential. Other Marxists saw that position as a reversion to revolutionary syndicalism. Later, in 1932, after the CNT had taken to breaking up BOC meetings and assaulting its activists, the BOC turned sharply against the anarchists. As the CNT was fiercely anti-political, belonging to the BOC or speaking at one of its meetings were grounds for expulsion. Many union branches were excluded from the CNT, or left because of disagreements with the policies of the FAI’s leadership. By the end of 1933, the BOC tried to group such branches together in a federation (the FOUS) with other tendencies which were abandoning the CNT. The BOC’s initial illusions in the CNT were replaced by a gross underestimation of its strength. On the other hand, the BOC corrected its sectarian anti-PSOE line, which it had inherited from its origins in the PCE, and made serious efforts to involve it in a united front with other workers’ organisations
The BOC’s attitude to soviets and to the united front were among its best points. Maurín argued that Spanish soviets would not be a simple copy of a Russian model. The greater incidence of trade unionism, however fragmented, meant that unions would be the main base for soviets. That observation had often been made by union leaders in order to deny the need for united working-class organisations, but Maurín’s intention was the opposite. In its attitude to workers’ unity and to the united front, the BOC was indeed ‘Trotskyist’ despite its disagreement with Trotsky and his Spanish followers on many other issues. The tactic was demonstrated in its leadership of a successful strike of commercial employees, a traditionally non-militant group, in 1933. The BOC obtained the support of left nationalists and of minority trade-union and political forces, which, combined with the energetic support of the BOC’s action groups, produced a remarkable victory at a time when more militant sectors of the working class had been defeated. The success was limited, as in Barcelona a united front without the CNT was by definition a minority affair. Being right was not enough while the core of the working class followed rival sectarian leaders.
The united front strategy was continued when the BOC, with the Izquierda Comunista, launched the Alianzas Obreras following the right-wing electoral victory in November 1933. The Alianzas called on all the workers’ organisations to unite in struggle. The leaderships of the main unions and parties were forced to give some support to these initiatives. However, at best, even when the UGT and CNT moderated their sectarianism, they saw the Alianzas as specific agreements between established organisations, and not as a means to overcome divisions at rank-and-file level. Democratically-controlled organisations would have threatened the leaders’ hold over their own members.
The BOC’s assessment of the development of Spain’s counter-revolutionary forces was remarkably perceptive. Maurín’s view was that their model was Dolfüss rather than Hitler, and that they still looked to a military coup, which is exactly what happened. As the prospect of counter-revolution loomed, the BOC’s pleas for unity got more of a hearing, and it was involved with a number of small parties in an attempt to create a united Marxist movement. However, as the Communist International abandoned ultra-leftism for the Popular Front, it attracted many of the forces with which the BOC tried to unite. Attempts to achieve unity at a Spanish level produced a split of the BOC’s more Catalanist elements. Many of those involved in the discussions ended up in the Stalinists’ Catalan section, the PSUC, as did some leading members of the BOC. By 1936 only Maurín and David Rey remained from the regional committee of the FCC-B expelled from the PCE in 1930. The limited result of the drive for unity was the creation of the POUM, formed by the fusion of the BOC with the IC, which had broken with the Trotskyist movement in 1933. Neither section of the new party saw their merger as a final step. As the name – the Workers Party of Marxist Unification – indicated, it was an attempt to unite all of the splintered sectors of the Marxist movement.
While the charges of Catalan nationalism levelled at Maurín were justified at some periods, uniting with the IC, at the cost of splits within the BOC, was the result of a serious determination to break out of a restricted geographical base. The BOC had few members outside Catalonia, whereas the IC had sections in Castille, the Basque country and Estremadura. It was very weak in Catalonia – estimates of its membership there varied from 11 to 60.
This book will not end the controversy over the role of the BOC. It changed a great deal over six years, so that criticisms which were true at one point did not always remain so. In its early years it shared some of the attitudes of other Right Opposition groups, praising Stalin as late as 1931, but as the PCE was able to claim that it was the party recognised by the Communist International, that position could not be maintained. In February 1932 Maurín declared that the degeneration of the Communist International had begun ‘after Lenin’s death’, which was a recognition that the rot had set in before the ultra-left Third Period. The BOC went on to criticise the suicidal policy of the German Communist Party in rejecting united anti-Nazi activity. The fact that the BOC, and later the POUM, had most of their members in a separate trade-union federation, the FOUS, was not the blindly sectarian policy which it might seem, but a consequence of FAI/CNT intolerance. The FOUS became the BOC’s union federation and therefore the source of its militia once the war started, but that was not the party’s intention. The BOC only slowly realised that the PCE had become the most dangerous enemy of revolutionary Marxism. That was understandable given the PCE’s weakness during the BOC’s formative years. Our knowledge of Stalinism’s role from 1936 onwards can make us forget the much greater strength of the ERC and CNT until Russian support made the PCE a state within a state.
BOC 1930–1936 helps establish the material basis for the politics of the group by providing a detailed account of its membership and social and geographical composition. Most members were Catalan speakers. It was strongest in Lleida and weak in Barcelona, where its members tended to be white-collar workers, reflecting its origins in the PCE and the CNT’s overwhelming hegemony among Barcelona’s industrial workers. That explains Maurín’s difficulty in winning its members to revolutionary positions. It is impossible in a review to do justice to the author’s depth of scholarship, in a work which is clearly a labour of love, not a factional account. It seems to me that he establishes that the BOC should not be labelled as a typical product of the Right Opposition. Until an English edition appears readers will have to be content with Durgan’s contribution to Revolutionary History, Vol. 4 Nos. 1/2. The book is a worthy complement to Pelai Pagès’ El movimiento trotskista en España, on the IC.
 



The massive demonstrations against ETA’s killing of a municipal councillor, Miguel Angel Blanco, on 12 July were publicised throughout the world, but little is known about the background to the tragedy. Basque nationalism arose in the 1890s as a reaction to the arrival of immigrants from other parts of Spain, following the development of iron mining and industrialisation. Basque nationalism was explicitly racist, Catholic and reactionary. Its founder, Sabino Arana, saw southerners as atheist, immoral and racially inferior. His solution to the danger he thought this presented to the Basque people was to insulate them from the evil influence of the maketos by encouraging the use of the Basque language, Euskera. Arana’s racism has been attenuated, but has not completely disappeared from the Basque nationalist party (the PNV) which he founded. ETA was established by the PNV’s youth group in 1959, less due to political disagreements than to impatience at the PNV’s lack of resistance to Francoism. ETA has abandoned Arana’s racism, and defines a Basque as someone who identifies with Basque culture and aspirations. In other words, one becomes Basque by becoming nationalist. Thirty-eight years later, many hundreds have died, and nearly 500 ETA members are in prison in Spain, and dozens more in France.
The Spanish government took full advantage of the revulsion against Blanco’s murder, which brought a million people out on demonstrations, a quarter of a million of them in the Basque country (Euskadi). ETA and its political wing, Herri Batasuna, claimed that this was due to political manipulation of the media, and that the demonstrations were merely updated versions of the massive shows of support to Franco organised up to the mid-1970s. Certainly, the media assault was relentless, with normal TV programmes being pushed aside to show endless condemnations of ETA, and the King and Prime Minister rushing to the dead man’s village to get in on the act. However, that analysis was clearly wrong as Egin, the daily newspaper which supports Herri Batasuna, recognised in its issue of 18 July. The government’s success in mobilising demonstrators who were neither Spanish nationalists nor conservatives, showed a rejection of ETA’s action by some of its traditional supporters.
Blanco was neither the first hostage nor political opponent ETA has killed, so why should the event strike such a chord? Almost every young person asked to comment mentioned Blanco’s youth. He was the son of working class immigrants from Galicia in North-western Spain and had a degree from the state university in Bilbao, not from the Jesuit university in Deusto, where the local élite are trained. That background would have suited a Herri Batasuna councillor, although not a moderate nationalist (PNV) one. ETA is explicitly anti-racist, and is proud of its many members who are not ethnically Basque. The killing followed on the police success in freeing a prison warder, Ortega Lara, at the beginning of the month after he had been held captive since January 1996. The press photographs showed an emaciated figure in a deplorable physical and mental state. His cell was compared to Auschwitz, ironically by people whose political forebears were keen on the perpetrators of Auschwitz. On the same day, ETA released another prisoner, the businessman Cosme Delclaux, after payment of a ransom of about £4 million. Delclaux was in excellent physical condition, showing that even in extremity the class system operates.
Ortega Lara had been kidnapped in order to pressure the government into bringing ETA’s prisoners back to serve their sentences in local jails. That is an indication both of how the organisation’s formal demands (independence for the Basque country) are now downplayed, and of a breath-taking political naiveté. ETA could have kept Ortega Lara captive until his beard reached his knees without making any impression on Spain’s rulers. Kidnapping Blanco was a desperate and suicidal reaction to the defeat inflicted by Ortega Lara’s release and the arrest of his kidnappers. ETA gave only two days for the state to begin moving the Basque prisoners nearer home, and there was never any possibility of that happening. Even as people demonstrated, they felt utter despair at the possibility of averting the tragedy. In a final horrific twist, the ETA commando botched Blanco’s killing by shooting him twice, and announcing he was dead. Some hunters heard the shots, and the wounded man was taken to hospital. As both bullets were lodged in his head, little could be done, and he died early the next day.
The main purpose of the government and media campaign was to isolate Herri Batasuna politically, as a prelude to taking legal measures against it. That presents problems for moderate nationalists, who until now have seen that party as a wayward member of the nationalist family. Specifically, there was a media campaign against Herri Batasuna’s elected representatives, especially its mayors. In ethnically Basque areas where no party has an overall majority, the nationalist parties generally choose a nationalist mayor. In Mondragon, where Ortega Lara was held captive, the media campaign led to the moderate nationalist parties removing the Herri Batasuna mayor.
The press campaign attempted to link the left with Herri Batasuna. There is no organised Marxist group in the Basque country, so on the morning of 18 July, I spoke to Maria Luisa Sánchez, the Communist Party (PCE) coordinator for San Sebastian. She explains that her party tries to work in social movements, residents associations, parents groups, etc. The only other party to do so is Herri Batasuna, who are, of course, much larger than the PCE. Should the PCE always oppose the only people who want to do anything? It would be fine if Socialist Party (PSOE) members would participate in social movements, but they don’t. They have a great loyalty to their organisation and remain faithful, although many are sickened by their party’s involvement in corruption. Those who leave are not likely to join the PCE. What about ETA’s prisoners? She told me that it is unconstitutional to keep prisoners so far away from home. Apart from nearly 500 ETA members, there are 2,000 ordinary Basque prisoners who, according to the constitution, should be serving their sentences nearer home. (The PCE is very keen on the constitution, which it was partly instrumental in drawing up.) This seems an eminently reasonable position. I bite my tongue and stop myself asking why she has a picture of Dolores Ibárruri (La Pasionaria) on her wall. The outlook for the PCE seems bleak, as its partners in the United Left electoral alliance begin to desert as the media turns on the pressure.
The left here was not always so weak. Twenty years ago, there were more Trotskyists per head of population here than anywhere else on the planet. In 1973 the leaders of ETA (who became known as ETA VI) joined the United Secretariat of the Fourth International. ETA VI was in fierce competition with a larger group, the Movimiento Comunista, who they themselves had expelled from ETA in 1967. [1] The two groups, by now greatly shrunken, united a few years ago and are now known as Zutik. I called round to get their statement on recent events. To their, credit, they have not surrendered to the prevailing hysteria, although Blanco’s murder puts a terrible strain on their relationship with Herri Batasuna, which they consider is the only substantial radical force.
Zutik does not define itself as Marxist, although some of its members consider themselves to be so. It publishes a journal, Hika, which is concerned with culture, ecology, the Third World and largely defunct or imaginary social movements. There is no group as nice as this on the British left.
Every Friday, the families of ETA prisoners hold a dignified, silent demonstration in San Sebastian. They assemble in the main square carrying placards with their relative’s name or photograph, and parade through the town. It would take a heart of stone not to feel sorry for the mainly elderly participants. The families usually take some time to assemble, as they come from all over the province, so it is generally easy to talk to them. On 18 July, a few days after Blanco’s funeral, they seemed to be late, so I sat down to wait. I asked a group of young people gathered in a corner of the square if they knew if the scheduled demonstration was cancelled, and was told that they did not know. They were perfectly polite (rudeness is not socially acceptable here), but were less communicative than their elders. A bloke addressed them through a megaphone in Euskerra, the Basque language, and I realised this was Jarrai, Herri Batasuna’s youth group, who are portrayed in the press as thugs or as a second division ETA. The young people leave the square, but return 10 minutes later, marching behind a banner and shouting ‘Long Live ETA!’. They disperse quickly, no police are in sight. Jarrai has shown that they are not running for cover.
On 20 July, the following Sunday evening in Zarauz, a pleasant seaside town, the sea front cafés are crowded. Suddenly, a procession of several hundred people emerges and marches along the promenade, shouting slogans in favour of the prisoners. The marchers are mainly, but not overwhelmingly young. Some wear Che Guevara T-shirts, proclaiming Hasta la victoria siempre, but the final victory is not on the current agenda, any more than it is with ETA; the stress is on the prisoners. The march disperses without a police presence or any sign of hostility from bystanders.
After a week, there are definite signs that the government’s attempt to isolate Herri Batasuna socially is flagging. Conservative Basque nationalists know that a resurgent Spanish nationalism will be turned against them. Besides, the idea of socially isolating members of Herri Batasuna is absurd. PNV members have friends and relatives who support that party. Arzallus, the PNV chairman, criticises the government interpretation of the anti-ETA agreement made by the main parties. The way to peace, he declares, lies through dialogue, not through criminalisation of opposing views. At one level, this is simple self-preservation. PNV leaders know that they would not have the degree of autonomy they now enjoy, were it not for ETA’s activities in the past.
The PSOE shows less intelligence, going along with the government’s attempt to blur the distinction between ETA and Herri Batasuna, a legal political party supported by about 12 per cent of the population. Giving extra powers to Franco’s heirs does not seem sensible, but the PSOE is not a free agent. When first elected to office in 1982, it feared a repetition of the military coup attempt of the previous year if it failed to end ETA’s violence. The solution adopted was the creation of GAL, squads of hired mercenaries who murdered ETA sympathisers in France. Creating secret funds for this purpose provided excellent opportunities for embezzlement for some PSOE leaders. As trials proceed and minions inform on their superiors, the finger of suspicion points at Felipe González, who has now resigned as general secretary of the PSOE. It is unlikely, however, that the conservative government will jail him for his services to a unified Spain.
Herri Batasuna called a demonstration for 27 July, demanding that ETA’s prisoners be returned to the Basque country, which was promptly banned. The organisers appealed to the court, declaring it would abide by its decision. When the march was allowed to go ahead, Herri Batasuna told Atutxa, the Basque interior minister, their pet hate, that they would provide stewards, and that there would be no trouble if he kept ‘his boys and girls, whether in uniform or not’ out of the way. The campaign against Herri Batasuna lost momentum when, on 22 July an ETA prisoner, Juan Carlos Hernando, killed himself. It is suggested that the prison authorities, observing his horror at Blanco’s murder, leaned on him to make a declaration attacking ETA, causing him unbearable mental torment. When remission was taken into account, Hernando’s sentence was already completed, so he should already have been free. Herri Batasuna mounted a vigorous campaign alleging that there was a double standard in condemning loss of life according to whether the victim supported the government or not.
On 25 July, at a hamlet not far from the city, I expect my host, a native Basque speaker, to be a model abertzale (patriot) as he has a friend who has been sentenced to 102 years in prison. A ludicrous slogan on a nearby wall proclaims ‘Spaniards! This will be your Vietnam!’, but the young man is less militant than his wife, although she is from the city and a from a culturally Spanish background. I listen with slight surprise as she describes the oppression of the Basque people. I know that members of her family suffered death, imprisonment and exile under Franco, none of it for nationalism, but for socialist and anarchist activities. Her grandfather, whose death sentence had been commuted in 1940, had been the secretary of the socialist UGT during a strike in a ceramics factory. He regarded nationalists as agents of the Vatican, eager to return to the eighteenth century. On our walks he would point out churches as fortresses of reaction and corruption. ‘What can you do while people believe this nonsense?’, he would proclaim, congratulating me for my good fortune in living in an irreligious country. I ponder on the eclipse of his tradition as his granddaughters show me the Basque flags they will be carrying on Sunday’s demonstration.
On 27 July, I waited at the march’s finishing point. There were lots of police vans drawn up in the side streets, but they made no attempt to interfere. The stewarding, much of it by women, was very efficient. The demonstrators might not appear stylish by Barcelona standards, but some are too smart to be at such an event in London. There were lots of young people, but there were also old people, children and even a bloke in an electric wheelchair. The main banners were in Euskera, as were the speeches. There was a large banner in English, but I saw none in Spanish. Everything passed off peacefully, but when the demonstration ended the police blocked the main avenue, and it took some time to get into the narrow streets of the old town, where some demonstrators had retreated. There had been a few arrests and some slight police injuries, and there were some horrible smelling remnants of Molotov cocktails, but that did not interfere with the normal activity of strolling round the bars. The riot police appeared alarming, wearing what looked like paramilitary balaclavas, but turned out to be flameproof metallic masks. The skirmishes had ended, and the police showed no aggression to the general public, apparently being more constrained by political or social pressure than their British counterparts.
Attitudes to nationalism divide many families here. I spoke to Maria Teresa Castells, the sister of one of Herri Batasuna’s lawyers, and the owner of Lagun bookshop, who was imprisoned during Franco’s dictatorship. Last winter, her bookshop suffered two attacks by abertzales. In the first incident, after paint was sprayed over her shop, someone suggested that, as a gesture of solidarity, people should buy the damaged books. Now, for many people, a paint-sprayed book is a valued possession. On the second attack, the assailants dragged part of the stock out to the square and set fire to it. Maria Teresa is a genuinely moderate, principled, person, and seems sceptical that the people who once approved of her persecution now support democracy. It is unlikely that the book-burners would know of her anti-Franco record.
As the peace campaign winds down, the politicians resume their disagreements. Only one person, Gerry Adams, whose autobiography has just been published here, is above criticism. Herri Batasuna sees his strategy as an example of the success of combining armed and political struggle. When the Madrid government is prepared to negotiate, as the British government now seems to be doing, the nationalist response will be as generous as Sinn Fein’s. Adams is also lavishly praised by mainstream politicians, leader writers and academics for negotiating the IRA’s cease-fire. They ask why neither ETA nor Herri Batasuna has produced a leader of similar stature. Why don’t they fly him in to mediate, perhaps accompanied by Mother Theresa?
The Irish cause is very popular with Herri Batasuna supporters. Irish music plays in my local Herriko Taberna, and there is a petition to sign protesting against the chaining of Roisin McAliskey while pregnant. The two struggles are seen as parallel, and there are indeed a number of similarities. Both movements have broad support, making absurd the common allegation that their activists are isolated lunatics. Neither can be crushed by military action, and neither imagines it can inflict a military defeat on the ruling state. ETA, like the IRA, has put its ultimate demands on the back burner, as it concentrates on the issue of the prisoners. Both movements were once strongly Catholic, but ETA has moved much further away from Catholicism than the IRA is ever likely to. There are, however, important differences, notably the absence of a religious divide. Although ETA’s support still comes predominantly from Basque-speaking areas, support for ETA, and identification with either Euskadi or Spain, can and does split families. Half of the population is of immigrant (from elsewhere in Spain) or partly immigrant origin. Ethnic Basques are more likely to be better off than ‘Spaniards’.
One of the most disappointing aspects of the present situation is the role of the peace groups which were formed in the 1980s by small groups of people, of whom some had relatives killed by ETA. One, the Association for Peace in the Basque Country, adopted a very limited platform. Whenever someone was killed, no matter by whom, it held a silent assembly. It was thought that taking more specific stances would split the movement. The government and the mainstream political parties were largely indifferent to such movements, disliking anything which they did not control, and not seeing all deaths as equal. Herri Batasuna was extremely hostile at the equation of freedom fighters and members of the state’s repressive forces. The pacifists were presented, quite unfairly, as just another arm of the government. When a Basque industrialist was kidnapped by ETA, people took to wearing a blue ribbon as a sign of solidarity with him. This caught on, arousing the anger of Herri Batasuna, which alleged that the ribbon wearers were covering up for state violence. The peace movement was unable to develop a strategy, and it lacked the political skill to disengage from the politicians’ embrace. Now, in a sad conclusion marking the movement’s loss of independence, the government has issued a postage stamp bearing the blue ribbon. The main peace movement would now appear to accept state violence, but that outcome was not inevitable.
The most promising attempt to break the deadlock comes from Elkarri, a peace movement which has emerged from the abertzale milieu. Elkarri accepts the objective of Basque independence, but believes that the armed struggle has reached a dead-end, and that the way forward lies through discussion involving all parties. ETA and Herri Batasuna have a very ambivalent attitude to Elkarri, respecting its origin in the nationalist movement and its roots in the community. Yet a call for dialogue of all concerned challenges ETA’s hierarchical concepts. ETA would rather negotiate directly with the Spanish government, as it did in the 1980s. The main Spanish parties’ attitudes to the common people mirror those of ETA. The idea that anyone but themselves should be called to do anything but vote, or demonstrate when requested, appears absurd to them.
The Spanish government sometimes suggests that ETA will soon be crushed. More often it speaks of a fairly long-drawn-out operation, but this is seen as a police, not a political, measure. It is true, of course, that ETA has been defeated just as the IRA has, in that its main objectives are postponed to an indefinite future. Undoubtedly, there are differences within ETA which would sharpen if the state offered concessions in return for a truce. However, it is not in the interest of the present conservative government to do so. At present, anger against ETA strengthens the government’s position, at least outside the Basque country. If that continues, the Partido Popular (the ruling conservative party) can hope to call an election, and win an overall majority in parliament, thus freeing it from reliance on its Basque nationalist and Catalan allies. If that happens, the consequences for the working class everywhere in Spain would be disastrous. If the government were to succeed in criminalising Herri Batasuna, that would be a prelude to attacking the left, and clawing back many of the concessions which were made after Franco’s death. Socialists will have to fight to defend Herri Batasuna’s democratic rights. To be successful, they will have to win over many of those who, carried away by the horror of Blanco’s murder, have supported the government. It would be quite wrong to conclude that most of them are lost to democratic politics.

Notes
1. I deal with this at more length in my ETA and Basque Nationalism (Routledge 1988).
 



Patrick Baker
The Spanish Transition to Democracy: A Missed Opportunity for the Left?
Socialist History Society Occasional Papers Series, No. 11, £2.50
Predictions of revolution in Spain after Franco’s death in 1975, and following the end of the Greek and Portuguese dictatorships, came to nothing. Spain’s rulers made the transition from a dictatorship to a weak parliamentary regime more easily and cheaply than they could have imagined.
The forces which backed Franco’s rising in 1936 have kept almost all of their privileges. The Constitution recognises the army’s place in guaranteeing Spain’s territorial unity. It is now a key part of Nato, where Spain is, next to the United Kingdom, the keenest supporter of Nato’s wars. The Catholic Church and the monarchy retain the positions they so nearly lost in 1936. Police and army killers and torturers remain in their posts, and the paramilitary Civil Guard has not been reformed. Political changes are limited, compared not only to the expectations of 1975, but to those implemented in Greece and Portugal after the fall of their dictatorships. Amazingly, key posts are occupied by people like Fraga Iribarne, Franco’s former Interior Minister, and members of Francoist clans such as Prime Minister Aznar and current Interior Minister Mayor Oreja.
The former opposition, particularly the Communist Party, have suffered a tragicomic fate. Many leading members have made careers in the Socialist Party, and others have moved yet further to the right. Ramón Tamames, once tipped as Santiago Carrillo’s successor, is now a prominent member of the governing Partido Popular, a party established by Franco’s supporters.
Political corruption is endemic, parliament is rigidly controlled, and there is very little political involvement by the general population. Newspapers refer to the ‘political class’, a peculiarly Spanish formulation, which recognises that the general population hardly participates in political life. The once mighty Communist Party has not recovered from the part it played in preserving Spain’s élites.
The Spanish Transition To Democracy is based on 23 interviews with former members of the opposition to Franco, some of whom played a key part in the transition. They include Santiago Carrillo, the former General Secretary of the Spanish Communist Party, Francisco Frutos, the present incumbent, and Gregorio López Raimundo, a former leader of the Catalan communists. These are astute characters who have been questioned before. Patrick Baker was not free to deploy the interrogation techniques which Carrillo once used so effectively to extract confessions from dissident party members, even if he wished to. Frutos’ observation that Carrillo is a ‘short-term dribbler’ who has little strategic sense, or long-term vision is accurate but too limited. Carrillo was playing a different game, as his main aim was always to obtain a share in government. A good result for him would have done nothing to benefit working people.
The interviews with rank-and-file activists show strong criticism of the policy followed during the transition, particularly the Moncloa Pact when the unions gave the government a free hand in return for promises which were never kept. Yet such activists are too kind to their former leaders. Begoña San José presents the late Pilar Brabo, once seen as an heir to Carrillo’s throne, as a critic of his methods, whereas the prevailing view is that she lost favour by assuming that her succession was guaranteed. Such an observation reinforces the impression of the party’s rank and file that one had at the time: these were people who were prepared to work and suffer, but were also prisoners of a political culture which inhibited critical thought.
The pamphlet is part of a larger project, which could shed more light on an important topic. Patrick Baker accepts that Carrillo’s policy was a disaster, but seems to assume that the Communist Party could have helped mobilise the workers to gain socialism, or at least a better deal. That was not a realistic expectation, given its leadership’s record in the 40 years prior to the transition.
 

