

The A.F. of L. “will not tolerate within it an organization challenging the supremacy of the parent body.” This ultimatum against the Committee for Industrial Organization, Wm. Green delivered in person to the United Mine Workers convention and when he got the answer he deserved, he protested and insisted that his remarks had been “unfairly” interpreted as an ultimatum.
In the answer given, the seventeen hundred delegates voted unanimously to support the Committee for Industrial Organization and to support its policy of industrial unionism. They voted authorization to the officers to withhold per-capita tax payments to the A.F. of L. should such action be deemed necessary.
This was the highpoint of a remarkable convention. It was known in advance that its decisions would have an important bearing upon the outcome of the present conflict in the A.F. of L. over the industrial union issue. The convention, therefore, received the undivided attention from all sections of the labor movement and, needless to say, not the least from the A.F. of L. top bureaucracy.
 
Crushing Defeat for Green
Wm. Green faced a supreme test. His Executive Council had demanded that the C.I.O. dissolve. He appeared before the miners’ convention in the role of a patriarch presiding over the great family of trade unions, in which, he said, some of its members were in “open rebellion.” Although he undoubtedly used all his powers of persuasion, he did not leave a very powerful impression. The delegates listened to him in stony silence, broken now and then by a chorus of boos. John L. Lewis on the other hand utilized to the fullest extent all his showmanship talent, lending so much greater effect to the decisions made. In this respect the convention was magnificently staged.
When Green had finished his address, John L. Lewis asked those delegates who had changed their minds because of the address to stand up. Two men stood up. Following this Lewis asked how many believed the C.I.O. should be dissolved. A lone delegate stood up. To the final question how many believed that the policies of this convention should be carried out, all delegates arose amid hand-clapping and cheers.
After this demonstration of unanimity, Lewis was able to turn to Green and exclaim: “I trust, sir, you will carry back to your organization the answer of the United Mine Workers.”
 
Millers Branch Out
Indeed, the coal miners had given an answer thoroughly in accord with their splendid tradition as militant unionists. They spoke as members of the most powerful organization in the A.F. of L., whose expression of opinion must be accepted in earnest. No doubt the coal miners feel confident that the strength of their union has been restored; counting over 500,000 members, the union now embraces about 85 percent of all the coal miners in the country. Most typical of the recent gains is the fact that the whole of the state of West Virginia is now organized, where formerly, and particularly in Logan County, the terrorism of the coal operators and their henchmen in governmental offices for years kept the union out.
Conscious of their strength, the coal miners in this convention decided also to extend the union to embrace all workmen “in and around coal processing plants.” This, when carried out, would add about 100,000 workers in by-product and gas and chemical plants to the organization. But the craft union officials already claim jurisdiction over skilled mechanics working in these plants. This, however, maybe considered only a minor matter in view of the general conflict around the industrial union issue. While this specific action will play its part, it is the attitude of the miners’ convention in regard to this larger question confronting the trade union movement today that will serve to sharpen enormously the present conflict in the A.F. of L.
No doubt John L. Lewis has also emerged considerably strengthened in the union leadership since this convention. In its most extreme form this was indicated by laudatory and uncritical statements such as those made by delegates from Logan County, West Virginia who compared Lewis to Moses, who “has led us out of the land of Egypt.” But in its real essence the strengthening of the position of John L. Lewis can be motivated only by the readiness of the rank and file coal miners for industrial unionism and to accept progressive ideas. They understand the issues involved in this fight and they have proved that they are ready to make it.
 
In the Grand Style
John L. Lewis, however, understands also how to make the best use of his strengthened position. We need mention only the incident of the contemplated boost in salaries for the leading officials, which by the way, became a mere incident only after Lewis had had the opportunity to gauge the real sentiment of the delegates present.
The committee on officers report brought in a proposition to increase the officers’ salaries by 100 percent, which would elevate the remuneration for Lewis from a “paltry” $12,000 yearly to $25,000. The resentment to this proposal was well expressed by an Indiana delegate, J.W. Norris, who said:
“We have miners that are going barefoot. Isn’t the present salary plenty to sustain any one in a standard of decency and health.”
A turbulent debate followed with a demand for a roll-call vote. But the opposition was steamrollered; both Pat Fagan, who was in the chair at the time, and later John L. Lewis ruled this demand out of order and declared the committee’s report, including the projected salary boost, adopted. The following day, however, Lewis cleverly manipulated this question to his own advantage. With a grandiloquent gesture he declined to accept the salary increase. The other officers hurried to follow in his footsteps.
 
Autonomy and Roosevelt
A turbulent debate ensued also on the autonomy question. In this is involved the right of the district organizations to elect their own officers against the present practice of the general officers instituting what is called provisional governments, by appointment of officials who are to work under the supervision of the general officers. On a roll-call vote this practice was sustained more than two to one. Lewis won an easy victory, but surely not, in this case, a victory for progressive ideas.
Similarly Lewis carried the day with ease lining up the convention practically unanimously for support of Roosevelt – to “go forward with Roosevelt,” fighting under his banner for re-election. Undoubtedly the ease of these victories must in a large measure be attributed to the all-overshadowing issue of the fight for industrial unionism in which the delegates by their determination to support the position taken by John L. Lewis and the Committee for Industrial Organization were easily swayed to swallow a good deal more than would otherwise have been the case.
 
Clash with Craft Unions
On this major issue none of them made any mistake. They were able to judge also from practical experience. Last year, for example, a number of the higher, and particularly reactionary, craft union officials attempted to have the Guffey coal bill amended so that skilled mechanics, working in or around the mines, would be taken out of the jurisdiction of the U.M.W.A. Needless to say, the miners became thoroughly aroused by this attempted raid.
This, however, is only one small example of the conflict between craft unionism and industrial unionism that is now extending deeper into the whole of the movement in every instance where actual union advance is projected. The Oil Workers Union, also represented on the Committee for Industrial Organization, recently obtained an election under the National Labor Relations Act in a campaign against a company union. Here again the higher craft union officials stepped in and attempted to have the National Labor Relations Board recognize the craft unions who claimed jurisdiction over the mechanics in this field instead of the Oil Workers Union.
 
Radio Workers Bolt
It will be remembered that the A.F. of L. Executive Council meeting, held in Miami recently, rejected the appeal of the radio workers’ federal unions for a national charter based on the industrial form of organization. The radio workers have since decided to ignore the council’s decision and to proceed to organize industrially regardless of whether or not this means expulsion from the A.F. of L.
There are similar indications that the automobile workers’ union will go ahead, defy the A.F. of L. decision to segregate skilled mechanics and refuse to let the craft union chiefs raid the industrial jurisdiction which this union has already written into its constitution.
It is thus clear that great forcesare already set into motion in the fight for industrial unionism. In increasing measure these forces will look toward the miners’ union for leadership. And if the recently concluded convention is to be taken as an indication, the United Mine Workers is becoming conscious of its new role. Fundamentally this is the light in which the results of this convention must be viewed in order to get a full and complete understanding.



Reports from the Executive Council sessions, at Miami, Fla., fully bear out the unmistakable rumblings of a conflict in the A.F. of L., more profound than any ever witnessed before and of far-reaching consequences for its future. The A.F. of L. is approaching a crisis. Sooner than could have been expected it is coming to its crossroads and it must decide which way to go.
The industrial union issue is now a matter of intense dispute in the high council and may soon become the axis of active struggle throughout the ranks of the organization. On the surface only this issue appears to be involved; but the conflict that is developing goes much deeper. Forms of organization, or to be more exact, industrial unionism versus craft unionism, embrace, on the present-day basis of a highly developed industrial structure, the whole problem of which direction the movement shall take. Its attitude to the most burning questions of the class struggle and its own policies and methods will be vitally affected by whichever of these conflicting forms of organization become predominant.
Militants should, therefore, give the utmost attention to this present struggle in the A.F. of L. They should become its most active participants.
 
Lewis Central Issue
The Executive Council sessions, from beginning to end, were taken up almost exclusively with the question of the Committee for Industrial Organization, headed by John L. Lewis, and related questions. Other matters were simply put aside. This was natural. What could it do, for example, about the projected amendment to the United States constitution, so long as this all-important question stared the craft union dignitaries in the face. The intensity of the debate was reflected in the threats of an imminent split with which the reports of the sessions are filled.
It is stated that the craft union officials, led by O.A. Wharton, W.D. Hutcheson and Dan Tobin, demanded aggressive action against the Lewis’ committee. They are reported to have demanded the suspension of the eight unions whose representatives make up this committee. In the end, however, somewhat more moderate counsel prevailed. A committee was designated to confer with the industrial union bloc and report the results to the council sessions in May.
 
A Threat to the Old Guard
Yet, in view of the declaration adopted by the Executive Council, the selection of this committee is largely perfunctory. It will have to approach the industrial union bloc with a condemnation and a demand for its dissolution. The latter cannot be mistaken about the intent of the condemnation. Even if there had been no preceding conflict the wording of the declaration adopted leaves no room for doubt.
The Executive Council declared that:
“... there is the growing conviction among an ever increasing number of affiliated unions and those outside of the labor movement that the activities of this committee (the Lewis’ committee) constitutes a challenge to the supremacy of the American Federation of Labor and will ultimately become dual in purpose and character to the American Federation of Labor.”
Further on it is stated that:
“It is the opinion of the Executive Council that the committee for industrial organization should be immediately dissolved.”
 
Bitter-Enders Dissent
This puts the question bluntly, but still not bluntly enough for some of the members of the Executive Council. In the voting five of the “bitter-enders”, which means the most conscious craft union reactionaries, dissented. They said the declaration was “not strong enough”; they wanted more drastic action. Open threats of secession by the unions they control, is reported to have been made by them, unless more drastic action is taken. And how deep-going this conflict really is, can perhaps best be illustrated by the orders that have gone out from Hutcheson’s office instructing all carpenters local unions to withdraw from every city central labor body that indorses the objectives of the industrial union bloc.
No doubt these most conscious craft union top officials fully comprehend what is involved. In the Lewis’ committee they see a challenge not only to the control of what they consider their own special preserve, but also to their whole idea of trade unionism. No matter how stubbornly they insist on the superiority of the old forms of organization, they are aware of the dynamic forces that the industrial union issue may set into motion under present-day conditions. They may not be of the particularly old-fashioned, corrupt type like Skinny Madden, Robert Brindell or “Umbrella” Mike Boyle. Nevertheless they are conscious supporters of the capitalist system. That mechanical skill ought to have a special reward they consider as established by tradition.
 
Organization as Special Privilege
In their opinion, organization is, therefore, to be a special privilege of the skilled workers and they feel that this can best be accomplished in cooperation with the employers, or, at least, on friendly relations with them. Beyond this their social philosophy does not penetrate; their interest in organization does not embrace the workers as a class. They are perfectly contented to leave the great mass of production workers in the basic industries outside the unions. And, besides, the organization of these workers causes the sharpest conflict with the employers.
It is true that the bosses do not want any union at all in the big manufacturing plants. It is equally true that, if compelled to make concessions to union organization,they dislike to deal with a multitude of craft unions. But much less do they want unions with greater militant potentialities such as industrial unions, embracing all the workers in the plants, will have. On this basis the reactionary craft union top officials do not find it so difficult to cooperate with the employers. They also want to limit the unions to the skilled crafts. The right to represent the latter is the only concession that they demand from the employers. And so, harmonizing their position in the unions with their own basic concepts, they function essentially as agents of the employers.
 
Antagonism Will Grow
Out of this situation arises the great fear of the industrial union issue manifested by the reactionary bureaucrats; and out of this arise also their furious opposition to the Lewis committee. It should be easy to foresee that in further developments of union organization, this opposition will tend to increase rather than diminish. An encouragement given to industrial union organization will immediately inspire them to greater resistance against the onslaughts of the employer and equip the whole working class with a more effective weapon of resistance than the craft unions can give.
Out of this develops also the much more fundamental issues in the present cleavage in the A.F. of L. leadership. In every respect this will tend to increase and sharpen the present conflict. The dyed-in-the-wool craft union chiefs will be compelled to lean ever more upon the bosses and upon the instruments of the capitalist state for support to stem the tide.
 
Pressure on Lewis
On the other hand the leaders in the industrial union bloc will most likely find themselves compelled to lean ever more upon the workers who are actually set into motion for industrial unionism and who also demand democratic unions with an aggressive policy of organization. These workers who are in motion, and whose ranks are sure to increase, will press the issue forward and exert their pressure on the Committee for Industrial Organization. It will be increasingly more difficult for the latter to retreat at the same time as it will be extremely difficult for the reactionary bureaucrats to accept a compromise on this issue. What can be expected is, therefore, a sharpening of the present conflict all along the line.
John L. Lewis, in answer to the Executive Council condemnation, has already indicated that the Committee for Industrial Organization will continue with its program. With his characteristic scorn for the Council, he said: “The mountain has labored and brought forth a mouse.” He added:
“After all the rumblings and convulsions at Miami for a week past, the unorganized workers of the country had a right to expect that the A.F. of L., in its own interest, would extend a sympathetic hand of assistance rather than a churlish denunciation of these organizations in the federation which are trying constructively to help the cause of labor and the common people in this country.”
 
Deep Organizational Gulf
In questions of basic class ideology it would be difficult to find a real distinction between John L. Lewis and his official co-workers, on the one hand, and Green and company on the other. To foster illusions on this score would be pernicious and worthy only of the mealy-mouthed flunkey. But in questions of organizational policy the gulf already appears to be an unbridgeable one. The very existence of the Committee for Industrial Organization, as inadvertently admitted by the Executive Council declaration, is a challenge to the rock-ribbed reactionary organization policy of the A.F. of L. A continuation of this committee’s work must of necessity deepen the present cleavage.
So far there has not been much concrete evidence of direct intervention by this committee for industrial organization in the mass production industries. Nevertheless, the raising of the issue is an important step in itself and, as could be expected, a powerful response followed immediately. The automobile workers’ union wrote into its constitution, contrary to A.F. of L. decisions, a provision making the union industrial in character. In this field there is a definitely growing clamor for an all-inclusive industrial union in which the independent unions may merge. Representatives of the radio workers’ federal locals intimated to the Executive Council meeting that secession from the A.F. of L. may follow rejection of their demand for an industrial union charter. Nevertheless it was rejected.
On the whole, there is ample evidence throughout the country that the demand for industrial unionism is beginning to take on the form of a movement. Such a movement will be distinctly progressive in character. It will give a stimulus to new and greater struggles and it will provide a fertile field for the advancement of revolutionary ideas of policy and methods of working class organization. This particular fact will undoubtedly exert its influence in a fundamental sense upon the present conflict in the A.F. of L.
 
The Possibilities of Split
It may be entirely premature to speak of the probability of a split in the A.F. of L. in the sense that the report from the Executve Council sessions do. While one cannot lose sight of the fact that the A.F. of L. is purely a voluntary federation of completely autonomous unions, and while secession of some of these unions, sometimes more than one at a time, have taken place before, they have occurred usually over purely jurisdictional disputes leading to a separation of a purely temporary nature. In such cases the secession did not carry the stigma of dual unionism; nor would the A.F. Of L. undertake to organize rival unions in the place of those that withdrew from its ranks. An actual secession movement in this present situation, or a split arising out of this present conflict and around the present issues in dispute would be far more profound in its nature and in its implications for the future. Inevitably the result would be two rival movements struggling for supremacy.
 
Horse-and-Buggy Age Over
While a split of this nature in the A.F. of L. may not be an immediate probability, it cannot be denied that all the implications leading in this direction are already at hand. The choice, however, is essentially with the officials who are in control of affairs of the A.F. of L. They cannot help but see the handwriting on the wall. They have the choice of changing, and adjusting the federation to the requirements of modern conditions and to the needs of the masses or to give way to other forces capable of undertaking such a task.
The issue of industrial unionism is now of paramount importance. It grows out of the needs of the working class and once its real importance is fully appreciated it can become the vehicle for the revitalization of the whole labor movement. The moods of the masses is changing. The masses seek organization and they seek to utilize their organizations as instruments of struggle for their own class ends. In this respect there are now the most favorable opportunities available.
If the Committee for Industrial Organization stands its ground in this present conflict a first and most important step can be accomplished. It can become an instrument toward the creation of a genuinely progressive movement in the trade unions. This is today an imperative necessity and an absolute prerequisite. Once this genuine progressive movement is finally established there need be no fear of the consequences of any position taken by the reactionary A.F. of L. top leaders, be it ever so hostile.



Some new verbal broadsides have been fired in the ever sharpening conflict between the A.F. of L. craft union bureaucrats and the official leaders of the Committee for Industrial Organization. At the same time the repercussions from this conflict begin to penetrate deeply into the broadest layers of the movement.
In the name of the Executive Council, Wm. Green has issued a warning to all local and federal unions, to all State Federations and city central labor bodies, that it will not tolerate any organization that “gives allegiance, assistance or support to the Committee for Industrial Organization, or any other organization which attempts to usurp the functions of the American Federation of Labor.” While no exact penalties were specified, it is reported that the intention is to revoke the charters of any organization found guilty of giving such allegiance.
In reply the C.I.O. once again defied the Executive Council and indicated that it would continue its work. Not only did the C.I.O. refuse to dissolve but it challenged the A.F. of L. to undertake a serious campaign of organization in the steel industry, to which the committee would contribute a half million dollars and the services of trained organizers. Two conditions, however, the C.I.O. Considered necessary for success: Firstly, that the “organization must be along industrial lines,” and, secondly, “the leadership of the campaign must be such as to inspire confidence of success.”
With these developments it becomes increasingly clear that fundamentally the conflict in the A.F. of L. centers around the issue of organization of the millions of unorganized workers, and especially those employed in the basic industries.
 
Steel Industry Pivot
Naturally the steel industry occupies in this respect a pivotal position. To the trade unionists, real security of organization is unthinkable without the inclusion of the steel industry. The full extension of the powers of union organization is well nigh impossible with the steel industry remaining unorganized. Moreover, the steel barons, fighting to preserve their feudal power, have for a long time been the backbone of the employers resistance to every working class advance. An aggressive campaign for the organization of the steel industry is therefore becoming an ever more pressing necessity.
Thus the threat made by the craft union bureaucrats of disciplinary measures to be taken against the unions that may give allegiance and support to the C.I.O., has been met by a challenge to organize the unorganized. There need be little doubt which is the most effective. And this applies not only with regard, to the steel workers, who by several recent manifestations of revolt appearing even in their company unions have shown their growing readiness for reorganization; it applies to the whole trade union movement. The C.I.O. scored a real advantage in these recent broadsides and gained new support. It also made clearer the direction in which it is headed.
As a result new forces are rallying to the movement for industrial unionism. The automobile workers union and the rubber workers union have for some time been on the most friendly terms with the C.I.O. Judging from all present indications both of these union are drawing closer to its standard. The radio workers union and the flat glass worker union have now decided definitely to expand on the basis of an industrial form of organization. It may not be amiss to add that insofar as present trends are concerned, it is characteristic that all of these unions which are the first to rally to the industrial union movement operate in mass production industries. But the growing support given to the program of the C.I.O. is by no means confined to these unions. Several central labor bodies and numerous local craft unions have expressed their sympathy and support to this new movement.
It is to be expected that the craft union bureaucrats will retaliate, in the face of this growing support, with arbitrary measures of expulsion, not merely of individual members but of whole organizations. When confronted with the possibility that progressive ideas may take root and spread, they know of no restraint. In such possibilities they see a threat to their own reactionary domination. About this they make no mistakes. A real incentive to active unionization, they know will mean new and more bitter struggles against the monopoly corporations which are determined to resist; and of such struggles they are sworn enemies.
 
Trade Union Democracy
But it is equally reasonable to assume that the industrial union movement will find it necessary to draw closer together in defense of the elementary trade union rights of democracy and freedom of expression of ideas. The industrial union movement will be compelled to rally to the assistance of every union that is victimized by the craft union bureaucrats. Thus there are hardly prospects of moderation of the conflict in the A.F. of L. Present indications point rather in the direction of a sharpening of the conflict all along the line.
But this is only the one side of the present situation. As is already implied in the offer made of active assistance to a campaign of organization of the steel industry, the industrial union movement, in order to rally the support it needs, will find itself ever more actively engaged in the organization of the unorganized. As a matter of fact many unions already call upon the C.I.O. for assistance in organization campaigns.
The outcome of this conflict is momentous for the American working class. A beginning has been made. An aggressive policy of organization and a program of industrial unionism is the need of the moment. This the C.I.O. Has brought forward and on this basis a movement is taking form. Militant workers should have no difficulty in finding their place within it.
The beginning that has been made may open up a new period of union organization such as has seldom been witnessed before in this country. It has the possibility of laying the foundation now of a trade union movement that is geared to modern methods of production. But the struggle that this movement will experience before its existence is assured will have the effect of elevating it to a higher level of consciousness. On the basis of the old craft union ideology and in the spirit of class-collaboration it would be inconceivable. It can be born and grow only in the fire of the class struggle; and from the class struggle it will receive an indelible imprint that will help to shape its outlook and its policies.

  “The date” – Governor Olson’s conference at Chicago, May 30–31, to explore the possibilities of a national farmer-labor party – “may prove to be a landmark in the history of independent political action and the great battle for the rights and welfare of the American people.” So says the Daily Worker. Governor Olson himself could not have said it better. Should there be any doubt of this prophecy, let us recall the example of the Illinois coal miner. He meant well. During the period in which the National Miners Union was created, he had read in the Daily Worker about the various history-making conferences and when his turn came to attend one of them he arose solemnly just before the hour of adjournment to propose: “Mr. Chairman, I move you that this conference go down in history.”  Mr. Olson’s Record Certainly the political developments that preceded this conference invests it with an unusual importance, though most likely in the opposite sense of the prophecy mentioned above. A sufficiently wide variety of representatives of the common people, so-called, are invited to give it an appearance of a new movement. But the significance to the working class of such movements, whether new in reality or in appearance, depend entirely on their political direction. And it should not be difficult even at this time to form an estimate of what role history will assign to Governor Olson’s conference based on the position of the various forces that will be represented. The actual sponsors are made up of a combination of the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party, including Governor Olson and Mayor Lattimer, and Stalinist leaders of the official party and stooge organizations. This is the leadership. It should hardly be necessary to remind our readers of the despicable role played by Governor Olson during the strike of local 574 when he declared martial law and had his soldiers throw the strike leaders into the stockade, not to mention the police assaults, under the direction of Mayor Lattimer, upon the Strutwear strikers and upon the strikers of the Flower Mill Iron Works. The whole history of the Minnesota F.-L.P. leadership is one of disreputable deals with the Democratic Party. In the last election Governor Olson’s party lost its control of both branches of the state legislature. It is therefore with the fear in mind of a further possible loss that the Minnesota F.-L.P. leaders have set out to utilize their present unique opportunity of combining a step toward extending their own third party experiences to a national scale with a much bigger deal for support of Roosevelt, all of which is expected to bring returns in a greater popularity at home.  Who Will Be There? Who will attend the Chicago conference? There will be serious trade union elements like Schlossberg and Gorman, the “outstanding trade union champion for a labor party,” according to the Daily Worker, Heywood Broun, for whom Morris Hillquit once said that Socialism was such a nice novelty, will be there; liberals, amateur radicals and third-partyites will attend, together with a good sprinkling of Stalinists and their stooges; Non-Partisan Leaguers from North Dakota; Farmer-Labor Progressives from Wisconsin; Farmers Holiday people; Epic Democrats, Knickerbocker Democrats and Townsend people who will support anything with pensions in it; Social Crediters, Share-Our-Wealthers and Anti-Fascist Leaguers. What will this motley gathering do? Browder says: “The conference has the opportunity of working out a program which will be a clear guide for the growing sentiment in the United States for a national Farmer-Labor Party.” But the main forces in this gathering are prepared to make their deal with Roosevelt. The trade unions that are now generally listed in the progressive category are committed to support Roosevelt’s re-election. Commitments in this case means more than support of the person or the individual; it means support of his program and support of his national ticket.  Will Back Roosevelt The Chicago conference will not consider a national third party ticket. Naturally! Why should it? The old method of parliamentary deals still holds true and the Democratic Party will decide the national ticket. But, as has already been amply demonstrated by experience, a Farmer-Labor Party is essentially an institution of parliamentary maneuvers and election activities. So also in this case. The real center of attraction in these elections is the presidential ticket; the standard bearer and his platform determines the character of the election campaign and of the governmental administration after the election victory is achieved. Anything that comes out of this conference can therefore in no sense be anything else in reality but an adjunct to the Roosevelt re-election campaign. Browder cannot possibly have any illusions on this question. Evidently, he sees no conflict between the Roosevelt and the Farmer-Labor Party sentiment. And how could there really be any according to his people’s front Farmer-Labor Party conception. He says: “We must collaborate organizationally and politically with those who are committed to the support of Roosevelt in 1936.” To collaborate organizationally and politically is a very broad promise. It has all the possibilities of a real national union of the so-called common people behind Roosevelt. Given the premise that already exists and reinforced by the Stalinist people’s front ideology, it could hardly have any other outcome. It is therefore only in this sense that the clear guide which Browder seeks from Governor Olson’s conference can have any meaning. And this is all to be put over in the name of the fight against reaction.  Browder Protects Statue of Liberty These forces of reaction, proclaims the Daily Worker, “have drawn close together to hurl the Statue of Liberty into New York Bay.” Next we will be informed, in tones trembling with indignation, that these same forces will attempt to bury the stars and stripes beneath it. “We must make the masses of the country understand,” says Browder, “that the victory of the Republican Party-Liberty League-Hearst combination would throw power on to the side of the war makers.” By this the masses are also to be made to understand that Roosevelt and his party are not amongst the war makers. What a frightful delusion and deception of these masses of whom Browder speaks with such a glib tongue. Or, could Browder’s statement possibly have some other meaning? No, it is clear that these masses are to forget this year’s gigantic military budget mounting up to more than one billion dollars, for, says Browder: “We would not do or say anything that would tend to turn Roosevelt support over to the Republican candidate. We distinguish between twins. Even twins are not identical.”  Roosevelt’s War Program Certainly twins are not identical. But it is very important to know the difference as measured by time, place and objective conditions. Such an estimate will place Roosevelt as a much more effective and a much more progressive defender of capitalism and all that it stands for than the old fashioned reactionaries. Roosevelt’s program, when stripped of its demagogy and verbiage, is clearly a program for more effective and more up-to-date class-collaboration in order to prepare the home basis for a new onslaught on the world market, for new conquests, economic, political and military. The gigantic army and navy appropriations sponsored by Roosevelt can be understood only in this light. But the Stalinists are not going to “do or say anything that would tend to turn Roosevelt support over to the Republican candidate.” This cannot mean anything else than no opposition to Roosevelt and the conducting of the election campaign in such a manner that votes will be garnered for Roosevelt regardless of whether or not the C.P. goes through the formality of nominating its own candidates, for, as we have seen from the statements of Browder, any other policy would bring the forces of reaction down upon us and “hurl the Statue of Liberty into New York Bay.”  The Great Deception What a dastardly deception and delusion of the working masses is being here perpetrated in the name of the campaign for a Farmer-Labor Party. And this is at a particular time and under objective conditions in which certain important strata of the working, masses have actually begun to enter a process of awakening, when signs are manifest that point toward a beginning of political consciousness. This is the time and place and condition demanding above all clear and precise efforts toward education of the masses for the needs of a new social order – for the needs of a persistent and tenacious struggle for Socialism. In view of this situation what can Governor Olson’s conference do? Does this general situation not mean in reality that even the idea of a national Farmer-Labor Party is already shelved for 1936? Appearance and reality after all are two different things. In this particular situation it will be found so much more to be the case. Whatever Farmer-Labor Party proclamations may be forthcoming from this conference, such would really be nothing else but a new way, at least for some parts of the country, to corral support behind the Roosevelt standard. Apparently the open betrayal of the political class interests of the working masses does not even wait for the actual formation of a reformist Farmer-Labor Party.   
  During the last few weeks the plea for Roosevelt’s re-election has gained new converts and new adherents with amazing speed from the trade union movement. It is taking on the character of a clean sweep. By the manner in which the plea is presented, and in view of the present objective conditions, it is not at all surprising that the labor party question fades into the background with the same ease that tills sweep gains in momentum. Or, perhaps it would be more correct to say that the labor perambulator is being hooked onto the Roosevelt bandwagon. This stampede started last January when John L. Lewis whooped through the United Mine Workers convention a unanimous resolution for Roosevelt’s re-election. Following this lead Labor’s Non-Partisan League came into being. It was sponsored by the Lewis-Hillman forces. The American Federation of Hosiery Workers convention and the Amalgamated Clothing Workers General Executive Board next fell in line. Two international union presidents, David Dubinsky and Emil Rieve quickly deserted the Socialist Party for their new and real allegiance. Wm. Green, on the opening day of the A.F. of L. Executive Council second quarterly meeting, advocated the President’s re-election. And two days before this the delegates to the United Automobile Workers convention voted without a dissenting voice to support the Roosevelt candidacy.  Raw Deal for Auto Workers Nobody will suspect that the automobile workers harbored feelings of special gratitude to Roosevelt. They cannot possibly have forgotten his infamous automobile agreement which was foisted upon them during the spring of 1934. This agreement they looked upon then as a definite setback to their aims and efforts; and such it proved to be. It brought about the hated Automobile Labor Relations Board headed by Wollman. It strengthened, for the time being the stranglehold of Wm. Green and Collins, later supplanted by Dillon, and postponed the organization of the autonomous international union so much desired by the organized automobile workers. No, these are not the reasons for their endorsement of Roosevelt. The decision of the auto workers convention simply means that it follows the lead of the Committee for Industrial Organization. This is of double significance when viewed in relation to the labor party question. It must be remembered that on the whole the unions of the C.I.O. and its supporting unions, like the auto workers, represents the section of organized labor which is traveling in a progressive direction. This Is indisputable. It is also the section of organized labor that has shown the greatest vitality and growth, and particularly so when a comparison is made with a number of unions, distinctly craft in make-up and in spirit, which have remained stagnant for some time, or actually lost ground.  No Serious Labor Party Swing These facts only lend so much more emphasis to what has been stated in these columns more than once: There is not a serious movement on foot, nor are there any serious forces available for a national labor party, or farmer-labor party or third party in 1936. Those who still attempt to create the impression that there are, like the Stalinists do, are simply up to their old pernicious game of deception. An editorial in the May 7 Daily Worker finally acknowledges that “A Farmer-Labor Presidential ticket in 1936 is now out of the question,” but it maintains that the prospects are as good as ever for a farmer-labor party this year. Tills is equally pernicious and deceptive. Superficially it may seem as if the fervent desires nurtured by the Stalinists were to be realized through the conference call sent out by the Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party. However, the appearance in this case is also deceptive. The conference call is Issued only to individuals, not to organizations. Obviously these individuals are expected to do nothing more than to explore the possibilities for a labor party. But what they are to explore becomes further clear in the announcement that a farmer-labor presidential ticket Is not to be considered at this conference. In other words, the sponsors of the conference consider the presidential ticket to be a matter settled by the Roosevelt reelection indorsements. Nothing further remains to be explored but how to swing the labor party sentiment successfully into this reelection campaign.  Local Bodies Powerless A Labor party sentiment has been recorded in a number of local unions. Much of it is motivated on progressive grounds. To an extent it arises out of disappointment with promised New Deal measures which were not realized; to an extent also out of disappointment with conditions under the “New Deal blessings.” Above all it arises out of fears of reaction and an instinctive but unclear fear of Fascism. But, in view of the general lack of understanding of what the requirements of a party of the workers must be, it is particularly these fears that help to drive the organized workers in marching formation into the Roosevelt camp. It would be ridiculous to expect that local unions should take the initiative in organizing a national labor party apart from or in opposition to their parent bodies. It would be worse than ridiculous to assume that such a party can be brought about without the organizations of the industrial union bloc and its leaders as well. However much the Stalinists may put forward an appearance and attempt to invest it with the qualities of something real, however much they may try to convene labor party gatherings made up of singing societies and hiking clubs, to be addressed by liberal celebrities, these efforts will not carry any social weight. At best they will only furnish new arguments for the Roosevelt camp followers.  F.D.’s Eye on 1936 The stampede for Roosevelt has been cleverly manipulated by the deliberate and carefully planned policies emanating from the White House and from the “progressive” labor leaders. Roosevelt and his brain trusters – whatever is left of them, not to forget the corrupting patronage dispenser, Jim Farley – have for some time had their eyes on the November elections. Special emphasis has been laid in all the promissory notes upon the labor legislative program, the alleged social security measures, the tax program to soak the rich, the need of curbing .Wall Street and the need of preventing the invasion of the people’s rights by the courts. Roosevelt declares himself to be against war and Fascist tyrannies and for a “people’s government.” By these ingenious campaign devices, the Rooseveltians aimed, and rather successfully to forestall the emergence of a labor party, or a third party, in 1936. The adept pupils of these demagogic cunning devices, who are holding high posts in the progressive union bloc, follow up the campaign in the same high key. They are for aggressive unionization, for industrial unionism and against reaction. John L. Lewis started the ball rolling at the U.M.W. convention with a mighty attack on the Liberty League. An easy target. These leaders are now all against war and Fascist tyrannies and they also have broad views on the people’s front. It is therefore not at all unnatural they they should direct the genuine fears of reaction and the fears of war and Fascism into the safe channels in support of Roosevelt’s reelection. With a little manipulation that can easily be interpreted, and even in the prevailing labor party and people’s front jargon if necessary, as symbolizing the fight against reaction.  No Labor Party Wanted Now Of course, the truth is that these “progressive” leaders, in harmony with Roosevelt, do not want a labor party, or a third party and certainly not before their own preparations are well done; not until they are sure that they can keep it within the proper reformist bounds. Even then they can be expected to yield only to pressure. Their aim can then be expected to be to utilize such a development to counterpose the growth of a revolutionary movement. As solid converts to the New Deal, they aim to lay out the line of march with Roosevelt today and perpetuate his program tomorrow – if need by, by means of a third party. Today they attempt to make a distinction between Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. How can any real distinction be possible? Roosevelt is the standard bearer of his party – one of the two capitalist parties. From this party he receives his mandate and this carries with it the duty to serve finance capital. Need there be any doubt that this is the responsibility to which he will remain loyal even more decisively and unequivocally after his reelection. The trade union support of Roosevelt could not be unexpected. It is destined to go down in history as one of the great illusions of 1936. It has become possible primarily due to the lack of revolutionary education of the working class. After 1936 new disillusionments are sure to begin. Will a third party carrying on the New Deal tradition and program then prove a solution? Most decisively not! And it is well to remember that this is the only kind of a labor party that can reasonably be expected. Hence there remains one main conclusion to draw. Today and tomorrow the struggle for Socialism must go on.   
  Marxists have always taken the position that the question of war in the modern imperialist epoch is as inseparable from the capitalist system of society as is the class struggle. Our attitude towards war is therefore the same as our attitude towards the class struggle: our aim is in both instances to work for the defeat of capitalism and to secure the victory of the working class. This fundamental criterion the Stalinist leaders have thrown overboard long ago. Having abandoned the Marxian position the Comintern and all its sections now reincarnates in new form s and under new conditions the ideas of social patriotism which characterized the great betrayal in 1914. To the Stalinist leaders the fundamental differentiation in the present day world does not proceed along the irreconcilable lines of opposing and antagonistic classes. To them the main division occurs between good capitalists and bad capitalists, between which the working class is to take sides, for and against, to rely on the former against the latter. On the one hand in this division the forces for peace and on the other the forces for war, not divided along class lines, but divided into peaceful countries and nations of warlike intentions: a world divided between the capitalist democracies and the Fascist aggressors.  Gottwald-Browder Apes Haase In his report on the Communist Party position on war and the coming Presidential elections Browder names the Fascist aggressors: “It is clear to the whole world,” he says, “where the threat to peace comes from. It comes Immediately from Hitler, Mussolini, the Japanese imperialists.” On the other hand, he informs us, “we now have a number of countries which are directly threatened by the military aggression of the fascists and face the danger of losing their State and national independence, countries like Czechoslovakia, Austria and Belgium.” In Czechoslovakia, says Browder, “the Communists will probably (?!) refrain from voting on the military budget.” He is not sure! for you see, the situation – not the bourgeois rule – but “shifts from moment to moment.” In any event he assures us: “The Communists will recognize the necessity of military resistance to possible Hitler invasion requires that there be available the utmost possible fighting weapons against Hitler.” The Czechoslovakian Stalinists have likewise declared that they will defend the fatherland. Their “beloved” leader, Gottwald, came straight from Moscow to the seventh convention of his party to reassure his hearers that this “new line” does not really mean social patriotism: “Comrades,” said Gottwald, “there is no doubt but that the defense of the republic against fascism can be interpreted to mean class peace, reformism, social patriotism. But this is not necessarily the correct interpretation. And we Communists do not interpret our position this way.”  How else can it be interpreted? The social democrats of 1914, although equally treacherous, were at least much more frank. On August 4th Hugo Haase rose in the Reichstag session, the only speaker On the list, to proclaim in the name of the social democratic fraction, and amid applause from the Junker reaction: “Now we are making good what we have always stressed: in the hour of danger we do not leave the fatherland in the lurch.” In 1914 these fatherland defenders in the various nations entered the services of their respective bourgeoisies to the tune of the war cry, “Kultur versus Czarism” or “Democracy versus Kaiserism.” Today Browder proclaims: “And when Hitler fascism goes beyond the borders of Germany it must be met by military means (!!!). At the moment the greatest threat of the military forces of Hitler are against Czechoslovakia, Austria, France and Belgium.” But the question arises: by whose military means is this aggression to be defeated? Who will organize and direct the military operations? Do the Stalinists answer: the proletariat! No. This is to be left in the hands of the “forces of peace” – the bourgeois democracies among the capitalist nations – supported by the Communist parties and such workers as the Stalinist leaders can mislead by their deceptive slogans of defense of national independence. Obviously this defense is also to include Austria where the Stalinists and the Heimwehr may take up the cry in unison: “Long live the independence of Democratic Fascist Austria.”  Handmaiden of the Capitalist State Nothing shows more clearly than this the completely anti-Marxist attitude of the Stalinists toward the problem of national state independence among capitalist nations. Marxists recognize as well established the fact that the national state became a frightful impediment long ago to the economic and cultural development of humanity. The defense of the national state is therefore a reactionary task, worthy only of the depraved handmaidens in the service of decaying capitalism. Not the defense of the national state, but the wiping out of all national state borders is the task of the proletariat And how does Browder really propose to defend the independence of these national states? Obviously he relies upon the bourgeoisie but not entirely. In face of the war threats he demands the complete independence of the working class movement. “But”, he adds, “the complete independence of the working class movement does not mean, however, that the peace policy of the working class movement of each question and in each country is directly opposed to the policy of the capitalist government – the government of the bourgeoisie within that country.” Not directly opposed to the policy of the capitalist government! In other words, follow the war map and not the map of the class struggle; this is the advice of Browder. You may make your reservations, but do not oppose directly the policy of the capitalist government. Like Plekhanov, the one time brilliant Marxist, who stooped to the level of defender of Czarism in 1914: “The marauders (the Kaiser’s armies) are at the border of my country and are ready to rob and murder.” “Make your reservations.” he urged the Duma deputy, Durianov, “ – this is absolutely necessary – but vote for the credits. The rejection of the credits would be a betrayal (of the people) and abstention would be cowardice, vote for the credits.” Today this is implemented by Browder: “We are not pacifists ... when Hitler fascism goes beyond the borders of Germany it must be met by military means.” – Make your reservations in times of war or preparations for war – but do not oppose directly, the policy of the capitalist government! What a frightful parallel with the betrayal of 1914.  Vote the Credits! Vote the credits! Not only Czechoslovakia, Austria and Belgium. “There are other countries,” says Browder, “like France and the United States, which for their own particular interests are interested in maintaining peace, which are not furthering the development of war, which are resisting these developments.” And the French Stalinists echo: vote the credits! In 1914 the manifesto of the French Socialist Party proclaimed: “Spontaneously, without waiting for any other manifestation of the popular will, he (the head of the government) has appealed to our party. Our party has replied: Here!” And in 1936 Jacques Duclos, leader of the French Communist Party: “We are for the safety and freedom of our country. We do not want to vote credits blindly. We want to know what is done with them. The budget vote is a political act in which the struggle against fascism inside and outside the country must be taken into consideration.” Duclos is faithful to the Franco-Soviet pact and to the “new line” of Stalinism. He does not want the credits squandered. He wants it actually to go for the strengthening of France’s military means. And Marcel Cachin, his equally faithful co-worker, may now repeat what he said in 1914 under the auspices of the Social Democratic Party: “We promise to fulfill our duty completely, as Frenchmen and as socialists faithful to the International." France had then been attacked by the Kaiser’s troops, so he maintained. And now again we are told that the greatest threats of the military forces of Hitler are directed among other countries against France.  Bourgeoisie Pleased What kind of a war would it be, should these threats be carried out? The Daily Freiheit of May 19 gives the answer thus: “If Hitler should attack France it would be an imperialist attack on his part, and if France should in that situation defend herself, it would be a natural case of self defense which has nothing to do with imperialism because imperialism means the grabbing of foreign lands in the interests of home capitalism.” French imperialism would not grab foreign lands; God forbid! French imperialism does not want colonies. It didn’t in 1914 either said the French social patriots. It was just plainly and simply attacked. Did not Vaillant write in l’Humanité, then the official socialist party organ: “In face of the aggression, the socialists will fulfill their whole duty to the fatherland for the republic and for the revolution.” “More than that,” answered the satisfied editor of Le Temps on August 4, “we do not ask of M. Edouard Vaillant and his friends.” More than that no bourgeois can ask from Duclos, Cachin, Stalin or Browder. More than that they cannot even ask from Mr. Olgin, whose articles printed in the Daily Forward, after the United States had entered the war in 1917, were presented in Washington by Abe Cahan as proof that the Forward was patriotic, that it called upon the American mothers to give their sons for the country and therefore the Forward should not be suppressed.  Forces for Peace But imperialist France is not only in danger of attack, according to Browder. Together with the United States it is interested in maintaining peace. These two countries, he insists, are not furthering the development of war; they are “resisting these developments.” We are not sure that the editor of Le Temps, even in his most exalted moments of bourgeois hypocrisy, would guarantee that much for France. As for the United States, Browder has unquestionably accepted in earnest and is ready to dish out the bourgeois demagogy about the strongest armaments being the best guarantee of peace. No doubt the rival capitalist powers have a different understanding of President Roosevelt's one billion dollars military budget. They have learned to know the capitalist United States as a powerful force struggling aggressively for world hegemony and not hesitating to use any means at its command to gain this objective. But in this respect Browder also gives a warning. The capitalist United States is “interested in maintaining peace ... not furthering the development of war ... resisting these developments,” that is, provided power is not taken out of the hands of the Roosevelt administration. In these coming elections, “the victory of the Republican Party-Liberty League-Hearst combination,” exclaims Browder, “would throw power on the side of the war makers.” The question of war is here again presented not as an inevitable outgrowth of the capitalist system, caused by the forces that capitalism itself sets into motion, but as something instigated only by the bad capitalists. The working class, according to this has the choice, not of building a revolutionary party for the overthrow of capitalism, but purely the choice between the good and the bad capitalists.  The Bad American Bosses “The main enemy of the people of America today is the Republican-Liberty League-Hearst combination,” says Browder in his statement on the C.P. position in the coming elections. He adds; “We must place as the center of our work in the election campaign the need for combatting this reactionary bloc and defeating its plans in 1936.” This is where the emphasis is to be placed according to Browder, not direct opposition to the capitalist system, far from it, but merely opposition to the bad capitalists. In line with this it was quite natural for him to make the announcement at a press conference a few days before: “We would not do or say anything that would tend to turn Roosevelt support over to the Republican candidate.” What is the objective meaning of this statement? Can it be anything else but to support Roosevelt? or at least to take care that none of the potential supporters are lost from the Roosevelt camp, which God forbid, may mean the victory of the Republican-Liberty League Hearst combination – the victory of the bad capitalists over the good capitalists. Surely in taking this position Browder remains entirely consistent and he remains faithful to his Stalinist line of policy. And this extends also to his position, and to the C.P. position, on the farmer-labor party question. Browder wants to “collaborate organizationally with those who are committed to the support of Roosevelt in 1936” – Labor’s Non-Partisan League, he explains in his usual “lucid and learned” fashion, “not merely the continuation of the role of labor as auxiliary to the old parties.” He wants to see in it also the beginnings of a farmer-labor party. But to ordinary mortal beings how would this be possible.  Pro-Labor and Pro-Roosevelt? Can a movement fulfill the role not merely as an auxiliary to the old parties, i.e., to the capitalist parties, or even to the one of them which carries the Roosevelt label, and at the same time be a beginning toward a working class political movement? Obviously this question is not decided merely by forms or by labels but by the ideological position and by the program it stands for. And in this case, in particular, no doubt need exist that this very thing which is the old and at the same time is supposed to be the beginning to something new still would retain its previous ideological position and program. At its best the same auxiliary to the old capitalist parties, possibly minus the Roosevelt label, possibly with a brand new farmer labor name would continue the tradition and the program of the Roosevelt New Deal. But it would continue under new objective conditions as a more effective barrier damming up the path of advance for the revolutionary movement. For as we have emphasized often before, in such a case the shedding of the old shell of Rooseveltian bourgeois reformism can be expected to coincide with the time when objective conditions make the new clothing of farmer-labor party reformism a more effective means of arresting the revolutionary advance. In taking this position Browder also remains entirely consistent. In inverted form he proves that the question of war in the modern imperialist epoch is as inseparable from the capitalist system of society as is the class struggle. A false position in regard to the question of war leads inevitably to an equally false position toward the everyday issues of the class struggle. It leads not to the victory of the working class but to its defeat.  Hillquit-Browder Wants U.S. to Act “We must,” says Browder in concluding his report on the war question, “crystallize such a mass opinion in America directed towards restraining the instigators of war that the United States will become an effective international force, will become a positive contribution to the world front of struggle for peace.” He does not want the mere slogan Keep America Out of War, because that is the slogan of isolation, of neutrality. Well and good. He wants to link up America with the other capitalist imperialist nations to which he attributes the virtue of restraining war developments. In a somewhat different situation, but still with the same objective meaning Morris Hilquit opposed American isolation in 1917. When Debs went to prison for his courageous anti-war stand Hilquit protested: “I do not advocate an immediate separate peace, a withdrawal by America. Nothing that I have ever said or written could justify such a sweeping assertion ... I want America to act, not to withdraw." Browder now wants America to act, not to withdraw. In his statement, cited above, one cannot quarrel with his idea of crystallizing mass opinion toward restraining instigators of war. But who are the instigators of war? Is this a question merely of certain people of certain nations? Marxists reject such a conception and emphasize time and again that war is inevitable concomitant of capitalism regardless of which nation fires the first shot. And much more decisively must we reject Browder’s deceptive and delusive prattle about making America a “positive contribution to the world front of struggle for peace.” Proceeding from the Marxist conception that the causes of war are inherent in capitalism and that actual war grows inevitably out of this form of society and, proceeding further from the Marxist conception that only the working class achieving its historic mission of overthrowing capitalism can secure peace, it follows necessarily that both of these questions of war and peace are fundamentally the question of class forces, and the relationship of class forces. Petty bourgeois Philistines may call upon America – capitalist America – to become a positive contribution to the world front of struggle for peace. Revolutionists will address this call to the American working class and to its allies. In this lies the fundamental distinction between the Marxist position and the position of Browder and his Stalinist fellow bureaucrats. Their position proceeds from the Stalinist peace policy of the Soviet Union which has for its premise the preservation of the status quo of the boundaries of capitalist nations, of the relations between these nations as well as of their internal equilibriums. In other words the status quo of the capitalist system of society alongside of which the Soviet system is supposed to be able to exist peacefully. This policy cannot tolerate any upsets or any overturns. That would be its antithesis. It leaves no room for a policy of proletarian revolution. The Marxist policy aims directly for the proletarian revolution as the only way of eliminating imperialist war.   
  With the organization of Labor’s Non-Partisan League, the Labor party question has come into new prominence. It is a peculiar kind of prominence and it is a new version of this question. At the same time it is the most genuine indication yet presented of what a future labor party will actually be. The sponsors of this organization, among whom are John L. Lewis of the United Mine Workers, George Berry of the printing pressmen’s union and Sidney Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, have announced that their present objective is the re-election of Roosevelt in 1936. That task accomplished, it is intimated, the League may become the precursor of an American labor party or third party of labor, farmer, liberal and progressive elements. This is the way it is now offered to the working class. Starting out with the re-election of Roosevelt, such a party, when emerging full fledged, would have for its base the New Deal program. This is not surprising. An examination of the present labor party trends, the position of the trade union leadership – which, it is to be remembered, is still the authentic spokesman of the movement it represents – and the actual role that a labor party can play in the stage of capitalist decay, should convince intelligent workers that what is intimated through the creation of Labor’s Non-Partisan League is a fairly true picture of coming events.  Stalinists and Lewis Let us compare this with the labor party idea sponsored by the Stalinists in their present hurricane campaign. There is no need to ignore their violent disavowal of the Lewis, Berry, Hillman coalition or its present aims, for even as a pretense that much would be necessary. With this we need not be seriously concerned. In politics, intentions or desires are of little account, even declarations have validity only when accompanied by corresponding deeds. But, above all, it is the objective logic of the position that is the decisive criterion. Leaving all outward appearances aside the fundamental issue therefore remains: what will be the objective result of these two positions on the labor party question? And in it we shall be sure to find a resemblance as striking as two eyeballs. In outward appearance there are differences. In origin and gestation the differences may seem to the less discerning as if in open conflict. But opportunist trends easily meet regardless of origin. Labor’s Non- Partisan League gestated from the New Deal program and its spokesmen are still very cautious about future perspectives. In words they indicate only vaguely the labor party or third party direction. They have no illusions about a serious labor party movement in 1936. But they see cleary the leftward trends in the trade union movement which have been manifested especially in recent strikes, and they understand that these trends will also sooner or later endeavor to find political expression.  A Shrewd Strategy In regard to these developments the Lewis-Hillman group, which is credited with the new strategy, has again proven its ability to gauge the moods of the masses more accurately than the craft conscious bureaucrats. Progressives in certain questions of trade union organization, this group is Rooseveltian in political ideology. This means that it is a conscious supporter of the capitalist system. And for this reason it has set for itself the immediate task of canalizing the trends in the movement for independent political action into the safe channels of support of the pseudo- reform measures of the New Deal. To secure in actuality these measures – which are even too radical for finance capital and for the most part ruled out by the Supreme Court – with Roosevelt as long as this is possible and later through a new political instrument; this is the way the question is presented to appear in palatable form to the workers. The contradiction of this strategy lies not in the linking of support to Roosevelt in 1936 with a labor party to appear later. The contradiction, insofar as the workers are concerned, lies in the blurring of the class issues, in the harnessing of the slowly developing political consciousness to a program and a movement based purely on obtaining concessions from capitalism at a time when real concessions can be wrung from it only to the extent that the working class advances and organizes along revolutionary lines. The history of the Roosevelt measures bears this out most clearly. Therefore, so long as the developing political consciousness of the workers can be thus harnessed capitalism remains safe to continue its exploitation.  Wither the “Peoples Movement?” This is also the contradiction of the Stalinist campaign for a labor party. But this glib propaganda on the question, insofar as they influence class conscious workers, is far more dangerous and far more criminal. Attempting to delude their followers, who sincerely want to “fight against political reaction and Fascism and against the threatening war,” they present the labor party as a means to this end. At the same time the labor party, in their version, is to be “neither socialist nor communist,” and still capable of performing these gigantic tasks. It is to be a “broad people’s movement.” What a welter of confusion and treachery. Any small town banker, or smart bourgeois lawyer, or battered down bourgeois “liberal” politician may rightfully demand his place in the “broad people’s movement.” On what grounds could they be excluded? And why should a people’s movement disparage the New Deal program? For quite some time the Stalinists have addressed their appeals to the Lewis’ group urging it to support the Labor party idea. It now appears as if these appeals have not been in vain. Support for a labor party is at least intimated. Such a party would also bear prominently the imprint of the official trade union leadership and of the whole coterie of elements who have no difficulty in pronouncing the Roosevelt program and the labor party with the same accent. It is from these elements and not from the workers that the Stalinists may claim their just reward for services rendered in the cause of social reformism.  A Significant Omen Labor’s Non-Partisan League already claims for itself a widely extended support. Norman Thomas sees in this development a hopeful sign for a future farmer-labor party. David Dubinsky of the International Ladies Garment Workers threw in his support immediately, and to leave no room for misunderstanding he resigned from the Socialist party. His loyalty, to the extent that he had any, had been with the Old Guard. On what good grounds can the Old Guard decline to follow his example? On the whole it would be difficult to deny that all the signs of labor party developments point unmistakably in one and the same direction. It could not be otherwise once a reformist party is projected. Differences in outward appearances should not deceive anybody, for the objective logic of the positions advanced along the lines of social reformism must necessarily lead to one and the same general result. Today the most genuine indication of what the actual result will be, is furnished by the Lewis, Berry, Hillman coalition – for Roosevelt toward a labor party or third party based on the New Deal program. This can hardly be the thing that class conscious workers are looking forward to. It can hardly be an object of support to socialist workers. Their job still remains the one of building a movement for socialism.   
  Will the half million workers, whose fortune and misfortune is harnessed to the brutal and capricious dominance of the gigantic steel empire, finally be organized? The Committee for Industrial Organization considers this question to be a challenge. It passed the challenge on to the A.F. of L. But, it attached also an offer to contribute a half million dollars and a staff of experienced organizers for an organization campaign, stipulating that conditions necessary really to produce results would require assurance that “all steel workers organized will be granted the permanent right to remain united in one industrial union,” and that “the leadership of the campaign must be such as to inspire confidence of success.” Certainly, more reasonable conditions could not be stipulated. However, the A.F. of L. Executive Council, now meeting in Washington, D.C., wrathfully spurned the offer and refused to accept its conditions. Wm. Green declared that the Executive Council would act only if it were “free from the interference on the part of any group or groups either within or outside the jurisdiction of the A.F. of L.” In other words, these distinguished elders flatly rejected the whole idea presented by the C.I.O.  A.F. of L. Decision Remains Paper Convention resolutions of 1934 and 1935 put the A.F. of L. on record to organize the steel industry. Nevertheless, the net results to date falls below zero. The steel workers’ union has even lost the gains it made during the early NRA period. To establish the responsibility for this failure should not be difficult. It is a well known fact that the leadership of the steel workers’ union, headed by Mike Tighe, is even considered by Wm. Green to be so incompetent as not to merit the confidence necessary to direct a campaign of organization. Self-complacent bureaucrats, when irritated by demands for action, usually need a scapegoat, and truly, a better one than Mike Tighe could hardly be found. But this means nothing more than the old proverb of the pot calling the kettle black. The sluggishness of Wm. Green and company would also seem to mirror a consciousness of their own incompetence. And no doubt; the stubborn insistence on craft union prerogatives has very likely led them into a position that they themselves cannot think through to the end when considering organization of the steel industry.  Lewis Flays Wretched Policy Still, the real reason for the dismal failure so far is a much more fundamental one. Unwittingly John L. Lewis touched its very nerve center when he addressed himself the other day, on behalf of the C.I.O., directly to the convention of the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers. With withering scorn he condemned the A.F. of L. policy as “inadequate, futile and conceived in a mood of humiliated desperation on the part of men who have for years past trifled with the destinies of 500,000 men employed by your industry and have materially stayed the progress of the American labor movement.” Lewis also addressed his offer directly to the steel workers’ convention. But chances were rather scant for a better response from this gathering than that received from Green. A direct descendant from the proud Sons of Vulcan, and itself antedating the formation of the A.F. of L. by several years, the Amalgamated Association is again reduced to a mere shadow of a union. It represents today a far cry from the powerful organization that conducted the Homestead strike in 1892 and cleaned up on the Pinkertons. Its gain of 150,000 new members during the 1919 steel strike withered away under the unfortunate leadership of Mike Tighe, who was then its ancient president and who remains in control today despite his senility and decrepitude. Even the new spark of life with which the union was infused as a result of the impulse from the NRA was too much for the hoary president and his slightly younger lieutenants. A new set of progressive elements had come into leading local positions. They condemned in scathing terms the policy of paralysis; they made some stupid mistakes, but they demanded action and organization. Mike Tighe knew only the reply of suppression and expulsion and numerous local lodges were wrecked.  After Fifty Years To Mike Tighe the secret rituals and mummery left over from old days of trade union illegality remain a sacred union heritage, more dear to him than activity and progress. And so well did he discharge his obligation to the inviolability of his contract with the steel manufacturers that the union, after more than a half century of existence, counts a paid up membership of not more than 4,800. Needless to say this contract which Mike Tighe holds as sacred, is not meant to embrace more than a scattering of workers here and there is a few mills. It is a contract designed essentially to restrict and to prevent organization. From this description it would be difficult for any reader to note any real distinction between Mike Tighe and Wm. Green, except the difference of age. Outward differences there are. Actual differences there are none. In essence the formed has carried out the policy of the latter and both are more or less equal partners in the policy and methods of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy. And thus the real reason for the dismal failure of organization in the steel industry – aside from the devastating gross incompetence – can be found only in the position of this bureaucracy. Wm. Green and his allies do not think of coming to grips with the problem and undertaking a campaign of organization in the only way that it could actually succeed. Such ideas are alien and repugnant to them. Their own role is determined by their attitude to the capitalist system to which they swear allegiance. They naturally become champions of the rights of collective bargaining for labor with themselves, however, occupying the position of agents who are privileged to bargain both ways. In this role they will endeavor to gain concessions for the unions but simultaneously they consider themselves to be the custodians of the interests of capital against aggression from the rank and file members.  The Empire of U.S. Steel In the steel industry, however, no alternatives are offered. The United States Steel Corporation, is the absolute and despotic ruler. It is in itself an empire within an empire. Only 23 American cities had a greater population than the population of the U.S. Steel Corporation in 1920. Not less than 190,000 workers and their families are dependent for their livelihood upon this corporation. This is America’s largest employer of labor. The directors of this corporation do not at all fancy any ideas of sitting down at conference tables with representatives of labor. Their policy in this respect was laid down in a resolution of June 17, 1901, when J.P. Morgan the Elder organized the United States Steel Corporation. It says: “We are unalterably opposed to any extension of union labor, and advise subsidiary companies to take a firm position when these questions come up, and say that they are not going to recognize it.” Every word here is meant just exactly as it is written. Moreover, the U.S. Steel executives have never deviated from this resolution. Nor has Mike Tighe ever deviated from his respect for the inviolability of his contract with the steel companies. He has understood it and interpreted it just exactly as it was meant to be understood. This is one of the reasons for the fact that the organization he leads has only 4,800 members.  The Challenge of Steel Meanwhile modern conditions of production has forged ahead to constantly greater improvement of machinery and efficiency of output, constantly also subordinating the conditions of labor to the control of the capitalist ownership of industry. Under these conditions the whole trade union movement is in danger of utter ineffectiveness, if not actual extinction, unless the basic industries and particularly the steel industry is organized. Even Green, Tighe and company cannot possibly be entirely unaware of this fact, though they may not comprehend its real meaning – or for that matter, care much. But they do know that the tackling of the steel empire is a serious campaign of organization, leaves no room for compromise or for bargaining. Besides it is such a gigantic task and may result in serious bruises because the feudal rulers of this empire believe in fighting it out to the end. This is the challenge to the whole trade union movement. What the A.F. of L. Executive Council will do about it is now perfectly clear. It will do exactly nothing of any serious consequence.  The A.A. Convention The Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers has just ended its sixty-first annual convention. For days on end it gave consideration to the offer made by the C.I.O., only by a scant majority was a conditional acceptance achieved. Mike Tighe, however, succeeded in maintaining his stranglehold upon the union and making his bid for the friendship of both Lewis and Green. The final decision adopted affirms the charter rights of the Amalgamated Association, which are the rights of sole jurisdiction as an industrial union. Outside of that the conditional acceptance of the C.I.O. offer will have real meaning only provided the industrial union forces take hold of it and carry it into life.  Company Unions Stampede Last year company union representatives from a number of plants held a convention in Newcastle, Pa. at which demands were formulated for wage increases and improved working conditions while the delegates refused to grant admission to management representatives. Shortly thereafter a similar company union convention in Gary, Indiana, considered a proposal for a final breakaway from company control with the vote unanimously in favor of taking independent measures to defend the interests of the workers. These are important signs of a new trend and of a new vitality displayed in an original way. Real possibilities of organization in the steel industry are unquestionably available. The organization of these workers has now become imperative. But the challenge has been thrown right back into the lap of the industrial union bloc. What will these unions do about it? Trifling with this problem or nibbling at it will not do. A rich opportunity awaits these unions. A spark of new life was manifested at the steel workers’ convention nourished by the pressure for action made by the progressive elements. New unions are growing and gaining ground in several mass production industries from which forces for further extension can be recruited. Practically all of these new unions appear to be ready to continue an aggressive fight for the building of a truly powerful industrial union movement; but its future is bound up with progress in steel. The organization of the steel industry is a gigantic task. Enormous difficulties will have to be faced and the minimum requirement is nothing less than a gigantic movement capable of surrounding this feudal empire, capable of invading it and executing the necessary tactical flank maneuvers together with the head-on frontal attack. This is the next big job for American labor. Success in this field will no doubt depend much more directly upon the ability, courage and tenacity of the developing genuinely progressive trade union forces than upon the good-will of any leaders.   


THE AMERICAN Federation of Labor is now split wide open. No other interpretation can possibly be made of the action taken by the Executive Council against the Committee for Industrial Organization. Suspension of the ten affiliated international unions took place on September 5; and this is only a prelude to an intense conflict. A new chapter now begins. And it is not difficult to foresee that the conflict so far will have been mere childs’ play when we attempt to visualize what is still to come. Now the struggle between the A.F. of L. and C.I.O. begins in earnest From this point onward it will be in the nature of a struggle for supremacy between two rival movements.
Overtures for a reconciliation may still be made. However the essential issue of the conflict will remain.
But the full significance of future developments will surely extend far beyond the mere struggle for supremacy. Not only does the chapter which has come to a close mark a certain stage of a specific conflict, it also marks the end of a whole historical period of a peculiar type of American trade unionism.  Henceforth the center of gravity of the movement will shift to new fields; it will face entirely new problems; it will set new forces into motion, all of which will contribute toward the molding of a new type of unionism. And, we may also rest assured. there will be deep-going changes in the traditional political policy that had become part and parcel of the A. F. of L.
What will be the consequence of this split and these new perspectives for the working class? Will this split retard the movement as a whole, or does it have distinctly progressive features? If the latter is the case and a new and more effective type of unionism arises as its logical outcome, what can then be expected to be its course of development? Above all the question arises: Will this split retard or advance the development of political consciousness among the working masses? For Marxists these questions assume the greatest importance.
 
Unity and Progress
Mere generalization about the desirability of unity as against splits does not constitute a sufficient answer. Naturally, the maintenance of trade union unity has an enormous advantage for the working class; but this becomes a hollow formula if it is abstracted from the concrete conditions of the movement. On the other hand, it is entirely impossible to agree that trade union unity should be subordinated to the whims of corrupted bureaucrats. In this case, for instance, the C.I.O. unions could have continued to remain within the federation only on the penalty of disbanding this organization. In reality this would mean to abandon the idea of industrial unionism and to give up the organization of the mass production industries.  Such was the only alternative. A retreat of this character was not to be expected; nor would it have been desirable. A correct answer to the questions raised above can therefore be given only from the point of view of the historic tasks of the movement. In other words, only a Marxist answer will have real validity.
It is easy enough to agree in advance that this coming struggle for supremacy will possibly carry the devastating effects of internecine warfare. To such possibilities we cannot afford to close our eyes. At the same time this presents only the one side of the picture, and its negative side. More fundamental considerations must be taken into account if we are to understand correctly the perspectives that arise out of the present situation.
The American Federation of Labor, limited to its narrow craft union basis, embraces only a small section of the working class. Its total membership reported for the month of August 1936, is, including the C.I.O. unions, 3,682,224. The overwhelming majority of the workers have remained outside, and they have remained on the whole unorganized. In fact, the A.F. of L. structure, its policies and its methods, made it extremely difficult if not virtually impossible for the masses to join. Craft limitations became one of the factors which made out of it a mere bargaining agency for concessions from capitalism – obtained almost exclusively by virtue of skill. However, with the development of mass production industry, this could only mean that these concessions were obtained in reality at the cost of leaving the masses of unskilled workers, and partly also the semi-skilled workers, almost entirely without organization, and subject to more intense exploitation. By virtue of being bound up directly to the general staff of industry and bound up indirectly to the capitalist political parties, this leadership was motivated in its official policy and in all practical considerations by the idea of a partnership between capital and labor. Collaboration with the employers, according to this scheme of things, proceeded strictly within the framework of capitalism. It was carried on in conformity with the capitalist rules of the game in the most reactionary sense. The unions were not to be conceived of as actual class instruments of struggle of the workers, and they did not really function in this sense. Sell-outs and betrayals by corrupted bureaucrats were made easy. This condition enabled the officials to exert an almost undisputed domination over the unions.  In return for concessions obtained, the traditional leadership kept the unions within strictly conservative bounds and thus effectively retarded the development of an independent class ideology.
 
Unionism and Decay
Years of unexcelled opportunities for organizational expansion and advance brought continued stagnation.. Resolutions were adopted successively at A. F. of L. annual conventions to organize the South, to organize the automobile industry and to organize the steel industry. None of them, however, was carried into actual life. The San Francisco convention two years ago went on record for the establishment of industrial unions in certain mass production industries; but this decision also remained on paper. Such organizational efforts as were made in these industries went ahead practically in spite of the official leadership and were at the outset faced with the problem of battering down the obstructions of craft union barriers. Even the great stimulus to trade union organization afforded by the beginning of the present business revival and the additional impulse given by the NRA, the bureaucratic leadership failed to utilize to advantage. Workers from basic industries streaming toward the unions were in many instances repelled. To the bureaucracy they represented simply an unruly and troublesome element. In successive strike waves it became perfectly clear that militant struggle alone could overcome the increasingly bitter and increasingly violent resistance offered by the big monopoly concerns to union organization; and the workers displayed their readiness for struggle. They proceeded to turn the unions into instruments of struggle. With this the need for mass organization grew. The very life of the trade union movement came to depend much more on mass numbers, for which the industrial form of organization alone could furnish an adequate basis. This simple conclusion, accepted by the more progressive forces, gave to the C.I.O. leaders their new prestige and power, but it also brought down on their heads the full and unmitigated fury of the craft union bureaucracy.
The greater the need for progressive change, the greater the fury. Of course, the craft union bureaucracy frowned upon all ideas of an open struggle with monopoly capitalism. It had far greater love for its own harmonious relations with these agents of privilege than it had desire for organization. The mere advocacy of industrial unionism and the launching of an active campaign by the C.I.O. to conquer the steel industry for organized labor, this bureaucracy characterized by the fantastic charge of fomenting an insurrection in the A. F. of L. Under these conditions it was manifestly impossible to find a solution to the most vital problems of the movement within the old craft union framework. The living dynamics of the movement made the conflict inevitable.
In view of these considerations we cannot escape the conclusion that in its essence the split has distinctly progressive features. This fact itself will be of decisive importance in the coming struggle for supremacy between the two rival movements. No doubt needs to remain of the incomparably more favorable position of the C.I.O. Its affiliated unions are the most cohesive and the growing unions. It has already gained the support of many state and city central organizations of the A.F. of L. Sympathizers with its ideas are numerous. It has begun to strike roots in mass production industry, and it is perfectly clear that this must become the actual basis of the future movement. Now the C.I.O. faces its real test. It set out on a progressive course, but it can succeed only by maintaining this course. Only through the building of a movement that is powerful by virtue of mass numbers can supremacy be attained. The logic of the position now occupied by the C.I.O. leaves it no alternative other than to pursue this course.
Pursuance by the A.F. of L. of the opposite course can only hasten its own doom, which it invited when the Executive Council embarked on its splitting policy. To attain success for itself the C.I.O. will therefore be compelled to distinguish its own position sharply in many important respects from that of the A.F. of L. A return to the reactionary position of the latter would gain it no support whatever. On the contrary, the rival struggle for supremacy will tend to drive the C.I.O. unions in a leftward direction. Facing the furious opposition of the big monopoly concerns, and facing a struggle for organization in which no quarter is given, this general trend can only be reinforced. And the C.I.O. can hardly afford to retreat if it is not to give up the field to the opponents. The attempt to organize the steel industry, even if success cannot be assured in advance, will undoubtedly lead to consequences extending far beyond the question of union organization alone. This is tantamount to a challenge to the giants of industry and the giants of finance capital. The struggle for organization cannot help but become a gigantic one. It will place all the important issues of the class struggle at the very top of the agenda. In such events as these, the peculiar type of American trade unionism, now known as the remnants of the Gompers era, is bound to give way. A new type of unionism will begin to take shape. It stands to reason that these events may also give a great impetus toward the development of political consciousness among the working masses. This question is bound up also with the development of an effective revolutionary Socialist party.
 
C.I.O. Politically Backward
No doubt the leaders of the C.I.O. are aware of these possibilities. Some of their present efforts would indicate that much. In the field of trade union organization their position is distinctly a progressive one and it should receive the full and complete support of all revolutionary Socialists. Expressed in terms of politics it becomes clear, however, that their position on questions of basic class ideology cannot at all be termed progressive. These leaders have become the main sponsors within labors’ ranks of the re-election of President Roosevelt. Basically this represents the same old capital and labor partnership idea; only in a new version. It is obviously an attempt to forestall, by new methods, the development of an independent class ideology. This becomes so much clearer by the suggestions made by these leaders, that the support to re-elect Roosevelt this year may be the fore-runner of a national labor party for the next elections. The actual organization of a labor party in the state of New York for the re-election of Roosevelt also makes more clear what they intend a national labor party to be. This party is organized as a direct opponent of the Socialist party.  It is organized precisely in the State of New York in order to furnish an illusory medium through which to swing workers who are socialistically inclined behind Roosevelt. As such it represents an attempt, still in embryo form, but an attempt nevertheless, to forestall revolutionary growth by swerving it into the channels so much safer for capitalism – the reformist channels. But in this we have also – still in embryo form – the beginning of a change in traditional political policy pursued by the labor movement in the past. And it represents also a beginning in opposing revolutionary growth by a large scale reformist movement.
All of these developments in the A.F. of L., from the emergence of the C.I.O., through the split to the present events, have taken place entirely without the slightest conscious influence or intervention by any of the existing workers’ political parties. Obviously, this fact cannot be in the least flattering to revolutionary Socialists. For the future, however, their active and conscious intervention will become an imperative mandate.
 



THE UPTURN in the economic cycle is now unmistakable. Since about the middle of 1933 the business indices began to show a rise; some sharp fluctuations followed, but on a whole this period records an almost continuous upward trend. This revival is not experienced by the United States alone; it is world wide. As a matter of fact, the statistics of industrial production gains place several countries ahead of the United States, ranging somewhat in the following order: Japan, the Scandinavian countries, Italy and Great Britain. Insofar, however, as the perspectives of world economy are concerned, the question of recovery in the United States is of major importance.
The crisis was world wide in its nature and in its devastating effects, although not uniform in its manifestations in the various countries. Similarly, the present trends toward recovery are of a universal character. No more proof than this is needed to verify the fact that the business cycle still continues as the “normal” mechanism of capitalist development. Still, it cannot assure anticipations of new prosperity peaks emerging in their alluring splendor on the road ahead. Such assurances are not to be found in the present economic trends.
The World War upset many previously accepted calculations; it destroyed the “normalcy” of the regular upward and downward movements in industry and finance, and interrupted the course established by the requirements of world economy. Now, in spite of a number of difficulties and artificial barriers, world economy again proves its powerful reality. And again, the dominant position occupied by the American sector within this general world framework stands out more clearly. Even in the question of applying Sanctions against Italy, the League of Nations’ powers found occasion to bewail the futility of actions not participated in by the United States. Notions of national seclusion and permanent economic self-sufficiency have suffered shipwreck more than once. In their place we have, as an established fact, the universal interdependence of nations, threatened once again – to be sure – with a major interruption, with a new world war. And the further extension of the present business revival will be most seriously affected by such a perspective. War preparations account today in a large measure for the wheels of industry being set into motion in a number of countries. This lends a profound emphasis to the capitalist nature of the recovery so far attained. In the case of an imminent major conflict for the redivision of the world, there can be no doubt that the course of the economic trends will again smash all calculations.
The lowest point of the crisis seems to have been reached about the early part of 1933. Now, with the end of 1936, the exuberant reports appear: In the United States production of steel ingots reached the largest volume last year since 1930. Automobile production is the largest since 1929. Railroad freight traffic is the heaviest in five years, or since 1930. Electrical power production last year set an all-time high record, surpassing even 1929. Farm income last year, as estimated by the government, was the largest since 1931. At the end of 1935 bank deposits in all national banks mounted above 24 billion dollars, or about the same as the all-time high record reached on Dec. 31, 1928. Wholesale commodity prices were in an uptrend throughout the world, and in the United States the index has been raised from the low level of 52 ruling in 1932 to remain stabilized at approximately 80 throughout the last year. Industrial corporation profits, as calculated by the National City Bank, were the highest since 1930. Stocks were at highest levels since 1931; that was also true of corporation bond averages. Since June, 1932, the low point in the stock market, the market valuation of listed stocks on the New York Stock Exchange has risen from $15,633,000,000 to more than $43,000,000,000.
Undeniably, these are signs pointing toward recovery. But, in quoting the above figures, and for that matter, in quoting any figures of economic development, it should be borne in mind that the figures of the various statistical agencies differ and it is well nigh impossible, in the space allotted, to give the source in every instance. On the whole, however, the differences do not upset the general trend, and that holds true also for the figures showing the reverse side of the recovery medal. Turning to this reverse side we find that a further perusal of reports bring out the dreadfully, monstrous contrast of labor’s position, when compared to that of capital, in this general picture.
In practically all major respects the ravages of the crisis continue to pursue the masses of the exploited with unmitigated re-lentlessness. Thus, in face of the crushing weight of unemployment, a survey made by the AF of L finds that from Jan. 1935 to Dec. 1935, the average working week of employed industrial workers had increased from 38½ to 40½ hours. Since 1929 the productivity of labor, measured per man-hour, is estimated to have increased 25% or more, (some estimates place this figure as high as 40%), or as it is stated by the same survey covering last year alone, the workers in industry increased their output 14% with a gain in employment of only 4%. In this difference of 10% is reflected the increased productivity by longer working-hours, by speed-up devices and by introduction of labor saving machinery. The AF of L survey further maintains that between July and December alone hourly wages dropped from 56.8 to 55.9 cents. Looking at the general trend of the working class standard of living we get perhaps the most clear picture from a composite index presented by the New York Federal Reserve Bank. Its estimate shows a comparison of increase of cost of living for industrial workers to gains of real wages for labor in manufacturing industry. The trend of the cost of living was: 1933 plus 5.6, 1934 plus 4.3, 1935 plus 3.3; the trend of real wages was: 1933 plus 9.1, 1934 plus 3.1 and 1935 minus 1.5.
Real wages, however, can be estimated only for workers who have jobs. What has become of the working class standard of living when measured on the basis of the large percentage of the workers still remaining unemployed and subsisting either on the dole or on the meager returns from relief work? No composite index ventures to give such estimates. And a picture of the actual condition could be drawn only when the real meaning of the enormous numbers, who search in vain for jobs, is fully comprehended. In regard to this situation the US Bureau of Labor Statistics tells us that while in 1936 the total employment in manufacturing industries, and the total payrolls, averaged over the twelve months, were higher than in any year since 1930, employment was still 22% lower than in 1929; weekly payrolls were 36% lower. At the end of 1935, according to AF of L estimates, which are generally accepted as reliable, and certainly cannot be said to err on the side of exaggeration, the unemployed army numbered still not less than 11,401,000. During January and February, 1936, these ranks were further swelled to a total of more than twelve and a half million. Nearly 20,000,000 people have still nothing else to depend upon for their subsistence than their small relief rations. And now the chief New Dealers further estimate that, on the basis of present industrial efficiency, a return to the 1929 production level would still leave 20% employable workers without jobs. Turned into simple figures, this would mean between 8 and 10 million unemployed under conditions of the highest prosperity peak ever known in the United States.
The main reason for this condition must be sought in the fact that in the general process of capitalist production the capitalization of surplus-values created by labor and appropriated by the exploiters does not proceed along the lines of an equal proportion between constant capital and variable capital. Constant capital grows more rapidly, and the disproportion to which this gives rise increases with greater strides than the growth of the total capital that is set into motion. Thanks to the growing application of machine technique the need for living labor diminishes relatively and the number of employed workers decline compared to the total capital investment.
So long as a certain rate of expansion of industry can be maintained, as for example in the period between the Civil War and the World War, when industrial expansion is claimed to have averaged about 5% per annum, each new expansion would create new employment possibilities. However, during the last couple of decades this rate of expansion began to decline. Correspondingly the relative decrease in the number of workers employed tended to become transformed into an absolute decrease of the number of workers necessary to the process of production. In one concrete instance this is already borne out through a report put out by the National Industrial Conference Board which shows from May to June, last year, industrial production increased 1% while unemployment simultaneously increased 1½%. There may have been, during this particular month, certain auxiliary factors which contributed to this result; nevertheless the illustration shows the general trend.
It is clear that new and profound changes have taken place in American national economy during the recent years. The question of recovery, and of a possible subsequent prosperity, can therefore not be answered merely by referring to past analogies. Before the present epoch each turn in the business cycle from its crisis phase witnessed new and unparallelled expansion of industry, of finance and of the markets. A mighty field for capital investment and for utilization of natural resources was available within the borders of the forty-eight states. From the time of the Civil War each industrial upswing became epitomized by new expansion of railroad transportation. The boom following the World War saw a particular extension of automotive transportation. And so commonly accepted is the idea that new industries can continue to emerge, and to expand sufficiently, to take off the constantly developing oversupply of human labor, that bourgeois economists indulge in speculation about where these industries are to be found. At the present time this speculation has proven futile. Not only is there no such magic industry in sight, but the present recovery phase has not been due to any new expansion of industry or due to any newly found markets. Still the tendencies of the business revival are unmistakable, but it is essential to understand their real nature.
Before the economic upturn could be assured it was necessary for capitalism to restore confidence in the continuity of the process of reproduction. And since the realization of surplus-values provides the only inducement to what is popularly called the possibility of profitable investments the necessary steps are taken in that direction. It was accomplished essentially by raising the rate of exploitation of labor. Economies of various kinds were instituted in industry to lower the cost of production, beginning with a low wage level, extending to the lengthening of working hours and increasing the speed-up of labor and of machine technique. Efforts were made to effect a rise of commodity prices and to stabilize the price level in order to stimulate the profit incentive. Credits were expanded, outstanding capital values liquidated and stock capital increased. These are among the well known capitalist methods of revival. However, in this instance the process could not be set into motion entirely on its own accord. It needed the assistance of state intervention.
This state intervention assumed two main forms. On the one side were the measures of regulation of industry and finance and on the other the large scale government spending by way of subsidy to corporate enterprise and expenditures for relief purposes. In both of these aspects the state intervention was of primary importance as an early impulse to the business revival. Moreover, it fitted admirably into the whole pattern of capitalist revival. Let us attempt to trace its course: First the banking holiday of March, 1933, wrote finis to almost 10,000 “feeble” banks. Many of these banks had served as the main support of a number of small industrial and commercial enterprises, which also went under, through bankruptcies, etc., and the elimination of all these “weak” structures paved the way for further consolidation. The devaluation of the dollar was followed by an uptrend in commodity prices, which brought new returns on surplus-values produced and provided a beginning for new capital investments. Through the passage of the Monetary Act of January 1934 whereby the dollar was stabilized at 59.06 cents gold, the sharp fluctuations of the inflation process came to a stop and a new impulse was provided. Shortly before this the NRA emerged. Despite its labor relations provisions, so much detested by most of the big employers, the NRA became a bridge for them to cross over toward the business revival, before they burned it behind them. This illustrates once again, clearly and precisely, the dialectics of capitalist production. Capitalism held on to the measures of the NRA when it was hardest hit by the rough seas of depression, but once the safe shores were reached, its demise served as a greater impulse to renew the untrammeled competition for profits. Freed from the restraints of the labor relations provisions, the big employers lost no time in lengthening working hours, slashing wages and speeding up labor and machine technique in order to lower the cost of production, it would, of course, be an exaggeration to say that these various measures of state intervention have been responsible for the degree of recovery attained. The New Dealers like to present their case in this manner, but such a contention cannot stand up. The main significance of these measures lies in the manner in which they served to aid effectively the general process of capitalist revival.
The second form of state intervention, the government spending for the priming of the pump, deserves special notice. Funds were allotted not only for relief purposes, but industry and finance was actually put on the dole. Corporate enterprise received its share through the enormous loans advanced by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, which since its inception under President Hoover has mounted up to the stupendous sum of approximately eight billion dollars. This is amost double the amount spent for unemployment relief. During the crisis, however, loan capital performs the function of paying for previously contracted obligations to meet interests and amortization requirements. The loans advanced in that period went almost exclusively toward the sustenance of corporate enterprise, toward the liquidation of outstanding capital values and they were not turned into productive capital. For the major part of the RFC activities this is the case, and while capitalism naturally considers this to be an important prerequisite to an upturn, this aspect of government spending could only later become a direct spur toward the business revival. Out of the magnificent paper values created by the RFC loans the banks alone received not less than 555 million dollars for which they issued brand new preferred stocks. The railroad magnates received from the RFC between 550 and 600 million dollars, most of which was also cashed in by the financiers in payment of interests and maturities, for during the years 1932, 1933 and 1934, according to the Railway Association’s reports, the annual expenditures for maintenance of way were on an average $510,000,000 less than in 1929, a decrease of 59½%, and $585,000,000 less for maintenance of equipment, a percentage decrease of 48½. Owing to this the increased net operating income lifts the railroad magnates “out of the red”; but the steel corporations still complain that buying for railroad equipment was extremely light in 1935.
State intervention undoubtedly had its most far reaching consequences in relation to agriculture. In turn the increased purchasing power in the agricultural regions – which is indisputable – constitutes one of the important pillars in the present business revival. But this fact alone also illustrates one of its serious weaknesses owing to the purely temporary nature of farm “recovery” arising in the midst of a general and protracted agricultural crisis. Industry has attained an overwhelming preponderance in the United States, as compared to agriculture, and the benefits of the increased purchasing power in the farm belts have gone primarily into production of consumable? goods, outside of what went directly to the banks in payment of interests and principals on farm mortgages. And what holds true for industry applies also to agriculture – the methods pursued in attaining economic improvements have been typically capitalist in their nature.
In order to work off the huge “oversupply” of agricultural products so that the price structure could be strengthened, the Roose-veltian program proceeded by deliberate design to restrict acreage of cultivation, plowing under crops, slaughtering pigs and cattle together with outright government buying of wheat and cotton at prices above the world market level. In return for this restriction of acreage and wanton destruction a subsidy went to the farm regions on the allotment plan, mainly to the well-to-do farmers, and paid out of a processing tax, derived from the higher prices to the consumers, collected by this unique method of check-off on increased consumer’s prices through the packing house corporations and the wheat, cotton and tobacco merchants. As a result, the huge “carry over” of wheat, whose rise from 128,000,000 bushels in 1929 to 383,000,000 in 1932 had cut down seriously on merchant’s profits, was reduced to 152,000,000. Gross income for farm products, as estimated by the Agricultural Department, increased from $5,337,000,000 in 1932 to $7,800,000,000 in 1935. Farm operating cost was increased only by a half billion dollars. The index of average per unit purchasing power of the farmers, which fell from a standard of 100 in July, 1929, to 57 in February 1933, stood at 92 in November, 1935. Naturally this increase in farmers’ purchasing power, although definitely temporary in its nature, became one of the main-springs in the present business revival. It stimulated the profit incentive in industry and finance, not the least of which was the return of the hundreds of millions of dollars of the impounded processing taxes to the agricultural products and packing house corporations with the demise of the AAA. Agriculture, however, is becoming ever more subordinated to industry and finance and it experiences an upturn without its chronic instability and crisis being solved. Its further development is the more closely bound up with the question of recovery of American national economy as a whole.
As a result of all these developments, beginning with the very first steps taken in the direction of creating the possibility of profitable investments, industrial production began its upward movement. While this is not yet so strongly marked in heavy industry the general trend is clearly visible. The steel industry, from its lowest point in 1932, in which its total output was only one fourth of its 1929 total, passed last year at 50% of capacity production. Not less than 25% of the steel output of last year went into automobile production, the highest proportion ever reached by the automobile industry. As could be expected, a certain part of the steel output went into the farm implement industry to satisfy the increased demand on the farms made possible by the processing tax subsidy. But a more lasting foundation for business stability, say the steel manufacturers, requires a resumption of such activities as railroad construction and equipment, pipe lines, water mains, power plants, building, industrial plant rehabilitations, machinery replacements, highway construction, etc. Even the automobile manufacturers, who report gleefully their juicy profit increases, complain that most of the motor vehicle buying, since the beginning of the business revival, was of the replacement order type. Foreign markets absorbed 565,000 motor vehicles out of the total of more than four million produced in 1935. Both figures represent a substantial gain over those of the lowest depression years; but the replacement character of this increase in production is attested by the fact that the total motor vehicles registered for operation in 1935 were still more than half a million units under the peak achieved in 1930. The owners of this industry, among the most prosperous since the business revival, are worried about the problem of new expansion.
What stands out on the whole with ever more marked clarity in this present business revival is the fact that it is primarily due to government spending, most directly affecting consumption goods industries. This the bankers and the corporate interests recognize to be an “unfortunate” weakness that can be offset only by serious movements in the capital goods industries. At the same time they look askance to the enormous cost of government, to the unbalanced federal budget and to the mounting national deficits which have taken a jump since 1930 of $14,000,000,000. These financiers are worried about future heavy taxation. They point to the fact that the administration’s promises of rigid economy and drastic reduction of government expenditures have brought the exact opposite results. In 1934 the taxes, municipal, county, state and federal, brought a total revenue of approximately $9,5000,000,000 while the total cost of local, state and national government had mounted to $15,500,000,000. This latter figure was about four billion dollars above the 1929 cost of government. The federal government is therefore compelled to go in for constantly heavier borrowings.
For obvious reasons the financiers and the big industrialists want a stop put to any further state intervention insofar as this implies regulations of industry, provisions of labor relations and heavy relief expenditures for the unemployed. Continued subsidy to industry they will insist upon and let the government take the risk; but insofar as heavy relief expenditures are concerned, they fear the loss of a ready-made, cheap labor market. On the side of the already accomplished credit expansion, the ever increasing liquidity of money capital together with the continuing decline in the interest rate drive straight ahead toward a new credit boom bound for the blue sky of the financiers’ heaven – easy money will be available for borrowing purposes to stimulate the capital goods industries. New inflation will be in prospect as this boom starts on its merry course toward a new crash. Meanwhile replacements of obsolescent machinery will begin in earnest and the installment of more efficient high-speed equipment will further reduce the physical cost of production. We shall again witness an acceleration of the process of accumulation of capital and a sharpening of the contradictions of capitalist production, because such a development again reduces relatively the number of workers necessary to the process of production. Such is the inevitable course of an economic system, whose present recovery phase can be characterized only as a capitalist recovery in which the masses do not participate.
Finance capital has already strengthened its grip on the levers of production and distribution. Profits and dividends rise in every field of activity. There is no reason why the replacements in industry, and to a certain extent new construction, should not permit it a further considerable economic advance. However, it is not likely that this advance can extend to the point of changing the present decline in the rate of expansion of industry. Such a question depends now entirely upon the problem of redivision of the world and on the ability of American capitalism to reduce the ration in world economy of its rival powers. Foreign trade, according to figures compiled by the Department of Commerce, shows an increase in export for the last fiscal year, over the preceding year of nearly 8%. The favorable balance of export over imports, amounting to a total of $336,000,000, records a gain over the year before. But, as reported by the League of Nations Review of World Trade, America’s share in international trade, which during 1929 represented 13.84%, had in 1934 dropped to 9.53%. Moreover, the position of the United States as a creditor nation still meets certain obstacles by the defaults in payments and by the difficulties still in the way of favorable foreign investments. For this reason a large portion of the government relief expenditures went to new armament constructions under the pretentious name of allotments for public works. And for this reason also the new budget of military and naval expenditures has reached the stupendous sum of one billion dollars.
American capitalism is now experiencing a business revival without having appreciably reduced the tremendous unemployment and with the permanency of the unemployed army definitely established. A concrete illustration will easily remove even the slightest doubts on this score. Taking as our base the year 1935, we find by far the greatest economic advance of any one single year since the lowest point of the crisis. But who? which class benefited from this advance? This is for us the important question, and it is the only way to pose it if it is to make sense.
The answer to this question is given conclusively by facts and figures. Standard Statistics, for instance, points out that the profits of 237 large industrial corporations exceeded 1934 by 48%, and it adds the following significant comment: “In the first eleven months of 1936 there were 1,220 favorable dividend changes by important companies, including increases, extras, resumptions and initial payments. One compilation places total dividend payments for the period at $2,999,000,000.” Contrasted to these amazing gains figures available for industries employing 13,800,000 workers show that the drop in hourly wages from July to December from 56.8 to 55.9 cents represents a total loss of buying power amounting to $5,364,000 per week for these workers. Obviously this downward trend can only be further accelerated by the WPA system of reduced wage rates. And yet, this tells only a small part of the story. When we turn to the unemployment statistics once more the frightful conditions of the working class as a whole, contrasted to the gains of capitalism, become so much more glaring. The AF of L monthly bulletin now announces that total unemployment in February this year stood at 12,550,000 compared to 12,764,000 in February of 1935. Could more decisive proof of the permanency of unemployment be found? During a year of 48% gains in profits and an increase in the volume of industrial production, as presented by the Federal Reserve Board’s index, of about i5%, the unemployed army remains practically stationary. To vizualize in their entirety the frightful consequences of such a situation one must turn to a perspective filled with inevitable furious class conflicts of record breaking magnitude.
The main reason for this crying disproportion between the actual growth of production and the failure to reduce the number of unemployed is, as mentioned before, the increased application of machine technique and diminishing number of workers employed compared to the total capital investments. For a practical illustration of this fact but of real life, the automobile industry, which is typical of the present revival, furnishes a very clear example. General Motors corporation net profits last year amounted to $167,226,510, against $94,769,131 in 1934, a gain of 76.4%. The corporation’s payrolls last year reached a total of $323,030,699, compared with $263,204,226 in 1934, a gain of 22.7%. The total number of workers employed by the corporation last year was 211,712, against 191,167 in 1934, a gain of only 10.8%. In these figures we have a graphic illustration: Net profits increased 76.4%, total payrolls increased 22.7%, largely accounted for by an average increase in working hours of 11%, while employment increased only 10.8%. However, when we examine further into a few practical details of the typical disproportions of capitalist production cited above, the growing application of machine technique and its displacement of human labor becomes a great deal clearer. These examples we take from a report submitted by Leon Henderson, who headed Roosevelt’s NIRB committee to investigate the automotive industry. Among other things he states: In 1930, 260 men finished 100 motor blocks in a unit of time. Now 19 men finish 260 blocks in the same time. In 1929, the labor cost of one manufacturer’s door was $4.00. In 1936 it was 16 cents. Since 1929, body framing has dropped from $3.00 to 30 cents in labor cost, hand finishing from $3.00 to 20 cents and trimming from $12.00 to $4.00. When used full time, an automatic buffer in a hardware plant can displace 160 men. A new photoelectric inspecting machine dispenses with 10 to 20 human inspectors.
Of course, the automotive industry is not the only example of this labor displacing process. In the steel industry the increased efficiency of machine technique similarly takes its toll. The modern continuous strip-sheet steel mill, twenty-one hundred feet in length, with 32,000 H.P. of connected motors is rolling sheet steel, ninety-six inches wide, at the rate of 760 feet each minute. A few men on the control bridge tend the switches of this automatic giant of the steel industry, eliminating in each case hundreds of men formerly employed.
Even the most frightfully exploited section of the United States population, the Southern share croppers, are not exempted from the advance of the labor displacing machine technique. Plucking by hand the snowy cotton from the cotton balls is arduous toil and seldom does a man average more than hundred pounds in eight hours. That was yesterday. Now a newly invented cotton picker, propelled by an ordinary farm tractor, can pick the cotton from two rows simultaneously and accomplish approximately 3,000 pounds of picked cotton in eight hours. Many more and similar examples could be adduced from the development of capitalist production to illustrate the fact that in this process as a whole excess capital exists alongside of an excess of population and that they are conditioned on one another.
These trends of economic development have not remained without effect upon the working class movement. History has repeated itself. Usually, almost from the inception of the American labor movement, its course of development would follow lines parallelling the rise and fall of the economic cycle. In times of greatest industrial advance, when capitalism reaped the benefits of its prosperity and the cost of living rose, labor, determined to maintain its standard of living, engaged in strikes, sometimes political in character, to gain this end. Today the American working class again battles to maintain its standard of living. The strike movements have shown a steady rise in volume, in militancy and in determination since the lowest point of the crisis. In 1932 there were only 808 strikes involving a total of 242,826 workers. In 1933 the strike movements rose to a total of 1,562, involving 812,137 workers; in 1934 to 1,742 strikes, involving 1,353,912 workers and in 1935 the total estimated strikes were 1,819 involving 1,128,000 workers.
More significant, however, than the growing number of strikes and the growing number of workers involved is the general character of these struggles, linked up, as they are, with a growing consciousness of the need of union organization. Some important lessons from the crisis have penetrated the broad layers of the labor movement and are beginning to bear fruit. The conditions for union organization are favorable and this coming period may witness the beginnings toward the creation of a class movement of the American workers.
Arne SWABECK

  An intense struggle of wide ramifications, precipitated by the opulent national shipping companies and waterfront employers associations, and involving issues of life or death to the Pacific Coast maritime unions, has come to an end by joint agreement. The unions found themselves compelled to make a retreat; but the shipping companies were frustrated in their openly avowed aims to overturn the present militant leadership, which was to be only a preliminary to the complete smashing of the unions. One may be sure, however, that these waterfront employers have not at all abandoned their aims. They are biding their time for a new opportunity. This epic struggle has come to an end only for the time being. It was long protracted, bitterly contested, at times smoldering, then out in the open and finally coming to a head during the last couple of weeks. Its wide ramifications involves many seemingly side issues which are nevertheless all interwoven to form one of the intense dramas so typical of the American labor movement. Leaving aside for the moment the great San Francisco general strike, which constitutes the background for the more recent events, it is necessary to mention only such outstanding questions as:  Five Outstanding Questions Firstly: the hearings now taking place before Secretary of the Department of Commerce Roper and Secretary of the Dept. of Labor, Perkins, on the case of the sailors from the Panama Pacific liner California, whom Secretary Roper charged with insubordination and mutiny when they struck for their demands. Secondly: the case of a crew refusing to man the freighter Oregon at Los Angeles because it was laden with aviation gasoline destined for Italian Somaliland. Thirdly: the organization of the Maritime Federation on the Pacific Coast, uniting all the maritime unions in common action and inspiring to a solidarity hitherto unknown. An organization justly feared by the shipping companies and whose example spread to the Gulf ports resulting in the setting up of a similar federation there. Fourthly: the question of wages and working conditions established in the Pacific Coast ports, superior to those prevailing on the waterfronts anywhere else in the country. And most important in this connection, the union control of manning the ships and handling the cargo through joint “hiring halls”, these representing the gains that resulted from the San Francisco general strike, enforced by the vigilance of an active leadership and by the unparalleled militancy of the rank and file. Fifthly, and lastly, we have here a case of the most vicious, the most sinister and the most rotten connivance of corrupted high paid national officials with the shipping companies, sometimes using government agents as intermediaries, the former operating by the methods of circumventing strikes, threatening expulsions and actual expulsions of whole locals, herding scabs to man ships in Eastern ports and giving them union cards in order to help break the courage, the militancy and the very existence of the Pacific Coast unions.  Frisco Local Target for Attack In these most recent events the San Francisco longshoremen’s local 38-79, of which Harry Bridges is president, became the direct target. The Grace Company liner Santa Rosa had been picketed in New York for failure to comply with union conditions but it secured, with the help of the top union officials, a crew from the Great Lakes which was spuriously supplied with union cards. Arriving at San Pedro it was again picketed by the Maritime Federation and subsequently diverted to the San Francisco port, which the avowed threat of the employers “to force a showdown.” The longshoremen’s union considered the Santa Rosa as carrying “hot cargo,” and, therefore, not to be unloaded, and insisted on an examination of the crew’s union cards. Immediately the Waterfront Employers’ Association countered by breaking off relations with local 38-79. The opportunity the bosses had waited for had come. All members of the Employers Association were advised not to order any men through the hiring halls. These hiring halls were made the center of the attack. Through them the unions were able to regulate the hiring of crews so that each received its proper share of the work available and the unions were also enabled to prevent any effective blacklisting by the employers. Naturally, such an institution became a thorn in the sides of the latter and they were determined to move heaven and earth to have it smashed.  The Attack Fails So far, however, this attempt has failed. All the carefully laid plans and all the dastardly connivance of the reactionary national officials with the employers could not break the maritime unions on the Pacific Coast. In the most splendid manner they all rallied to make common cause against the combined attack. The Central Labor Councils of Seattle, of San Francisco and smaller cities voted full support to the longshoremen, even local reactionaries did not dare oppose it. The Maritime Federation of the Pacific Coast voted full support as did numerous local unions up and down the coast. Still the longshoremen’s union had to make a retreat and consent to a stipulation being written into the agreement signed before the federal administrator, Judge M.C. Sloss, by which it gives up its right to job action and pledges itself to handle “hot cargo” while disputes are referred to the judge for settlement. This is a serious retreat and it calls to mind the fact that Harry Bridges has once before caused strained relations with the other maritime unions when advising them to refrain from “job action.” It should be clearly understood, however, that the Pacific Coast unions were compelled to make this retreat essentially because of the conniving treachery between the employers and such officials as Joseph P. Ryan of the International Longshoremen’s Union and Victor Olander, Paul Scharrenberg and Andrew Furuseth of the International Sailor’s Union. The maritime unions of the Pacific Coast have attained an advanced position by their militant methods of struggle as well as in regard to conditions gained. For these reasons they had to bear the brunt of the attack and bear it alone. And it is a foregone conclusion that for them to maintain this position it is necessary that the maritime unions, particularly in the East, be similarly organized and establish a far greater degree of cohesion and solidarity. The dramatic events of this protracted Pacific Coast struggle can best be understood when related in chronological order. At the same time each one of them contain lessons necessary for militant unionists to assimilate if they are to be on guard in future events. In practically every instance we see reflected the conflict between the old school of corrupted trade union leadership and the newly awakened rank and file militancy. But in its broader implications, it is the conflict of the capitalist owners of industry and their labor lieutenants pitted against an advanced section of the working class.  The Strike Award Out of the San Francisco general strike grew the special award of the National Longshoremen’s Board providing for the present working conditions on the waterfront. The longshoremen gained the six-hour day with a wage scale of 95 cents per hour and $1.40 for overtime. Subsequently all other maritime workers made gains. The sailors established a wage scale of $62.50 per month, the stewards $50.00 per month which compares to the lower rate on the East Coast of $57.50 and $45.00 for these two crafts respectively. According to the new award all cases of dispute were to be handled by the local Labor Relations Committee, and in the event of disagreement to be referred to Judge Sloss for arbitration. One of the important and at the same time one of the most bitterly contested gains for the workers, contained in this award, was the provision for all hiring of crews to take place through “hiring halls” jointly operated. Through this medium the unions were able to exercise almost complete control over hiring and firing of crews. Of course, it should be remembered, that all of these gains were made only after a whole series of struggles consciously aimed at an immediate goal.  Gains Consolidated Following up these gains the unions further strengthened their position enormously by organizing the Maritime Federation of the Pacific Coast, embracing all of the maritime unions and counting a total of 35,000 members. Ordinarily there would not be anything startling for A.F. of L. unions of related crafts within one industry to combine in the establishment of a federation. This has been a long established practice by the various departments already in existence, comprising the building trades, the metal trades, the printing trades and others. But after the lessons of the general strike, which had brought forward a determined leadership in the local maritime unions, and in fear of a rising tide of militancy, the top bureaucrats took an entirely different view of the matter. The newly gained cohesiveness made the workers conscious of their organized power which they did not hesitate to use. Ships with non-union crews, or with cargo loaded anywhere by scabs, found difficulties in every Pacific port. While the federation is in no sense as fully effective as an industrial union it did inculcate a high degree of solidarity and unity of action all along the coast. Even as a mere step in that direction it became a splendid tribute to the idea of industrial unionism. From the point of view of the employers this situation appeared ever more desperate. The business revival began to make its way; profits showed new and excellent prospects, buttressed by the enormous government ship subsidies, and lo and behold, the workers on the waterfronts and on the ships insisted, through their unions, upon their modest share as specified by the federal award. They insisted on union control of working conditions. The maritime unions had become a powerful force. Following their acceptance of the federal award the employers confined themselves to guerilla warfare, but only in preparation for their day of the general offensive. This assumed varied forms. In one instance sailors were commanded to unload steam schooners at a [line of type repeated and line missing – Note by ETOL] to circumvent the longshoremen’s scale of 95 cents an hour. The sailors refused, so the employers had to hire longshoremen, but they would subsequently tie up the schooners, leaving them lying idle in the ports; first dozens of them, later scores. Petty violations of the provisions of the award were common occurrences. Ships carrying “hot cargo” called at the ports right along while a hue and cry went up against the workers’ refusal to unload them. But in all these situations the workers also learned how to resort to a special kind of job action through what was popularly called “quickie” strikes. They met the strategy of guerilla warfare rather effectively. All the time the employers prepared for the showdown. The local Chambers of Commerce, the Hearst press and the radio loud speakers blared out their shouts for a showdown while an important part of the plans were concocted right in the international union offices. Joseph P. Ryan, the president of the I.L.A., had bungled things for the bureaucrats during the coastwide strike when he failed to carry a single vote for his outrageous settlement proposals. He was already badly discredited on the Pacific Coast. So the gentlemen receiving the high salaries in the sailors’ union, Paul Scharrenberg and Victor Olander, came to the rescue of the employers when help from these labor lieutenants was needed the most. Paul Scharrenberg. who was often denounced by Tom Mooney as one of his jailers, had himself been expelled from the sailors’ union of the Pacific because of his treacherous activities during the tanker strike. Victor Olander, one of the left-overs of the old Gompers’ regime, required a good deal of his training in the kind of politics where an opponent is never met openly until all the traps are securely set. At the I.S.U. convention in January, when serious disputes on the Pacific Coast were in a deadlock, these two gentlemen appeared to administer their blow.  Union Charter Revoked The sailors’ union of the Pacific Coast was indicted for having refused to unload the steam schooners at 29 cents an hour, for having combined with other unions in the Maritime Federation and for having taken into its ranks members of the dissolved Marine Workers Industrial Union. The sailors’ union on the Pacific Coast was expelled and its funds tied up in court litigation. What was the purpose of this action? Here we will let the New York Times, which carries “all the news fit to print,” give the answer. In its issue of January 31, George P. West reported from San Francisco on the “staggering blow to the hitherto victorious maritime unions” by the charter revocation. He added: “Shipowners are jubilant as they abandon carefully laid plans to lay up all ships early in February and thereby lockout sailors and longshoremen as a final desperate expedient in combatting the militant leadership of Harry Bridges and his allies. Instead they now announce they will wait until the I.S.U. has organized a new Pacific Coast unit. “If the local leadership refuses to recognize the new union and work cargo the responsibility will be transferred to the men and the issue fought out as a strike instead of a lockout.”  “We’ve Got the Men!” Matters did not work out entirely in this fashion, and chiefly because of the fact that the bureaucrats of the I.S.U. failed in their nefarious scheme. They did not rally any of the sailors on the Pacific Coast to their banner. It turned out to be as stated by Earl King, one of the leaders of the Maritime Federation: “They’ve got the charter, we’ve got the men.” The Maritime Federation stood its ground and remained solid so the employers had to change their strategy and move for the showdown precipitated by themselves when they broke off relations with longshoremen’s local 38-79 on April 14. This long protracted struggle is now settled – at least for the time being. The shipping companies and the waterfront employers have once again experienced the power of labor when well organized and given militant leadership. They have also experienced a new lesson, namely that they cannot entirely depend upon the top bureaucrats, be they ever so corrupted, once the rank and file workers have become conscious of the despicable role these individuals play. To the workers it should have become increasingly clear that real gains are made only through conscious struggle and when their organizations are made a means for this purpose.  Significance of the Retreat But the retreat embodied in the present agreement leaves the Pacific Coast maritime unions in a weakened position. The pledge to handle “hot cargo” can become extremely dangerous and can easily serve as a treacherous means toward the breaking up of the solidarity and the organization attained, not only on the Pacific Coast, but elsewhere. Under no conditions can the unions afford to agree to handle “hot cargo” of the kind that is actually loaded by scabs under the conditions of a strike in other ports. That would mean the giving up of the very right to an organization. But, as stated at the outset in this article, the key to the problem remains the organization for common action in all the ports in the country. The establishment of the Maritime Federation of the Gulf Coast district embracing about 10,000 maritime workers is one important step in this direction. When followed up on the Eastern coast, regardless of the opposition of the reactionary bureaucrats, the retreat made can again be turned into a new advance.   


The convention held in Pittsburgh last week of federal local unions, representing about 50,000 workers in radio and refrigeration manufacture, decided to demand from the A.F. of L. Executive Council that it be given an international charter guaranteeing the industrial form of organization. The delegates assembled apparently had no difficulty in making up their minds on this question. At the same time it is reported, that the delegates also decided to align themselves with the aims of the Committee for Industrial Organization, headed by John L. Lewis.
Both of these decisions are important and indicative of the present trends in the trade union movement. Once again they prove that under modern industrial conditions the most elementary questions of union organization bring forward from the outset the disputed progressive issues. They are not injected artificially. They grow out of the problems that arise and and thereby become necessary measures for the movement to adopt. Once the trends, now beginning to take form around the progressive issues, get to a solid basis they can be expected to sweep the trade union movement like a prairie-fire.
 
Join with Lewis Movement
Like the unions in other mass production industries the federal locals in radio and refrigeration manufacture found their first real obstacle to organization in the multiple jurisdictional claims advanced by various craft unions. Building on that foundation would simply mean no real progress in organization, not to speak at all of offering serious resistance to the powerful employers’ corporation. These federal locals learned by their own experience that only the industrial form of organization could provide an effective union.
On the other hand, the decision of the delegates from these federal locals to align themselves with the aims of the Committee for Industrial Organization, shows that the emergence of the Lewis bloc of “progressives” is becoming the stimulus for a genuine movement. A necessary critical attitude to the Lewis’ bloc must at all times take this into account.
 
Questions Plague A.F.L. Old Guard
Due to this stimulus already given to the progressive trends the bureaucratic trade union top officials are in a dilemma. Even the questions that they settled at the recent A.F. of L. convention are returning to plague them. The demand from the federal locals in radio manufacture is to come before the Executive Council meeting in Miami, Florida, this month.
Naturally Green-Woll and company fear such demands. These demands come into conflict with the vested interests of the craft union officials and to give way to them will undoubtedly mean to strengthen the opponents. At the same time the failure to react to the most elementary needs of union organization only increases the struggle for the progressive measures.
 
Auto Unity Movement
Among the organized automobile workers the struggle now goes on in the somewhat concealed form of sparring for positions. In the maritime unions it is already an open clash and in the Northwest the attempts to purge the unions have so far resulted in a complete rout of the reactionary forces.
There need be no doubt that the movement for amalgamation of the three independent automobile workers’ unions, the Associated Automobile Workers, the Automotive Industrial Workers Association and the M.E.S.A., has been greatly stimulated by the developments in the A.F. of L. The amalgamation is not yet completed. Negotiations with A.F. of L. representatives have not yet brought positive results due, in the main, to the reactionary and specific craft union obstacles thrown in the way by the latter. There are not yet any tangible signs of direct intervention by the Lewis bloc to make good on its professed claim to promote the organization of the mass production industries on an industrial basis. But one small indication of which way the wind is blowing is afforded by the meeting projected for Lewis to address the auto workers’ unions in Cleveland. The Cleveland Federation of Labor has gone on record to endorse this meeting. Here is the first concrete sign of the trade union movement of one city being pressed in the direction of support of progressive issues, at least to the extent of supporting what appears to be a step toward industrial unionism.
 
New England Progressives Gain
In the New England states, due undoubtedly also to the stimulus of general developments in the A.F. of L., the progressive trends are in the ascendancy. The Boston C.L.U. is undertaking to establish a forum to discuss industrial unionism versus craft unionism. This, however, is climaxed by the recent elections of officers in the New Haven Central Labor Council. The progressive slate won in the contest for almost every office. And the candidates made the run on a progressive program containing such points as: trade union democracy, industrial unionism, independent political action by labor, and the organization of the unorganised.
Everywhere these developments denote the sharpening conflict between the progressive tendencies and the outright reactionary forces. As said before, in the maritime unions this is already an open clash.
 
Maritime Federation Under Fire
Centering around the question of the Maritime Federation, taking in all the unions operating in the marine industry, which was organized some time ago on the Pacific Coast, the clash is avowedly an assault by the whole of the bureaucratic officialdom, particularly in the seamen’s and longshoremen’s international unions, upon the militants of the Pacific Coast. The issues have become clear cut. The international officials plead for the enforcement of the contracts with the ship owners, charging the Maritime Federation with violation of these contracts. But they are particularly alarmed at the spreading of the idea of a maritime federation. On the Gulf Coast, where the longshoremen and other maritime unions have conducted a protracted but vigorous strike, plans for the setting up of such a federation have gained considerable support. These plans are to be given further consideration at a conference to be held this month by the unions of the Gulf ports.
Of course, the setting up of a maritime federation does not mean a change to an industrial form of organization. But it is a distinctly progressive step, particularly in view of the fact that it serves to coordinate the actions of the unions in this field; it serves to strengthen their feeling of solidarity and gives a much better opportunity for the local union progressive forces to assert their leadership. The international officials look upon this as an obvious and serious threat to their positions and they have declared war on the whole idea of a maritime federation, while this is not aimed directly at the official “progressive” bloc headed by John L. Lewis, it is, in the light of general developments, definitely a part of the conflict between the reactionary and the progressive tendencies.
 
How Support Lewis?
The trend that gravitates in the direction of a uniform progressive movement is now showing some unmistakable signs. It is equally clear that the Lewis bloc provides an important stimulus in this direction. This does not mean that this bloc should be accepted uncritically as the already established authentic leadership to which the progressive movement must be subordinated. A good example of how not to approach this question is the attitude of a blanket endorsement given to this bloc by the Stalinists, adding only the plea that Lewis go on record for a labor party. However, the political position of Lewis is already very clearly expressed in his proposal to the recent anthracite miners’ convention to get “100 percent behind President Roosevelt and his policies.”
Leaving all other considerations aside, it is, of course, impossible to accept the supporters of Roosevelt’s policies as leaders of a real progressive movement in the trade unions. Much is yet to be done toward the building up of this movement. But the important thing is to utilize every opportunity. The first step should be for the militants to get into the stream that is now in motion in the direction of progressive organization.



In the investigations by the Nye Senatorial Commission of the part played by the House of Morgan in the last world war, the fact – previously so well known to Marxists – that the real cause of America’s entrance into the war was furnished by the interests of finance capital, has now become clearly established. The quest for profits by the great financiers determined, in each decisive instance, the policy of the Wilson administration. Their fear of the loss of hundreds of millions, already invested, together with the fear of cutting off profits and prosperity for American business finally decided the issue.
The voluminous evidence introduced into the committee hearings should remove all doubt of this fact even in the minds of the greatest sceptics. Viewed in the light of the present Roosevelt neutrality policy all this evidence should receive added attention.
On several occasions the President has chided the Wall Street bankers. Two years ago we had the Pecora investigations. Today the Roosevelt administration sponsors the Nye committee hearings. We were told that its purpose was to “take the profits out of war.”
 
Object of Investigation
No doubt this is still accepted widely amongst the masses as a genuine objective of the investigations. To this extent they serve to strengthen illusions in regard to the “peace” policies pursued by the Roosevelt administration. As such they are also quite in accord with the general methods of the New Deal schemes. In a bourgeois democracy governmental policy to be successful must have popular mass support. This is something the Roosevelt administration understands particularly well. Therefore the New Deal policy was carried on under such slogans as: increasing the purchasing power of the masses, safeguarding their collective bargaining rights, their minimum wage, limitations on working hours, etc. Likewise the war preparations in the Rooseveltian system must have popular slogans, such as: taking the profits out of war. Besides Wall Street can still be consoled with the comment by the New York Times on these investigations, that the “financial sensations have all been exploded, with little or no damage.”
It is to be expected that the bankers like these investigations about as much as they now like the New Deal. But for Roosevelt this is one way of applying pressure for his specific aims. In his recent messages to Congress the neutrality policy stood out prominently. Yet his budget message proposed to set aside about a billion dollars for the 1936 armament expenditures.
 
A Sham Opposition
It is one thing to investigate the bankers, but it is something entirely different to take steps toward a change of the system that makes Wall Street possible. The Wilson administration also had its period of “opposition” to the bankers. On the whole much in the present situation is reminiscent of those days;and where in the decisive moments the real and the important pressure was applied has been shown very clearly by the records of the Department of State, brought out in the hearings of the Nye committee.
At a very early stage of the world war the Wilson administration was committed to a policy of strict neutrality, according to the records of the committee. When the question of loans to the allied powers by the American bankers was first broached, W. Jennings Bryan, who was then Secretary of State, formulated an adverse opinion set down in a letter of January 20,1915, saying that, “money is the worst form of contraband because it commands everything else.” Wilson expressed the wish that such loans should not be made. Shortly thereafter, Robert Lansing, as Councillor of the Department of State, authorized the bankers to extend credits, advising them, however, not to submit the question to the government for a formal opinion. Purchases of munitions and other war material by the allied powers increased in volume at a rapid pace. From then on began the real intervention of American finance capital, and especially of the House of Morgan.
 
Morgan Turns on the Heat
Apparently following the advice of Lansing the House of Morgan carried on secret negotiations for a $100,000,000 loan to the allied powers. But the task of changing the government policy against loans still remained, and an opportunity to do so soon came. In August 1915 there was a crisis of exchange. The pound sterling rate declined. Previously the House of Morgan had supported sterling, a policy it now suddenly abandoned it and for obvious reasons. Bankers, including governors of Federal Reserve Districts, quickly made their presentation to the Department of State. In the language of the Nye committee, they “turned the heat on”. They visualized the danger that the decline of sterling would wipe out all profits on goods sold even before it was actually delivered. Robert Lansing, now Secretary of State, wrote his famous letter to Wilson – a letter never included in Lansing’s Memoirs. He estimated that for the year 1915, excess exports over imports would reach the stupendous sum of two and a half billion dollars. The pre-war average had been about half a billion. “It is estimated that the European banks have about three and one-half billions of dollars in gold in their vaults,” said Lansing. He insisted it would be disastrous to withdraw any considerable amount, and if the European countries cannot find the means to pay they would have to stop buying, thus causing a proportionate shrinkage of American export trade.
“The result,” said Lansing, “would be restriction of outputs, industrial depression, idle capital and idle labor, numerous failures, financial demoralization and general unrest ...”
It would therefore be necessary, according to Lansing, to adopt a policy of extending loans.
In the characteristic manner of secret diplomacy Wilson answered:
“... we should say that ‘parties will take no action either for or against such a transaction,’ but that this should be orally conveyed, so far as we are concerned, and not put in writing.”
The policy on war loans thus changed. The House of Morgan floated not a mere $100,000,000 but loans totalling in excess of one billion dollars. Morgan “turned the heat on” the munition manufacturers inducing them to subscribe heavily. The House of Morgan became the sole purchasing agency for the allied powers, placing orders to the tune of a total of three billion dollars for which it received the handsome commission of $30,000,000. Contracts for war materials were let to a total of 888 firms in which Morgan had what he described to the committee hearings as a “negligible interest.” As one example of this there is the United States Steel Corporation, organized by the elder Morgan, who received a promotion fee of $125,000,000 in cash and common stocks. This alone would suggest the degree of interest held by the House of Morgan in U.S. Steel.
Still after this change of policy on war loans and after the initial heavy deliveries of war materials to the allied powers, Wilson managed to put Congress on record against what he called the intolerable attitude of Britain’s interference with the freedom of the seas. Wilson’s intervention for peace at that particular time, has been characterized by Senator Clark, of the Nye committee, as an effort to “draft terms definitely to the advantage of the Allies, terms which Germany was sure to refuse, thereby opening the way for our entrance into the war on the Allies’ side.” Nevertheless in the presidential elections of 1916 Wilson could roll up a plurality vote on the slogan: “He kept us out of war.” In reality the way had already been opened for America’s entrance into the war on the side of the Allies.
 
Lousing Gives Game Away
In March, 1917, Wilson proposed his fateful declaration of war, proclaimed to be the result of the loss of “lives of peaceful and innocent people,” in the unrestricted submarine warfare that Germany put into effect. But in the voluminous documentation, the state correspondence and the correspondence of the international bankers, nothing of importance is said about the unrestricted submarine warfare, except insofar as its results could be used as a cover for the deliberately planned policy of entry into the war.
In this respect the cable addressed by Ambassador Page from London to the State Department, under date of March 5, 1917, is most revealing. In terse language it states the real cause for America’s entrance into the war. Ambassador Page stated that the international condition was “most alarming to the American financial and industrial outlook.” Page complained that the allied powers could not make shipments in gold to pay for purchases in the United States and said that:
“The almost immediate danger, therefore, is that Franco-American and Anglo-American exchange will be so disturbed that orders by all the allied governments will be reduced to the lowest minimum, and there will be almost a cessation of transatlantic trade.”
He felt that the pressure of this approaching crisis had gone beyond the ability of the Morgan financial agency – meaning that it was time for the U.S. government to intervene directly.
 
Page’s Letter
“If we should go to war with Germany”, said Ambassador Page, “the greatest help we could give the Allies would be such a credit.”
Further on in the same cable he added:
“Perhaps our going to war is the only way in which our prominent trade position can be maintained and a panic averted ...”
A few weeks later the United States declared war on Germany; and when it was over 120,000 American soldiers had lost their lives while another 182,700 were wounded. But according to testimony of Charles A. Beard, in his American Leviathan, the American corporations, which became the merchants of death, filled their coffers with gold. These corporations made profits of thirty-eight billion dollars, over and above all deductions, including excess profit taxes. For them America’s entrance into the war became an exceedingly lucrative business.
Thus the real causes of America’s entrance into the world war are revealed. While the House of Morgan became the principal object in the investigations now about to be concluded, we do not, of course, face the problem of one individual, or some individuals, as the actual instigators of war. On the contrary. What we face is the system that inevitably produces wars; and a class, the bourgeoisie, the representatives of finance capital and of the industrial corporations, in collusion with their agents in governmental positions, that engineer the plans and preparations for war. To the working class this is the real enemy.
 



I.
The revisionist conception of Socialism in One Country and the policies flowing from it have not only helped to lay the political foundation for a cyclical revival of capitalism but also have aided in creating a danger for the Workers’ Fatherland far greater than active support of revolutions outside of Russia could have done. Stalinism with its theory of the “united front from below,” together with the social democrats, has helped to lead the German working class to defeat. It has helped to destroy the second strongest Communist party of the world. At the same time its impotence has been instrumental in creating a condition the workers fear.
With the rise of Hitler to power not only has the revolutionary movement had a set-back but we are beginning to witness an alignment of social forces favorable to a capitalist attack on the Soviet Union itself. In spite of the so-called “non-aggression pacts” between the USSR and other nations, particularly France and Poland, the contradictions between the imperialist world and an isolated workers’ state are developing toward the point of explosion.
 
If the Workers Triumphed
Had the German working class defeated Hitler, thereby taking a step toward social revolution, the influence of their success would have spread. Workers throughout the world would have been heartened and the objective revolutionary factors created by the present world crisis might have been matched by a growth of subjective factors now lagging behind. A political crisis for capitalism, as well as its economic crisis, might have developed.
History is replete with examples of revolutionary movements in one country leading to progressive reforms in other parts of the world. As comrade Trotsky pointed out in Whither England?: the great French Revolution served as a powerful stimulus to the growth of the labor movement and democratic tendencies in England; the July Revolution of 1830 in France was largely responsible for the first English Election Reform Bill in 1831; the revolutionary movement of Chartism contributed to a reduction of the English working-day in 1844–47 and to the abolition of the Corn Laws in 1846; the influence of the Russian Revolution in 1905 helped to raise the Labor Party to the position of an important fraction in the English Parliament, while the Russian Revolution of 1917 was to a large extent responsible for the new Election Reforms of 1918.
In short, an examination of history leads us to the conclusion that a triumph of the workers in Germany would have strengthened the international working class in general.
 
Defeats Bring Reaction
But with the rise of German Fascism the reverse is true. Both the German workers and the international working class movement have suffered a tremendous defeat. Just as the defeat of the great French Revolution led to the restoration of the Bourbons in France and the Corn Laws in England, the defeat of 1848 dealt a blow to the English working class, and the defeat of the German workers in 1923 gave American capital the opportunity to begin with the realization of its plans for the (momentarily) peaceful subjugation of Europe,” so today, a similar wave of reaction is beginning to set in.
Instead of a series of advances a series of set-backs are likely. Nor has the tension between the imperialist nations and the USSR lessened because of the silence of the Comintern. On the contrary it has increased. The existence of the Soviet Union still remains a threat to the capitalist world. Its territory is needed by the imperialists during the present period of their decay and it is the one power all of them wish to destroy. But now political conditions for intervention have shifted in their favor. The Soviet Union’s first line of defense (the possibility of effective workers’ resistance in other countries and particularly in Germany) has been temporarily weakened.
(To be continued)



 


Simmons
Kansas City, Mo.



 



(Continued from last issue)
It is a fundamental teaching of Marxism that capitalism, once out of its swaddling clothes, extends the scale of production at the same time as it constricts the available market. As capital accumulates, an ever larger share of its total is expended on the means of production in proportion to that expanded for labor power. Competition between various capitalistic units compels the production of commodities at a lower cost, that is, with each commodity containing a smaller amount of necessary labor power. In an effort to do this, more and more capital is expended for labor-saving machinery with the result that unemployment grows, at first relatively, and after, absolutely, as well.
For example, the Hoover committee report, Recent Economic Changes, tells us that the number of workers employed in the major branches of industry (agriculture, manufacturing, mining and railways) in the U.S. fell from 25,165,000 in 1918–20 to 23,428,000 in 1924–26. At the same time, production was increased 18 percent – an increase of 21 percent per worker, in manufacturing alone the number of workers tell from 10,780,000 to 9,810,000 and production was increased 22.0 percent – an increase of 34.5 percent per worker. Between 1923–29, according to Lewis Corey, while production was increasing, unemployment was also increasing by about 1–2 millions yearly, due to the displacement of workers by machinery and other technological causes.
On one hand, this process causes the rate of profit to fall, thereby compelling the capitalists to seek to increase the mass of profit by extending the scale of operation and also to seek to increase the rate of exploitation or production of surplus value per worker by means of wage-cuts, speed-up, etc., and on the other hand, it reduces the number of effective consumers and the extent of individual consumption It sets in motion a contradiction capitalism can never permanently solve.
Add to this the facts that capitalism has already developed its productive forces beyond the effective capacity of the world market that its national aspects, that is its contradictions, competition between its various units, etc., are international in scope, that capitalism is in the fourth year of a violent process which attempts to re-establish temporarily its lost equilibrium, that there has been a general narrowing of markets due to unemployment, lowered living standards and the development in many formerly backward countries of native industrial workers, and you have a rough picture of the world situation today.
The United States, as a national unit of world capitalism, is compelled to find additional foreign markets. That it will succeed in this there is little doubt. It is in the position of a highly efficient manufacturing plant competing with a less advanced one. Its superior technique and greater resources, as well as the burden imposed on its foreign competitors by means of war debts and loans, give it an advantage that cannot be overcome.
However, as the United States expands it will do so at the expense of other exporting powers, primarily England, thereby heightening their internal contradiction and driving their workers ever closer to revolutionary action. At the same time, the prerequisites for such expansion include a lowering of the standard of living of American workers by all the means at the capitalists’ disposal as well as a tightening of the noose of centralization around the necks of weaker capitalist enterprises to the point where ever larger numbers of them are driven out of existence, thereby hastening the already rapid and extensive monopolization of American industry.
By the very process of attempting to escape the effects of its contradictions America will weld its workers into a class-conscious mass. As wages continue to fall and unemployment to rise, the pretty fable of American class collaboration will disappear in favor of a growth of labor militancy.
In this connection it is well to remember that the use of militant action is not alien to American shores. America is not devoid of revolutionary traditions. It has had many a stormy outburst in the past and the political lag of the American workers behind their European, brothers can best be explained not by reference to something inherently conservative in their nature but rather by the absence of material conditions necessary to give their philosophy its proper social direction.
In conclusion, however, it might be well to point out that capitalism will never collapse of its own accord. As Lenin once said “there is no situation from which there is absolutely no way out for the bourgeoisie.” While the shocks of economic crises open wide cracks in the structure of capitalism, to bring about its collapse more than an economic crisis is needed. The workers’ will to revolution must rise to the point where it is strong enough to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat in contradistinction to the present more or less concealed dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. A section of the working class known as “the vanguard” must have sufficient strength, both numerically and ideologically, to lead the revolutionary proletariat onto the broad highway outlined by Marx and Lenin. And, in the opinion of the writer, it is precisely this point which constitutes the fundamental task of the American revolutionary parties today. It is one of building the “vanguard”, of drawing into a state of revolutionary consciousness a larger number of American workers, of educating them in the strategy and tactics of the coming struggle. Tomorrow the nature of our tasks may change. But, until that happens, they must be considered in their proper chronological order.
 



In addition to the Stalinist practice of tagging everything and everybody not a member of the official Communist party (or close sympathizer) with the contradictory label of social-Fascist and Scott Nearing’s amusing view of Fascism as a movement based on a retreat from the technological mass production economy of today to the village economy of the past, a new conception of Fascism has come into being. This conception has for its basic premise the belief that “State Capitalism’’ is a distinguishing characteristic of Fascist dictatorship. It sees in the growth of state control over industry and state monopolies a move toward Fascism when in reality such a process is a part of the evolutionary tendency of capitalism and has been developing for a good many years.
Increasing state capitalism is not a characteristic peculiar to Fascism but is a phenomenon present during the state of economic and political development which makes the rise of Fascism historically possible. It is an instrument of Imperialism, being an advanced form of the mechanism by which competition between capitalist countries is carried on – a sort of a growing integration of the economic activity of a national or international unit as a whole.
By means of concentration and centralization, the credit system, issue of securities, financial pressure, directorships, ownership of stock, etc., a handful of finance capitalists have organized the economic life of the various nations into virtual monopolies. The parts of this system are ever in the process of drawing closer together, due to a certain interrelation of interests, thereby exhibiting a tendency to transform the entire economic activity of each of the leading countries into a single national enterprise under the control of the state which acts as an “executive committee of the ruling classes” regulating prices, production, distribution, etc. At the same time there is occurring the formation of actual state monopolies financed by large banks, as well as monopolies jointly controlled by the state and private trusts.
Between 1914 and 1919, under pressure of the demands of the world war, the move toward state capitalism went forward at a rapid pace. In Germany, for instance, in addition to state control of private enterprises and jointly controlled, “mixed” enterprises, state monopolies for the production of bread, potatoes, nitrates, etc. were formed. The financial system was centralized under control of the Reichsbank. In short, the entire economic life of the nation was consolidated temporarily into a single unit, the same process being discernible in other belligerent nations and, to a lesser degree, in some of the non-belligerent ones.
Since then, although state capitalism subsided for a time, its growth has reached a point where emphasis must be placed upon the competition and antagonisms occurring between nations as national units rather than upon those occurring within the territorial confines of the various capitalist powers.
State control of industry or state capitalism, during the present period of capitalist decay, with its narrowing markets, is the mechanism by which individual national economies or countries are preparing to attempt to wrest from other national economies a larger share of the existing trade and world control. It is the mechanism by which the living standards of the workers will be driven further downward.
Nor is its development confined to Europe. On the contrary state capitalism is almost as evident in “democratic’’ United Slates as it is in Fascist Germany and to view the process as a move toward Fascist dictatorship is to create confusion.
The fundamental role of Fascism is not to form a so-called “corporate state” but to prevent the workers from moving toward social revolution. Fascism will gain strength precisely at the moment when the workers begin to threaten – when the revolutionary movement begins to assume menacing proportions – and once it comes to power it will seek to destroy not only the vanguard but also all working class organizations and to sweep out of existence all elements of working class democracy.
To believe that it will “convert big business into an adjunct of the state”, as is claimed in an article in the July issue of the Modern Monthly, is to reveal a failure to understand its real character. To see in the growth of state control a move toward Fascism is to create the illusion that the present administration of the United States is Fascistic and tends to resurrect the theory of social-Fascism in another form.
In reality, Fascism is an instrument created and maintained by the big bourgeoisie to protect themselves against the march of the workers. As comrade Trotsky pointed out in What Next?:
“After Fascism is victorious, finance capital gathers into its hands, as in a vise of steel, directly and immediately, all the organs and institutions of sovereignty, the executive, administrative and educational powers of the state: The entire state apparatus together with the army, the municipalities, the universities, the schools, the press, the trade unions, and the cooperatives. When a state turns Fascist, it doesn’t only mean that the forms and methods of government are changed in accordance with the pattern set by Mussolini – the changes in this sphere ultimately play a minor role – but it means, first of all for the most part, that the workers organizations are annihilated; that the proletariat is reduced to an amorphous state; and that a system of administration is created which penetrates deeply into the masses and which serves to frustrate the independent crystallization of the proletariat. Therein precisely is the gist of Fascism.”
 



Although American capitalism is entering, or has entered, the upward swing of a new cycle, it is reasonable to assume that the perspectives of the near future point to a growing radicalization of the American masses.
While it might seem as if the United States stands as a refutation of Marxism, due to the fact that it possesses both the most highly developed forms of the capitalist mode of production and the least (or near the least) developed revolutionary working class, in reality this contradiction is no refutation at all. On the contrary, it can be understood to its fullest extent only by means of an analysis based on the larger content of Marxism.
The political lag of the American working class is the result of peculiarities of national development. In the past the consciousness of the American workers as a class rose to a certain level as a result of various stages of American economic development only to subside under the influence of a subsequent period of comparative “prosperity”. American historical development (with the opportunity of the frontier and the possibilities of individual escape from the working class by means of a limited success as a farmer, small merchant or professional man) operated as a safety valve preventing the rise of the American proletariat as a political factor in the social life of American capitalism. The American wage earner viewed himself as a potential capitalist rather than as a member of the working class. His ideology was that of the petty bourgeois and he failed to recognize the desirability of acting as a mass.
But today the peculiar historical conditions which drilled the philosophy of individualism so deeply into the minds of the American workers are no longer present. They are succumbing, or have succumbed, to the march of economic development. The frontier is closed. No longer is it possible for any appreciable number of workers to rise out of their class by becoming small farmers or by entering the permanently over-crowded professions. The small farmer has been reduced to the economic status of the “poor peasant” of Europe. American schools and colleges are turning out thousands of young persons, trained for professional service, for whom there is no employment. The possibility of a success as a small merchant has been reduced to the neighborhood of zero by a rise in the minimum amount of capital necessary “to start in business for oneself” and by the invasion of large scale capital (with its superior technique, greater control over sources of supply and similar advantages. into such hitherto neglected fields as retail distribution, to such an extent that in 1929 it made a total of 21.5 percent of all retail sales.
At the same time, American workers are beginning to realize that their interests and those of the capitalists represent two antagonistic poles. They are becoming aware that a rise in productivity does not necessarily result in a corresponding rise in their so-called share of the national profit. And to this the fact that a cyclical recovery will not bring a substantial restoration of the depressed American standard of living and it is easy to believe that the awakening process will continue.
Labor power is a commodity. As such its true value is determined by the value of the physical minimum of requirements necessary to reproduce that labor power from day to day plus certain requirements dictated by natural conditions and by the particular social level of the United States. However, by reason of its being a commodity, labor power is amenable to the invisible laws governing all commodities. It is influenced by the factors of supply and demand, being forced below or carried above its true value according as the available supply of labor power is above or below demand. But with the tremendous technological advance of production in recent years there exists a permanent and relatively growing over-supply of labor power. While a cyclical recovery would cause them to rise slightly above their present level, as a result of the absorption of a part of the over-supply of labor power, from that point they would once more recede.
Thus we are led to believe that the period of “prosperity” existing between 1923 and 1929, as far as the workers are concerned, has passed never to return. It is estimated that improvement of productive technique has progressed to the point where a return to the production levels of 1928–29, which is not likely, could be made today with the re-employment of not more than 50 percent of the 16 million American workers unemployed at present. Thus, the United States will enter any period of cyclical recovery with a permanent industrial reserve army of at least 8 million persons. Nor will this army shrink. On the contrary, it is reasonable to presuppose its further growth. The technological displacement of workers will continue. Each year an influx of young persons who have attained “working age” will swell the ranks of available workers. So take it, all in all, it may be said that the American period of high wages is a thing of the past.
In 1929 the United States definitely joined Europe in a condition of general capitalist decline. Its industrial activity, held up by the export of capital between 1923–29, permanently slackened. The general crisis of capitalism laid it by the heels and today America is confronted by an accumulation of surplus capital seeking investment, excess plant capacity, over-capitalization in expectation of high monopoly profits, restricted markets and other phenomena characteristic of the period of capitalist decay.
However, this does not mean that cyclical variations are excluded. On the contrary, one is beginning to take place now. But all phases of the business cycle – lull, average production, boom and crisis – from now on, will occur on a generally descending curve in contradistinction to a formerly ascending one. They will take place within a restrictive circle dictated by the present stage of development of the international economic and social relationships of world imperialism. Booms will be extremely short-lived and succeeded by crises of unusual length and depth.
(Continued in next issue)
 



Stalinism Weakens the U.S.S.R.

Sharpening Contradictions of Fascism
Increase Danger to S.U.
 



(Continued from last issue)
II.
As a result of the World War, Germany was reduced to hardly more than the status of a colony, becoming economically controlled and exploited by other countries. Approximately 1,300,000 square miles of colonial territory, with a population of more than 12 million persons, was lost as a result of the Treaty of Versailles. In connection with the production of iron, steel and coal, according to the World Almanac for 1933, the Lorraine fields were permanently taken over by France together with the Saar Basin for a period of fifteen years; Aix-la-Chapelle was occupied by Belgium, and in May 1922, 75.4 per cent of the output of Upper Silesia was lost to Poland.
Following their victory, the Allies demanded huge reparations. Later, when it became apparent that the sums demanded could be secured only at the price of sharpened competition by Germany upon the world market a compromise was effected. A large part of the reparations was renounced in favor of a process that would hold Germany down as an industrial rival.
A mortgage was placed upon its railways and industries in order to increase production costs and thereby lessen Germany’s chances as a competitor for world trade. Control of the bank of issue brought about a limitation of credits and high interest rates to further hamper the development of German industry. At the same time the investment of huge sums in German securities brought the more important branches of industry under the direct control of foreign imperialists.
 
Foreign Interests In Germany
However, while the demands upon Germany have been reduced from time to time as the result of political and economic developments, particularly in the last two years, it is interesting to note that the amount of foreign-owned German bonds was estimated by the Second Committee of Experts at Basle in December 1931, at approximately 400 million Marks; foreign-owned shares and interests in German industries at between 2,500 million and 3,500 million Marks, and the amount of foreign-owned real property at approximately 2,000 million Marks.
The total amount of German foreign indebtedness on February 29, 1932, was estimated by the Statistical Bureau at from 25,600 million Marks (par value, .2382 cents) involving an interest service of approximately 1,225 million Marks per annum. Of this amount approximately 8,392 million Marks are owed to the United States alone, Germany’s leading creditor, of which 3,227 million are in short term and 5,165 million in long term credits.
Such figures are interesting for two reasons. On one hand they shed light on the respite granted Germany by the Hoover moratorium and the reparations “settlement.” The United States, in its role of the leading imperialist power of the world, granted Germany a breathing spell in order to prevent civil war and, if failing in that, to assist Hitler in his fight against the working class of Germany, thereby aiding in not only averting a political crisis for Central Europe but also in protecting American economic interests and markets from the consequences of social revolution.
On the other hand, the figures mentioned above indicate that Hitler is compelled to steer his course according to the desires of Germany’s foreign masters.
 
Against Versailles
While thundering against the Treaty of Versailles and the dismemberment of Germany for the creation of the Polish Corridor, Hitler can make no serious move in that direction. Bankrupt Germany dare not to risk a war with military superior France without a comparatively long period of rapid industrial revival and outside, particularly American, economic support. Hitler cannot free Germany from its “slavery of interest.”
Neither can he stand still. The pressure of German capitalism upon the German working class, intensified by Its defeat in the World War, are too great for that.
So Hitler is compelled to act. He is forced to move toward war and from the logic of the situation it is quite conceivable that Fascist Germany may become the spearhead of an ttack on the Soviet Union from the west while Japan attempts to grab Vladivostok and the Chinese Eastern Railway in the East.
 
Soviet Union Menace to Capitalism
It must be remembered that the workers’ state is a constant bone in the throat of the capitalists. Its existence has been permitted not because Stalinism checked the world work of the Communist International but because of a lack of favorable conditions for intervention. As comrade Trotsky wrote more than a year ago,
“To make intervention possible, a great, highly industrialized, and moreover European empire would be needed – one which would desire and be able, to take upon itself the principal weight of a holy pilgrimage against the Soviets. To be more accurate – a country would be needed which had nothing to lose. A glance at the political map of Europe will convince you that such a mission could be undertaken only by a Fascist Germany. More than that, a Fascist Germany would have no other road left to go. Having come to power at the price of innumerable victims, having revealed its bankruptcy in all domestic problems, having capitulated to France and consequently to such semi-vassal states as Poland, the Fascist regime would be inexorably compelled to seek some sort of a gambling way out of the contradictions of the international situation. A war against the Soviet Union would grow out of these circumstances with fatal necessity.”
Capitalism has developed its productive forces to a point beyond the effective consumptive capacity of the world under the profit system. As a result, in many countries, the present crisis is primarily due to a glut of commodities arising from a narrowing of markets rather than from an increase in the level of production. In Great Britain, for example, by the latter part of 1929 production in many industries had not attained pre-war level. The output of coal was approximately 28 million tons less than in 1913. The British proportion of the world’s output of pig iron was 13.2% in 1913 while in 1929 it fell to 7.8 percent; steel in 1913 was 10.2 percent and in 1929, 8.1 percent. Consumption of raw cotton had declined by 617,000 tons. Yet, during the first two years of the crisis British production had a further decline of approximately 30 percent. Although industrial activity was hardly above the years immediately prior to the war, nevertheless British capitalism was suffering from “overproduction”.
 
Only Avenue of Escape for Capitalism
Due to this contardiction the various national units of world capitalism are compelled to expand. They must find additional foreign markets. This they can do only at expense of some other power and the Soviet Union is the one power nil capitalists wish to destroy. They see in an attack upon it not only a chance to destroy a political menace, not only a possibility to shift the much needed reparations from bankrupt Germany to the USSR, but also a chance to obtain a potential field for further expansion – a possible avenue of escape from their present position in an almost blind alley.
However, while the situation points to a probable attack on the Soviet Union by no means does it follow that the Workers’ Fatherland will be destroyed. On the contrary such an attack might apply a spark that would consume at least a large part of world capitalism in the conflagration of social revolution.
In conclusion, however, it must lie pointed out that Stalinism with its neglect of world revolution (and particularly the German situation) from fear of provoking a capitalist attack, instead of preventing such an attack, has helped to transfer it from the realm of imagination to the sphere of probability.



 


Simmons
Kansas City, Mo.



 



Part 1

Part 2
 



A look at the League today, in its palpitating growth, throughout the country and the excellent types of serious fighters it is attracting into its ranks in ever-growing numbers, offers a really encouraging picture. It is a far cry now from the time when those who expelled us from the official party scornfully dubbed us the “three generals without an army”. Still, there is no intention at all on my part to exaggerate our numbers and influence or to create false impressions of a greater strength than actually exists. But the League is making a place for itself the conditions now developing in the country.
 
Growth of the League
With a total of 28 branches spread today from coast to coast, including Canada, we have more than doubled our membership since the last National Conference two years ago. On the recent national tour larger audiences than before were attracted to our meetings. Including those held in New York City, a total of over 4,000 advanced workers participated in the meetings and heard our proposal for a new party. We can say today that the League has definitely become the standard bearer of the future revolutionary party. It reflects not only this new current but steps on the scene as the herald of the future upward curve in the working class movement as a whole. That is why the revolutionary youth responds so readily to the extent that the Spartacus Youth movement has grown up within the last year, and a half from almost nothing to about a dozen live active branches. It is also the explanation of the particularly frantic onslaughts upon us by the Stalinist bureaucrats.
What a glaring contrast this presents. On the one hand the League surging forward, teeming with life and vitality, attracting to its banner the more conscious Marxian students; the League surging forward in accordance with the trends and direction of future struggles. On the other hand the Stalinist party, belonging to the past, bringing out from the arsenals of reaction the methods of gangsterism which have long ago been properly branded as a curse to the American labor movement.
 
The Youth on the March
In Chicago where the Stalinist party, infuriated by the progress we had made, came organized in large numbers to break up the meeting held on my tour, two new League branches have since emerged. That is a most fitting answer. To it can be added the fact, which augurs well for further progress, that in Chicago our youth movement is perhaps the most active of any place in the country. Two live Spartacus clubs already exist there. The Chicago Workers’ School, directed by comrade Goldman has become an excellent supplementary institution reinforcing the Marxian foundation of the movement. With a total of over one hundred enrollments, the school is now expanding and forming branches in various parts of the city. The Friends of the Militant Club and an influential Italian workers’ club complete the Chicago picture.
To the misguided workers who participated in the Stalinite blackjack expedition these developments should be telling proof of the falsity of such methods. They will only produce the kind of repercussions which return to annihilate their initiators. In the final analysis the issues of the movement, and the positive ideas which grow out of them, will always have to be considered squarely. Personally, I noticed that those who performed the hooligan role in this instance were not at all enthusiastic about it. On the other hand the League members and other workers who defended the meeting were in high spirits. They were defending the principles of democracy and free speech in the labor movement. This is something worth making a fight for. In this the League already today performs a service which will be of much greater importance in the future sharp conflicts to be fought with the capitalist agents in the ranks of organized labor.
 
Test of Political Position
Will the League play a serious part in the grandiose perspective for rising labor militancy speeded on by the structural changes of American national economy? That, after all, is the decisive question. For a young organization there naturally is no great tradition to point to. But there is such a thing as a test of political position in the crucible of events. In this respect we have lound our position standing firm as a rock.
Therein lies the great hope for the future. Still we are today very small for the big job ahead. In recognition of this one of our comrades, a well driller from Oregon, wrote us the other day asking the very pertinent question: “In the awakening which is now beginning will not our forces be too small. There is so much to be done. Will we not be altogether too late?”
Today we stand before the coming storms. A few recent strikes, notably the Philadelphia transportation strike, indicate the resistance which is gathering against the pressure of degrading working class conditions. And we need not expect in advance that international union officials or the NRA labor boards will in every case succeed in smothering the fight. On the contrary, even the very conservative unions will be forced to take some steps forward. In preparation for that the League is also taking its first steps towards its announced objective, of rebuilding the Left wing in the trade unions.
 
The Trend of the Future
The accomplishments are modest so far. Not only that, but it must be said that in view of the immensity of the job ahead our own weakness in this field is all the more apparent. The steps which have been taken are reflected in The Militant, in union and strike activities of our comrades in New York, Minneapolis, Los Angeles, and elsewhere. But, as an indication for the future, it is noteworthy that in two separate points in the Pittsburgh steel region members of the League have already taken the initiative and become the most active organizers of newly established local unions of the A.F. of L.
 
The Unemployment Movement
A further good indication for future trends is afforded by the examples of the Minneapolis comrades. They have been in the very forefront organizing the local unemployed movement and founding it firmly on a trade union basis, thus establishing the unity between employed and unemployed, with the unions taking up the fight for the needs of the unemployed. There was a similar example in Toronto, Canada, although somewhat different in its nature. In that city our comrades were leading and moving forces in a united front Anti-Fascist demonstration which brought out between 15 to 20 thousand workers in a demonstration coupled with a strike of brief duration. It became a powerful thrust against the infamous Section 98 of the criminal code and restored free speech in Toronto.
In the unemployed movement the League is entering a broader field of activity. It is now collaborating directly with the Workers’ Leagues of Chicago to extend this organization of the unemployed to other centers. Despite the general sag in the unemployment movement it has maintained several branches intact with more than a thousand members and a few additional hundred members outside of Chicago. The Communist League is cooperating in the work of this organization with a serious determination to help revive the unemployed movement.
 
New Forces in the West
On the Pacific Coast our new branches in San Francisco, Oakland and Vancouver were almost entirely recruited from forces coming over from the official party. In New York City, where we have our largest membership, there are at this moment considerable new forces also taking the step from the official party to the Left Opposition. Within the official party itself there is a dead calm, all the more ominous after the Soviet recognition “bargain”. Unquestionably many of its members feel very uneasy and there will be new forces turning away from Stalinism to become supporters of the new party. This was already indicated by the official party organizer in New Castle, Pa., when he attended our meeting of my recent tour. He said, “Yes, the Left Opposition rests upon a sound foundation and it has excellent forces while the official party in New Castle is dead.”
 



On my recent tour through the country I gathered impressions of a multicolored variety. In the first place one cannot fail to notice that after deceptive glamour of the early appearance of the New Deal the same old desolate appearance of the crisis has returned. One does not encounter so much the traditional nuisance, the traveling salesman, but the endlessly long freight trains still carry their loads of unemployed workers and homeless tramping youth roving from place to place in quest of some new way of getting by. The aristocratic appearing New England towns radiate the screaming colors of the blue eagle signs, proceeding westward, however, these become rather scarce. Here and there emerge little “Buy Now” parades. But the attempts to stage them gaily fall flat. The throbbing hubbub of a busy industry is absent. Within the forest of smoke stacks in the Pittsburgh and Gary steel regions only a few belch forth their pallid clouds, in Buffalo and Niagara Falls, however, the war industries and allied chemical industries are running full blast.
 
Decline of “New Deal” Illusions
Here one of our comrades told me of his work in one of the plants producing the means of chemical warfare for Uncle Sam. “Three days of work in one stretch is all a man can stand”, he said. “After that must follow at least two days in a completely darkened room to avoid instant blindness.” But jobs are scarce today. Yet the lifetime of a worker in such an industry is exceedingly brief. The eyesight gives out. Such are some of the blessings of modern capitalism.
But all is supposed to be well with the New Deal policy, although the defenders of its redeeming features, as a means of recovery, say it is at its cross roads. This is true in more than one sense. “Oh, yes”, they agree – both supporters and opponents among the agents of privilege – “its social relation features are of positive significance”.
They mean by that the code and arbitration board regulations which represent the attempts to tie the workers within definite bonds of collaboration with capital, entirely to the latter’s advantage. That aspect has not yet become clear to the workers in general. But it is noticeable throughout, and more apparent as one reaches westward, that of the former implicit confidence in the NRA, which made it synonymous with recovery, with jobs, there is at least only a thin veneer left. What stands out the more clearly is the readiness to organize and the direct response from the workers to organization efforts.
 
Surge Toward Unionization
The first big “recovery” strike wave had just about reached its ebb when my tour began. Organization activities were no longer at their former height but neither had they entirely petered out with the blasting of the recovery illusions. The truth is that the overwhelming numbers surging towards the existing unions, and decidedly towards the conservative unions, represented the instinctive mass reaction to the opportunities afforded by the NRA collective bargaining clause, supplemented by the heavily increasing economic pressure upon them. It came about with such a rush that the A.F. of L. leaders were taken by surprise. In fact it was not at all due to any aggressive action on their part. They served as an impediment, gladly collecting the imitation fees which came rolling in but resisting and sabotaging organization at every step.
In Kansas City, for example, one of our comrades began to undertake organization in a plant of industrial mass production. He collected an imposing list of applicants but found it impossible to pry the trades and labor council loose. He could get no attention from that outfit so entirely oblivious to interests of expansion and growth. What could one expect then from the higher circles of the heirarchy? It is true that the gluttonous mandarins heading the New York garment workers union had a special interest in organizing the whole industry as a means of wiping out the T.U.U.L. union in the field. But elsewhere no such competition existed as a serious factor, and their worthy associates did their level best to drive the workers back from struggle for union organization and for union recognition.
 
Fayette County Miners
That was the case with the Fayette County coke miners in their strike against the steel subsidiary of H.C. Frick and Company. Several times the glib-tongued, expert horse-traders in the class collaboration field, from John L. Lewis downward, pleaded with these miners to return to work and to trust to them and to Mr. Roosevelt to preserve the interests of union organisation. But the miners stuck to their own rights and made their own fight for a union, and at that for the very union headed by Lewis and the others. Not that the miners were fooled by this gentry. On the contrary. When William Feeney came on October 3, to address a meeting near Uniontown of 15,000 strikers he was greeted with the shouts “You sold us out in 1922”, “Throw him out.” He was unable to speak and left the meeting.
Even this very early stage of the “new deal” for the workers heralded the coming deep conflicts between the rank and file and the reactionary union leadership. The distribution of the roles in this case showed the miners defending the principles of unionism against the officials of the very union involved. It may be argued that this is not a new phenomena in American labor history. That is true. But by occurring at this time it has a special significance for the future. Today the NRA class collaboration machinery is based upon arbitration boards which tomorrow will be turned into means of suppression of strikes and, thereby, suppression of the very life of the trade unions. With this machinery the union officials remain sewed up, for today and tomorrow, because they are agents of capitalism. And with this the rank and file interests will come into ever more decisive conflict. It is from conditions such as these that the coming great labor struggles will find their reflex within the unions in serious revolts against the reactionary policies and against the officialdom. Thereby the path will be prepared for a new unionism.
 
Failure of Stalinist Unions
That this path will not be found through the T.U.U.L. unions under control of Stalinism is only further verified by the most recent experiences. Today one can find no trace whatever of the National Miners’ Union in the important fields going as far west as Illinois. The thousands of miners of Pennsylvania and Ohio, who two years ago struck under the banner of the T.U.U.L. union, were this time striking, and just as militantly, under the banner of the A.F. of L. striking for the rights of union recognition which the NRA was supposed to grant.
With the NRA came the rising curve of commodity prices the effects of which are felt very directly. “The NRA is just so much bunk”, has now become a quite common expression, not only amongst those who still tramp the streets in vain search for jobs, but amongst the employed as well. For them the low wage standard resulting from the crisis is a serious reality. It is difficult to make ends meet. A grim determination is beginning to make its appearance within their ranks. One feels perceptibly that the present lull after the first strike wave is the calm before the next storm sure to break soon with the force of a hurricane.
 
Conditions of the Unemployed
And the unemployed? Amongst them are many signs of a sluggish adaptation to the low subsistence level afforded by the miserable relief rations. But these do not predominate. Most of the various mutual self-help enterprises, based upon begging and upon barter of labor for goods, which flourished for a time in several smaller cities, could not survive the realities of class society. Instead relief work, or “working for the city”, as it is called by some who hope to invest it with a non-existing dignity, is becoming a regular institution in many cities. It means to do regular work for a relief pittance either, in cash or in groceries bearing no semblance to a wage. And often it is on such projects that regular wage labor is directly eliminated. Yet it becomes compulsory for those who need the grocery basket.
In spite of all this there is no sign anywhere today of an all-embracing unemployment movement. What exists is only the isolated local groupings; and of them there are few. In Minneapolis the Left Opposition has infused new life into the unemployed movement. In Chicago one finds still the Workers’ League and locals affiliated to the Borders Committee. On a whole the issues of the unemployed receded into the background for a time with the advent of the NRA ballyhoo. The movement, such as it was, experienced a decline. But that does not tell the whole story.
 
Catastrophic Position of Official Party
Alongside of the decline is recorded the failure of the movement or the tendencies within, mainly those of the official Communist party and of the social reformists, to at any time seriously aim for the indispensable united front. From this the movement is now suffering the consequences. The Unemployed Councils, directed by the official party, which first emerged with the powerful spontaneous demonstrations, with the auspicious opportunity, during the early part of the crisis, have either entirely vanished or, what amounts to the same thing, lead a purely paper existence.
In general the decline and the sinking into disrepute of the official party is so outstanding as to be catastrophic. In city after city, not in the least in the mining and steel regions, I made the same observation. The official party is discredited to the extent of reflecting unfavorably upon the ideas of Communism in general. Again and again I would hear reports of workers saying, “I am through with Communist Party”, or, “I quit the Daily Worker some time ago.” How clearly did this illustrate the reactions thousands of workers who have been repelled by the emasculated party of Stalinism. For the Left Opposition this means more emphasis on the duty to build anew a revolutionary party in the United States. Our part in this task will be reported in another article.
 



(Continued from last issue)
But that is only one side of the picture. On the other hand the politically corrupted Stalinist bureaucracy did not hesitate to engage in light-minded maneuvering in the moments of fateful decision. It published and broadcasted leaflets in which the Socialist party and the trade unions were called upon to form a united front with the Communist party for a general strike. It did not address its proposals directly to these organizations officially as organizations. It did not make any proposals for formation of united front organs. It did not make any concrete proposals for the conduct or the objectives of the general strike. It did not prepare its own membership and followers to fight for the realization of the united front, because it was not meant seriously. It was only a maneuver so that the bureaucrats could say to the Communists workers: “There you are. We offered them the united front, but they did not accept it.”
 
Only the United Front Can Mobilize Workers Power
The general strike, now that the establishment of a Fascist government has become a fact, will, of course, be a very important first step in the struggle of working class defense against the menacing enemy. But it can be only a first step and even this first step cannot be realized at all without the most complete working class unity. The C.P. alone cannot mobilize the working masses for a general strike. That is already conclusively proven. Its method of continually hurling the slogan without proposing concretely how and when, by what means of organization, at what point and around which issues, can only lead to discredit of the slogan and to demoralization, not to mention the fact that the most resolute working class section which responds is in danger of further isolation and destruction. To speak of a general strike without the social democratic and average trade union workers is criminal light-mindedness, and it is not yet possible to mobilize these workers for such action against their leaders and less so by counterposing Communist leaders or the Communist party. To reach such a stage further preparation is necessary.
A general strike purely under social reformist leadership without control by the masses through their own established organs of struggle can have prospects only of further sell-outs and betrayals. But the social democratic workers are threatened by the scourge of Fascism us are the Communist workers. Even these very S.P. and trade union bureaucrats are being forced toward the wall, but pressed only from the one side from this menace. They feel this pressure and fear it. Now they must be pressed also from the other side, from the revolutionary workers. They must be put to the test and exposed at this crucial moment before the eyes of the working class and particularly before the eyes of their own following. Failure to do that spells failure to fight the traitors. The means with which to do that is the united front policy. The key to the situation is still the united front. Nay, it is more, it is a matter of life or death.
 
The Left Opposition Conference Appeals to Comintern
In this fateful situation, in this hour of mortal danger, no guidance, no assistance, in fact not a word is heard from the Communist International. What woeful neglect. What criminal failure. What has become of Lenin’s world party? It too is paralyzed, gagged and bound by the disloyal bureaucratic Stalinist regime.
In the midst of these developments the Left Opposition held its preliminary international conference in Paris, participated in by delegates of 13 countries. Our conference dispatched an urgent appeal to the Comintern for immediate convocation of its Seventh Congress, with the Left Opposition to participate in its deliberations. We proposed that the main point on the agenda be the Comintern initiative for a conference of the Second International, the Amsterdam International of trade unions and the Communist International to establish a united front in defense of the German working class against the Fascist menace.
Fascism has not yet conquered Germany. But it has its hands on the instrument of power. It is in the government together with elements of the attempted Bonapartist regime. Even an election victory for this combination will not finally settle the issue. There will still be a stage of differentiation with the Hugenberg and von Papen forces. However, these are not fundamental and are entirely subordinated to the issue of civil war. For the working class there is yet time; but every day, every hour is precious. The fate of the events of the immediate future are in the hands of the Communist forces. Of these the Left Opposition is a part. Our ranks in Germany have grown appreciably in the recent period; but numerically we are still small when compared, to the party. Our strength lies in our Marxian program and the Left Opposition in Germany will do its duty. We commenced a long time ago a determined fight for the working class united front Today it is the only way out; a united front from organization to organization, Communist, Social Democrats and trade unions and the establishment of definite united front organs of these organizations to function as the centrally directing force in the struggle for defense against the Fascist enemy. Within these organs, within this united front, the Communist solution will be proposed and fought for. That is the road to the Soviets. That is the only road.
February 11, 1933
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



The Militant prints here the first article from comrade Arne Swabeck, who is now in Germany and who will continue writing directly about the events there.
* * * *
Berlin, February 11. – While the Fascist hordes are at the helm of government in Germany they have not yet conquered. A mere glimpse at the country where the fate of mankind, as far as its immediate future is concerned, hangs in the balance, fully justifies this contention.
Throughout the Reich there is an ominous calm, a lull before the storm, but interrupted surreptitiously by the barking of guns in clashes between workers and Fascists. Daggers flash in the hands of the latter. Political assassinations increase. But these are only vanguard skirmishes before the battle. The situation as a whole leaves a painful impression as if the German working masses do not yet really know what is at stake. The advent of the Hitler government found them stunned, bewildered, and unprepared, left in the lurch by the deliberate treason of the Socialist party bureaucrats and by the criminal failures of the Communist party Stalinist leadership. Yet all is not lost. The issue is not yet decided. The German workers have previously proven their gigantic fighting capacity and they will still have a decisive word to say.
On that ominous night of Jan. 30, when Hitler received his mandate, heavy Fascist columns were marching, by the flare of torchlights, down Unter den Linden, through Brandenburger Tor, to the cry of: “Clear the streets for the brown battalions.” That signalled the intention of a coming terror regime. It has made its beginning. Last Saturday and Sunday alone, February 4 and 5, witnessed six killed, many scores of wounded, some seriously, and many arrests. Schupos (German police) armed to the teeth are in evidence everywhere. Their actions are carried out with characteristic German efficiency and surety far the existing regime, but they usually manage to be too late when workers are murdered. It is necessary to note that the Fascists, while recognizing the Communists as their mortal enemy, and not in the least mistaken about that, still make no distinction whatever in their assassinations and terror acts. Among those killed was the Social Democratic mayor of Stassfurt. At Chemnitz in a clash between Fascists and Reichsbanner people, one of the latter was killed. At a similar clash in Breslau one Reichsbanner man was killed. At Charlottenburg one Communist party member was killed. At Harburg-Wilhelmsburg one worker coming from a Socialist meeting was killed. At the university of Muenster several students were wounded in clashes with Fascists developing after a lecture of a Social Democratic professor.
But in these clashes the workers do not turn the other cheek. They have given a good account of themselves. For example at Duesseldorf a Fascist storm troop was broken up, its officer killed and several wounded. At Leipzig similarly, a gang of Fascists was broken up and about a dozen of them were wounded. This is only a partial account of the events of two days.
One of our Left Opposition comrades in Oranienburg, who has been very active and very effective in the work of our local group actually to establish a genuine united front of the various working class tendencies, has so far barely escaped death. The planned assassination which was to be carried out at night in his home by local Fascists, was discovered by a worker just in time to take the necessary measures.
 
Capitalism Mobilizes Its Last Reserves
In these continuous skirmishes workers, Communists, Social Democrats, Reichsbanner people and trade unionists instinctively unite and fight shoulder to shoulder. Numerous are the accounts brought by our comrades of workers everywhere asking: “Why do we not build the united front?” Liberal bourgeois papers reprint letters from workers posing this question. But – and that is the crucial question – the leaders, Stalinists, Socialists and trade union bureaucrats refuse to realize the united front from organization to organization.
The workers are still sadly bewildered. But it is not so in the ranks of the bourgeoisie. The present situation found them quite well prepared. The forces on that side of the barricade were not taken by surprise. They decided quickly for the Fascists precisely out of fear of the growing misery and discontent of the working masses. Economic developments within the Reich continued to present their protracted black picture. Unemployment was on the increase. The official figures of January 15, 1933, gives the numbers of 5,065,000. This accounts only for those officially registered who receive unemployment insurance, but not of those not registered or the part-time workers. In reality the total figure is much higher. The emergency decrees had already helped to reduce further the working class level and increase its discontent. The Communists had gained in the last elections. The Schleicher government, evidently despite its good intentions, could not consolidate the Bonapartist regime. Its prospects of maintaining capitalist rule and avoid civil war diminished. The bourgeoisie called upon Its last reserve – the Fascists hordes.
Against the dangers of a growing working class threat the capitalist solidarity extends beyond the national boundaries, not even taking cognizance of such distinctions as former “mortal enemies”. And so also in this case, the change In Germany produced its echo in France. The Paris Soir of Jan. 31 commented: “Hitler in power! This news would a few months ago have produced the effects of a bombshell. Today it reverberates but there is not much detonation.” This bourgeois paper is fully conscious that the imperialist road now leads through the Fascist regime toward a united front against the growing threat of the German revolutionary workers. True, there is the Versailles Treaty standing a little in the way. But such matters can be adjusted to enable the German and the French bourgeoisie to work hand in hand. In this manner the first steps toward forging the spearhead of the army of intervention against the U.S.S.R. are being taken. That is the very heart of the question of a possible final conquest of power in Germany by the Fascist bandits. Finally that much at least seems to have dawned upon l’Humanité (the French party daily). It did mention that danger in one of its recent issues. But in face of that recognition it demonstrates its utter helplessness, its paralysis. Choked by the false concepts of Stalinism it cannot show the way. It can only repeat what in view of the concrete needs of the situation becomes a mere abstract commonplace. It repeats the slogans of downing Fascism and of the united front from below.
 
The Issue Is Now to Be Settled by the Means of Civil War
The Fascist government does not at all hide its objectives. Hitler’s very first ministerial address to the public declared: “The greatest actual danger is the danger of Communism ... Bolshevism would spell disaster not only to Germany but to the entire world. The national government is determined to defend Germany against Bolshevism, against anarchy and against the scourge of the class struggle.” That the C.P. is the vanguard of the working class the Fascist leaders fully understand. But the full scope of their objectives became further clarified by Hitler’s election campaign address of February 8. He declared in his usual bravado style, but now with a more sinister sureness: “I shall not resign my function until I am fully convinced that my mission is accomplished. That within less than ten year’s Marxism shall no longer exist in Germany.” Such are the threats of extermination of every section, of every vestige of the working class movement, for in their usage of the term Marxism the Fascists include the Social Democrats and even the reformist trade unions. Yes, precisely that is the mission of Fascism. German capitalism, the weakest link in the imperialist chain, in the throes of the decay of the system as a whole, has decided to settle the issue by civil war in the hope of thereby accomplishing the destruction of the working class movement in order to maintain itself in power. For that aim Fascism is the instrument, quick in its actions – one has followed the other in rapid succession – in the attempt it is making to consolidate its position. The Reichstag was dissolved without even being permitted the opportunity to convene. The new elections will take place, not after the usual sixty days, but within one month, on March 5. The important positions under the ministry of the interior, particularly those of chiefs of police, are being filled by Fascists. Several issues of the Rote Fahne have been seized. A press censorship decree is issued giving the chief of police the authority to prohibit any paper which advocates a general strike, or strikes of any kind, or prints what is called “deliberate misinformation”. All city councils (aldermanic bodies) throughout Prussia are dissolved and new elections set for March 12. The Prussian state government, the Braun cabinet, which had only a shadow existence, is unceremoniously and completely dissolved to prepare the road for dissolution of the Landtag despite its majority opposition. Even bourgeois democracy due to its flexibility, still has a certain usefulness: – Dissolve by decrees, get new elections with all the machinery of suppression in readiness so as to obtain a voting strength which can furnish a mask of authority. That is to be preparatory to the final coup d’état These are parts of the immediate strategy of the Fascist government.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
There need be no doubt that the millions of German workers who have definitely expressed their sympathy and support either for the Communist party or for the Socialist party instinctively feel that Fascism represents the Sword of Damocles hanging over their heads, threatening their organizations with destruction, threatening their even now miserable standard of living and threatening their very lives. There are examples every day of such an instinctive feeling. But compared to the immensity of the needs of the situation there is passivity. A dead hand of paralysis still holds the working class in its grasp. Its organizations are either unable or their leaders unwilling to act. At times it seems as if the paralysis and the passivity is breaking. Last Sunday the social-democrats called a demonstration at the Lustgarden in Berlin. It became a monster turnout. Otto Wels, after many radical phrases declared for a “non-aggression pact” with the Communists. It was only a further step to sabotage the genuine united front; but that declaration alone nevertheless expresses the increasing pressure for unity of action which these leaders feel upon them from their own mass following. Again yesterday afternoon, February 10, a gigantic funeral procession wended its way through Berlin to the cemetery of Friederichsfelde in honor of the three class victims Bermer, Kollatesh and Schultz, who were murdered by the brown-shirted bandits. Despite the police prohibition over 100,000 workers marched through the streets. Without a united front being formally established the S.P.. the Y.S.L., the Reichsbanner and the C.P. officially participated. The Reichsbanner spokesman appealed to the workers of his columns for common struggle with the Communist workers and for a united front of action. The Y.S.L. spokesman admonished his followers to make all possible sacrifice for the establishment of a fighting united front. Comrade Pieck. in the name of the C.P., called upon all the workers to join the united front. Yet the party fails to act, fails to organize the united front.
There are radiant rays of hope when one feels the throb of such mighty marching columns. The broad shoulders of these husky German proletarians, within each row almost touched one another. Their faces were solemn but showed distinct determination. What a splendid picture of class solidarity. Power is expressed in these heavy footsteps.
 
Why Are the Strong Hands Paralyzed?
But the defeat of Fascism in Germany is an enormous task. Even such powerful demonstrations can only be the small beginnings. Why then are these strong hands paralyzed? That is the question of the position of the parties, of policy and of leadership. Never before has the treasonable role of the Socialist party bureaucracy been so clearly revealed as at this moment. Since their betrayal of the revolution in 1918 and their murder of the best working class fighters they have made a parliamentary shambles even out of their own party’s social democratic aims in order to fully re-establish capitalism. Thus they prepared the road for Fascism. And in the development of this brown shirted menace they deliberately fostered the illusions that this would be only another affair to be conquered by ballots and to be conquered by the forces of the “iron front” including all the supporters of Hindenburg. They still speak in the name of this “iron front”. As a matter of fact the social democrats are now all that is left of it. But, and that is important, millions of workers still follow these traitors, who only out of fear for their own hides simultaneously give lip service to the slogans of struggle against Fascism. Yet that is precisely the reason why the formation of the united front of the entire working class becomes the key to the situation which the Communist forces must take hold of. It is the means to defeat Fascism, it is the means to finally unmask the traitors. This the Left Opposition has demanded since the beginning of the Fascist menace. In this our small forces have attempted to show the way.
 
The Balance Sheet of Stalinism in Germany
The Communist workers, however, were also unprepared. They were lulled into a false underestimation of the sinister menace, into the false security that “We come after the Fascists”. They were misdirected by the slogans of “national liberation” and of a “people’s revolution”. They were sharply divided from their class brothers by the false concepts of “social Fascism”. They were split away in small sections from the mass organizations by the criminal policy of independent revolutionary trade unions. The position of the party leadership to date has represented a criminal capitulation in face of the existing menace. When Hitler received his nomination, it threw out the slogan of the general strike in a sort of hit or miss fashion and naturally the response was almost nil. The party leadership set up phantom united front organs. For example in Berlin on the fateful night of Jan. 30, a conference attended by more than 2,000 delegates convened to take measures against the Fascist danger. It listened to much oratory, decided to meet the next day to organize the general strike and collapsed. It represented in reality nobody outside of the party. The general strategy of these Stalinist leaders has since sunk to the level of isolated demonstrations, mass meetings, demonstrative strikes of one hour or two hours, one day in one smaller factory or small town, another day in another and in some places merely economic strikes against certain special measures. This strategy, or lack of strategy to be more exact, could only demonstrate the frightful weakness of the party position and particularly its separation from the workers in the industries. The party’s own membership composition is about 80 percent unemployed. The party’s inability to lead and to mobilize masses became sadly revealed. Such is the balance sheet to date of the party Stalinist leadership.
(To be continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
The New Turn
The formula and practice of the united front from below also became untenable by the logic of events, and – what irony of “fate” pursuing Stalinism – an important part of this was the fact that the initiative to offer an organizational united front had been left to the Second International. But in giving up the “united front from below” the Stalinist leaders made a volte face and decided that in approaching the socialist leaders for united action they would renounce the fundamental political right of mutual criticism.
These examples alone are sufficient to prove Stalinism as utterly oblivious of a Marxian policy or of a revolutionary strategy. It swings in jerks and spasms from one opposite position to another, forced by the blow of events. Naturally it cannot maintain working class confidence and it becomes entirely impotent of giving any leadership whatever in a serious revolutionary situation. Any old hand organ can change its tune by merely turning a small switch, but it remains nevertheless a hand organ. Centrism with its turns, half-turns and false turns nevertheless remains Centrism.
Even this change in the united front tactic, partial as it is and with its falsity to boot, still rests within the framework of Stalinist theory and policy. In other words, the partial change rests upon its old false foundation. The united front tactic cannot, of course, express the sum total of revolutionary policy and although it was at the present period the most acute question it makes up nevertheless only a part of the whole content of a Marxian policy. But here it is necessary to add that in changes of strategy or tactic in a revolutionary situation, when events usually move with lightning speed, the question of time becomes an important element: sometimes a matter of life and death. And in this instance it was a matter of life and death. Even this partial change, if made in time, could perhaps have given the impulse to a genuine united front and moved the masses forward to an extent which would have gradually enabled them to tear into the foundation of Stalinist policy, at least in Germany. But, as we know, the party leaders then tenaciously opposed any such change, branded it as counter-revolutionary and removed or expelled comrades who tried to apply the united front on a local scale, as we shall show by some concrete examples.
Now, however, the events in regard to this specific question have already moved beyond its timeliness in Germany itself. By this we do not at all mean to assert that nothing further can be done. Quite the contrary. What must be brought out, however, is the fact that the German social democratic leadership after the consolidation of the Hitler dictatorship have broken with their own International, the Second International, over the issue of opposing the latter’s protest against the dictatorship. In this they hoped to ease the road for themselves personally. Though Hitler cannot at all use these miserable creatures, except insofar as they can serve for the future destruction of the working class movement, they have capitulated completely to him.
That means that they have to all intents and purposes put the final touches to the liquidation of their own organization. One can therefore no more speak of a united front in Germany from organization to organization as far as the social democratic party is concerned. It is now necessary to commence on a new foundation. A timely, and a real change, by the Communist party, however, could unquestionably have brought the millions of social democratic workers into united action with the Communist workers, avoided the heavy price the proletariat now has to pay, and matters might have looked entirely different today.
The series of previous failures, the many stupid blunders, the whole system of false orientation, policy of theory of Stalinism, brought the German party to its fatal position of impotency in face of the Fascist onslaughts. Some German comrades even today seek to partly absolve the party from guilt in its present catastrophe by saying: “It was not unwilling to fight but it was unable to fight.” Precisely that is the issue. The party was unable to fight because its leadership over a long period of time, by its bureaucratically imposed false policy, theory and concept, had succeeded in finally disarming the party. And when the vanguard is disarmed, the mass faces certain defeat. In all of its objective consequences this can mean nothing else than Stalinism having experienced its August 4th in Germany.
 
Lessons of Some Practical Experiences
Many comrades, party member’s, discuss freely with us the experiences of the past mistakes. In this they are also trying to draw the lessons which may be appropriated for the future. Their reports are particularly illuminating as to how the Stalinist tactic worked out in the practical activities. One comrade from Berlin, Heligensee, relates:
“The united front was correctly understood by the masses but it was sabotaged by the Central Committee. I will prove that by our district. There existed a united front built on a broad basis with the social democratic workers, in eluding the lower functionaries. It had organized a powerful mass self-defense corps, it conducted regular weekly discussion meetings, functionaries of both parties came together to confer about matters and joint demonstrations against Fascism were held. The sub-district committee reacted to this by removing all our local party functionaries, among them old and tried class fighters. The district leadership (Brandenburg) covered and protected the sub-district committee. A hunt for Trotskyites began with the slogan: ‘Those who have any relations with Trotskyists will be summarily expelled.’ The biggest part of the membership became stirred and asked: ‘We should discuss with the Nazis but not with our own comrades.’ Protest resolutions were adopted but filed by the district office never to be answered.”
Another party member could, in his report, make a valuable contribution which graphically illustrated how a united front correctly applied, will serve effectively to unmask the social democratic leaders. He relates from Dessau:
“We took action on the occasion of the constitution of the National Socialist government. Together with an important factory committee and the S.A.P. we had established a united front committee and we invited all the reformist organizations to participate in united struggle. The social democrats asked us for negotiations but submitted unacceptable conditions. We nevertheless went to carry on negotiations and we declared: To every one of these points with which the working class is in accord for a struggle against the Nazi government, the conditions submitted by you means a practical prevention of united action. The negotiations stranded because the socialist leaders would not budge. The next day there took place in our city the greatest demonstration seen for a long time directed against the government and also against the sabotage of the social democrats. Despite this outstanding success the district leadership removed the sub-district committee.”
These simple reports are important documents. They should serve as enlightenment for Communists everywhere.
 
What Is to Be Done Now?
However, an entirely new situation exists now in Germany and only fools will pay any attention to the Fascist boasts of abolishing the class struggle. The internal antagonisms of capitalist society are not diminishing but sharpening. They will become many times more accentuated in Germany by the existence of the Fascist regime. To perform its mission, it will pursue the attacks upon the present trade unions much further. A struggle to destroy the workers organisations is not performed only by murder, by arresting, and by breaking things up; but it is also accompanied by the inevitable attacks upon the workers’ standard.
That is certain to be expressed in attacks upon the working conditions gained, upon the wage level, upon the unemployment insurance, social insurance and so forth. The general statement previously often repeated by party leaders who felt confident that “Hitler would soon get out of business,” to the effect that he has no favorable economic perspective ahead of him, is, of course, true in its historical sense. But it does not preclude that Germany will in this present period experience a certain upward economic conjuncture. A reduction of unemployment would inevitably tend to increase the working class demands as well as the struggle for these demands.
In general, the capitalist economic system is developing its relation of forces not favorable to the Fascists but favorable to the working class. Thus the knights of the Swastika, despite their easy victory, will yet have the greatest difficulties ahead of them. Their suppressions and repressions will undoubtedly assume yet more violent forms. But it will not continue to remain a one aided affair. There are certain also to be struggles in the near future. What leadership then, fof the German working class?
Have we fully comprehended the extent, the scope and the implica tions of the defeat in Germany’? The two workers’ parties, the Communist party and the social democratic party are destroyed. It is Austria’s turn next. There Fascism is preparing its forces and gathering its strength while the working class leadership is failing as miserably as in Germany. The Comintern also here had the duty to propose a united front to the Second international and put the question of the defense of the Austrian working class on the very top of the agenda. If Austro-Marxism follows its German brethren to annihilation it will mean to the Second International the loss of its two strongest and socialistically developed parties – in other words a perspective of practical extinction. And the Communist International? Yes, to the Comintern the German party meant as much if not more than the German social democracy meant to the Second International. In this the Comintern, under the Stalin regime, has now suffered its most fatal blow. The party of the Soviet Union is so immersed in the false theory of “Building Socialism in One Country,” that it organized not one single demonstration in support of its German class brothers during their hour of greatest need. The party of the Soviet Union is paralyzecl by the dead weight of Stalinism.
Enormous tasks are arising for the Left Opposition. The sporadic activities now carried on by the remnants of the German Communist Party do not signify its recuperation on a new and illegal basis, but merely reveal the rear end of its former legal condition. What must therefore now be done was well expressed in the statement of a German Left Oppositionist:
“Above all we must immediately issue the directives for the building of a new party. None of the parts of the old apparatus will do for the future. I have discussed this with many class conscious workers, sterling fighters, and they are quite unanimous in asserting emphatically: yes, the building of a new party is an imperative necessity.”
April 1930
 



(Continued from the last issue)
The factory councils are now compelled to beat a hasty retreat, in many places already passing into oblivion set aside by the Fascists; nothing else could be expected when the Reformists are left in practically undisputed control. Here again they admonished the workers to remain neutral politically and not to fight. “Do not let yourselves be irritated, your rights and your duties are guarded by the constitution and by the factory council law,” so said the Hamburg trade union leaders. And this at the very moment when the councils are bruskly dissolved or reorganized, by the method of the worker elected representatives being jailed and tortured and replaced by Fascists. No, those who sat safely so far behind were not irritated, only frightened and paralysed. But even the reorganizations are only temporary measures. Not even Nazi councils, so close to the rank and file workers, where class ideology may again penetrate, can be tolerated. That the Fascist dictatorship is in deadly earnest about their attempt to destroy all working class organizations one need not doubt for a moment.
 
The Fascists and the Trade Unions
The Fascist and the workers organizations are the two opposite poles, mutually exclusive. Within the latter the trade unions form the great reserve. Even these the Fascists cannot tolerate as they will always offer a basis for struggle against capitalism, including the mere struggle for reform demands. Capitalist society has reached its decay stage and is under ever greater difficulties in granting any reform concessions. At this moment this is the most marked in Germany. Hence, Fascism is called upon to perform its mission.
In its approach to the trade unions it is also completing the counter-revolution by stages, encountering no obstacles whatever from the miserable functionaries who are now the lackeys [1] of Hitler as they once upon a time were to the Hohenzollerns. In this respect, the lead was given by the president of the German trade union federation, Leipart. The day after Hitler had arrived in power he said:
“The present government may carry through a period of no agreements perhaps even further reduction of wages; they may even bring out reactionary plans from the storage room of antiquated ideas and make arrangements which oppose the rights and liberties of the German working class. But the German workers know that after a long period of social ascent can also sometimes follow reverses, yes even temporary conscious retreats.”
In other words, the German workers have had their good times, now they should submit and accept the bad times.
But even such lackey service is not sufficient. Today the Fascists exact a much heavier tribute than did once the Hohenzollern. The methods of suppression, first applied to the Communists, the social democrats and then the auxiliary organizations, each in their turn, has also commenced against the trade unions. The rank and file membership, also in this instance showing their alarm at the Nazi advance and showing their readiness to fight, respond and gather in masses at their headquarters at each attack. That does not at all suit these frightened lackeys who are much more alarmed about the rank and file action than by the Nazi attacks and prefer to sell-out to the latter.
Their answer is leaflets, in which they plead with the workers to stay at home and not to resist. “Congregating at the headquarters,” said the Berlin leadership, “will be taken advantage by the Communists. What do they seek at our headquarters?” And the sad truth is that to the bulk of the membership the Communists have appeared as the disorganizers of the movement.
Thus the road is cleared for the Nazis. They pursue their destruction so far unhampered. Perhaps the clearest indication of how they proceed by stages to destroy the present union basis and to transfer the unions into pure organs of the Fascist state is given by the Bavarian government appointed by police commissioner von Epp. Its first act was the trade union decree in which the unions are ordered to “resume their functions,” but on the following conditions:
They are to make no direct or indirect attempts toward contact with the prohibited political organizations, their late leaden or their members.
Their headquarters will remain occupied by the police whenever the authorities find such necessary.
All political activities are prohibited, the unions are not to hold any public meetings and regular membership meetings to be held only upon notification given to the police.
At any time the actions or decisions of the unions, including their finances, are subject to inspection by the Nazi established shop nuclei.
 
The Fatal Policy of the R.G.O.
In this work of destruction, the Nazis are proceeding quite unhampered as far as the militant minority is concerned. It is practically entirely outside of the trade unions, not merely by persecution or default but by deliberate and – particularly now proven – false policy.
That is the Stalinist policy of independent “revolutionary” unions. As in the United States the T.U.U.L., so in Germany the RGO, only in the latter case it proved much more fatally and much more criminally wrong, due to the more advanced political conditions and due to the larger scale of the splits and of the isolation of the party from the masses. Otherwise the characteristics are common to both of these products of the “third period” era.
Trade unions to be effective must embrace all workers of the industries or at least a sufficiently decisive section. That will include workers of varying political opinions. The R.G.O., a rival union, based upon withdrawal of the revolutionary minority and based upon acceptance in advance of party policies and leadership, remained a paper organization playing no serious role at all in the class struggle. Its membership was composed only of Communists and only a very small section of the Communists at that. The R.G.O. could, therefore, not at all serve to connect the party with the masses, but on the contrary detached it and created a wall of separation.
The basic aim of the revolutionary party is to gain influence upon the working masses and particularly those organized in the trade unions. The R.G.O. became precisely the most formidable obstacle to this basic aim. Numerically feeble, it could of course not at all substitute for the mass unions. It was unable to even influence them because it was distinctly a rival organization.
The R.G.O. could naturally not remain immune from the typical Stalinist bureaucratic methods either. One party member relates how in the early part of this year the whole Berlin R.G.O. leadership was removed and a new one appointed in its place without the slightest explanation made to the membership.
A fatal injury to the movement is the record of this R.G.O. policy. Its consequence contributed heavily to the party’s impotence in face of the Nazi advance, to its being wiped out without a struggle and to the defeat of the working class as a whole. Long ago the Left Opposition demanded a change in this course and as, the only correct one, for the R.G.O., to immediately return to the trade unions in order to take up the Left wing activities within them.
That is still, despite all the positions lost, an imperative necessity. It does not diminish with the transformation of the trade unions into organs of the Fascist state. On the contrary. It increases in importance. So long as they represent a form of organization gathering workers within their ranks, they constitute a field for revolutionists to work in and to learn how to be able to do the work, skillfully, carefully – well planned and courageously executed. To fight every inch for the existence and functioning of the trade unions, to fight for existence and functioning of the factory councils, helping to give expression within them to the working class needs and connecting up therewith the democratic remands which inevitably must arise – that is the job at present. Now that Fascism in in power, it is an especial necessity to utilize every means available for flank attacks until the proletariat can again gather its forces. That the workers will respond heroically, has already been shown even in these difficult days by local strikes and demonstrations against arrests and against attacks upon the factory councils.
But the Stalinist party and Comintern leaders have not changed their course in regard to the R.G.O. It was commissioned to initiate the anti-Fascist congress scheduled to be held in Prague but prohibited by the Czecho-Slovakian government. Naturally, it is to be assumed that efforts will be made to hold the congress in some other country. But no matter where it will be, when initiated by the R.G.O. it cannot even mark a serious attempt to really rally a mass response to this gathering, not to speak of initiating subsequent actions. As far as a genuinely united working class action against Fascism is concerned, this congress called by the R.G.O. is condemned in advance to sterility and Impotence.
(Continued in next issue)

Footnote
1. Since the writing of this article, the lackeys have as is only natural, and was to be expected from the past developments, been given the boot. – Ed.
 



Only seven weeks were required for the German counter-revolution to complete its first stage. The Hitler government emerged on January 30. At its pompous session in Potsdam on March 21, the Reichstag sealed the fate of parliamentary democracy and conferred full power upon the government. That period decided for the time being the issue of Communism or Fascism in Germany. With that commences an entirely new historical period for the working class which will have its serious repercussions throughout the world. The German workers retreated without a struggle. The Communist party leaders were revealed as the organizers of defeat. Fascism remained the victor and has now been able to consolidate a virtual dictatorship.
But the Stalinist leaders continue in their previous course. In a manifesto issued from their place of refuge, dated March 15, it is said that:
“Our party has fought in brilliant fashion ... Despite the pompous declarations of the government, March 5 is not a victory for Fascism, it shows on the contrary that the masses of the toiling people are resolved to wage the struggle boldly and courageously.”
And from the Stalinist headquarters it is maintained in Pravda of March 6:
“The working masses of Germany cannot be intimidated either by provocation or slander. They are on the side of the Communist party and under its leadership will put an end to the Fascist regime.”
It is necessary to make a correction here. The working masses were prevented from being on the side of the Communist party by the fatal policy of its leadership. And it is well to add that the new tasks in Germany will belong to the new Communist party which in no case will be organized by the Stalinists.
For the moment the sad truth must be recognized. It was the empty boastful phrases of Stalinism which contributed so much to render the party impotent of leadership. They have nothing to do with a Marxian analysis because they are not based upon reality and can result only in adding further confusion to the demoralization created by the serious defeat suffered. Above all, they do not correspond with the complete failure of resistance.
Parliamentary democracy took leave in a blaze of torchlights, accompanied by the roar of guns and ringing of churchbells, blessed by the sermon in the Potsdam church over the text: “If god be with us (the Fascists) who can be against us.” And the god who is always on the side of the strong bayonets found his rightful place in Fascist Germany. Hitler also lifted himself into this general setting and made a venture into the stratosphere by dedicating his address to the people “on the elevation of the soul.” Now he will proceed the more ferociously on terra firma, in destroying the only progressive class and exterminating its organizations. He has already opened a number of concentration camps in which the most active Communist fighters and social democrats are to be interned and kept under the Fascist lash. One of these camps is located at Dachau near Munich. It has “accommodations” for 5,000. The other is located at Heuberg in Wurtemberg. While the activities took place in Potsdam, 400 Communist prisoners were on their way to the latter camp.
 
Fascist Strategy in Name of “Defense”
Chronologically one can trace the sweeping rapidity of the Fascist rise to the full fledged dictatorship and to the just as rapid, disorganized retreat of the Communist and social democratic movements. Its blunt strategy could become possible only in view of the failure of the proletarian leaders, Communists and Socialists alike. Their common failure prepared the road for Fascism. To recount this strategy has value not so much from the point of view of merely recording what has passed, but primarily for the sake of assimilating the lessons of these events for the future tasks
As soon as Hitler and his lieutenants entered the government they set as their first aim the control of the police, not for the national coalition, but for the Fascists themselves. This they accomplished in the name of the defense and security of the people, strange as it may seem. Having the affairs of the interior regime of Prussia well guarded in the hands of Goering, they proceeded to appoint police commissioners for the other states, Bavaria, Wurtemberg, Saxony, etc. These were not just mere chiefs of police but fully authorized commissioners whose powers were symbolized by the act of von Epp, commissioner for Bavaria, in appointing a new government for the state. Elsewhere within the various states and cities followed in rapid succession the removal of the elected governments, legislators, mayors and even regular functionaries and hired emlpoyees who did not swear to the Fascist colors. At first it took place by the more polite method of granting leaves of absence but later the victims were violently chased out. All were replaced by Fascists. Step by step with these inroads grew the suppression and complete proscription of the workers’ press, their meetings and their organizations.
The Communist press and even the Socialist press formerly counting of 192 papers is entirely proscribed. The Communist auxiliaries, the Reichsbanner and other socialist organizations are dissolved and prohibited. These actions were supplemented right along with the necessary emergency decrees. But in all of these the Fascists had fully learned the art of taking the measures in the name of the defense and security of the people. The Fascist strategy managed to put the working class organizations in the position of being the offenders – the terrorist monster against which they were defending the people. The workers who had cause to speak in the name of, and to take measures for, their own defense, and thereby the defense of the majority of the people, failed to do so. To put it more correctly, their parties to which they had given all their confidence – their workers’ parties and more particularly their party leaders – failed to give such leadership, failed to give any leadership at all. The Fascist strategy, although crudely and clumsily carried out nevertheless became superior. The working class’s lack of strategy, and where any was shown, its false strategy, hastened the defeat.
To fully comprehend the enormous chasm presented here it is necessary to make a historical comparison with the process of the Bolshevik revolution under Lenin and Trotsky. For example, at the time of the attempted Kornilov counter-revolution, the Bolsheviks mobilized the weight of the masses and through their deep antagonism to the Kornilovists impelled the Mensheviks to fight unitedly with them under the slogan of the defense of the people’s revolution. Also, at the time of the Kerensky attempt to strip Petrograd of its revolutionary soldiers, the Bolsheviks frustrated it under the slogan of the “defense of the revolutionary capital.” The subsequent breach with the army headquarter was made in the name of “defense of revolutionary order against counter-revolutionary attempt.” And again, up until the very last days before the insurrection, the heavy attacks were made in the name of defense under the immediate leadership of formally established “Defense Committees.” The Red Guard was organized and as late as October 22 defined to be: “An organization of the armed forces of the proletariat for the struggle against counter-revolution and the defense of the conquests of the revolution.” No class-conscious worker will today deny the historical right and correctness as well as effectiveness of the Bolshevik strategy carried on in the name of defense. Yet these lessons have already been lost to the proletariat. Its leaders falsified the lessons of October.
(Continued in the next issue)
 



(Continued from last issue)
The German working masses instinctively knew their enemy and were seeking the means of defense; but the leaders failed and disarmed the workers each in their own way. The social democrats prevented the workers from preparing the defense, counselled patience and trusted in the constitution for which, however, they said they would sound the call to fight should Hitler violate it and resort to “illegal” methods. The social democratic leaders who had long ago given up their pretense to socialism and become completely bound up with bourgeois ideology had thereby also long ago abdicated the last pretense of actually leading a fight for the defense of the democracy, So when the last shreds of democracy went down in the torchlight blaze and gunpowder smoke, trampled upon by Fascist heels, their miserable position became fully revealed.
But Hitler found the Weimar constitution, written by the social democrats, sufficiently flexible to serve his purposes. He could, by the failure of his opponents, carry out all measures necessary to complete the first stage of the consolidation of his power, including the crushing of the Communist party and the throttling of the social democrats.
The Communist party leaders started from the absurd idea of concentrating the main fire against the social democratic party as the twin brother of Fascism. It was precisely the deep antagonism between the social democratic workers and Fascism which should have been made the bridge to the united working class defense. But even this simple historical lesson had been lost to the party leaders. Their bloated exaggeration of party strength and frivolous proclaiming of the general political strike could not become a substitute. On the contrary, it threw confusion and demoralization into the ranks and accelerated the party catastrophe. In the industries and within the mass organizations, from which the united working class defense should proceed, the party policy had torn up its own roots. Save for its election victories, which were empty, it was in reality isolated from the masses long before the decisive hour had arrived. So much so, that Goebbels, the new Fascist minister for culture and propaganda, could declare, in a speech on March 31: “We broke Communism with one blow and we have isolated the social democratic party from the people.”
The Party in the Industries
How well was the party rooted in the industries? We remember that for some years there has been within every German factory, shop, mill and mine a factory council established by the factory council law. This law, it is true, imposes definite limitations as to their powers but nevertheless they have been in the position of functioning as important organs of struggle. In a certain sense they have furnished an embryo structure of future Soviets. Naturally they should be an important basis for Communist party activities. And there is also the place to actually gauge the strength of the revolutionary party. But it is precisely in this field that its fatal weakness was most glaringly demonstrated.
In this we can now much more clearly perceive the disastrous fallacy of the so-called united front from below practiced by Stalinism. The actual results prove a thousand times stronger than words that this sort of policy contradicts all tenets of genuine united front policy. The so-called united front from below was only a mask to cover up the refusal of the Stalinist leaders to build the bridge of the workers’ unity of defense, composed of all organizations, Communist, social democratic and trade unions.
Actual working class unity against Fascism under the conditions existing in Germany would have unmasked all of the bureaucratic incompetent leaders. And in this the Communist party leaders, equally with their prototypes of social democracy, feared for their positions and prestige. But from this state of affairs Fascism gained enormously in strength and self-confidence and the social democratic lenders escaped exposure. Elections to the Factory Councils The factory council elections particularly demonstrated the Communist party’s weakness. One can argue, and with considerable justification, that in the Reichstag elections held March 5th, the party could not at all mobilize its full strength because of the pressure of the Fascist terror. But within the shops and factories at the factory council elections matters are different. That is at the source of production and exploitation where the workers are the most accessible and where they respond in the most direct sense to a correct revolutionary program. That it at the very foundation, where the class struggle receives its dynamic expression. At the present time it is necessary to add that with the increasing suppression of all of the rights of ordinary democratic channels and the general campaign of terror the party was duty bound to increase its efforts to connect the more solidly with the masses in the industries. In turn it was to be expected that the contacts below would be the stronger expressed. The party, however, was not rooted in the industries. That was proven by the factory council elections held during this period of seven weeks. To attempt to give a picture, I am presenting a cross section of these election results, reporting mainly the larger concerns.
In the “Leuna Werke,” a chemical factory and one of the biggest concerns in Germany, the factory council election results were the following: The Reformist ticket received 2,981 votes, Communists 884, Christian trade unions 285, Fascists 2,094 and Steelhelmets 1,043.
In the “Wolfen Film,” the second largest chemical concern, the results were the following: Reformists 942, Communists 1,795, Fascists 439, Steelhelmets 198 votes.
In the Hamburg Street Railway council elections the Reformists received 4,319 votes, the Communists 189, the Fascists 158, others 106.
At the Elevated Railroad in Hamburg the results were Reformists 1,152, Communists 416, Fascists 160 votes.
At the Troisdorf Dynamite factory the Reformists received 1,249 votes, the Christian trade unions 309, the Communists 189 and the Fascists 199.
At the Bremen Street Railway council elections the Reformists received 869 votes, the Fascists 160, the Steelhelmets 106 and the Christian trade unions 72.
At the Phoenix Rubber Factory, Marburg, the Reformists received 1,595 votes and 13 delegates, the Fascists elected one delegate, others none.
In the various Kiel factory council elections out of a total of 61 delegates elected, 57 were Reformists and 2 fell to the Fascists.
These results are only a general cross section, if a more complete tabulation was to be made the results would show even less favorable for the Communists.
 
The Party and the Factory Councils
When we add the total votes cast in these factories where exact figures are given we have the following results: The Reformists scored a total of 13,098 votes, the Communists 3,403 and the Fascists 3,210. There is a serious weight expressed in these figures but not on the side of the revolutionary party, despite the elections taking place at the most acute moment of attacks upon the workers. That more than anything else perhaps gives the lie to the delusions of grandeur contained in the empty boasts of the party leadership conjuring up altogether non-existing victories in this field. Thus for example the Wedding party congress held in June 1929 declared:
“The factory council elections in which the Communist Party of Germany came forward for the first time in the sharpest struggle against reformism as the bearer of the united front of the organized and unorganized, became a triumphal march in the most important industrial fields and large factories. The labor masses elected countless red factory councils under the banner of struggle against the state power, the employers and reformism.”
Nothing more, nor less. The only trouble is that it was an attempt to ascribe to the party a strength it did not possess which subsequently had to be admitted by the party controlled trade union Left wing congress. Such is the method of inflating one’s own strength out of all proportion and simultaneously minimizing the strength of the enemy. It is typical of the self-complacent bureaucracy but it is mortally dangerous to the party – as the events have now so decisively proven. Against this the Left Opposition has many times warned: The way to get strong is not to begin by the mistake of exaggerating one’s own strength.” Not only that, but the policy of consistently separating the militant minority from the bulk of the trade union membership in the factories by their separate red election lists, even though appearing under the grand name of “unity lists,” contributed heavily to the isolation of the party and to the disorganization of the movement. One can say chat though the party apparatus never followed a consistent policy it certainly managed to be consistent in its mistakes, even to the extent of disarming the workers.
(Continued in the next issue)
 



Fascists Attack in the Guise of “Defense”

Workers’ Leaders Lacked Strategy Against Fascists

The Fascists and the Trade Unions

German Labor Writhes Under the Whip of the Fascists
 



In a previous issue the National Committee addressed an appeal to all members and to all friends and comrades of The Militant calling attention to the great danger which now threatens out weekly organ. It was said frankly in that appeal that unless drastic measures are taken immediately the success which we have had thus far in maintaining the weekly will end with its collapse. This needs to be reiterated with all possible emphasis and to carry the addition that with this issue our financial conditions have become yet more acute.
It is no longer sufficient to speak of maintaining the weekly Militant in its regular appearance, the problem now is to SAVE THE MILITANT. In the solution of that problem all our comrades, all our friends and sympathizers, must take part. It is a serious task. It is an important task. It holds out no promise of personal rewards but it demands some real revolutionary sacrifice. That is what we request of you and we feel certain that such a request will not be addressed in vain to the members and supporters of the Left Opposition. We know that you have the will to display such a spirit of sacrifice and where the will exists the way can be found.
You comrades, who have followed The Militant from week to week in its struggle for the Leninist path, fully appreciate the importance of saving our organ and again lodge it upon a more solid financial foundation. That the significance of its role increases from day to day, has been amply illustrated by all experiences so far. But the past will appear small compared to its future role and for that we must prepare.
To SAVE THE MILITANT the National Committee has launched a concentrated national campaign to collect a special fund of $1,000.00, apart from the regular income of the organization. This campaign is under way. It is to terminate March 1, 1933. A number of comrades have already come forward with their contributions. We know it represented a sacrifice on their part and we know that they will help further. We most say also in all seriousness that the number of comrades participating in the contributions to date is entirely too small and has not yet at all reached the point of diminishing the danger to our weekly organ. Because of this we count firmly upon the added support of all of you who read this appeal. We expect you to put your shoulders to the wheel, we expect you to help.
 







(We publish herewith a second article on the German situation, written by comrade Arne Swabeck who is at present in Europe, close to the scene of the events which he deals with in his correspondence. – Ed.)



* * * *
The course of the further developments in Germany will decide whether the epoch shall continue and finally secure the proletarian revolution or whether we shall face an entirely new epoch. This decision, of course, extends far beyond the German borders. And in either case it will spell the beginning of the end to Stalinist domination of the movement.
On the one hand it is now possible to affirm that a victorious German revolution developing out of this juncture could be accomplished only in opposition to Stalinism and in violent collision with its policies. On the other hand it is just as certain that a defeat of the working class in Germany at present and the inauguration of a new and reactionary epoch would also signal the transformation of the revolutionary movement onto a new basis. Although a frightfully narrowed basis of retarded developments, it will nevertheless be one within which there will be no room for the curse of Stalinism.
 
The Possible Variants
The outcome of this gigantic struggle, that is in which direction the decision will turn, nobody can as yet predict. The Fascists have already gained an enormous advantage while the working class has been kept disarmed and unprepared. But in the process, which this struggle implies, the dialectics of class relations may turn the present proletarian disadvantage into its opposite. Many intervening factors will still have to he reckoned with their effects, however, primarily depending upon this strategy of the revolutionary vanguard. Yet it may be asked, are there no possibilities of a middle course in between these two extreme variants? The answer is that such possibilities are fading away and that they could at this stage only mean a postponement of the final decision. But likely also is a postponement creating new advantages to the proletariat for a decision in its favor.
The lines are now sharply drawn and extremely tense. Hitler proclaims the extermination of Communism and Marxism, not only in Germany but throughout the whole world. Conscious of their present advantage the Fascists in the government are particularly vociferous in declarations that they will not abdicate until they have reached the goal. In reality this means a recognition on their part that the power is not securely in their hands until the working-class movement is completely destroyed. In this manner they serve as the most deadly instrument of the reactionary German junkers and big bourgeoisie.
To fully appreciate the serious menace constituted by the Fascists in this role it is important to understand the extent of their social basis within contemporary Germany. The Fascist movement is a plebeian movement, composed essentially of the petty bourgeoisie and slum proletariat, but drawing recruits also from the bourgeoisie and from the proletarian masses to a certain extent. It has a large basis in Germany particularly by virtue of the numerous middle class there. Germany has yet a large farm population maintained through decades by protective tariffs imposed by the reactionary junker regimes. While this kept agricultural prices high, it also served to maintain the farmers as a social counter-weight against the proletariat. England, by her industrialization, and by virtue of acquiring a large colonial empire could afford to sacrifice her agriculture and drive the peasants into the factories. The German bourgeoisie was not so fortunate. It did not attain such a wide expanse and therefore had to find specific means to create this social counterweight against the proletariat. To an extent that was also accomplished by the development of a large and conservative state bureaucracy. But its lower layers were hit hard by the general pauperization of the post-war crises. And hence it became so much more important at the present juncture to clean out the “unreliable” social democrats from their positions in this bureaucracy.
The German Fascist movement has passed through its evolution of demagogy, socialist in tone and coloring necessary to recruit a mass movement. In the beginning the leaders, who rose from the rank and file, promised to drive out the international bankers and all “foreign”, particularly Jewish, exploiters. They promised to break up the landed estates and to rehabilitate the farmers. They promised to restore the middle class
property and the losses it suffered during the inflation period. They turned the fire of aroused nationalism against the former enemies across the border, particularly against the Versailles treaty and all that it implied.
Now that the Fascist brigands believe that the maintenance of power is securely within their grasp the direction of their fire has entirely changed. While continuing their demagogy as a coat of arms under which a ruthless working class suppression is carried out, the international bankers and the and owners no longer appear in their vocabulary characterizing the enemy. They now feel that they can move their troops directly against the Communist and working class movement. For that the state powers are put at their disposal. This aim has moved up to the very center of their campaign. The Fascist hordes no longer direct their fire against the Versailles Treaty. The annual payments of tribute have practically ended and further readjustments promise no great difficulties. Military equality for Germany can easily be obtained. And more so by virtue of the direction of the Fascist fire which is now turning eastward toward the Soviet Republic. The first intimations are the reports of straining relations between the two governments.
The German Fascists and the German big bourgeoisie know very well that within the working class of the Soviet Union lie the greatest sources of sympathy and support to the German working class movement. Its existence is no doubt clear to them even if they do not discount the present stranglehold of Stalinism paralyzing actual assertion of this sympathy and support. They recognize the world implications of the advance of the Communist movement, and hence they hurl their challenge to the Comintern and to the proletarian dictatorship. In their threats to exterminate the Communist movement throughout the world they are already consciously and deliberately forging the spearhead of imperialist intervention against the Soviet Union. This is the double-edged sword by which they aim to accomplish their immediate goal in Germany and simultaneously rally the support of allies of the imperialist powers everywhere for the international objective.
 
Touching Reconciliations
The German southern states recalcitrant to the early Hitler prononciamentos, have now declared that their unity in the aims against world Communism. French imperialists, who once greatly feared the Hitler ascension to power, are now completely reconciled to that fact and not at all disturbed. Voices in France indicating rapprochement to Germany are becoming more audible. While the international objective is yet concealed in these voices it undoubtedly is taking form in the minds.
Thus we see today in actual development the enormous danger against which the International Left Opposition a long time ago raised its voice of serious warning.
The events, however, will continue and develop their own inevitable logic. German capitalism today still constitutes the weakest link of the imperialist chain. Its tremendous convulsions lend emphasis to the unevenness of development existing also in the capitalist decay stage. But to the revolutionary proletariat this poses definite strategical problems which the Stalinist regime has completely failed to master. On the one hand it poses the possibility of breaking the weak links in the imperialist chain and the possibility of the proletariat seizing power. In this sense the uneven development of decay becomes a lever favoring the proletarian dictatorship in the USSR. But at the same time it also emphasizes the impossibility of building socialism within one single country, in the USSR which is still subject to the conditions of this very unstable equilibrium of the world market dominated by decay capitalism. These two problems of strategy cannot be separated but must go hand in hand so that a policy of building toward Socialism in the USSR first of all presupposes a policy of preparing the parties, of preparing the working class for the extension of the proletarian revolution by the seizure of power in the weak links of the imperialist chain.
 
Effects of Stalinist Strategy
The entirely false strategy of the Stalinist Comintern regime has run counter to the dialectics of the developing capitalist contradict ions. As a result the proletariat has suffered defeats and become disarmed, despite the objectively favorable situations, and the most murderous reaction has at present gained the upper hand. What enormous crimes! But by this the Stalinist regime has only succeeded in postponing the shocks which will now reverberate with so much more titanic force and sweep it from its position of domination in the movement.
Without entering into discussion of the possibilities and implications of further developments in Germany, and without even excluding in advance the worst variant for the next stage, it is nevertheless well to remember that the at present attempted counter-revolution will still meet its complications. The economic conjuncture is by no means favorable to its development. The working class is not yet defeated. And it is more important yet to remember that the German working class, though unprepared still possesses great resources within itself. But these can be unfolded fully only when its vanguard has become freed from the curse of Stalinism.
(To be continued)
 



The international conference of Left Socialist parties and independent Communist organizations, held in Paris, August 27–8, adjourned without being able to define a future common course. That was to be expected. The reason for it is the wide divergence of views represented, ranging from an international Communist position to that of outright reformism. Hence the main resolution adopted speaks vaguely of retrieving the international unity of the working class on a revolutionary Socialist basis. Nevertheless distinct progress can be recorded from this conference by virtue of the fact that the beginnings of a firm international revolutionary kernel emerged. Three important groups, the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Holland, the S.A.P. of Germany and the Independent Socialist Party of Holland definitely committed themselves to the position taken by the International Left Opposition.
Represented in the conference were the following parties and groups: (1) the Independent Labor Party of England; (2) the Socialist Labor Party of Germany (S.A.P.) (3) the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Holland; (4) the Independent Socialist Party of Holland; (5) the Swedish Communist Party (Kilbom Brandlerites); (6) the Norwegian Labor Party; (7) the Italian Maximalists; (8) the Spanish Communist Federation (Workers and Peasants Bloc); the Independent Polish Socialist Party (represented by proxy by a member of the I.L.P. Delegation); (10) the Party of Proletarian Unity of France; (11) the Independent Roumanian Socialist Party; (12) a representative of the Left wing of the Russian Socialist Revolutionists; (13) the Leninbund, Germany; (14) the International Left Opposition. Participating as observers in the conference were also an American Socialist and two delegates of the French “Socialist Action”.
During the general discussion the conference revealed three distinct tendencies. The first tendency was represented by the International Left Opposition expressed in its declaration submitted. That contained our analysis of the defeat in Germany, recorded the bankruptcy of the Second and Third Internationals and proposed an orientation for new national parties and a new International. As already mentioned the representatives of the Revolutionary Socialist Party of Holland, the S.A.P. of Germany and the Independent Socialist Party of Holland adhered to and signed this declaration.
On the opposite side were the delegates from the Party of Proletarian Unity of France and the Norwegian Labor Party. They took the position that the strength of the proletariat will be realized through the unity of the organizations. By that they meant the unity of Communist and Social Democratic organizations. In support of this tendency were the representatives of the Roumanian party, of the Left Social Revolutionists and of the Maximalists, the latter, however, declaring themselves against unification of the two Internationals.
In between these two tendencies the British I.L.P. found a position. While its representatives criticized both internationals they expressed hope in possibilities for the reform of the Comintern. Somewhat similar was the attitude of the Swedish Kilbom party which found itself in agreement with the I. L. P. criticism but has not yet defined its further course. It should be noted that by its participation in the conference the Kilbom party broke the discipline of the Brandler organization of which it is still a part.
It was quite inevitable that groups of such divergent views could not find their way to a common orientation and a common course of action. Before that can be hammered out further clarification is necessary. And with that there is also likely to be further differentiations, those who remain adherents of the reformist views going their own way, while the revolutionists pursue their course toward the restoration of the International. However, due to the confusion still existing and expressed’ at the conference, the resolution adopted by the majority, inexact and vague in the most important points of view, failed to pose the orientation of the new International. Where it speaks in the general abstract manner of retrieving the international unity of the workiug class, that will have as many and as distinct different interpretations as their were tendencies represented. Some of the delegates undoubtedly supported the resolution because it postponed the new regrouping of revolutionary force outside the two internationals, others because they did not yet consider it necessary to create a new International and finally there were those who interpret the failure of the two Internationals as proof of the necessity of unification of all workers organizations on the basis of concrete demands and without regard to divergent principles.
Summed up this conference nevertheless presents to us a picture of the travail and the birth pangs of a movement. We recall the time of the rise of the Bolshevik revolution and the collapse of Social Democracy how important sections and groups within it were struggling to find their way to Communism and in most cases not without difficulties. Again this process is repeated, but, as it appears, at an accelerated tempo. The lessons of Germany are sinking in deeply among several of these present groups and parties developing Leftward toward international Communism. This general development is the fact of monumental importance standing out above all difficulties and all the confusion still apparent.
The decadence and betrayal of Social Democracy became the compelling force driving many of these parties in a Leftward direction. Such new groups will still emerge. But the Stalinist control of the Comintern instead of facilitating has hindered this process, and that in a large measure accounts for the confusion still existing amongst them. In their further developments those parties will therefore find themselves ever more faced with the task of smashing the Stalinist barriers.
Before this conference the Left Opposition affirmed its break with Stalinist Centrism and its greater irreconcilability than before towards reformism. That position will in the coming period stand out the more impressively and win its way within the parties groping for an international revolutionary orientation. The firm kernel which has already emerged augurs well for the future.
 



President William Green is advancing claims for the coming A.F. of L. convention, to begin October 2, to become the most momentous gathering of this body in sixteen years. This comparison refers to the wartime convention held n Buffalo, in 1917, at which Samuel Gompers, together with his whole staff, made their “heroic” efforts to harness the American Federation of Labor as an auxiliary machinery to serve the interests of the imperialist war mongers. The comparison is ominously sinister in its implication.
No doubts need exist of this gathering becoming a momentous one. It will be so, not by virtue of what the skilled pie-card artists in attendance can be expected to do, but by the special period and exceptional conditions under which it takes place. In the first place this convention gathers under the sign of another “heroic” effort to harness the American working masses in the chains of the brand new NRA machinery of regulating class relations and reinforcing the means of keeping them in subjection as a class. But on the other hand, the very developments growing out of this, already indicate that the A.F. of L. is arriving at its cross roads with a speed which is truly American. How it will attempt to, or rather how it will fail to cope with this new situation will be of decisive importance for the future.
 
The Growth of the A.F. of L.
The A.F. of L. executive claim at least 500,000 new members. There is no reason to doubt this figure, the acrobatic arithmetics of Statchel – the “head” of the TUUL – notwithstanding. In a Daily Worker article, of September 19, by the process of deducting from the A.F. of L. claims and padding the TUUL claims, all on paper, he succeeds in proving, apparently to his own satisfaction that the latter has made gains amounting to almost fifty percent of that of the former. Despite this juggling the truth remains that the overwhelming trend of labor organization flows at this moment, toward the A.F. of L, while the TUUL unions, in making certain gains in isolated cases, are being wiped out elsewhere; and precisely in those cases where the A.F. of L. has growth to record. Once more, and by the process of life itself, this proves the fact that the official party TUUL policy runs in violent contradiction to the curve development of the living movement.
The present record growth of the A.F. of L. almost amounts to a stampede with genuine mass strikes everywhere for recognition of its unions. In such cases where the party unions exist alongside of them the former are, by their radically false policy, forced to trail behind, in many cases they are even more conservative in their demands, and impotent to influence the workers where they are not entirely eliminated. These are salient facts of which the reactionaries do not fail to take notice. Revolutionists, above all, must take notice and act accordingly.
It would be idle to speculate on what the reactionary A.F. of L. capitalist agents will do at this convention. First of all they will endeavor to strengthen their own positions and strengthen their own relations with capitalism, by correspondingly reinforcing the means of holding the working masses in subjection. It is in this sense, and distinctly in this sense, that they have embraced the NRA. The A.F. of L. will demand adequate representation in the machinery created under the codes, says Green. Will this be for the purpose of advancing the ideas of workers’ control of production? Will these leaders demand that the books of the industrial enterprises be thrown open for the inspection of labor’s representatives and by this method begin to give labor a say in the matter of control of production? Of course not. The A.F. of L. demand will be advanced with the purpose of strengthening the relations with capital for more effective class collaboration under the new conditions.
But there are also other trends indicated for the coming convention. The Metal Trades Department is now about to propose the industrial form of organization for the basic industries. This shows the pressure to which the A.F. of L. will likely feel itself compelled to yield, if not now, then later. This pressure will increase under the new conditions. Most significant, however, is the statement made by Green that the A.F. of L. “is going to be the recognized all-embracing spokesman for American labor. That means there is no room in the United States for any other labor movement.”
That no efforts will be spared to make good on this threat is certain. To that the convention will unquestionably be keyed up. That is one of the duties which American capitalism imposes upon its agents within labors’ ranks to be carried out with the assistance of the NRA. Its intention is to crush any and all militant or progressive unions outside of the A.F. of L. and, in this manner, help to head off and forestall the development of working class militancy finding organized expression. For the moment this may be comparatively easy; but it will begin to really bring to the fore the contradictions of the A.F. of L. position because it Implies a more open suppression of the militancy bound to develop within its own ranks. In this lies the prospects for revolts from within.
The A.F. of L. officialdom; is entering upon its thorny road. The reconstitution of a Left wing is now more essential than ever.
 



The New York Times in an editorial on August 20, issues a warning against any attitude of panic should the NRA not succeed according to expectations. It says: “But it is now evident that the issues of the battle will not be decided by the first shock of attack. A long period of what may be called trench warfare is before the country.”
The main issues of this trench warfare are already discernible – and it will have plenty of new and greater shocks of attacks, covered also by barrages of heavy artillery. First and foremost, in the order of importance, is the onslaught upon the world market to be launched as soon as the home front is sufficiently prepared. In other words we are facing the American imperialist offensive against Europe. Its further fate and even the fate of the recovery program, is bound up closely with this offensive. Conversely that will also influence the trend of the American working class movement in the coming period.
Let us say at the outset that this should not lead to a minimizing of the importance of the domestic market or of the significance of relationship of forces at home. On the contrary. Precisely that aspect must be the starting point of an accurate estimation of American prospects in the world market. The huge domestic market is the stronghold and the reservoir from which proceeds the operations abroad. The extent of this penetration since the world war has already left the American imperialist imprint upon Europe. But now operations are being prepared for a far more formidable scale destined to put all past ventures in the shade.
The American bourgeoisie needs to strengthen its hands at home in order to be able to move with that much more certainty abroad. Efforts toward this strengthening are taking place in three different directions which, however, all fit in to one pattern: Between the various financial and industrial units which make up the national economic structure; in the relationship between capital and labor and finally in the relationship of the government to both. The specific method, or instrument, by which this is hoped to be accomplished, is the NRA.
In regard to the first of these directions named, the most noteworthy factors are the reorganization accomplished in the financial structure of the country, eliminating some of its most antiquated features and immensely strengthening the great metropolitan institutions as well as the reorganization of industry on a much more formidable monopoly basis. Not only is this the monopoly form of the past large enterprises, but it is the addition of a degree of governmental supervision and control through industrial codes which facilitates the elimination of small competitors on a perfectly legal basis. In regard to capital and labor relations the efforts are distinctly to re-establish the old condition of “identity of interests” which was somewhat badly shattered during the crisis. The aim is not merely the “identity of interests” on the old narrow basis of collaborating directly with unions, exclusively craft in composition, and confined to the aristocracy of labor, or through labor banks, labor insurance schemes or stock ownership schemes – the methods of fattening the aristocracy of labor as a means of better keeping the proletariat under control. Such means are no longer sufficient. Moreover changes have taken place in the composition of American labor; the leveling process has not been without effects. Now the idea is to extend the “identity of interests” to an alliance based upon joint interests in recovery, to embrace the working class generally. First among the measures applied is the reorganization of labor power to the productive forces through reduction of working hours in order to blunt the most dangerous edges of the unemployment problem. Secondly, the affirming of the right to organization and collective bargaining which in reality means a tacit agreement to a further extension of the conservative unions for the purpose of cementing the alliance. Wages are, of course, to be adjusted to the needs of capital and its profit incentive. But for the whole it is hoped that the NRA machinery of labor advisory boards and of arbitration will make the alliance complete. Nevertheless the promoters are not at all overlooking its usefulness also as a means of entirely outlawing working class rank and tile resistance. In all of this the relationship of the government to the various component parts of national economy fits and performs its function to strengthen the hands of the American bourgeoisie in the home market. The executives of advanced capitalism and of the backward labor movement, the presidents, Roosevelt and Green, jointly make their appeal to capital and labor. On a vast scale the means of keeping the working class in subjection are being reinforced.
The NRA as such, that is as far as an actual recovery in the country is concerned, is about to face its decisive test. But, judging by surface manifestations, it would appear that its most essential objects enumerated above, are well on the way to being accomplished. In this respect the NRA climaxes the reorganization of American national economy in its present stage. The offensive against Europe can soon proceed full force. American capitalism again proves itself as the most advanced of capitalisms and the full effects of the latest forward steps upon its working class should soon become visible. But this question we leave until a later point in our estimate.
The United States, as we already know, is the world’s principal manufacturer, its principal commodity warehouse and its principal banker. The estimated wealth of the United States reaches above the three hundred billion mark and by far outdistances that of any other nation. Its enormous annual capital accumulation since the war had to seek new fields of investments. A heavy proportion thereof was exported to other countries to be employed at a higher profit rate. It became the means of promotion of the exportation of goods and the acquisition of super profits. The total estimated amount of foreign papers held in the United States, including the items listed under inter-government – runs into $28,000,000,000. But most characteristic of the American intervention in Europe during this period, is the fact that the loans advanced recorded a change from its first form of loans to governments for purposes of stabilization to loans to industrial enterprises. The latter are estimated at about seven to eight billions. American imperialism thus began to lay its hands on the national economy of the European powers. Its general intervention, had the objective of permitting Europe to rise again but within specifically defined limits, to assign to its nations their specific but reduced rations in world economy.
In the United States the annual capital accumulation has suffered an enormous reduction during the crisis. But the masters now anticipate its rise at a vastly accelerated rhythm. And for that the NRA machinery of attempted regulation of class relations is to prepare the ground at home for more effective operations abroad. Even bearing in mind the scope of such operations in the past, we should be prepared for the fact that the campaign of American finance capital for the conquest of the world market will actually in its real magnitude begin only tomorrow.
For this offensive the principal instrument is finance capital backed up by a now more completely organized monopoly, expressed In greater centralization and concentration of finance and industry. One of the initial means is likely to be the advancing of additional large scale loans and credits – influenced by political motives – as a means of promoting the exportation of commodities. But this, in general, will be backed up by the commands of a power of a superior national economy, and with that, heavier political and military preponderance. It is not for the purpose of creation of jobs that the United States naval constructions are now vastly speeded up.
The crushing defeat suffered by the German working class signals a much freer rein for the American imperialist offensive. To the masters of Wall Street it signifies that the danger of a further extension of the Bolshevik revolution has been allayed. They breathe easier. Their responsibility, as the rulers of the strongest world power, for damming up against the extension of October, has become enormously lightened by the bankruptcy of the Stalinist International. They feel that they can now afford to proceed more ruthlessly and more mercilessly against their competitors in the world market. Their consciousness of power, their consequent unbridled expansion, will know no bounds. It is their much more complete world hegemony, as a means of self-preservation, which is at stake. It is the struggle for the maintenance of capitalism as the continued form of social relations. But the further advance will also lay the foundation for much more furious conflicts within the world arena. That, however, is only one side of the problem. Simultaneously with this develops the shifting of gravity of the revolutionary center from Europe to America. It is here in this country that future revolutionary struggles on a more gigantic scale than anything hitherto experienced can be expected.
 



Powerful strikes are again shaking the very foundation of the country. Following right upon the heels of the big walk out of Pennsylvania miners some weeks ago and that of the New York dress industry new strikes are popping daily setting workers into motion everywhere and enormously sharpening the class relationship which the NRA attempts to regulate. Yet what we witness today is unquestionably only a prelude to the much bigger battles coming tomorrow.
The rapidity with which workers now decide to strike and their walk out in splendid response makes an estimate of how many are involved at any given time almost impossible. But it can easily be said without any fear of contradiction that during the last few weeks there has been a continuous wave of strikes embracing several hundred thousand workers. We will attempt to list some of them as examples of the general movement.
Most furious is the battle now being waged in the textile industry, silk section, where police clubbings and tear gas has been employed in full force but without in the least shaking the solid ranks of the strikers. It started in Paterson, but has now spread to involve, total of approximately 60,000 workers taking in also the silk dying industry and extending to Lodi and Fairlawn, N.J. to New York City, to Phillipsburg, Port Jervis, Stroudsburg, and Allentown Pa., as well as the New England textile region. Throughout New Jersey and parts of Pennsylvania the silk textile and dying mills are practically completely shut down. In general the strike is in protest against the terms of the cotton code now in operation also for silk textile, but in particular it is for union organization and for shorter working hours and higher wages. The Associated silk workers in cooperation with the parent organization, the United Textile Workers conducts the strike as far as the overwhelming majority of the workers are concerned, but a section of them came out in response to the call of the National Textile Workers Union of TUUL.
Within a few days this mass movement may even be dwarfed by the new miners strike now looming on the horizon. Already 30,000 are out in central and Western Pennsylvania. These miners are losing patience with the quotatory promises made to them before that President Roosevelt and the NRA coal code would soon remove all their depression misery. They are returning to reliance upon their own mass force as the prospects of a code bringing favors to the miners recedes into the background. The efforts of the UMW officials to hold them tied to their job until the advent of the code seems to be of little avail.
An effective strike of 1,000 miners in the state of Utah has been in progress now for some time with all the means at the disposal of the capitalist state institution massed against them. Clubbings and jailings are on the order of the day with military control in the field almost amounting to a state of martial law. This strike is under the leadership of the National Miners Union. In both the Eastern and Western Kentucky fields members of the UMW have begun strikes. Even the anthracite miners are stirring. In Lackawanna county several shafts have been shut down and the “liberal” governor Pinchot has taken this occasion to instruct his sheriffs to prevent all mass picketing.
Outside of these two most important fields, mining and textile, innumerable strikes, some of considerable size are either in progress, or have just been settled or have so far reached the stage of a definite threat unless the workers’ demands are met. Notable, however, is the fact that in practically every instance where settlements have already been arrived at, or the threats averted, some positive gains have been scored by the workers involved.
In Now York City 10,000 cleaners and dyers have struck for shorter working hours and higher wages. The delivery truck drivers threaten to follow. 25,000 underwear workers have declared a strike. 4,000 button workers are already out. 10,000 neckwear workers are on strike. Several thousand embroidery workers scored important gains in their strike settlement just made. 25,000 millinery workers threaten to go on strike. 4,000 moving picture operators won against an attempted company union by the threat of a strike and picketing of many theatres.
An injunction against picketing has been issued against the New York bakery workers strike which is now running into several months duration. About 3,000 are still out. Similarly the Brooklyn Shoe workers strike, involving several thousand men is still in full force despite all the attempts to make it illegal under the charge of being a communist strike.
From St. Louis comes the report that the city is in the grip of many strikes, in the main it is the clothing shops which are hit, about 7,000 being out at the time of this writing. A total of 300 pickets have been arrested. In Cleveland a street car strike of 3,000 workers was narrowly averted by the company agreeing to recognize the union and to have the demands for wage increases settled by arbitration. In the Fresno, Calif., region a strike of 15,000 fruit pickers gained for them a 33 per cent wage increase. Fruit pickers in Jackima Valley, Wash., are on strike for better wages and working conditions.
These are just a few examples, culled at random, of strikes going on at this moment. A glance will convince the most sceptical observer that there is today a strike curve constantly moving upward. This is not accidental. Moreover, it is indicative for the future. The extremely low standard of living to which the American workers have been reduced demands improvements and the workers are showing determination to get it. As the now rapidly upward moving cost of living really begins to make its effect felt the workers will surge forward that much stronger.
The strikes in progress also prove beyond a shadow of doubt that the American workers do not rely merely upon the N.R.A., despite all its ballyhoo, to accomplish this improvement. Generally speaking the masses still believe that it will be helpful, but they also believe in reinforcement by their own strike power to actually obtain its benefits. Apparently we will be justified in saying: In the main the workers are striking today with the NRA with some signs of taking action regardless Of it. Tomorow, when their illusions disappear, they will be striking against the chains imposed by the N.R.A.
 



The Brandler-Lovestone “International”, or whatever is left of it, held a plenary meeting, following right upon the heels of the gigantic German experiences, and once more demonstrated its incapacity to distinguish the face of the revolution form its rear. The sum total of its deliberations it crystallized into new efforts to pull the revolutionary movement backward to the Stalinist Right-Centrist bloc. A resolution adopted imposes this orientation as binding upon its affiliated groups. But hardly was the ink on the signatures dry before its biggest affiliate, the Swedish (Kilbom) Communist party, which was not represented at the meeting, broke the binding decisions and attended the Paris conference of Left Socialist and Communist parties. Meanwhile the split-off Gitlow group in the United States has come out openly against the Brandler policy and proclaims the collapse of the Brandler-Lovestone “International”.
This is true; this “international” is collapsing. After Jilek and Hals of Czechoslovakia led their trade union following back to the social democracy in the Amsterdam International, the French P.U.P. started to tread the same ideological path. The Neurath group of Czechoslovakia took the opposite course to the Left Opposition, and the Swiss Brandler section is permeated with and learning from the ideas of the Left Opposition. Stagnant ideologically, this “international” is diminishing organizationally. With all its opportunist practicality it neither embraced masses nor brought correct ideas into the movement. From the German experiences it has learned nothing. Its orientation to pull the movement backward becomes so much more distinctly fallacious in this epoch of deep going differentiations in which groups and parties, formerly social democratic, are groping their way toward Communism.
 
Right Wing Prepared the Ground For Bureaucratic Adventurism
The Brandler-Lovestone meeting brought forward a document which theoretically verifies what has been said above. This document is characteristic for its lamentations over the ultra-Leftism pervading the Comintern, for Its fulminations against “Trotskyism” and for its overtures to the Stalin regime on the basis of live and let live.
But it is precisely these partners of the former Right-Centrist bloc who prepared the ground for the “ultra-Leftism” – it should be called by its correct name, bureaucratic adventurism – which they lament so much. It is their opportunism which prepared the zig-zags to the “Left”, to adventurism by the fact of Centrism, having no consistent Marxian position. In pursuing its empiricist outlook and methods It recoils from opportunism to adventurism when pressed by events and
the catastrophes resulting from its own policies. These Right wing lamentators have no complaints to make over the disastrously false and opportunist bloc with Chiang Kai-Shek in the Chinese revolution or the bloc with the strike-breaking bureaucrats in the Anglo-Russian Committee, or the many other similar combinations.
Their fulminations against “Trotskyism”, that is, against the Left Opposition, are all borrowed from Stalin, and they have made no improvements upon them. It is quite natural that these people should find, themselves at one with Stalin in this respect for today after the terrible German catastrophe, it has been demonstrated more clearly than ever that the Left Opposition, with its orientation for new national parties and for a new Inter national, represents the main kernel of the progressive forces within the proletarian movement. Moreover, these people also know that it is only through such fulminations that the requirements can be met for application for re-entry into the Stalin bureaucracy.
 
The Anti-Trotsky Crusade
In essence this Right wing document, except for its lamentation over “ultra-Leftism”, absolves Stalinism from any complicity in the German defeat. It says – we quote from the document published in the Workers Age, of September 15:
“Especially is it necessary to expose all attempts to attribute the tactical mistakes of the C.I. and the C.P.G. and the defeat of the German working class to the alleged national interests of the Soviet Union. The assertion that the theory of the construction of socialism in one country has made the Russian Communists sacrifice the interests of the workers of other countries, must be branded as dangerous anti-bolshevism.”
This is their type of crusade against so-called Trotskyism. But first of all this itself contains a politically dishonest distortion of the views of the Left Opposition in substituting the “national interests of the Soviet Union” for the bureaucratic interests of the Stalin regime. Between these a definite distinction must be made. Comrade Trotsky, more than anyone else has repeatedly pointed out that “between the interests of the Soviet State and those of the international proletariat there is and there can be no contradiction. But it is false to the roof to transfer this law over to the Stalinist bureaucracy.” This is precisely what the authors of this opportunist document have done. By this they brand themselves as flunkies of the Stalinist bureaucracy anxious to crawl back into its good graces.
 
Defenders of the Theory of Socialism in One Country
If it is not the theory of Socialism in one country, with its resulting reactionary national position, which is bringing the Stalinist bureaucracy into contradiction with the interests of the Soviet Union as well as the interests of the world revolution, how then explain the Comintern responsibility in the German catastrophe? But with this the authors of the document were not concerned and hence they stated further: “The I.C.O. fights to liquidate the false tactics of the C.I., not, however, to oppose the policy of the C.P.S.U. in the Soviet Union.” By this they only further reveal themselves, not as revolutionary theoreticians but as “practical” opportunists of give and take. You let us have our policies for our respective countries; we will let you have yours. For them as for the reformists the international situation is a sum of the national situations. But this is also what led the social reformists to their August 4.
 
To Re-establish the Right-Centrist Bloc
This “remarkable” document concludes with a proposal from the Brandler-Lovestone “International” to the Comintern for the “setting up of a working bloc, which ... can establish joint action for carrying out united front tactics, for a common struggle against reformism, centrism and Trotskyism”.
Here we come to the very crux of the issue: the reestablishment of the Right-Centrist bloc for a common struggle against the Left Opposition, against the progressive force within the revolutionary movement. The struggle against reformism and centrism is thrown in only for embellishment.
There need be no denial of the fact that much of the Brandler-Lovestone criticism of the Stalinist bureaucratic adventurism has been stated correctly; but it is animated by entirely different motives and is heading for an entirely different course from ours. From the German experiences they draw the conclusion for the practical absolving of responsibility and for the further strengthening of the Stalinist bureaucratic regime. We draw the conditions leading to the creation of new national parties and a new International. Theirs is the course toward the strengthening of reactionary nationalism as against revolutionary internationalism.
 



Western Pennsylvania is again aflame with a miner’s revolt growing daily in sweep and scope. The miners’ wives from the outset joined directly in the battle taking the blows with their husbands and giving blows as the powerful picket line extended over a far flung territory. Death has taken its toll. One miner is reported killed in typical Pennsylvania steel trust fashion; shot down in cold blood by company plug uglies while carrying the American flag at the head of a picket line. Several other miners are expected to die from wounds received and many are suffering from lighter injuries.
The strike started in Fayette Co., Pennsylvania’s darkest corner and the scene of many labor battles. It started as a direct challenge to the H.C. Frick Coke Company for the right of union organization. This company is the largest producer in the county and a subsidiary of the United States Steel Corporation. In its further sweep the strike has embraced the adjacent counties of Westmoreland, Allegheny, Washington and Armstrong. The latest reports estimate a total of 35,000 miners involved. As it spread the issue became more than the one of right to union organization. It assumed the character, even though there is no set of specific demands formulated, of a general revolt against the intolerable open shop and semi-open shop conditions imposed by the Pennsylvania steel and coal barons.
It is significant that the strike has also embraced the mines of the Pittsburgh Terminal company which now has a contract with the United Mine Workers. This company was the very backbone of the onslaught which smashed the U.M.W. in the lost strikes of 1927–28. Later when the National Miners Union made headway and led the Western Pennsylvania strike in 1930 the Pittsburgh Terminal Company again recognized the U.M.W. and signed a sort of a contract, though not one agreeable to the men.
 
Test of Recovery Act
This strike is one of the many expressions of working class attitude under the national industrial recovery efforts. It is a test indicating that the working class is ready to resume the offensive, not relying upon the clauses of the recovery act but upon its own mass power to inforce its right to union organization and to gain better conditions. While in progress, the spokesmen for the steel trust at Washington hypocritically eliminated from their industrial code the demand for company unions. Obviously their intention was to rely upon the police club and soldier bayonets to maintain this demand in practice. They have struck a snag. The miners gave the answer: Up to this point, but no further.
On July 29 the Pennsylvania governor dispatched National Guard troops to Fayette County – to “maintain order.” How did the troops discharge that duty? It became the immediate signal for the H.C. Frick Company to declare its mines reopened, calling for scab labor and pledged governmental protection. A new bloody onslaught was launched upon the miners led by the company’s privately armed deputies, of which the H.C. Frick Company is said to have – only 275. But despite these heavy odds against the workers they have stood their ground. The mines remained idle, the strike spread.
 
Conditions in Fayette Coke Region
Between the black hills of Fayette county lie dotted numerous of the old type bee-hive coke ovens, stretching their low built structure for blocks with the rows of open fires resembling miniature open-hearth steel furnaces. Daily these ovens belch out smoke blackening everything in sight. A heavy pall hangs over the little mining communities. But that accounts for nothing compared to the heavy hand of the steel trust in evidence everywhere. Everything is company owned, the soil, the miners homes, the city and village administrations, the stores in which the miners make their purchases often in company scrip as the only reward received for their labor. The laws laid down by the steel trust are inforced by their own “yellow dog” deputies. For years the Fayette county miners have been compelled to work under these most revolting conditions. It is these conditions that the steel trust fights tooth and nail to maintain.
Many attempts have been made by these miners to organize a union as the only protection for their rights. Often they were sold out by the U.M.W. officials. We still remember the dastardly sell-out of the 1922 strike when John L. Lewis signed the Cleveland agreement leaving out 60,000 miners of Fayette and adjacent counties and sacrificing their budding organization. The miners were caught in a death trap; but they have been fighting on ever since. Now again they are joining the U.M.W.
 
What Does This Strike Indicate?
There is much to be learned from this present Pennsylvania miners’ strike. It is offensive in its character. Perhaps that is its greatest significance. In that sense it is very indicative for the future, particularly when viewed in connection with many other strikes throughout the country, smaller but similar in character. Does it not bring eloquent testimony to the conclusion which we have drawn long ago that in the stage of recovery efforts the class struggle is bound to increase in intensity? In its further development these struggles are just as sure to immensely sharpen the class distinctions in the United States and serve to lead the workers toward political consciousness as a class.
The strike also indicates that during the recovery period there will be a decisive trend of the working masses toward union organization. The stream will head toward the conservative unions despite all their failures and betrayals. Perhaps one can say that in the Pennsylvania mine fields there is today no other union in existence anyway. That is true. The National Miners Union by its utterly false policies and methods long ago forfeited its right to existence and passed out of oblivion. But that only so much more proves the point and indicates the future trend. To keep abreast with that trend the Left wing must now take up in earnest the problem of lodging Itself within the mass unions.
 



We are entering a new stage in working class developments. This s verified not merely in the appearance of the N.R.A. and the new methods of capitalist co-ordination which it attempts to put into life, but primarily in the new relationship of forces created by the new economic conjuncture. These new methods of co-ordination express the efforts to find new ways of chaining the change in relationship of forces and maintain it with in the old bounds.
It is a stage of developing economic struggles over a far flung field which is unfolding before us. At the present moment we see only its small beginnings, however, with a sharpness and acuteness fully indicative of the gigantic tremors which will ensue as these struggles enlarge their scope and intensity. The role that trade unions will play in this next chapter, to be recorded by history in this period, will become one of paramount importance. In the same measure, we can say confidently, will the question of trade union policy be the decisive question of the immediate future. Communists least of all can afford to overlook or ignore this.
No promises can be held out for the upward economic conjuncture. It can be expected only to be of a cumbersome, contradictory nature and heralding deeper plunges into prolonged and more turbulent crises. But that is a quetsion of perspective for which the workers needs to prepare in this present stage. Meanwhile the sharper the present change the sharper the action of the masses. The fact of the reduction of unemployment will correspondingly increase the self-confidence of the workers. Even a small change of economic conjuncture in one direction or another does not take place without leaving its mark. The change which is expressed in new workers being, hired by the factories breeds a spirit entirely different from the one of the continual layoffs.
With all the efforts of capitalist co-ordination of its economic structure, of creating a gigantic monopoly, the competitive warfare does not cease. It only becomes elevated to a higher stage. On the other hand the workers find themselves in increasing measure united by the process of production. Their interests become constantly hammered down to a more unified level. In this sense the relationship of forces is changing in favor of the workers. The intolerable conditions, however, of the extremely low standard of living imposed upon them during the years of the crisis press ever harder for readjustment. But readjustments are not at all contained in the N.R.A. all demagogic palaver of higher nominal wages and shorter working hours to the contrary notwithstanding Readjustments mean struggle. That is what we see initiated today.
It is characteristic that the greatest of the strikes, that of the Pennsylvania miners grew from the demand for the right to union organization. That can be said also to hold true to a more or less degree for other strikes of a smaller scale. In other words under the N.R.A. the workers are taking advantage of the change toward a more favorable relationship brought about by the turn in conjuncture. The elementary instinct of the workers is to translate the fact of their being united by the process of production into unity in organization. Everywhere there is manifested the tendency of workers seeking organization and it is to be assumed that the new conditions created will immensely further and develop this tendency. But in connection therewith the important question arises: Towards which unions will this working class stream gravitate, towards the conservative unions or towards the so-called revolutionary unions, or will it seek new and independent forms?
It should not be difficult to answer this question. The answer depends in the main upon the political maturity of the American working class. And, in this respect we know that we cannot speak of a working class politically mature of having a tradition of socialist consciousness behind it. As a matter of fact we are not here concerned merely with the smaller section of skilled trades but with the broadest strata of the working class. It is the politically undeveloped workers, who are yet, at least to an extent, captivated by illusions of the N.R.A. who are just breaking away from their former capitalist ideology; it is these workers who are being set into motion and who are gravitating toward the unions. Their direction will inevitably be toward the conservative unions. That is already indicated in the Pennsylvania strikes. They cannot be expected as yet to take the step all the way to militant unionism, nor as yet to seek new independent forms.
Will this not imply a revival and growth of the American Federation of Labor? Undoubtedly it will. Moreover, to a certain extent it will change its basic character in that it will record an influx of proletarians from the heavy industries. What will emerge will be an A.F. of L. altered in composition and compelled to make certain organizational readjustments in order to measure up to new conditions. To a certain degree it will be compelled to give way to pressure from the ranks. Furthermore, a pressure in a militant direction will inevitably assert itself as the struggles grow and stand as a heavy counter-weight to the capitalist ideology and policy of the leadership. The continued castigation of the A.F. of L. as a company union, and conclusions drawn accordingly, as performed by the official Communist party leadership, in no way solves the problem of attitude to this union. It only adds further confusion and isolation to the militants. It will be said, and well founded upon past experience: The A.F. of L. leadership will continue its policy of betrayal, it will continue its service as labor lieutenants of capitalism. True enough, one cannot hold out any hope for a change of outlook in this respect. But betrayals have been facilitated essentially by being left unchallenged from the militants voluntarily remaining on the outside. Under such conditions the reactionary policies of the leadership remains entirely dominant over the mass movement. And, on a whole, that is just the salient fact, the leadership is still dominant in the movement and determine its ideology. The problem is to effectively challenge this leadership and infuse the mass movement with a new militant ideology and lead it to political consciousness.
This poses the old problem again before the Communist movement, but in a new and more pressing form. The place of the Communists first of all is within the mass movement. It is therefore necessary to say to the leaders of the official party that now an end must be made to the suicidal and fatal T.U.U.L. policy. It is a splitting policy. It must be substituted by a unity policy. Trade union unity is becoming the paramount issue. The opportunities for its being carried into life are at hand. No one would, propose an outright liquidation of all T.U.U.L. unions in disregard of the question of relationship of forces. But the general orientation must be for unification, away from the revolutionary paper unions and for the Left wing to function within the mass movement.
The prospects are excellent for the workers struggles to deepen and broaden in the coming period.
It will mean also an opportunity to instill Socialist consciousness into the masses. That is the task of the Communists. Only the Communists can lead in that direction. But it is not sufficient to proclaim the abstract right to this leadership; it is necessary to attain it by deeds. It cannot be accomplished only within the very limited frame of the party controlled independent unions but on the whole field of the class struggle. The essential starting point at this moment, however, lies within the mass unions.
 



By the developments toward the much heralded national industrial recovery, which have taken place so far, it appears that the New Deal is getting en the way. Maybe this should give us an opportunity to determine just what this New Deal is. Undoubtedly the general idea behind it, the system of policies represented by that name, are quite clear. But the New Deal itself will be fully estimated only when it is put over and has become a reality. Today the first steps are being taken, it is set into motion, and we must view it in motion to forecast its final results. It is possible to say at the outset, however, that when finally put over, the New Deal will loom up to the working masses as something entirely different from what it appears to be today.
To the same extent the working class judgment will differ. Today there seems to be an attitude, and quite, understandably so, that any change is sure to be for the better; that at least cannot become any worse. Many workers are even captivated by illusions of special benefits from the industrial recovery act and its industrial codes. Tomorrow when its scope is known we will find that the New Deal lends itself well to other more choice and more harsh names. Crisis Creates New Conditions One thing is certain; the system of policies centered around the industrial recovery efforts represents something new, at least to the extent that new conditions press for new methods. The new conditions are at hand. The crisis in its course of development laid the basis for them. It offered the possibility of an immense reorganization of the whole national economic structure in preparation for the next stage of the business cycle. Now the problem is to step into that stage and secure an upward economic conjuncture. And it was precisely at this point that many of the old concepts and formulae of capitalist business were found not to fit the new conditions or the new requirements. They were discarded. At the same time new ideas were sweeping the world, catchy ideas, ideas of planned economy. Why not try to apply some of them on a capitalist basis? And so, it came about that the ideas now identified with the New Deal are combined into a sort of a plan aiming at the "organization" of capitalism. A greater concentration and centralization of capital, a more gigantic monopoly. It is the proponents of "organized capitalism", appearing under the collective name of the brain trust, who are the moving forces behind these ideas.
 
Capitalist Economy Reorganized
But before we look further into the question of the industrial recovery policies of the Roosevelt administration and in order to gain a better understanding of them, it is necessary to first examine their background. As already mentioned, a crisis becomes also a period of capitalist readjustments. An immense reorganization of the whole structure of American national economy took place during the crisis. With a view to the future, this reorganization followed strictly along the lines of the motive force of all capitalist production— the realization of surplus values, the realization of profits. To check the heavy tendency of the falling rate of profit by preparing for an increase of the mass of profit and an increase in the aggregate capital was the problem. It was tackled first by raising the intensity of exploitation of the workers. A higher degree of rationalization and standardization within industry, new efficiency methods to increase the output per man, together with direct speed-up and even longer working hours, were the measures applied. In a recovery, industry will thus start from a high level of intensity of exploitation. Secondly, an enormous depression of the wage level below the value of labor power was forced through ruthlessly. In this the drop in commodity prices naturally served as a means of facilitation, the heavy unemployment and its competition for jobs did the rest. The result is that on a whole the disproportion between value added by applied labor power and the actual wage paid is constantly on the increase. But what is especially to be borne in mind is the fact that industry starts today from an extremely low wage level.
These were the measures affecting the working class most directly. But there were others worthy of attention from the point of view of studying the background of the present situation. For example the problem of expansion of credits. Undoubtedly the establishment of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and its billions made available for the bankers and big industrial corporations served this
purpose admirably. In the main however, the huge sums expended went to buttress the large metropolitan banking institutions to help them in paying in settlement of previously contracted obligations The funds expended did not become transformed into productive capital; for during the course of the crisis there was a generally constant drop in new capital emissions in new financing. Nevertheless finance capital faces the recovery stage with a greater fluidity of credits. Simultaneously there has been a cheapening of the elements of constant capital by the price fall of commodities and raw materials.
 
Concentration of Capital
Aside from these points mention ed there is also to be taken into consideration the reorganization of industry and banking already accomplished. With hurricane speed the crisis eliminated the weaker and more antiquated sections of the capitalist structure, countless of small independent producers whom they supported. Industrial mergers, rationalization and standardization were given more favorable conditions, subsidies were made ready for the monopoly enterprises, efforts were initiated to adjust the various sections of industry to better correspond with the whole and branch banking by the big metropolitan institutions began to make real headway. All in all these were important steps as a result of which the organic composition of American capital is becoming higher. But it still remains for the Roosevelt administration recovery policies to cap the climax.
Some pressing steps are yet to be taken by American capitalism to complete the adjustments of it structure of national economy These are now in the making and those workers who may credulously believe that the departure of methods of the Roosevelt administration, from that of its predecessor, will in any way at all mean a departure from the capitalist imperialist and monopoly basis, will experience some rude awakening. To the extent that these methods are new, precisely to that extent do they also serve much more effectively to reenforce the imperialist monopoly basis of American capitalism.
 
Higher Living Standard an Illusion
What do these methods imply? First of all the completion and further rounding out of the reorganization program already initiated during the crisis. In this, two measures now on the way lend themselves particularly well, and are being utilized to the hilt, for demagogic propaganda fostering illusions of capitalist liberal generosity. We have in mind the questions of a return and a stabilization of the purchasing power of the masses and the reorganization of labor power to the productive forces by reduction of working hours. In regard to the first question what is to be expected? Is it a matter of securing what is abstractly called a decent standard of living for the masses? Not at all as far as the capitalist rulers are concerned. It is simply a matter of securing conditions under which surplus values can be realized, and to that extent to stabilize the purchasing power; but on a level distinctly lower than used to be known as the celebrated American standard.
In regard to the second question, that of working hours, it should be noted that during the crisis with industry running at partial capacity, overproduction still resulted in short order. The relative decrease of employed living labor, compared to the amount of crystallized labor and compared to the amount of capital which it set into motion, became transformed into an absolute decrease of necessary labor power for the productive forces. With a huge unemployed army this embodied prospects of the class struggle to develop at a rapid pace against the owners of private proparty. From this there need be no misunderstanding. It is not the welfare of the working class as expressed in shorter working hours which is the concern of the recovery policies. On the contrary; it is the aim to neutralize the unemployed army by taking off a part of the oversupply and obtain a better working basis in the interests of capitalism.
The third measure in the way, and a keystone in the industrial recovery policies, is the increase of commodity prices. That is so essential for capitalism for its realisation of the profits contemplated for the future. What it will mean to the working class, however, is an entirely different matter. It will form part of the bitter experiences which will be their lot under the New Deal. The rise in commodity prices proceeds both by the way of inflation as well as by setting arbitrary monopoly prices.
In this general program there remains still the one most essential step to be accomplished; that is to increase the ration of American capitalism in world economy. It is not at all let out of sight in the New Deal. Granted the re-establishment of confidence, within capitalism, in the process of reproduction, which is now so valiantly aimed at, the conditions will be fully prepared for a gigantic offensive upon the world market. A dress rehearsal has already taken place in the London economic conference.
 



When I arrived in Berlin during the middle of May I went directly to the home of my good comrade S. On my previous visit in February he had invited me to come next time to stay at his house. Now I found a police seal on the door and somehow it helped me to make up my mind very quickly, to get out of the house and make no inquiries. I knew then that both comrade S. and his wife were in the clutches of the Fascists. The vision of the savage beatings with steel rods always applied to Communist prisoners sent a cold shiver down my spine.
Raids upon workers’ homes were still going on; now less dramatically but more “ordnungsgemaess”. Formerly the groans of the victims could be heard on the outside. Now all sounds were muffled. But the terror was still used by the Nazis to show the possible doubters who was the master. It also provided an outlet for the acrimonious hatred deliberately fostered and tempered to a white heat in every Storm Trooper. Swiftness and thoroughness had now been added to improve the earlier dramatic staging. These had become specific features of the process of German Fascism taking over power and consolidating its gains.
What a difference in the picture now presented from that of my first visit in February! Then there was an atmosphere as if before a big battle in which the opposing forces had not yet come to grips, had not yet really measured strength. A disquieting anxiety prevailed, a painful uncertainty as to what the next step would be. It was in the air, it was everywhere. Could it be possible? Were the Fascists really going to be victorious? Apparently there was yet time to stop the onrushing horde. But time was precious. And then, in May, it had been settled, virtually without a battle. The important features of the “Third Reich” were visible and even the Nazis were surprised at the ease of their victory.
Most typical of the German scene now was the artificially drummed up enthusiasm flowing over into spectacularly staged demonstrations. “Celebrating the National Uprising” became the general title covering them all, but almost any occasion could be used for a demonstration; and, besides, they served admirably to feed illusions to the Nazi plebeian following. Hoisting the rehabilitated imperial colors with the Swastika on public buildings meant the careful setting of the stage for a demonstration. Sometimes, in the rush, the Storm Troopers would forget about the national colors and the Swastika would go up alone; but the “enthusiastic” demonstrators did not seem to notice the difference. When the new nationalist reactionary spirit demanded a change of street names from their former obnoxious Marxian, or even mere republican coloration, as for example changing Platz der Republik to Adolph Hitler Platz, or the rechristening of such streets as Erzberger Strasse, Karl Marx Strasse, Bebel Strasse, Eberts Allee, etc. a demonstration with the solemnity of a religious ritual would be staged. Similarly at the enunciation of a new program of worthless promises or the installation of new officials under the “Gleichschaltung”. Even the burning of Marxian books had to have its festival setting in which would be sacrificed to the devouring flames the literary treasures not only of the German working class movement but also that which gave expression to the country’s progress in science and culture.
The greatest demonstrations, from the point of view of numbers, were those on May Day which was converted into a Nazi day of labor. In a certain sense these Nazi May Day demonstrations became a test of strength of the regime. To the workers, with socialist and trade union tradition of long standing, it meant adding insult to injury. Still they could not escape it. For them attendance was made compulsory. Berlin on that day therefore found the bulk of its proletariat marching dejectedly with their footsteps heavy and their heads bowed in agony. In the Ruhr territory on the other hand, I was told, that in most cases they sent stories afloat along the marching ranks which in a jocular fashion told about the size of the potatoes this year; showing the clenched fist to indicate size (the “Red Front” salute).
May 2 witnessed the final and complete taking over of the trade unions by the Nazis, including their well stocked treasuries, and the arrest of practically every trade union official, from the top down. Outstanding among them were Leipart and Grassmann. Both had particularly distinguished themselves by their abject servility. Now the official report of the arrests gave them special mention saying laconically: “transferred to a hospital”. Of course, this was all done in typical Nazi fashion with appropriate proclamations about “the furthering of the interests of national elevation” and the protection of the united people against the “Marxist Bonzen”. In reality it was one further important step in the Fascist process of “Gleichschaltung”. Evidently they had reason to consider the strength of their regime as having fully stood the test; that at least was the verdict of Goebbels at a huge Berlin meeting of his party functionaries held a couple of weeks later. He presented what he called the recent major political achievements, enumerating for special emphasis four different events. First there were in the field of foreign affairs the demand at Geneva for German arms equality and Hitler’s speech on foreign policy. At home there were the May Day demonstrations and the capture of the trade unions. Incidentally this also gives a picture of the Nationalist Socialist party political methods; the method of constantly keeping the followers intoxicated with the spirit of marching from victory to victory. All that was lacking was some ceremonial self-criticism. But that is not yet in the faculty of the Nazi.
“I mean that the National Socialist movement is to become the State”, Goebbels said at this meeting. “In this the old guard possess an unquestioned privilege”, he added amid the thunderous applause of the horde. A little later the party decided that the original hundred thousand members were to be provided with jobs immediately. Surely one could then better understand the reasons for the campaign to freeze out all so-called non-Aryans from their economic and professional positions. One of the very attentive observers of political developments in Germany at that time said to me: “On the day of the Jewish boycott the Storm Troopers had been whipped up to such a frenzy that a mere signal could have turned the whole affair into all the horrors of a Bartholomew’s Night.” The anti-Jewish campaign was gruesome in all its revolting details. But it was essentially a by-product of the real aim, namely, to cow the working class with a reign of terror.
It was difficult to imagine the German working class cowed or in abject submission. But a look at the Berlin North district soon convinced me that it was so. I stopped one-day to read one of the Ullstein papers displayed for passersby. Beside me were two women. Their poor but neat appearance told they were from the working class quarters. Both had their attention attracted to an article dealing with the trial of the Altona Communists and the demand for the death penalty. Their eyes met in silence. It was a mutual dreadfully frightened expression. At that moment two trucks loaded to the bumpers with Nazi Storm Troopers approached. Their “heilrufe” split the air. The women hurried away. That excessively charged atmosphere made one feel uncomfortable. A couple of weeks later I learned that the supreme penalty had been imposed upon four of the Altona prisoners. When receiving the verdict, the leader of the group, Luetker declared: “The death penalty is the highest honor to a revolutionist.”
In February the Fascists were only beginning their expansion, reaching out for every position within the state apparatus, cutting the ground from underneath their opponents while, at the same time, also moving by way of head-on collision. But the advance was still quite chaotic. The streets swarmed with the Nazi ruffians, moving in detachments in the process of taking possession, but not yet entirely sure of themselves. Members of the Steelhelmets would meet, click their heels and salute in the stiffest Prussian military fashion, causing a jealous animosity among the Storm Troopers. Here and there could still be seen groups of uniformed Reichsbannermen; but they were much more uncertain. The workers everywhere carried the expressions of bewilderment and fearful anticipations.
Did the German workers fall in the decisive hour because they were not ready to resist the Fascist advance? No, that would not be the conclusion of the attentive observer. For that there were too many examples of actual readiness. There were the instances of general strikes in the free city of Lubeck and in the city of Stassfurt protesting against the Nazi murders. In both cases all wheels were brought to a standstill. For anti-Fascist demonstrations would turn out oftentimes hundreds of thousands eagerly awaiting a decisive leadership. In Hamburg, at the time when Nazi Storm Troopers began to occupy trade union headquarters, thousands of workers gathered in front of their building; ready to defend it. But the officials on the inside, who were more frightened at this mass demonstration and anyway suspected a Communist plot, beseeched and cajoled their members to stay at home.
One incident of workers’ bravery I observed personally, although I arrived only as the smoke cleared away. It was at Neukoelln where I came one evening when Storm Troopers had made a raid on a restaurant frequented by Communists. I got near enough to see some brown shirts who lay sprawled on the street being picked up by their brethren. The workers had given a good account of themselves. But that was only one of the isolated, desperate efforts to fight off the mortal enemy. A centralized direction to these efforts, a firm policy, or a serious attempt to unite the working class was not at hand. The parties in which the German workers, through their tradition of organization discipline, had placed their confidence, failed. In that lies the real explanation of the ease of the Fascist victory.
 







(The article below represents the first installment in a discussion on the problems of the German situation after the victory of Fascism. Comrades are invited to state their views which will be printed as discussion articles. – Ed.)





By the course of events in Germany, when culminated in the complete victory of fascism, the international proletarian movement finds itself face to face with an entirely new situation. In its objective essence it means a new historical stage; the inauguration of a new reactionary period with its serious implications not only for Germany but for the world as a whole. That it will be fraught with new attacks upon the workers, with prospects of imperialist wars moving much closer, with new serious dangers to the Soviet Union and also with new revolutionary possibilities, goes without saying.
In measuring the consequence of these events the International Left Opposition has some time ago made clear that for the new situation the orientation, the position and the formulae of the past will no longer suffice. We thereby placed ourselves entirely upon the basis of the new historical situation created by the victory of Fascism and the collapse of the German Communist Party. Where we had previously emphasized the immediately pressing problems for a change of course of the party and of the Comintern to prevent the Fascist victory, that is, where we had emphasized the short perspective we now place before ourselves the long perspective. Where we before, in pressing for a change of course, also held the position of reform of the party, we are now compelled to recognize its complete breakdown and to orient ourselves upon that basis. To this extent there was unanimity within the International Left Opposition. In this we also met with sympathy and considerable agreement from other working class groups stirred by the course of events. Some doubt, however, did naturally arise when the question was posed fully in the concrete: What must follow the breakdown of the party? Can there for us be any other course than that of a new party? To pose the question that way was such a radical departure from our former position of a party fraction fighting for reform of the party. But this was necessitated by the historical change which had taken place and, in the first instance, the doubts could only emerge wherever the full significance of this change was momentarily lost sight of. These doubts are disappearing and in their place we have a greater clarity.
In order that we here in America may better understand what is involved in this question of whether or not a new party in Germany we must endeavor to fully appreciate what the historical change means to the working class in general and to the German proletariat in particular. We have already mentioned that it means a new reactionary period. No further proof of that is needed than the tangible evidences of experience since German Fascism came into power. What needs particular emphasis, however, is the seriousness of the scope of the working class defeat. First the Social Democracy miserably exposed its bankruptcy followed by the bankruptcy of the Communist party. Both parties were numerically powerful yet they disappeared in face of the onslaught of the Fascist regime. Today there is no revolutionary party in Germany. This is the greatest defeat recorded in working class history. It is the culmination to a series of defeats suffered by the Comintern beginning with Germany of 1923, through the disaster of the Chinese revolution and back to Germany, in 1933. And yet all these defeats occur under the conditions of the downward spiral of capitalism, during the capitalist decay stage, during the very period of its bankruptcy being the most glaringly demonstrated. This is the frightful paradox. And because of that the responsibility for the policies and strategy which brought such disaster becomes only many times greater.
Of course, the Comintern leadership, the Stalinist leadership, must be held entirely responsible. Once again the importance of a working class revolutionary party has been demonstrated, but this time in a negative sense. Already from the time of the Communist Manifesto we knew that the emancipation of the working class was unthinkable without its own revolutionary party. It was the absence of such a party, or to put it more precisely, the failure of the Stalinist party to perform this function which accounts for the Fascists and not the proletariat being victorious. In seeking the reason for that, when traced to its source, the verdict will read: It is because we had in Germany a party of national Socialism instead of a party of international revolution. For proof of this, wherever doubts or disagreements still exists outside of our ranks, we need not confine ourselves to the inescapable conclusion that the theory of Socialism in One Country can produce nothing else but parties of national Socialism. We can add the advice to the comrades to study the numerous declarations of German party leaders on their program of national and social emancipation. This program is of course only a reflection of the basic party and Comintern orientation.
Today, after this frightful defeat, the German party leaders, speaking from emigration, and behind them the Comintern leaders, commit the double crime of stubbornly denying the historical character of the defeat and add to it the attempt of maintaining the dangerous illusions in the minds of the Communist workers that Hitler will soon get out of business.
But as Hitler remains and consolidates his power the disillusionment will inevitably set in. New and more frightful demoralization will result. The Communist workers will leave the Stalinist party leaders in disgust and despair. Today these gigantic experiences are fresh in the minds of the Communist workers and yet there is no discussion permitted by the party leadership. Inquiries into the correctness of the official line are taboo. Those who express doubts are hounded and expelled. From these facts it follows that what still exists in Germany of sporadic activities by the official party remnants is not at all the beginnings of an orientation based upon the new conditions but only the tail end of the past. After that follows the void, for there can be no other perspectives for a party leadership which denies the existence of the new historical conditions.
The facts being so, one can brand only as criminal light-mindedness the final conclusion of the Comintern resolution adopted after the German defeat; the resolution of April 1. This resolution finds that it is necessary to strengthen the party and all the mass organizations of the working class, ... “to prepare the masses for decisive battles. For the overthrow of capitalism and for the overthrow of the. Fascist dictatorship by an armed rising.”
In other words, the armed uprising is placed on the agenda in the midst of the greatest defeat yet suffered by working class. Upon what prognosis does it rest? First of all upon the Comintern alibi that the cause of what has happened in Germany is Social Democracy. Its part of the betrayal never needed to be doubted; but that does not in the least explain the Comintern and the official party responsibility, or its position. Secondly it rests upon the foundation of the Comintern affirming the infallibility of its characterization of “Social Fascism”, thus nullifying and giving the lie to any expressions for desire of a united, front with social democracy. Further it rests upon an estimation of the preceding governments of Papen and Schleicher having been Fascist governments the same as Hitler’s. Finally it rests upon the analysis, as presented in the resolution, that there was no revolutionary situation in Germany. Yet a complete historical change has taken place. But the change is not toward strengthening the possibilities of the proletarian revolution. On the contrary, the Fascist reaction is immensely strengthened, the German working class defeated, the Communist parties elsewhere declining, demoralized and impotent. In face of this the armed insurrection is placed on the agenda by the Comintern resolution. Criminal light-mindedness is about the mildest characterization one can find for this.
The International Left Opposition poses the problems facing the German working class, and the world movement, from the point of view of opposite considerations. To rebuild upon an entirely new foundation what lies shattered in Germany, its general working class movement and above all to rebuild the revolutionary party, that is the task. There can be no more talk about the old basis or the old formulae. The problem is to build anew. The Left Opposition proposes an orientation toward a new Party in Germany liberated from the deadly embrace of bankrupt Stalinism.
 



When President Roosevelt signed the National Industrial Recovery Act he expressed the belief that history would record it as the most important and far reaching legislation ever enacted by the American Congress: “It represents”, he said, “a supreme effort to stabilize for all time the many factors which make for the prosperity of the nation and the preservation of the American standard of living.”
To stabilize for all time – this is not possible in a world of flux, of constant motion, in which economic equilibriums are established to be shattered again. Least of all is it possible in a capitalist world – and still less so during its period of decline and decay. Nevertheless Roosevelt knew his ritual. He knew that the NRA would form the foundation upon which American imperialism hoped to make new advances and new conquests in the world market. Today the administrators are impatient to get this whole machinery in complete working shape in order to start seriously upon this advance. But today such an advance is also a problem much more complicated than before.
 
Results of Early Expansion
American capitalism in its early period of development had at hand all the prerequisites for monopoly capital within its own borders. When centered within the industrialized northeastern states, it found, by pushing westward, a mighty field of expansion for export of capital and export of means of production. But the resulting powerfully developed national economy, the vastly expanded productive forces and surplus of capital available produced also its opposite – growing interdependence upon world economy. American capitalism extended its structure throughout the world and acquired a world basis. Up to this point the law of uneven development of capitalism by which the various countries pass through their development in different forms and different tempi, has acted as a lever favoring the United States.
Through this uneven development, which, as comrade Trotsky reminds us, is more of a historical reality than a law, the United States reached its stage of combined development. This took on the form of a highly advanced industrial system alongside of a backward political ideology which is most directly reflected within the working class. The internal colonization, or rather the seemingly limitless expansion of the home market is, of course, the main factor and forms the basis for this retarded consciousness. Enormous capitalist profits and super profits allowed for a wide margin available for the maintenance of a higher standard of living for the labor aristocracy. Class collaboration unfolded to almost perfection and thereby reinforced the means of keeping the working class as a whole in subjection. Upon such a foundation the super structure of bourgeois democracy could attain its greatest triumphs and secure for itself a long lease of life.
 
American Capitalism Depending Upon World Equilibrium
But speaking in historical terms American imperialism arrived belatedly upon the world arena. It was therefore deprived of the luxury of floating leisurely with the upward current of growing capitalism as was enjoyed by British imperialism for an extensive period of time. The American counterpart was compelled to make a forced march at dramatic speed to acquire a world base. But its emergence coincided with the period when the capitalist system on a world scale had passed its peak and was heading in a downward direction. That its own inner contradictions have become vastly intensified by this process has already been proved by the crisis reaching its greatest proportions precisely in the highly advanced United States.
During the period of growing capitalism the unevenness of development of the various countries was far greater than now. Today the world has become more uniform. The backward countries have supplemented their backwardness with the latest industrial advances. Capitalist economy is world economy extending beyond the legal boundaries and intertwined among nations. Its outstanding feature is the interdependence of the various national economies. Each of the contending powers are dependent upon the world equilibrium and subject to all of its shocks and turns. Most of all is that the case of the United States because of its far flung interests. It should, therefore, not be necessary to reiterate the indisputable fact that when the United States penetrates further into the world market the mighty barriers of conflicting imperialist interests arise in all their imposing magnitude.
 
Future Trends Within the Country
But this is only one side of the problem. Within the United States itself, its new world advance will impose a terrific strain upon the class relationship existing at present. This relationship can by no means be held within its present bounds even with the assistance of the NRA machinery, which is designed primarily for such a purpose. The slightly favorable turn in the economic conjuncture which is now in evidence tends by itself to spur the workers on to make increasing demands and thereby bring more to the surface and make more acute the conflicts engendered by the capitalist mode of production. With the NRA institutions attempting to check these conflicts they will assume more of a political character. At present the heavy crop of strikes which are spreading like wildfire everywhere indicates the future trend of developments.
In this country we are moving no longer within the orbit of conditions of the past. The margin of capitalist profits formerly available for the maintenance of a higher level for the labor aristocracy has become seriously narrowed. American capitalism, in order to effectively pursue its furious onslaught upon the world market, and to be prepared for the competition it meets, needs above all a low wage level throughout its industrial enterprises. To maintain the tranquility of class relationships of the past on this basis is not possible. We must therefore visualize the immediate future in the United States as one of sharply intensified struggles with the added phenomenon of disturbances reaching revolutionary proportions not at all out of the question.
No one can as yet predict whether a real and substantially favorable change in the economic conjuncture can be accomplished in the United States. But the conflicts and disturbances which will grow out of the efforts for its accomplishment can be foreseen. The formerly favorable lever for the United States constituted by the uneven development of capitalism has been turned into its opposite and is reacting against the United States. It is now compelled to seek the new roads of advance within a decaying world system. It is compelled to assume the major responsibility for checking further class disturbances and, if possible, for the crushing of further proletarian revolutions inevitably growing out of the more intense world exploitation. If to this is to be added the possibility of failure to arrive at a favorable change of economic conjuncture, then it is necessary to say that the perspectives for the United States assume a much more directly revolutionary character.
The relations of world economic forces have changed with the rise of American capitalism. With the shifting of the world economic center to the United States this change became more definite and more direct. But with this shift, there is also a corresponding shift – at first only slowly but sure to gain in momentum – of the revolutionary center from Europe to America. In a general sense we formerly counted upon the revolution to be accomplished in Europe first and upon the victorious European proletariat to fight to hold its own against reactionary America. It is now possible to say, still speaking in a general sense, that this outlook has been reversed by the dialectics of the relation of forces. Revolutionary struggles here move up to the very top of the agenda of historically immediate possibilities.
It is said in informed quarters that a reporter of an important capitalist paper ventured the prediction to Roosevelt: “If you do not succeed with the New Deal you will be known to posterity as the worst President the United States ever had.” Roosevelt answered laconically: “If I do not succeed with the New Deal I will be known to posterity as the last President of the United States.”
 



(Continued from last issue)
Within these general workers’ organizations the Communists have played their role; but the “third period” policy shows its disastrous results. The Stalinist party leaders, with the inauguration of this “period”, began to interpret its aim of winning the workers to Communist leadership not by maintaining its activities within these mass organizations and in this manner winning them over, but by splitting away the Left wing and the Communist opposition to form their own small organizations in every field. It resulted, even though not always in new organizations at least in every case in an exodus of all Communist elements. Rival trade unions were formed (the R.G.O.), rival freethinkers, football clubs, anglers’ clubs, etc. But the overwhelming majority of the workers remained in the social democratic organizations and by and large also under their ideology and leadership. The new opposition organization vegetated in an isolated and sectarian existence.
Stalinist Leaders Prevented Trend Toward Communism
The Stalinist leaders, caught in the vise of their own policy, could not tolerate criticism; they made a bureaucratic caricature of the correct principles of centralization and discipline. The membership within these rival organizations were deprived of all rights of serious discussion and participation in decisions. They could not find themselves at home in these organizations which were stripped of their function and stagnated. The party bureaucracy became most strongly expressed in the struggle against criticism of and opposition to its false policies. For example, Schulz would become an Oppositionist. He would be expel led from the party. Next the demand would be made for his condemnation and expulsion from all other organizations under party direction, from the RGO, from its freethinker society, from its chess players’ clubs, anglers’ clubs, etc. Such a method could only help to alienate the workers from Communism and benefit the treacherous social democratic chiefs.
These are only some of the examples of the Stalinist methodology considered apart from the general strategy, by which the party leaders sought in their way to prepare the proletariat for its present fateful situation. In no wise could it correspond to the rhythm of working class developments. While the German worker’s went through a period of radicalization culminating in the great strike wave extending throughout Germany during the latter part of last year, in many instances forcing the trade union bureaucrats into the fight, the disastrous and criminal Stalinist party leadership policy and the independent trade union sects could only serve as a brake upon the general movement. The social democratic leaders, despite all their sell-outs were not dislodged from their positions but had their authority reinforced. For the workers there was no other choice than to remain within their fold.
In this sense the Stalinist Centrism circumvented the constantly growing working class trend toward Communism. That sympathy for Communism increased, is proved by the various parliamentary elections where the party, with certain temporary retreats, continued to record gains, not at all commensurate with the Nazi gains, but gains nevertheless. One can say that election after election strengthened the party victories in the field. But not so in actual struggle or in trade union and working class contact within the industries. Despite the parliamentary election victories the party could not lead in struggle against the constantly growing Fascist reaction. It remained paralyzed and powerless. By its policy and methods the Stalinist leaders saved the social democratic bureaucracy, enormously strengthened Fascism and seriously weakened the Communist vanguard.
Again and again the solid hold which the social democracy has upon the workers in the industries has been proved. Most recently in the Betriebsraete (factory council) elections in the Berlin municipal electric and gas works held March first. One may say that worker’s employed by a municipality tend to conservatism but nevertheless the results are illuminating.
In the gas works 3,838 votes were counted, of which the socialists received 2,352, Communists 1,298, and Nazis 101. The Communists lost the absolute majority which they had formerly held here. In the electrical works 3,320 votes were cast, of which the socialists obtained no less than 3,034, the Communists 156, and the Nazi 83.
Within the clerical staff of the municipal gas and the electric works the council elections gave the following results. In the gas section out of a total of 2,064 votes cast, the socialists obtained 1,151, the Nazi 413, and a neutral moderate ticket 459. There was no Communist ticket. Among the clerical staff of the electrical section out of a total of 2,547 votes the socialists polled 1,916, the Nazis 443, and the Communists 135. In all four elections there was a 90 percent participation.
Here is again telling proof of workers following the social democratic leaders and not at all considering themselves partners in the same camp with the hated Nazi. On the contrary. It proves that the workers are holding fast to the socialist party just at the period of its severe persecution by the Fascists and their campaign for the Hitler parliamentary ticket. But it also gives telling proof of the weakness of the Communist party among the workers in the industries. All in all, however, it is one more excellent reason for a genuine united front between the C.P. and the S.P. That is yet the key question. No other way exists to defend the German working class, its rights and its organizations against the murderous onmarch of the brown battalions than through a united working class.
 
Socialist Bureaucrats and Stalinists Partners in Betrayal
The social democratic leaders complacently accept the Hitler Reichstag election victory. They seek solace in their own statement that, “Germany is not Italy”, meaning thereby that Hitler cannot accomplish the destruction of working class wrought by Mussolini. While this is true in the sense that Hitler faces a far more powerful working class, a potentially far stronger antagonist than did Mussolini, yet the Wels, Braun and Severing gentry repeat the treason of their Italian fraternity. They have succeeded in maintaining their party intact but they continue to sabotage all struggle. They thereby keep the road open for Hitler.
But we have sought in vain also for any sign of struggle initiated by the Stalinist party leadership. By their own course they have arrived at a situation where the party is unable to fight, where it is being shattered and wiped out by the first heavy blows of Fascism in power. The party leaders paraphrased the social democrats. They said: “The difference between Mussolini and Hitler is basically that the latter has no economic conjuncture ahead of him”. True as this is in its abstract sense, when substituted for measures of struggle it becomes entirely false. The economic conjunctures alone will not defeat Hitler. For that is required a united working class, oriented, organized and prepared for such a huge task. In that the party leadership failed completely to even take the initial steps for working class defense. Thereby it also laid the road open for Hitler to smash the workers’ organizations beginning with the party itself. The extent of its destruction is illustrated by the one example among many others of an important functionaries’ conference called in the Ruhr region by special courier from the Central Committee. It was called shortly before the elections and sixty functionaries were to participate. Of this number only five showed up.
The sad truth is that today, at the time of this writing, the party which should function as the proletarian vanguard exists no longer. Its press, its meetings and all its public activities are completely prohibited. But it issues no leaflets, it gives no leadership whatever, its own leaders are either under arrest or fugitives, its headquarters are taken over by the police, its nuclei are disorganized and a frightful demoralization has seized its membership. The party is betrayed by its Stalinist leadership, it is sacrificed by an incompetent bureaucracy, the strength of its numbers faded to the vanishing point because it meant nothing when associated with an utterly false ideology, false perspectives and policies. Today is being recorded in Germany and with fateful consequence to the working class throughout the world the greatest crime of Stalinism.
What is becoming of the Comintern? Undermined and almost reduced to impotence by its controlling Stalinist clique it has likewise failed to function and to show the way. When feeble attempts in regard to the German situation were made by it they were made upon a false road. What will be its future if the Fascists finally conquer in Germany? This question embodies such serious consequences that it is difficult to fully contemplate today. One thing is certain. We see now the eclipse of Stalinism in Germany and perhaps in the whole Comintern. But a far more serious aspect of the present situation is the question of the eclipse of the Comintern itself, if not of the Soviet Union. The Stalinist regime has long ago reduced the Comintern to an appendix purely of the interests of its own bureaucratic clique in the Soviet Union. What will the destruction of strongest Comintern party outside of the Soviet Union, the only mass party outside of the Soviet Union, mean? The mere practical aspect of this question rolls up enormous difficulties. Through the German party were maintained the solid contacts with the proletariat of the western world despite the white terror rule of Poland and the Baltic states in between. Germany being added to that iron ring of Fascist and semi-Fascist dictatorships practically destroys this contact. The Stalinist regime will concentrate yet more purely within the Soviet Union in an attempt to give life to its reactionary utopian theory of socialism in one country. It will pay even less attention to the Comintern than before. Hence its utterly criminal complacency in face of the mortal danger threatening the world proletariat. And what of the political consequence of the destruction of the strongest party existing within a capitalist country? Will that not mean almost a death blow to the Comintern additionally weakened by the effects of a defeat of such gigantic consequences as a defeat in Germany today?
 
Fall of Stalinism Signals Rise of Left Opposition
These, of course, are considerations arrived at on the basis of the furious onmarch of German Fascism capturing one strong position after another and already having eliminated its main opponent – the Communist party. They must yet take into account the possibilities which despite all still exists of the German working class yet being able to rally in time the powerful resources lying dormant within its ranks. But it is necessary to be prepared for the worst variant. For such possibilities, however, the party of Stalinism will no the party of Stalinism will no longer give the initiative or leadership. Now there remains as the revolutionary hope only the International Left Opposition. It is true that compared to the giant task our ranks are still extremely feeble. But the Left Opposition possesses the first :ad most important prerequisites. We possess the weapon of a Marxian approach, of Marxian analysis and of a Marxian program. Of truly monumental importance is such a weapon today.
It was by virtue of this that the Left Opposition in the past, facing the failures of Stalinism, could show the correct road. When the Comintern, hamstrung by the Stalin regime, failed in this decisive situation to give leadership or even to speak to the world proletariat, the International Left Opposition began seriously to solidify its ranks in the international conference held recently. Delegates from eleven different countries participated and began in a small measure to prepare our organization for its groat tasks. When viewed in contradistinction to the silence and failure of the Stalinist Comintern one must say that in that fact alone lies an enormous importance. That was a signal for the new epoch winch are now entering. A signal for the falling of Stalinism and the rise of the Left Opposition.
 



Two days before the German Reichstag elections forty thousand Fascist storm troops, preceded by two hundred armed “auxiliary police” in Nazi uniform, marched through the streets of central and western Berlin. They were greeted by most of the Schupos (German police) with the Fascist salute. It was effective election propaganda, but more than that, it was an attempt to put force behind the Fascism claim that they are the “masters of Berlin”. To the extent that one can speak of weight of election figures, the claim appeared to have been confirmed two days later; though the real contest is yet to come. The streets of Berlin will undoubtedly witness some serious aspects of this contest.
Out in the West End the brown-shirted paraders were greeted by Fascist flags from practically every window. In that section of the big and petty bourgeoisie they could return the greetings to their friends, not excluding the rich Jews. But in Berlin North, the working class section which includes Wedding, on that very same day the whole section was isolated by a strong police cordon and every house ransacked while the terror and the arrests were mounting. To have horny hands is sure grounds for suspicion and almost proof of guilt.
Such is now the normal procedure of expressions of everyday life not only in Berlin but throughout Germany. The contest for final and complete assertion of power is on and increasing in intensity even though, compared to what is to tome, this is mere guerrilla warfare.
 
The False Outlook of the Stalinists
The election results expressed a serious setback to the revolutionary vanguard. Not even the screaming and empty boasts of victory made by the Moscow Pravda can hide that fact nor does this in the least change the reaction to these results within the disorganized ranks of the practically annihilated vanguard. The setback weighs heavy upon them. During these years of growing Fascist danger the Stalinist leadership of the official Communist party tried to combat Fascism and social democracy as two sections of the same camp – Fascism and social Fascism. That was the official policy of the Stalinized Comintern.
At the eleventh Comintern plenum held in April 1931, that is after the German Reichstag elections of September 1930 in which the Fascists recorded their first great forward sweep, Thaelmann, reporting on the German situation, said:
“After September 14, after the sensational successes of the National Socialists, its supporters throughout Germany nourished great expectations. We did not at that time permit ourselves to be misled by the panicky sentiment which partly existed within the whole working class and at any rate within social democracy. That there were even within our own ranks certain comrades who not only signalized but also overestimated the great danger of this development of Fascism, that is known to most comrades. But we (Thaelmann and fellow bureaucrats – A.S.) declare soberly and serenely that September 14 was in many respects Hitler’s best day which will be followed not by better days but by worse.”
Thaelmann in his report recognized that the social democratic workers have a different ideology of civil war from that of the Fascists, and that he proceeded to state the essence of the Stalinist view as follows:
“On the other hand we will witness that the Social Democrats will succeed also in Germany, as they are now already in a measure succeeding, to form terror groups for the civil war from their mass supporters, which will surely in the future fight side by side with the Fascists against us on the other side of the barricade.”
Up until the very last moment, that is to the actual establishment of the Hitler government, on January 30 of this year, the Stalinists maintained that the main attacks must be concentrated upon the “social Fascists. What are the results of this policy?
The actual results are that the criminally false policy of the incompetent party leaders has so far saved the social democratic bureaucracy. As a party, the S.P. held its own in the elections. The votes cast for a workers party in Germany indicate conscious support for its policies. According to this there are today seven million workers still under social democratic influence and following the social democratic leaders. Perhaps one may reduce the number by about one million, allowing that many for various functionaries, trade union, co-operative and what is left of social democratic local governmental officials. Its former petty bourgeois support in general has already gone to Hitler. This leaves nevertheless the conscious support of six million workers, the solid section of the proletariat, workers engaged in industry, in the main employed workers with the tools of production in their hands. That is yet a formidable strength.
The social democratic bureaucracy has been saved because it was not at all put to the test in action before the eyes of these six million workers. They can now continue to prate about opposition to Fascism and sabotage action. Would it not have been far better to put them to the test and inevitable exposure so as to be recognized in their true light in front of these six million workers? Is it not now clear that a real Communist pressure for a united front in its genuine sense with social democracy, would not only have united the working class but would also have forced the hands of this treacherous bureaucracy? But it is precisely the fatally wrong policy pursued of centering the attacks against “social Fascism” instead of a united front with social democracy which has permitted the Fascist hordes to terrorize the working class in the streets, to sweep the elections and to sit in the government claiming the imposing support of seventeen million votes to be used as a preparation for the final coup d’état. This is the catastrophic record of the policies pursued by the Stalinist leadership to date.
In increasing measure the Fascist bands roam the streets exercising themselves, training themselves for the big battles in assassinations upon the workers. One look at a Nazi storm troop reveals its makeup. Speaking in a political sense it is the rag tag and bob tail of society. Their appearance is in general that of roaming bandits. Its ranks contain primarily petty bourgeois elements to a large extent recruited from the declassed section, those impoverished by the inflation and the crises. The slum proletariat which go to make up part of its ranks is generally recruited from those who as a regular part of their lives are down on the lowest step of the social ladder, and the shady elements. But it recruits also other more or less demoralized proletarian elements. For example in Germany of today there are about two to three million workers who have been unemployed so long that they have lost practically all semblance of unemployment insurance. A frightful demoralization results. These elements divide mainly between the C.P. and the Fascists, the most conscious going to the former.
 
Fascist-Stahlhelm Unity Aims at Working Class Destruction
A goodly portion of these elements are attracted by the socialistically colored demagogy of the Fascist movement. However as it nears the pinnacle of power the movement changes its program and its whole structure likewise undergoes a change. The petty bourgeois elements begin to recede toward the background and the movement assumes its real role of championing and defending the big bourgeoisie – the last defenders of the capitalist system. This change is already in the making in Germany.
The Stahlhelm on the other hand makes quite a different impression, not less reactionary but still different. They represent the old Prussian soldier type. They love to cover themselves with the decorations of war days, especially the iron cross. When they meet they click their heels and salute in the stiffest military fashion. In composition the Stahlhelm is made up of bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie of the more solid layers especially from the rural towns, and even workers from the Prussian landed estates. At its inception it was for the republic and democratic. Today its ideology is reactionary. In the recent elections it had a common ticket with the German nationalists. Jointly they express the political organization of the von Papen-Hugenburg-Seldte section of the Harzburg united front. The differentiation between this section and its bigger and much more turbulently violent half-brother, the Nazi, is still to come. And it may have some serious reverberations.
The common goal of destruction of the working class movement found them easily united. To the reactionary bourgeoisie the brown hordes promised something which it had never enjoyed before – complete security against strikes. They embody its hopes of doing away with the hated and troublesome working class demands. Their ravaging fury, worked up on high and heavy promises, is therefore unleashed first of all and most directly against the Communists. But. the aim is much broader, as the many repressions against the social democrats show, yes, even going beyond to any section suspected of being allies to the working class parties. The broad aim is, of course, necessary if the Fascists are to realize their hope of conquest. But within it, also the the dangers of complications for the reactionary camp. Because of this it will surely yet have to make its retreats. Thus in more ways than one are the possibilities of difficulties in the Fascist path apt to become breathing spells for the proletariat, openings under the heavy attacks which it can utilize the better to gather its forces.
 
Workers Possess Remarkable Collectivity and Organizational Discipline
Meanwhile this heavy pall hangs over the working class, weighing upon it like an alp. The burden is carried in silence. But it is a grim silence foreshadowing serious events. It is something unnatural to witness German workers looking at a swaggering Fascist storm troop with eyes which express recognition of the enemy and then speaking their thoughts to one another in a careful whisper not destined for outside ears. No semblance of freedom of expression exists. For a long time all working class meetings and demonstration of any kind are totally prohibited. The same is the fate of the press, social democratic practically as well as the Communist.
The Left Opposition organ Die Permanente Revolution has been banned until the end of May.
There have been no mass demonstrations in Berlin since the mighty Reichsbanner meeting in the Lustgarten on Sunday, February 19. It was estimated well above 150,000. The Reichsbanner troops formed a solid gigantic square in the center. But they listened to their just re-elected leader Karl Holtermann proclaim the empty phrase previously coined by the Stalinist Remmele: “We come after Hitler”. Then the demonstration dispersed. Such an event leaves a distinct impression of gigantic forces at hand but not being utilized.
On February 27, the social democrats of Berlin had engaged the Sportpalast for a commemoration of the fiftieth year of the death of Karl Marx. The commemoration speech was made by Friedrich Stampfer, the editor in chief of the Vorwaerts. But he had no more than commenced saying: “To be a Marxist requires a great knowledge, whereas to be an anti-Marxist one does not need to know anything”, than the police found sufficient grounds to call a halt. The meeting was broken up. Moreover, it is now reported as a common opinion in capitalist political circles that when the newly elected Reichstag opens in the Potsdammer garrison church there will be admission for neither Communist nor social democratic deputies.
In Germany the highly developed technology has been accompanied with a thoroughgoing industrial discipline. In turn this has produced deep-rooted working class organizations and possessed the workers with a remarkable quality of collectivity and organizational discipline. The highly socialized production has produced in the German working masses its high degree of social consciousness and of class consciousnes as an inevitable result of a social system based upon class divisions. The German workers live practically the whole of their social lives within workers’ organizations, in the political, economic and social spheres. They have their own workers political parties, trade unions. consumers co-operatives, workers sports organizations (Friends of nature, football, anglers, etc.), workers freethinker associations, esperanto or chess players clubs; they come together in the huge people’s house, existing in every city, in workers’ movies and theatres and so forth. The German workers are born into organizational institutions and mostly receive their burial from them also. Broadly speaking, that is, excluding the C.P. and its auxiliaries, all these organizations are distinctly of a social democratic ideology and under social democratic leadership. As usual the Socialist party bureaucracy permits a wide latitude of opinion within these organizations, so long as its own direction and control is not seriously threatened,
(To be continued)
 



Part I

Part II
 



Fascist Germany presents today a frightful picture of devastation of a once powerful revolutionary and working class movement. The Communist party has been destroyed, vanishing under heavy, well-aimed blows. The Stalinist policy delivered the party, and with it the working class, gagged and bound to the Fascist hordes.
The Socialist party is crippled apparently beyond recovery. Only its parliamentary skeleton is still attempting to maintain an humble, submissive existence. The trade unions are beginning to feel the Fascist lash. Many of their headquarters are sacked and now the preparations are in full swing to turn them into Fascist state organs. All Communist and even social Democratic delegates, are unceremoniously removed from the factory councils and replaced by Fascists, that is, where the councils are not dissolved altogether and new elections prohibited.
The savage howls of the roaming Fascist bandits who murder, pillage and destroy are pierced by the heart-rending groans from the torture chambers. The bestialities which actually take place are indescribable.
This is the crowning height of the many bitter experiences suffered by the German proletariat since the first serious act of treason performed by the social democratic chieftains on August 4, 1914. This first step was only the beginning of the later unbridled wrecking, the drowning in blood of the workers’ revolutionary struggles of 1918 to 1921, the murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg, the perfidious collaboration in the restoration of capitalism after the working class defeat of 1923, until the completed preparation of the road for Fascism. But to this must be added the bitter experience of the Communist party, numerically the strongest outside of the Soviet Union, but Stalinized in every fibre of its bureaucratic apparatus, which has now experienced its August the Fourth. Though its leaders are now undergoing the most horrifying tortures nevertheless this must be said out loud.
 
Workers Under Bestial Tortures
The Nazis are advancing through streams of blood and tears. The horrible tales which come from the specially arranged Fascist torture chambers almost defy description. In their naked reality the actual events are much more hair-raising than the dribbling accounts would indicate which are smuggled out and find their way to expression outside of the German borders. I will attempt to relate a few examples culled from reports of eye-witnesses, for obvious reasons not giving names of the reporters, whose veracity, however, need not in the least be doubted. Our comrade relates:
“In the Nazi barracks they whip the Communists and break their fingers in order to get from them confessions and addresses.
“In the Nazi barracks in Hedemanstrasse there lay in one room about 150 Communists who had been tortured until they were half dead. They were all undressed and when they were naked had to run the gauntlet until they broke down.”
In Spandau, near Berlin, almost all Communists were arrested and taken into the barracks to be tortured. A woman comrade was taken from her bed at night, taken into the barracks to be horsewhipped and thrown into a cellar. When consciousness returned she noticed that she was not alone but was surrounded by others groaning or dying. Some are allowed to go out after they have been tortured: others never see daylight again.
The “Kassemats” in Spandau is an old antiquated prison to which most of the “bigger game” is being brought. There are incarcerated Thaelmann, Torgler, Pieck and Koenen, among many other Communists. But there are also such victims as Lehman Russbildt, the chairman of the “League for Peoples Rights”, whom the Fascists, symbolically it seems, put in chains, leaving him unable to move for days at the time. An eye-witness relates the beastly beatings that were administered to Thaelmann every night so that the once robust figure is now but a living corpse. A special confession was demanded from him in the form of a declaration all made ready for him to attach his signature. It was to prove among other things that the Communist party had organized terror groups to murder and to pillage, giving names of alleged commanders of these groups. It was to prove that the C.P. was supported by the Soviet government, alleging the manner in which funds were turned over.
The significance of the attempted direct connection of the Soviet government cannot be underestimated. It is but one out of many similar attempts, such as in the burning of the Reichstag building and others to stir up a popular hatred of the Soviet Union and pave the road for intervention. There are among the flamboyant declarations of Goering the one proposing to carve out a bigger piece of the Ukraine for Poland so that she may object less to the return of the Corridor to Fascist Germany. In general the Fascist press concerns itself very studiously at the present time with reports and estimates of the fighting capacity of the Red Army.
But the gruesome torture tales continue. Right along, corpses are found throughout the Reich and reported “killed by persons unknown.” Eye-witnesses also relate having seen victims in the Berlin prison of the police presidium brought there from the Fascist barracks with their eyes cut out or with their teeth smashed by rifle butts. They tell of the unfortunate prisoners being thrown on the floor, trampled upon and kicked in the abdomen. It is the Fascist storm troops who administer the tortures. This became too much even for some of the old hardened Schupos in the Berlin Moabit police station. About a dozen of them protested and were immediately disarmed.
A certain C.P. functionary, B. Ramer, who had once been a Fascist officer but remained loyal to the party had his legs so badly crushed in the prison tortures that it became necessary later to perform an amputation. Storm troops went to the home of Ruth Fischer; once a party leader, and not finding her home, smashed all they could lay their hands on and took her thirteen-year-old boy as a hostage.
It is not only the Communist victims who suffer barbaric mutilations but social democrats as well. Karl Bockel, the editor of the Chemnitzer Volksstimme, was beaten to a pulp and died in the street. However, the torture methods applied to the socialist member of the Reichstag Sollman, from Saarbruecken, are of the kind which put the notorious Spanish inquisition entirely in the shadow. A Fascist storm troop broke into his home, destroyed all furniture and beat him into insensibility. To bring him back to consciousness his socks were torn off and a lighted torch applied to his feet. As he writhed in pain one of the gang threw mustard into his eyes saying: “There is your black-red-and-gold dirty pig, your national mustard colors.” After that they forced his mouth open and urinated into it.
Finally his body was literally dragged along the streets in a parade headed by music and when the orgy was over, it was thrown into a coal cellar.
Some of the capitalist papers, fearing that the terror may bring too serious repercussions, at times endeavor to soothe the pains a bit by explaining this regular part of the Fascist system as merely some isolated excesses. That, however, is not at all the viewpoint in high Fascist circles. Goering made that perfectly clear in his speech at Essen, on March 10, where he said:
“I refuse to have the police appear in the role of protectors of Jewish department stores. It is about time to put a stop to every scoundrel calling for police protection. When you claim that here or there people have been captured and maltreated, one can only answer that: Where anyone planes, there the shavings fly.”
Yet there is some evidence of “efforts” to halt the “isolated excesses”. Recently a certain celebrated Berlin lady, a demimonde, threw her fashionable home open to a big blow out. The whole diplomatic corps was much in evidence. These gentlemen were brought there by their private chauffeurs and somehow a Nazi storm troop considered this a big occasion and in order to keep in trim, went to work battering some of the poor chauffeurs to pulp. That was obviously an “excess” and the papers promptly carried a warning from Fascist headquarters. After that the American ambassador, Sackett, could cable to his paper’s at home that law and order prevails in Germany.
The Fascists themselves were surprised at the ease and speed with which their brutal onslaughts succeeded in consolidating their position in power. That fact we need not doubt in the least. It is confirmed by events. The absence of resistance from the workers increased the tempo of the attacks to a speed which in itself became an ever greater provocation. This lack of resistance only caused the Fascists to be so much more merciless, not needing to fear anything in their way. An army in open retreat becomes an easier prey for the enemy whose ferocity increases with each step in pursuit. And in this case the tortures inflicted upon the working class are an integral part of the Fascist consolidation of power.
In this there is a serious lesson to be learned by the working class elsewhere who still cling to reformist illusions or depend upon capitalist democratic constitutions and remain unprepared while the reaction strengthens its forces. Every lesson of the German events should be hammered home, never to be forgotten. They must play an important role in guiding the preparations for the future. For it is a certainty that this consolidation of Fascist power in Germany inaugurates a new reactionary period, no one can say for how long, but we can clearly perceive its fateful implications. It will not at all be what the Stalinists conceived of their “third period” estimates. But by its sharpened contradictions it will nevertheless again become pregnant with new revolutionary possibilities.
The German proletariat was disarmed by the illusions which inevitably resulted from the perfidious policy of its social democratic leadership. They, who became the inheritors of the monarchy, allowed and themselves helped to prepare for the counter-revolution to conquer by stages. That is the lesson embodied in their rule from Noske through the bourgeois coalitions, the emergency decrees of Bruening, Papen and Schleicher to Hitler. The German proletariat was disarmed by the Stalinists sabotage of every correct measure of defense. In this lies the sad testimony to the serious weakness of a revolutionary party which rests upon the foundation of a false ideology and is paralyzed by bureaucratic incompetence. The German proletariat failed to receive the support from its international basis – the Soviet Union and the Comintern. And it must be said plainly that the guilt of the catastrophic defeat suffered is not only to be laid at the doors of those who were directly charged with the leadership of the German working class but must be traced to the highest seat of Stalinism in the Comintern and the Communist party of the Soviet Union. Its departure from the road of international revolutionary policy marks the most serious retreat for the world movement which is fraught with sinister implications for the future. One may rest assured that the Fascist enemy will endeavor to pursue its gains relentlessly. Its mission of destroying the German working class organizations is not finally completed so long the Soviet Union remains a bulwark.
With frightful accuracy the Left Opposition warnings of the course of events have come true. They were given correctly and in time because they rested upon the basis of a Marxian analysis. But they were not heeded. It is on this basis also that we have long ago sounded the alarm in regard to the course which will be pursued in the next stage. That is the one in which the Fascist spearhead, already pointing Eastward, will be concentrated upon the efforts to destroy the workers’ republic. But the Stalinist policy – the retreat from revolutionary internationalism – is also disarming the proletarian fatherland. Its defense can be secured only through the most Implacable struggle against Stalinism.
 



(Although the first part of the following article appeared in the last issue of Fourth International, we are reprinting it in this issue. We feel that comrade Swabeck’s contribution is of such importance that our readers will appreciate its availability as an integral unit for future reference. – Ed.) [1]

From his fundamental social and economic studies Marx drew, the conclusion that all human relations are rooted in the material conditions of life, or more specifically, in the prevailing mode of production and distribution .of, each historical stage of development. This is the basis for the existence of social classes and it gives , rise to class antagonism and conflicts as well as to consciousness of class position.
“It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but on the contrary, their social existence determines their consciousness.”
Economic conditions are not the sole determining factor. They form the basis for the political and legal superstructure with its philosophical, cultural and religious attributes. But between all of these there is reciprocal interaction with a fundamental economic necessity which in the final analysis always asserts itself.
Since the beginning of civilization human society has developed on the basis of dominance of class contradictions and class struggles, whenever new productive forces were attained the mode of production was altered and social relations changed correspondingly. New classes appeared in place of the old and the social contradictions and conflicts became the motive power of all historical development.
This holds true for each historical stage, to which capitalism forms no exception. On the contrary, capitalism has intensified these contradictions and enlarged the scale of conflict.
From these contradictions, constantly transformed from one series of connections into another, Marx formulated the objective laws of development of the capitalist system. And he found that the very forces which operate to yield an equilibrium of its elements generate counter-forces which disrupt that equilibrium, These contradictions and their reciprocal interactions, expressed in violent conflicts, crises and wars, account for the instability of the system. Historically, its character is transitory. The ever-expanding productive forces and their ceaseless revolutionization of capitalist society prepares the way for new and higher social forms.
While material conditions of life have thus made necessary a certain order of things during the historical stage of capitalism, they make equally necessary another order into which these must inevitably pass over at the next historical stage.
This we accept as our fundamental concept. It enables us to understand the variations and changes of social relations at each successive stage of development. It enables us also to understand the corresponding changes in the reactions, the moods and the consciousness of the working class. And the application of this concept provides the key to a correct; appraisal of the future course of development.
 
American Capitalism
The analysis made by Marx of the objective laws of motion of capitalist society is most fully confirmed by the evolution of its American sector – its most highly developed expression. The history of the United States is the history of capitalism in its most modern and its most advanced form.
Since its birth the United States has been built on a capitalist foundation from its economic substructure to its philosophical and religious summits. American history reveals an abundance of bold ventures, great spurts, and revolutionary leaps. Its outstanding phenomenon is the remarkably compressed character, and unexampled speed and tempo, of social development. Within this framework American capitalism displayed its special traits of audacity, aggressive enterprise and ruthless pursuance of its struggle for class supremacy.
As is well known, the secret of its success lies primarily in the unique position enjoyed by American capitalism during the earlier and greater part of its development. It had possibilities aplenty for sustained expansion on a virgin continent rich in natural resources. This provided the essential prerequisites for technological advance. Rapidly growing labor productivity created abundant surplus values to furnish the life blood of an ever greater accumulation of capital, all of which existed alongside of an organically expanding internal market. As it unfolded, this process was interrupted periodically by crises and panics, yet in its dialectic interactions it became a self-sustaining process.
The United States became the land of plenty and of opportunity. Its ever-mounting wealth enabled American capitalism to give greater concessions expressed in a relatively higher standard of living for the population and greater degree of formal democracy than was the case with capitalism elsewhere.
These unique possibilities available to American capitalism set its definite seal upon the corresponding social developments. While the working class movement often challenged the capitalist drive toward complete class domination, its own evolution during this early state followed an irregular pattern. Robust and militant from its inception, it forged ahead in turbulently explosive struggles, especially during each boom period, to retreat and almost disappear for a time. But it rose again to make further gains. Bold venture and revolutionary leaps became a distinguishing characteristic also of the early American labor movement, reaching its highest point during the upheavals of the eighties of the past century.
The equilibrium of class relations suffered rude shocks, sometimes merely causing a shift of fighting advantage between the opposing forces, at other times, however, having a sufficiently shattering effect to necessitate its re-constitution on a new plane.
Such a reconstitution took place after the explosive period of the eighties. A relative stability of class relations ensued, but it was attained primarily by narrowing the scope and influence of the unions to the skilled sector at the cost of keeping the great mass of the labor population
unorganized and helpless. Finally the unions were in actuality divorced from mass production industry. And as American capitalism, still enjoying the fruits of its unique possibilities, advanced toward its most healthy prime in the boom period of the Twenties, the labor movement retreated and lost ground.
 
The Great Depression
With the great depression the unique position which American capitalism had enjoyed came to an end. The long-term factors of organic expansion of its internal market had been exhausted. But exhausted also were its historically progressive qualities. The great depression marked the end of one era and the beginning of a new.
Since the crash of 1929 the social and economic structure of the United States has been subjected to a transformation which is qualitative in its content. Correspondingly, certain important functions of the political superstructure have been altered. As a consequence, social and class relations exist now on a foundation which is also qualitatively different. A new molecular process was set into motion; and the mutual interaction of these basic changes will influence decisively the course of future development.
Several features of this transformation stand out in bold relief and warrant careful examination. Let us consider first among these what an inventory of national wealth reveals.
 
1. A study of income and wealth published by the National Bureau of Economic Research presents illuminating facts and figures. Estimates of this study are carried through from the year 1896 to 1948. But their real significance lies in the sharp contrasts revealed by the two periods, before the depression and after. The figures given in constant dollars based on 1929 prices read as follows:
From 1896 to 1929, both inclusive, national wealth rose from $164 billion to $426.3 billion with a fairly regular upward curve of an increasing ratio, and amounting to an average annual rate of growth of about 3 percent. From 1929 to 1948, however, the figures present an entirely different picture. The rate of growth of national wealth now becomes highly irregular. Starting from a total of $426.3 billion in 1929 the increase over these years is very slight; the actual total of 1948 is only $4(61.8, or an average annual gain of less than one-half percent (to be exact, 0.45 percent).
Projections made of the above mentioned study by US News and World Report, carried through 1951, reveal the fact that while we have a plethora of automobiles, radios, televisions and innumerable gadgets, the total value of home buildings, measured in constant dollars on a per capita basis, is today 13 percent below that of 1929. These projections summarize as follows:
“Even now, big as the US wealth has become, the country is still a little below 1929 in real wealth, population growth considered.”
The basic trend revealed by these estimates is clear and beyond dispute. It does not conceal the fact that the American bourgeoisie has become fabulously enriched by vast profits made in peace-time as well as in war-time. But the twofold effect of ravages of depression, and a vast scale of arms output in place of production of use values, during this latter period, created a different reality for the American people. Relatively the country as a whole is now poorer than it was in 1929. In terms of population growth this relationship becomes absolute.
What does this basic trend portray if not a system in decline? The powerful internal dynamic once generated by American capitalism, out of its past unique position, to be sure, and not out of any inherent quality, this internal dynamic is now being rapidly dissipated. American capitalism now squanders, recklessly, the wealth accumulated by past generations. This is the surest indication that it has in actuality entered the state of decline of its world system as a whole.
 
2. A second feature of the transformation carries implications of more immediate and more basic concern. The great depression revealed the fact that American capitalist economy had lost its capacity to operate as a self-sustaining process. In place of an ever-growing market, keeping abreast of the expanding productive forces, a yawning disproportion appeared. The whole process had been thrown into reverse; it could no longer proceed unaided and on its own momentum. Artificial stimulants had to be injected to keep the economy a going concern.
At first these stimulants took the form of simple “pump-priming” through public works expenditures as an effort to close the gap between production and consumption. But the efforts of the first phase quickly proved insufficient. They were superseded by war and armaments expenditures together with foreign economic and military grants.
Thus, while in 1929 expenditures for the armed forces amounted to less than one percent of the gross national product, in 1944 at the height of World War II expenditures, these were not less than 45 percent. Today the arms program accounts for 20 to 25 percent of the gross national product.
 
The Arms Program
War and armaments production became, and has since remained, a sector of decisive importance to the whole economy. It was decisive not only in the sense of its central imperialist aim to which all other economic efforts had to be subordinated. It was, and remains, decisive also in the sense of maintaining a balance in a precarious economic equilibrium loaded with explosive, elements of crisis.
While the armaments program represents a terrific burden of overhead expense on the nation as a whole, its real paradox lies in the fact that the economy under capitalist relations of production could not be sustained without it. This has already become a demonstrated fact, it is the fact of a qualitative change. The truth is that this economy is no longer expanding organically in the sense of either rapidly enlarging old industries or creating new ones. Those of the latter category which have appeared during the period under consideration, such as radio and television, do not absorb a sufficient part of the immense productive capacity to provide a serious impulsion to the economy. Hence only arms production remains to provide an artificial stimulant. In the absence of an organically growing market these components of the economic structure lay the basis for more devastating crises to come. Thus all the factors which in the past stimulated and strengthened the prodigious growth of the American economy are either disappearing or turning into their opposite.
 
3. Alongside these changes in the economic foundation and closely integrated with them should be noted the vastly enlarged scale of function of the political superstructure. The paralyzing effect of the great depression made necessary a much more direct state intervention in all aspects of social and economic life. Beginning with the New Deal, this intervention continued through the Fair Deal and it will, all appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, become more complete under Eisenhower.
Greater and more direct intervention in social and economic relations is an outgrowth of, and at the same time a particularly distinguishing characteristic of, the capitalist world system in its stage of decline. Its appearance in the United States serves to underline the fact that basic elements of decline have also reached these shores.
Increasing anarchy of production in general, pushed to its extreme by the greater concentration of monopoly capital, generates ever more malignant elements of economic crisis. Complexities of international relations, expressed in wars and revolutions, and reflected as well in the astronomic costs of the war program, tend to invest every manifestation of economic crisis with a distinct social and political character. They tend to become manifestations of crisis of the bourgeois regime. The combination of these factors has necessitated constantly more direct state intervention in an attempt to preserve the social stability of the regime.
World War II, the Korean war, and the continued war program have brought this intervention to its highest form of development in the United States. The government became the centrally directing force in all social and economic activity. Major risks of capital investments in the war program were assumed by the government with guaranteed lucrative profit returns for the big monopoly concerns. The government took charge of labor relations and set patterns of wages and working conditions. Through heavy taxation, the government controls an increasingly large share of the national income. This constitutes its operating capital – social capital – which is used primarily to promote imperialist aggression in an effort to keep the economy on an even keel and safeguard capitalist profits.
On the whole, the powers of the political state are strengthened immeasurably; its preponderance, however, renders the political state so much more vulnerable to the tremors and eruptions of social and economic relations with which it is now so thoroughly integrated. The impact on the future political life of the nation will tend in this sphere also to bring forth new and higher forms of development.
 
4. Yet the most important aspect of the transformation of the American social structure since the depression is the change that has taken place in the relationship of class forces. While the outward stability of its social fabric still remains, this relationship now rests on an entirely new foundation. The working class has emerged as a distinct social force foreshadowing today its great potentialities of tomorrow.
From the lowest depth of its long period of ebb-tide the labor movement advanced in one mighty leap. A volcanic eruption climaxed the long accumulated pressures of capitalist exploitation which were intensified by the mass unemployment and destitution of the depression days. From virtual atomization the working class went ahead and built the most powerful union movement in the world. In the process of growth, quantity changed to quality. Union consciousness, cohesion and militancy replaced the diffusion, inertia and backwardness of the past.
The hitherto prevailing equilibrium of class forces was shattered and it could be restored only on an entirely new basis: on the basis of recognition of this new power. For the American social structure this change of relationship more than any other development signifies the end of an era and the beginning of a new.
Outwardly this new equilibrium still remains relatively stable. The opposite and antagonistic class forces have maintained a certain balance of power. How was this manifested in actual life? In the first place, the war and the arms economy provided a guaranteed market, relatively free of competition, for the products of capital investments. But it permitted also a vast expansion and a greater utilization of the available productive forces which in turn permitted a more complete realization of surplus value. On the whole this made possible the continuation of a measure of concessions to labor. Through full employment, including overtime, and the winning of several wage rounds, the working class standard of living maintained a rising trend. Out of these concessions the so-called Welfare State gradually evolved.
Conservative tendencies within the working class grew and became more pronounced as a result of these conditions. And the labor bureaucracy, supported tacitly by the rank and file union members, drew closer to the government, seeking its protection against the power of monopoly capitalism. In effect this new relationship took on the form of a political coalition, not formally recognized of course, but existing in fact. The government needed the collaboration of the labor leaders to assure the indispensable prerequisite of mass acquiescence in its war program; the latter wanted to maintain the benefits of the “Welfare State.” This was the essence of the political. coalition which served as an essential prop for the relative social stability that prevailed through the New Deal and the Fair Deal period.
Working class acquiescence in the imperialist war program became an established fact, not to be disturbed seriously even by the unpopularity of the Korean war. Now the Korean war has come to an end. This, of course, does not signify a change of the fundamental course of American imperialist policy. Its essence remains global war of undisguised counter-revolution: war for the survival of the capitalist system.
 
Washington’s Problems
But the war plans elaborated by the Washington strategists are now badly disorganized; their time-table is upset. Defeat in Korea underlines the power and sweep of the colonial revolution. Increased working class resistance to Washington policies in the European metropolitan centers unfolds alongside the mounting difficulties, insecurity and crisis of their bourgeois regimes. The overall effects cause hesitation and muffled resistance also by the latter and introduce paralysis into the NATO structure. Not because these bourgeois regimes, like, for example, that of the British Tories, are less imperialistic or less counter-revolutionary than their more powerful Washington allies. No, the real reason is the impact of more clearly defined and sharpened class relations on Tory home grounds. Stronger than the pressure from Washington is the more immediate and direct threat to Tory class rule coming from the growing consciousness and political advance of the British working class which, moreover, is displaying its hatred of imperialist war. Tory hesitation and resistance reflect their awareness of that danger.
This is paralleled by significant changes in the Soviet Union since the death of Stalin; and the totality of these developments has introduced further modifications in the world relation of class forces which compel a considerably slower tempo of the imperialist war drive. In turn these modifications, together with the change of tempo, tend to aggravate the contradictions of the American social and economic structure. The artificial stimulants which had operated to yield an equilibrium of its elements generated counterforces which threaten to disrupt that equilibrium. Out of their mutual interaction elements of crisis once again become predominant.
A twofold dilemma confronts the American bourgeoisie. In the field of foreign policy the relationship of class forces, on a world scale, is evolving more distinctly to the disadvantage of its projected counter-revolutionary strategy. Internal policy faces the beginning of economic decline which is fraught with serious consequences for the stability of the social structure. Dynamic forces have been set into motion in both fields which easily pass beyond the control of policy makers at imperialist headquarters. Both pose problems of social crisis.
At the imperialist home base the program of arms production did not mitigate, let alone remove, a single one of the basic causes out of which crises arise. Not only did these persist, but they have grown more malignant. This can be illustrated quite simply.
Commodities produced in a normal peace-time economy for the most part return to further sustain that economy. By and large they return either in the form of capital goods employed as means of production, in the form of raw materials of production, or in the form of means of consumption to sustain the labor force, in this manner they serve to build up and strengthen the economy and increase national wealth. The output of war material, on the other hand, is in its entirety unproductively consumed. Arms production on the present scale, therefore, constitutes a terrific drain on the economy and on all the resources of the nation. The debt load, both government and private, has reached astronomical proportions; credit inflation extends its disintegrating influence into every pore of the economy; heavy taxation cuts deeply into the lowest income brackets. And yet a serious reduction of arms expenditures would spell disaster to the economy.
But the program of arms production promotes also the exactly opposite tendency. Military needs, stimulated by the ravenous appetite for imperialist conquest, demand an accelerated and unrestrained expansion of productive capacity which quickly surpasses the absorbing ability of the market. Precisely this is now the case. Elements of a crisis of overproduction appear alongside of, and in spite of, the leverage of vast arms expenditures. It is clear now that the war and the armaments economy tends to push all the contradictions of the capitalist mode of production to the extreme. Tendencies toward crisis, merely held at bay by the injection of artificial stimulants of arms expenditures, are now due to erupt. Their explosive fury tends to become greater because of the consequent unrestrained expansion of the material forces of production.
 
Depression or War
The basic transformation of the economic structure now reveals its real nature: economic decline amidst an enormous armaments production. Indeed, this poses more sharply the terrible alternatives: depression or war. Any other course is definitely excluded. And implicit in both alternatives is the social and political crisis of American capitalism. Its decadence is approaching a deadly climax.
Once again the Marxist analysis of crisis arising inevitably out of the many-sided contradictions between the productive forces and the productive relations of capitalism finds its verification in the actual march of events. But these relations of production, as Marx made equally clear, are capable of final explanation only in terms of the social relation of classes and the position they occupy in the process of production. In other words, all these developments can be interpreted only in the sense of their dynamic interplay with existing class relations, or they cannot be interpreted at all. The reaction to these developments by the contending class forces therefore becomes the decisive question. What the power-drunk bourgeoisie intends to do is already clearly indicated. Its course of action is determined by its economic and political needs as a class owning and controlling the means of production.
Economic decline imposes serious restrictions on the full and complete realization of surplus value. While the magnitude of the latter must inevitably diminish, the magnitude of arms expenditure remains, and it will eventually increase. Yet these terrific “overhead costs” of Wall Street’s program of world domination can come from one source, and one only: national income.
Concerned first and foremost with profits and its accumulation of capital, the bourgeoisie, therefore, plans to effect a drastic redistribution of national income. It will not tolerate concessions to labor that approach anywhere near the previous scale. It needs an ever greater part of the purchasing power of the workers to finance the tremendous costs of armaments production. At the same time the bourgeoisie is less and less disposed to tolerate a social relationship in which the labor movement holds, a certain balance of power. And in order to strengthen its own class position it is equally determined to change this relationship. Nothing less will satisfy the American bourgeoisie as a minimum prerequisite in preparation for the next stage of aggressive moves in its predatory war plans. As these unfold, the titanic immensity of the contemplated desperate venture would cut the working class standard of living to the very bone and tax the manpower requirements to the point of virtual slave labor.
From these general considerations a two-pronged attack on labor unfolds. Instead of the measure of concessions previously granted, the chiefs of big business and finance are now determined to reduce the workers’ share of the national income, while they themselves plunder the nation’s resources. Austerity will replace prosperity.
But this part of the program cannot be carried out successfully unless it is combined with measures to curtail the power of the trade union movement in order to assure complete command for the capitalist monopoly concerns. The witch hunt, attempts at thought control, together with repressive and union-busting legislation are being fitted into the whole pattern of attack. Step by step these measures can be expected to unfold alongside of the production decline and the consequently more abundant supply of labor power. Flank attacks at the initial stage developing to a full-scale offensive for which all of the essential groundwork has been laid down carefully and consciously: this is the real significance of Eisenhower’s Millionaire Cabinet.
 
Anti-Labor Program
The political coalition between the government and the trade union bureaucracy has been brought to an end. It was terminated, not on the initiative of the labor leaders, but by the very same chiefs of big business and finance who have taken charge of the execution of the anti-labor program. Now the political coalition has been replaced by open, unabashed and completely unchallenged control of the government by monopoly capitalism. Its first objective is to carry the anti-labor program through to the end. Indeed, state intervention in social and economic relations will become more complete under the Eisenhower regime.
Even in this most highly developed capitalist nation, no clearer proof has ever been provided of the real role and function of the political state as an instrument of class rule. It was to be expected, of course, that this should become more pronounced as fissures of decline and decay begin to crack the capitalist foundation. Increasing state intervention in social and class relations arises, on the whole, out of the reactionary necessity to prevent the disintegration of the old order, to hold the working class at bay and to preserve the bourgeois relations of production. State intervention can therefore occur only on behalf of the interests of capitalism, whose class rule it symbolizes and translates into action.
But the relationship of class forces is not at all as favorable to the bourgeoisie as may appear on the surface. By virtue of its economic and social weight the working class is in possession of a far greater power than that of its adversary. It is now a class socially transformed to the highest level of union consciousness and organization. And the trend toward economic crisis together with the two-pronged attack on labor will tend to alter correspondingly the further course of the class struggle.
A downturn in production leads to a worsening in the economic outlook and a degradation of the living conditions of the workers. The combination of unemployment, elimination of overtime, wage cuts, job re-classifications, further speed-up to lower production costs, price and rent gouging, heavier sales taxes, cutting deeper into the lower income brackets, will exert a downward pressure on living standards and aggravate feelings of insecurity. Together with mounting attacks on the unions, the totality of such a situation is bound to stimulate the spirit of working class resentment and resistance.
Conservative tendencies, which are still predominant, will quickly prove to be relative and transitory in nature. It is true that for a considerable period worker militancy abated, but it was not subdued. The power of the labor movement was held at bay, but it was not impaired. On the contrary, as all the facts of life demonstrate, the American workers have become more conscious of the need to defend and preserve the standard of living already attained, and to preserve their democratic rights.
Confidence in capitalist prosperity and its automatic recovery from, crisis, predominant among the workers during the boom period of the twenties, is now nonexistent. Their thinking in this respect has turned into its opposite. Now the workers display their suspicion and distrust; they will be so much more readily impelled into action. And one thing is certain, regardless of the handicap of its present conservative and supine leadership, the nature and scope of working class action cannot fail to reflect the immense power of an organized movement eighteen million strong.
Viewed superficially, the outlook and actions of the American workers appear to fallow strictly along the path of deeply rooted empirical considerations. This is true to the extent that they remain relatively oblivious to any theoretical concepts and generally advance step by step following the rule of practical, experience.
 
Labor’s Power
But these workers have also shown themselves to be capable of making dialectic leaps into new and revolutionary methods of struggle, and toward new and more effective forms of organization, uncharted by previous experience. The enormous gains made by the forward leap which gave rise to the CIO, has made an indelible imprint on the working class as a whole. There need be no doubt that it has today a far greater sense of its power. Moreover, this power is not marred by any demoralization of defeats, nor is it infected with the debilitating poison of reformism) – either of the classic “socialist” variety or the latter-day Stalinist brand. And the American workers are today also much more keenly aware of what they consider to be their right to a high standard of living.
The movement now toward merger of the AFL, the CIO and the independent unions into one united federation, if and when successfully consummated, despite certain inevitable negative features, will tend to stimulate further this awareness and this sense of power.
How will this be translated into action? Facing a hostile administration and a hostile Congress, the workers assume already a more critical attitude toward government policy on domestic issues. They will soon question also the disastrous consequences of foreign policy. Politics and economics have become much more closely integrated due to the growing state intervention in social and economic life. In the minds of the workers the government is held increasingly responsible for the welfare of the people. Any failure in this respect will, therefore, be charged directly to government policy.
As a result, all the problems of the social and economic structure are more readily translated into terms of political action. Out of sheer necessity this will be further reflected in sharpened and more determined struggle for influence over and control of the government. Resistance against attacks on their living standards and on their unions is sure to impel the action of the workers in that direction. And inevitably so, for this will become the decisive battlefield at the next historical juncture.
Moreover the conflict of class interests in political action, hitherto muffled, will stand out more clearly defined. And it is reasonable to assume that the American workers will not be slow to learn that political power is implicit in the mighty forces of organized labor.
With the breakup of the political coalition between the government and the labor bureaucracy an important element of social stability has .been negated., With this also the stage is being set for mass struggles of an unprecedented nature, and. scope. And the dynamic components, inherent in this whole situation, will act as a mighty catalyst propelling the working class forward in another historic leap.
Engels said somewhere that the most significant leap of all time was the leap from inorganic matter into organic life. A transformation from a simple organization of atoms into molecules of chemical complexity, combustible, and of high energy content, which are the chief characteristics of all life. These permitted the almost infinite variability of organic matter capable of reproducing itself. From these characteristics emerged the cell as the unit from whose multiplication and differentiation the whole plant and animal body develops. Through the endlessly repeated cycles of interaction between inorganic matter and organic life, evolution made possible another historic leap – the transition from our simian ancestors to conscious man, from bestiality to humanity.
 
Approach of Turning Point
Forward leaps recording a change from quantity to quality are characteristic of human history as well as of nature. In the realm of human society such transformation’s arise out of causes that were prepared by the previous march of events. They occur as specific climactic points in the constant process of evolution; the outcome of the cumulative action of contradictory forces at work. Moreover, these transformations arise out of a fundamental economic necessity which in the final analysis always asserts itself. Precisely this is confirmed, above all, by the history of the United States. And it will be confirmed again by the events to come.
For the American working class it can be asserted, with the greatest confidence, that all the elements are now in the making for a new historic leap reaching, this time, a grander scale and a qualitatively higher level than that which brought the CIO into being. This time it will rise to the level of political class independence most likely expressed in the formation of a Labor Party.
Once started on the road to independent political action the workers will move forward with hurricane speed and power. They will move massively because the more profoundly life is affected by a given historical activity the greater will be the amplitude of the mass that is engaged therein. Their present immense powers, firmly established, will tend to reduce all time-intervals. And we shall witness on the North American continent a great working class transformation from political backwardness to political consciousness and action.
The American working class is thus approaching a decisive turning point which will prepare the ground for a revolutionary leadership. Its further advance and its historical action is marked out clearly and irrevocably by its own position in life and by the whole organization of contemporary American bourgeois society. It is the only force that can defeat the imperialist monster whose power, while predominant throughout the capitalist world, is concentrated in the United States.
The transformation of the American social and economic structure has made more certain that this historical action will be carried to its completion. In the process
a more harmonious rhythm will be established between the revolutionary potential of the American working class, already clearly demonstrated, and the tasks imposed upon it by history. It can be expected to march forward, to reach vistas and to scale heights of triumph never witnessed before, thus preparing the way for a new social order.
For the fate of mankind this will he decisive, because “in the last historical analysis all the problems of our planet will be decided upon American soil.”
 
Footnote by ETOL
1. The vast majority of this article (all but the last 18 paragraphs) had already appeared in the previous issue.



It is to be expected that Communism will become a much more serious challenge in these coming presidential elections than hitherto. That is so mainly because of the vital working class issues of the economic crisis and mass unemployment which is pressing harder every day for a solution, or at least for some measure of relief. There will, of course, be no solution found in the elections under a capitalist regime, and it is not for this purpose that Communists participate. They will foster no such illusions within the working class.
Nevertheless there is an opportunity, by the medium of the election campaign, to advance the development of the Communist movement and strengthen the working class politically. It is in this sense that the more serious challenge is presented.
But the Communists are not the only force appealing in the name of the working class, calling for its support and endeavoring to rally its ranks. Even the bourgeois politicians have not lost any of their power of demagogy. And, it is well to remember that capitalism still controls all the main avenues of working class influence, propaganda and education. The Socialist party hopes to at least raise itself to its former level of a contending force. It is stepping forward with a brand new platform, but as before cleverly designed to appeal to the working class and to the petty bourgeoisie. The tone and form of a number of its demands have a more radical flavor than usual, even here and there a smell of militancy. Yet it is so construed that it contains no serious offense – not to speak of danger – to the bourgeoisie. That, of course, is its object. While it will bear more analysis later, it suffices here to say that it is a reformist platform through and through.
For the revolutionary workers the choice presented in these elections is an easy one. Their choice will be the Communist party. It is our choice. To many workers, however, who may be entirely sincere in gaining relief measures for their class, the distinction is not so clear. Many of those will undoubtedly yet have to learn by bitter experience. But even the elections should become a valuable lesson.
It is in view of this that the platform presented by the Communist party assumes special importance. The needs of the workers come more to the fore during election times. Demands for amelioration of their distress become more pressing. The Communists fight for these demands. But they do not expect a solution to issue out of the elections. That is entirely bound up with the revolutionary way out. Immediate or partial demands contained in their platform are there for the purpose of more directly focusing the working class attention, to become the central points for the struggle of today, which must steadily develop toward the revolutionary way out. Hence that latter objective must first of all be clear in the Communist platform.
Is that the case with regard to the platform submitted by the official party leadership? Not at all. It presents the revolutionary way out as a workers’ and farmers’ government – even in several instances calling it a “revolutionary government”. What does this mean? Does it mean the Proletarian Dictatorship? If so, it should be stated so precisely by that term. If this is not meant – and it cannot be under that formulation – it becomes an opportunist adaptation to reformist views. The slogan of a workers’ and farmers’ government is not an adaptation to American peculiarities, for here the working class constitutes the overwhelming percentage of the population. The term a workers’ and farmers’ government in the accepted American sense is the reformist sense. When presented that way in a Communist party platform it becomes a mockery on Marxism.
We would, of course, not propose that the Proletarian Dictatorship become an objective for these elections. But as to the revolutionary way out it must be stated in that manner so that its definite proletarian and revolutionary basis becomes clear.
Only in this way can there be continuity in a revolutionary sense with the immediate and partial demands advanced. Otherwise they stand alone as mere reform measures.
Among the immediate demands, contained in the party platform, which generally correspond with the working class needs today there appears, however, the one for self-determination for the Black Belt (for the Negroes). It would have been far more in keeping with Marxism to substitute in its place the correct slogan for economic, social and political equality for the Negroes. But is it accidental that there is no demand for the shorter workday? Even the socialist parties in the pre-war period demanded the eight-hour workday, during elections and after. Today the demand should be the six-hour workday without reduction of pay. As a part of the platform it would become a means of focusing attention upon it as an immediate objective which can become helpful in building, strengthening and unifying the movement today. Its realization will naturally mean a step forward to a stronger class position.
One proposition in the platform reads: “Even to force concessions NOW from the three capitalist parties, there is no weapon so powerful as a vote for Communism and participation in the daily struggles led by the Communist Party.” (emphasis in original). And, it adds the direct inference that the capitalist politicians may grant such concessions to “keep the masses from turning to Communism”. This approach has nothing in common with Marxism. We do not ask the workers to vote Communist in order to force concessions from the capitalist parties. We do not ask them to participate in the daily struggles for this purpose. We ask the workers to do so because of our revolutionary objective and to strengthen their position toward finally reaching this objective. Concessions gained are by products of the class struggle, not our aim, and gained only because of our strengthened position against, and over the opposition of the capitalist parties.
If we fail to educate, to organize and to prepare the working class for a clear understanding of, and for the attainment of the revolutionary objectives, temporary concessions gained can, instead of becoming partial victories on the way, be turned into retardation of the struggle.
 



The American government is proceeding full blast in developing its “reconstruction” program to “break the backbone of the depression”. It solicits the support of bankers and industrialists. The program is epitomized by the national policy of credit expansion aiming at “releasing hundreds of millions of dollars in credits to start the wheels of industry turning.”
So far two main measures have been taken; (1) the loans advanced by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and (2) the release of funds by open market buying of government securities by the Federal Reserve Banks. About $1,000,000,000 in financial resources has been mobilized and set in circulation by these measures. But, as one financier laconically remarked: “Nevertheless, credit has not gone into productive channels, loans advanced by the member banks are showing marked declines.” Credit System During Crisis
It is well to stop at this point for a moment to pose the essential question: How does the credit system operate during a crisis?
When the process of reproduction flows “normally” credits are stable and continually expand. When a stoppage in this flow occurs, due to delayed returns and overstocking of markets, there is a superabundance of capital, of productive capital available; but, in a form in which it cannot perform its function. It is a mass of commodity capital which is unsaleable because of its very superabundance. It is a mass of fixed capital which remains unused because the very process of reproduction is at a standstill. Witness today the enormous production capacity of American industry, now not utilized, and with it the millions strong army of unemployed workers. In such a situation credit is contracted for good and sufficient reasons. Firstly, because this capital remains unemployed. Secondly, because the confidence in the continuity of the process of reproduction is shaken and thirdly, because the demand for this kind of commercial credits decreases. Those manufacturers who curtail, or cease production because they have lots of unsold goods on hand, or at least lack demand for their goods, do not need to buy on credit.
It is not a case of there being no need of loan capital. There is such a need. But loan capital performs one distinct function during the upward curve of the production cycle, and an entirely different one during the crisis. During the upward curve, loan capital is in demand for the purpose of being transformed into productive capital. During the upward curve, loan capital is in demand for the purpose of being transformed into productive capital. During the crisis bills of exchange continue to press for conversion into cash. But the majority of the bills represent actual sales and purchases, which, to make matters worse, have been extended far beyond the demands of society.
* * * *
Operation of Loan Capital
In times of crisis the demand for loan capital reaches its maximum. But the borrowing is done for the purpose of paying in order to settle previously contracted obligations. In this manner, the loan capital wanders right back to the banks in settlement of interests and maturities. The rate of profit, and with it, the demand for industrial capital have almost reached the vanishing point.
It is therefore no wonder that the loans advanced by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, to the tune of more than one half billion dollars today, with but two small exceptions, all went to meet obligations of principal or interest. The two exceptions were a $27,500,000 to the Pennsylvania Railroad, and a $4,399,000 loan to New York Central Railroad, both of which are claimed to be for purposes of reconstruction. From the other category of loans we will mention only one instance, that of $32,500,000 to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, advanced solely for the meeting of outstanding obligations of the company.
 
Credit and Industry
Surely, the credit expansion policy is developing full blast. The bankers and industrialists are being taken care of. For the latter the maturing bills are being met and for the former the bills of exchange are being converted into cash. But – the wheels of industry are not turning.
Will the “ingenious” proposal offered by the Young Committee of bankers and industrialists have better prospects of success? We recall that much ado was made out of the creation of this committee and its prospective aid in the “reconstruction” program. By its make up, the committee alone was said to represent aggregate capital resources of about $18,000,000,000. Now the committee has labored; and here is what it proposes: There are so many hundreds of thousands of small home owners who have mortgage obligations which, during these hard times, it becomes doubly hard to meet. And that is the grand idea of the committee, to facilitate the advancing of loans for such purposes. It is not so much to make sure that the small home owner keeps his home. No, the bankers do not want to have too much real-estate on their hands. But meeting these mortgage obligations enables the banks to keep their dividends in shape. Of course, – this will not start the wheels of industry turning either.
How do matters then stand with the second measure of the credit expansion scheme? During the period of accelerated buying, or taking over, of government securities by the Federal Reserve Banks, between April 13 and May 18, a total of $480,000,000 were released. This operation is now said to have “arrested the catastrophic decline in bank credits in progress since last July.” But loans and investments made by all the member banks throughout the country continue to lag nevertheless.
 
Where are the Markets
With these huge funds made available, the problem still remained one of finding ways and means for putting them to work. The dilemma is, what to do with the credits available – with the expanded credits. Where are the markets for profitable investments? This is the question asked by the perturbed financiers; and the cruel answer is: The market for which capitalism produces has become severely contracted!
The National City Bank of New York in its monthly letter of June bewails the present situation in the following terms:
“Never has there been a clearer demonstration of the part that the accumulation of capital ... plays in normal business activity. Every promise of sustained improvement in the industries making goods for personal consumption has failed of realization because supporting improvements in the ‘capital goods’ industries has not occurred.”
Yes, the capital goods production – production of means of production – failed to improve. And quite naturally so. Just remember the enormous production capacity now unused. This is the constant part of capital which in the process of accumulation increases much more rapidly than variable capital (labor power). In other words there is already such a huge overproduction of capital – of means of production – to the extent that they serve as capital.
One can get a glance from another angle of the capital investment problem by merely taking a look at the figures of new capital emissions. According to Otto P. Schwarzchild, president of the National Statistical Service Inc., the total new financing in the United States (stocks and bonds, but not including municipal bond issues) for the first five months of this year aggregated $229,078,00. This compares with a total for the first five months of last year of $1,600,697,000; and for the same period of 1930, of a total of $2,869,080,000. From this first crisis year till today there is a drop of 92 percent in capital emissions.
These figures illustrate but once again the fact that during times of crisis the demand for industrial capital seriously diminishes. And yet the “wise” capitalist rulers speak of the, expansion of credits to start the wheels of industry turning! For them, however, the question still remains: how are they going to “break the backbone of the crisis?”
 
The Government’s Part
“The government must first bring its house in order”, insists the Wall Street bankers. “The budget must be balanced”, was their demand. Now it is balanced – at least, it is a sort of a balance. Provisions are made for supporting the policy of credit expansion. But this credit expansion, instead of turning the wheels of industry, goes into loan capital to pay previously contracted obligations. So, in other words, the government becomes a more active guarantor for these loans advanced to pay interests and principals to the marauding brigands of Wall St. The budget balancing has extended taxation to make up for the expense; and, of course, the excursion into the field of indirect taxation met with some success. The sales tax schemes were finally, in the main, put over, leaving the collections for payment of the bills a broader field, embracing all who are still in a position to buy.
Apparently the so-called relief bills pending before Congress are also making progress. The ideas of those senators and representatives, who champion the interests of the petty bourgeoisie, to secure large appropriations for public works, are rather violently frowned upon. That would be too much like a dole, The Wagner bill now before the Senate meets the favor of those representing the higher brackets of present society. It provides for $300,000,000 in loans to the states – a drop in the bucket even as charity for the millions of unemployed. It provides for $500,000,000 for public works – to be spread over a long period of time. It provides for $1,500,000,000 in debenture for loans to what is called self liquidating enterprises, this to be administered by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
 
The Problems Still Remains
The government is surely putting its house in order and following closely the most hopeful designs of the Wall Street pirates. Further enormous sums in credit expansion are to be made available with the hope that the wished for business expansion will result. But there is still a long way to go and that depends entirely on different factors. To recapitulate some of these factors are: (1) Restoration of confidence, within capitalism, in the continuity of the process of reproduction. This is not a mere abstract problem; it involves such questions as markets, profit rate, etc. (2) Raising of the present level of commodity prices. This in other words will mean, at least, a degree of inflation which is practically on the way. (3) Checking the fall in the rate of profit by further increase of capital and thus increasing the mass of profit. This is the crux of the problem. It spells an increase in the intensity of exploitation and further depression of the wage level.
In this we consider only the home front; there still remains for consideration such questions as prospects in the world market. But these indications alone bear witness to the coming higher composition of capital and with it the greater intensity of competition and of class conflicts. They indicate the enormous contradictions in preparation for the next stage.


(Another article in this series will follow next week, dealing especially with the world markets and some prospects. – Ed.)
 



With the passing of its two and half year mark, the economic crisis is still on its downward spiral. Now, however, the American government has moved much more actively into its orbit. It has created a number of auxiliary instruments, outstanding among which are the Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the Young Committee, the latter established by the New York Federal Reserve Bank and expected to be followed by like committees in other federal reserve districts. By this is provided a more harmonious blend of interests and purposes of monopoly capitalism and its executive organ at Washington, D.C. But because of its occurring within the framework of the strongest of the world imperialist powers, this mobilization of capitalist resources assumes special significance.
The sum and substance of the proposals made by this combination of forces is the “expansion “ of credits and the measures which flow from such an objective. The aims it holds in view are: First, to restore, within capitalism, the confidence in the continuity of the process of production, which is badly shaken by the prolonged crisis. Secondly, an endeavor to increase commodity prices in the hope of extending a contracting market. Thirdly, to neutralize, or at least check the fall In the rate of profit by restoring a rate which will make possible to resume the cycle of reproduction. This latter is to be accomplished essentially and most directly by increasing the intensity of exploitation and depressing wages below the value of labor power, or in other words, to reduce the whole standard of living of the working class.
How well these alms are being realized, or in the process of being realized, with the capitalist measures proposed, it is necessary for us to examine. But we must first of all bear in mind that this crisis, as well as other such crises in capitalism is essentially one of overproduction of capital – an overproduction of the means of production to the extent that they serve as capital, that is, serve for the exploitation of labor. The credit system itself is the main lever of overproduction because of its forcing of the process of reproduction to its extreme limit. Consequently the efforts for further expansion of what already constitutes a superabundance of credits, although largely idle, and regardless of its immediate results, will, without fail, resolve itself into more acute contradictions in the next historical stage.
This question we propose to take up in detail, but before that, let us take a look at the crisis and its present sweep, still moving downward. To elucidate, the restatement of a few fundamentals will be appropriate.
It is one of the laws of capitalist production, and which its development carries with it, that compared to the total capital which it sets in motion and compared to the constant part of capital (means of production and raw materials) there is a relative decrease of the variable part of capital (labor power). In other words, compared to the growing mechanization of industry the need for labor power diminishes relatively. The same number of workers can in the same time produce an ever growing amount of commodities. And, the number of employed workers are continually on the decline compared to the mass of the means of production and the commodities produced. It follows that that portion of living labor which is unpaid and represents surplus value is likewise on the decline compared to the value of total capital invested. This results in the fall of the profit rate. But the increase of the mass of the absolute surplus value appropriated by the capitalists, or the mass of profit, on the other hand, provides for the growth of the total capital – an ever growing accumulation of capital.
We have not figures available showing the actual relative growth of constant capital over variable capital. But the following figures, once before published in The Militant, illustrate the trend of the growing mechanization of industry:
From 1899 to 1929, in American manufacturing industry, the number of wage workers increased by 85.5 percent. While their nominal average wage increased 206 per cent, yet their share of the produce of their labor declined from 41.4 per cent to 36 per cent due to the fact that during this period the value added by the process of reproduction represented a 556 percent increase. Expressed in monetary form, in 1899 the value thus added amounted to $1,025 per worker. In 1929 it had increased to $3,624.
This clearly illustrates the growth of the intensity of production due to mechanisation of industry. But it also in a sense gives a picture of the accumulation of capital.
In the process of reproduction the Increasing mass of surplus value, or unpaid labor, appropriated by the capitalists, leave an ever growing part to be turned into additional capital. The capitalist mode of production accelerates the accumulation of capital. But with that also the specific capitalist mode of production develops. Accumulation leads to an increased concentration of the means of production and a growth of the domination over labor.
The credit system which at first served as a modest helper of accumulation has now become transformed into an immense social mechanism for the centralization of capital. It caused an enormous extension of the scale of production and of overproduction of capital. The general process of capitalist production brings forward ever more its antagonisms of monopoly, developed productive forces and the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses. In this process, the credit system accelerates the violent eruptions of these antagonisms, the crisis.
“The stupendous productive power developing under the capitalist mode of production relatively to population, and the increase, though not in the same proportion, of capital values (not their material substance), which grow much more rapidly than the population, contradict the basis, which, compared to the expanding wealth, is ever narrowing and for which this immense productive power works, and the conditions, under which capital augments its value. This is the cause of crises.” (Marx, Capital, Vol. III, page 313)
In the light of the above it should now prove interesting to examine the present level of percentages of capacity production reached after two and a hall years duration of the crisis. The New York Times index for the first quarter of 1932 gives the following results:



Industry


February


March


April




Pig Iron production


31.5


27.9


24.9




Steel Ingot production


31.1


26.4


25.0




Electric Power production


73.1


72.4


71.3




Bituminous Coal production


62.5


74.5


71.3




Automobile production


33.5


27.4


80.3




Boot & Shoe production


90.7


96.6


91.0




Zinc production


41.9


41.3


40.1




Cotton Consumption


71.5


73.2


56.8




Freight car loadings


61.7


60.1


58.2



For the combined business index, of which the estimated “normal” is 100, we get the following figures:



Combined business


62.6


61.6


57.2



Truly, the stupendous productive power developed under the capitalist mode of production contradicts the basis, and the conditions under which capital augments its value. And it is not altogether unnatural that the New York Times comments cynically in an editorial, of Sunday, June 5th, entitled – This Crisis and Others:
“The break-down is permanent. The sharply curtailed consumption today is not primarily a reflex of a distress cut in income but a return to the ‘natural’ level (sic!). The unemployment figures of today are not emergency figures. They register the permanent effect of our triumphs in industrial efficiency, in methods and machines (hear, hear). Taking care of perhaps 8,000,000 persons out of work is a big problem, but one that can be solved if it is a temporary problem. But what the country must now look forward to is this huge mass of idle workers as a permanent feature of our economic life. Such is the fatal difference ‘in kind’ today.”
Yes, this is the salient point of the crisis today and for the future prospects. The New York Times wants to warn its bourgeois readers. We must similarly warn the working class to draw its own conclusions.
We would not accept the above unemployment figure as accurate. In reality it is surely a good deal larger than that. Exact figures are not available. The bourgeois government fears to have such a computation made. But the index figures published by the Department of Labor give us somewhat of an idea. Its index figures are based upon returns from eighty-nine industries since the end of 1930 and on fifty-four for the earlier dates given. They compare as follows for April this year with April of previous years, with the average for the full year 1926 reckoned as 100:



April 1932


 


  62.2




April 1931


  75.7




April 1930


  89.1




April 1929


  99.1




April 1926


101.0




April 1923


110.8



In this connection it will be well to also note the fall in the total payroll from the same index, covering the same industries and the same months. It will be useful for our further analysis. The payrolls for April compare as follows:



April 1932


 


  44.7




April 1931


  68.5




April 1930


  89.8




April 1929


104.6




April 1926


101.5




April 1923


105.7



There is shown here an ominous disparity in the much greater drop in total payroll when compared to the drop in employment. This is indicative for the future working class prospects. A permanent, huge unemployed army and a reduced standard of living. But what the working class will do in this situation still remains the decisive question.
The return to the “natural” level, as the New York Times so cynically puts it, embodies these prospects for the American working class. The return aims to restore confidence, within capitalism, in the continuity of the process of reproduction, to extend the market and to restore a rate of profit on existing capital on this “natural” basis. But capitalism produces for an unknown market. And, the contradictions between the expansion of capital and the market limitations leads to ever deeper crises.
Capitalist production, as a continuous connected process, first of all produces and reproduces the capitalist relations. Henceforth these will be the relations of yet greater concentration of capital – means of production which serve as capital, serve for the exploitation of labor – with greater intensity of exploitation and with an ever growing section of the workers in enforced idleness.
“The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself. It is the fact that capital and its self-expansion appear as the starting and closing point, as the motive and aim of production; that production is merely production for capital, and not vice versa, the means of production mere means for an ever expanding system of the life process for the benefit pf the society of producers.” (Marx, Capital, Vol. III, page 293)


(Note: Another article on the Crisis, Unemployment and the Working Class, particularly dealing with the present efforts for expansion of credits, will appear in the next issue of The Militant – Ed.)
 



Workers who have serious concern for the interests of their class cannot avoid posing the timely question of what is to become of the unemployment movement. With our advance toward the fourth crisis winter it naturally enters with so much more persistency, pressing for a solution. No actual relief measures have as yet been obtained. The numbers of the unemployed army are mounting higher but the emergence of a serious movement is still lagging.
Will anybody question the fact that such a movement, to have real meaning, should bring into its sphere of activity the trade unions, the various existing unemployment organisations and the working class political parties. Or, to put it more bluntly, the problem is to secure the necessary unity of action of all of these working class sections to tight for actual relief measures and to advance the movement to a higher plane. This does not at all leave out of account the sharp differences of aims and objectives. Of course, these fundamentally opposing differences remain. There can be no common ground between the aims and objectives of revolution and those of reform. Nor can there be any community of interests whatever between the revolutionary party and the reactionary capitalist lieutenants now in control of the trade union official positions. Nevertheless the united action of the workers from all of these organizations remains the imperative need when obtaining unemployment relief is to be seriously contemplated.
 
The Various Relief Programs
In surveying these various organizations it is apparent that the pressure of working class need exerts itself everywhere. Hence there is a good deal of identity in the programs of immediate demands. While the objectives differ sharply the immediate needs stand out clearly. The various organizations demand immediate governmental relief. They demand unemployment insurance and the shorter workday. Reformists make these demands to obtain reforms within capitalism and to cater to the working class support, though when the support is obtained, they will without scruples betray their own reforms. The revolutionists advance the demands for the working class needs to obtain them and to advance the struggle toward its revolutionary conclusion.
Even the American Federation of Labor, under pressure of these needs, is now compelled to somewhat change its front. The Executive Council at its recent meeting, in the swell resort of Atlantic City, instructed the meek Baptist, Wm. Green, to draw up a program for unemployment insurance. This reinforces the foundation upon which the revolutionists must put these organizations, including their leaderships, to the actual test. It increases the opportunity for the revolutionary party to forge ahead, initiating a mass movement.
If the party fails to do this it will be on the penalty of the reformist forces assuming uncontested leadership of the unemployment movement which will then develop without it and in spite of it. It is therefore necessary that the party without delay change its course in this respect.
First of all, the party must give up the idea of a separate unemployment movement narrowed by artificial limitations which demand that the party leadership and control be accepted in advance.
Secondly, it should utilize its present position of leadership in the Unemployment Councils to build a much broader unemployment movement. It should officially and genuinely propose to the trade unions, to the workers’ unemployment organizations of the various groupings and to the Socialist party to join the united front for unemployment relief. It should particularly appeal to the workers of all these organizations that they put their leaders to the test by demanding that their organizations join the united front fighting for the needs of the unemployed.
Thirdly, the party must maintain its independent position, patiently explaining its objectives to the workers, making its tactics of the united front clear and constantly criticizing the reformist forces in the united front. The party has the duty of clarifying its revolutionary objectives by pushing the actual struggle for relief measures and demonstrating in practical experience that they can be only temporary measures, that the unemployment situation can find its final solution only through the proletarian revolution.
In the Leninist party these elementary requirements used to be accepted as the ABC of the movement. The fact that they have been forgotten, emasculated and pushed aside to give way to false policies makes necessary that they be re-stated again and again until accepted in practice. Mere lip service will not suffice, it is the actual practise which counts and it is the future life of the movement which is at stake.
We could well conceive of a structure for the movement in which the workers, employed and unemployed alike, are organized in the city block councils and centralized on a territorial or city wide basis into delegated bodies where the trade unions and other workers’ organisations will send their representatives.
 
On the Program of Demands
Naturally the program of immediate demands for a genuine united front movement will first of all reflect the pressing needs of the present situation. But it is of the utmost importance that it be so construed as to take into account the identity of interests of the working class as a whole and not only its separate sections. It must particularly harmonize the needs and the objects of both employed and unemployed workers and unite them into one common stream. Ir must recognize the international aspect of the unemployment problem in such a way that it will strengthen the international class solidarity and help to break down the artificially erected national barriers. It must give articulate expression to the community of interests of the workers of the Soviet Republic and of the capitalist countries. That is why the Left Opposition has long since advanced the slogan of long-term credits to the Soviet Union. This has been rejected by the Stalinist leadership. But the continued failure to adopt this timely and correct slogan may easily play into the hands of reformist demagogues who may grasp it as an opportunity purely and simply to extend the capitalist market and endeavor to take it out of the realms of a working class issue.
In all of this, it is necessary to emphasize again the importance of the demand for the Six Hour Workday Without Reduction of Pay. There could be no objections to its timeliness. Moreover, with the advance of the crisis and the permanency of unemployment, a serious movement for its attainment could above all draw into its orbit and unite in action the employed and the unemployed workers. This demand would become a potent weapon of the united front. It does not in the least, however, obviate nor conflict with the other demands. For example, unemployment Insurance still remains as necessary and as pressing as ever. And suffice to add only the fact of the growing misery and destitution bringing to the fore more sharply the need for immediate governmental relief.
 
The Party’s Duty Is Clear
Illusions held of help coming from other sources outside of what the movement itself, by its pressure, can obtain, should soon be completely dispelled. The force of necessity will more positively propel the American working class into motion. The logic of coming developments will emphasize its community of interests and give it expression in the unemployment movement. From this point of view the position of the party assumes ever more importance which its leadership must not dare to fritter away.
Its duty should be clear. It is from the elementary needs and objectives that it must take its starting point. The genuine united front offers such a real starting point. It is a necessary prerequisite for the working class today without which it cannot hope to unify its forces for the greater revolutionary tasks. It is a necessary prerequisite for putting the misleaders of labor to the test and of finally separating them from their control and influence over large sections of the working class. It is the starting point to prevent their designs of sell-out and betrayals and to advance the class struggle to a higher level. The Left Opposition will fight with the party for these objectives.
 



The unemployment crisis has become an enormous factor in beginning to develop a change of ideology and – what will flow from it – a change of political allegiance within the American working class. These trends of a change are appearing first among the unemployed section. Its course will naturally lead away from the prevailing bourgeois influence. But its direction, whether reformist or revolutionary, as far as the Immediate future is concerned, is not yet decided.
Within the unemployment movement both of these two opposites are represented. They are represented on the one hand in the Unemployment Councils initiated, organized and controlled by the official Communist party. On the other, we have such as the Unemployed Citizens’ League of Seattle and other Pacific Coast cities, the Superior Labor Unemployment Committee, the unemployment movement of the West Virginia Miners Union and the unemployment organizations of the Socialist Party.
It is not the purpose here to describe these latter organizations in their history and development, or to try to make a thorough analysis; that will be found in another article in this issue. Here it is only the purpose to develop a few points by way of comparison.
 
The Party Councils
The Unemployment Councils, organized by the party, took on features from its inception which ordinarily should have been to their advantage. But they also took on features, and a good many more, which seriously hindered their development. In both respects it was a matter of party policy. First of all they were founded on the idea that nothing can be obtained by the working class except through struggle and naturally they become militant in character not so much concerned with the purely practical, and usually short-lived, methods of self-help. (In this connection we are leaving out of consideration the Browderian idea of soup kitchens which was, fortunately for the party, also short-lived). The Councils had a semblance of a national scope, being initiated in the main cities throughout the country under a centralized direction. This was all to their advantage.
But one particular feature of disadvantage alone was pretty well sufficient to offset all this. The councils were not at all, in the real sense of the word, organized as united front bodies. As a matter of fact the restrictions and limitations put upon them, with the bureaucratic methods of control entirely prevented them from becoming representative of a mass movement. To this it is necessary to add the adventurist tactical policies pursued by the party and swinging from the extreme of “capturing the streets” to the opportunist method of propagating only unemployment [word missing] which constantly reduced the movement to smaller proportions. For these reasons the Unemployment Councils have marked a fairly constant downward curve despite the exceptional opportunities available.
By way of comparison we have on the other hand the unemployment organizations mentioned of which perhaps the Unemployed Citizens’ League of Seattle, Wash., is one of the best examples. Its objectives were distinctly those of “practical” reform measures. It attained considerable success in the methods of mutual self-help such as collections of food and other necessities. It also used its influence in a political way to obtain certain relief measures from the city government. Its practical advances turned it rapidly into becoming a mass movement. But it was not only in the features already cited that it represented an opposite tendency to the party controlled Unemployed Councils, that held true in almost every other respect. It is a localized movement, loosely organized with few regulations and, while remembering that it is still a comparatively new movement, its existence has so far marked an upward curve.
 
The Reformist Dilemma
Nevertheless this movement is about to come to its crossroads. That is above all determined by its distinctly reformist direction and the alternatives it will face at the crossroads are already clearly indicated. It has already begun to take on the political parliamentary features of indorsing so-called favorable candidates for elections. It is speaking of “establishing factories” to produce for the league members. Of course, the means of production are not expropriated that way nor will such parliamentary politics establish a workers government. So in both cases these alternatives can lead at best only to reducing the movement to either a purely reformist parliamentary party or a mutual self-help society, neither of which will afford it the possibility of playing a very serious or positive working class role.
There is, of course, still another alternative at hand, namely; for this movement to change its course and progress toward a revolutionary direction. Of that, however, there will be little likelihood unless the revolutionary, the Communist elements consciously penetrate the movement with this as the distinct objective. But to realize such an objective it would be necessary first of all for the official party policy to change, by an earnest adoption of the united front tactic in the unemployment movement. Both of these measures would go hand in hand and would be entirely in accord with the needs of the working class movement as well as the requirements of a revolutionary policy.
But these two comparisons bring to the fore also the serious question of the stage of development of the broad working class movement today. Have we reached a point at which the Communist party can assume to function as the controlling center of the whole, broad mass movement? Hardly! An unemployment mass movement in the United States is yet in its infancy and its potential political level is so far only a very elementary one. In such a situation the party must still conceive its role and function as the Left wing within a general movement. However, if this is the correct analysis, and it could hardly be contested, then that fact alone so much more reinforces the imperative necessity of the party utilizing its present strategic position of being in control of the Unemployment Councils, to endeavor seriously to build the unemployment movement on a national scale into a genuine united front movement, not only embracing the unemployment organizations mentioned, but all existing working class organizations, political trade unions and fraternal bodies.
But even these questions touch only one side of the problem. There are now special features developing within American capitalist economy, accelerated by this crisis. On the one hand there is the phenomenon of a permanent unemployed army. Its permanency is quite well recognized, and need not be further substantiated by arguments. On the other hand there are the specific measures being applied by American capitalism in an effort to get out of the crisis. The first one noticeable is the beginning toward restoring profits on existing capital, i.e., increasing the mass of profit. In this respect “Broadstreet’s” tells us some interesting examples:
Capitalist Income
“The Baltimore and Ohio ... in February 1932, nearly doubled its February 1981, net operating income despite a $2,750,000 reduction in gross. The New York Central lowered its operating ratio to 74.5, the lowest for any month since 1929, and also increased its net with a smaller gross. Altogether some 20 railroads were able to report higher incomes. Mr. W.W. Colpitts, of Coverdale & Colpitts, railroad engineers, has estimated that if railway carloadings return to but halfway between their present level and the 1929 figures, the net operating income for the roads in the United States as a whole would be greater than in 1929.”
Here we have a practical illustration of what the restoration of profits means. It represents an enormous increase in the intensity of exploitation; more profits realized with less men employed. The violent depression of the wage level is already well known, and known by actual experience to all employed workers. But by these very facts, the problems of the crisis, the problems of unemployment becomes even more distinctly problems of the working class as a whole, not at all confined to the unemployed alone. And the conclusion which we must of necesity draw therefrom will be that an unemployed movement confined to the unemployed alone is doomed to impotence and extinction. The unity of action of the employed with the unemployed must be assured.
The possibilities for this are available particularly in the stage we are now entering. Its permanent army of unemployed, its increase in intensity of exploitation and its depression of the wage level also bring the immediate and most pressing needs of the working class as a whole down to a more general, a more common level for all sections concerned. This will serve to harmonize its demands.
It is from such considerations as these that the party leadership must draw its conclusions. Its great opportunities it has so far recklessly frittered away, bureaucratically stifled all criticism and driven away again from the party ranks the many workers who came sincerely to Communism but could not agree with such methods. The party is now faced with a serious contest for influence with social reformism within the unemployment movement. The direction this movement will take, toward revolutionary objectives or merely toward reformism is still to be decided. If the party is to cast its weight in the scale for the decision and seriously bring its influence to bear, it must change its course. Not a change toward emulating the “practicalness” of the reformists but a change toward uniting the workers in struggle and bringing forward, more clearly the revolutionary objectives.
The unemployment movement must be thoroughly integrated with, the general working class movement, particularly the trade unions. It is an operative necessity that all workers’ organizations be drawn into a united front movement for the struggle growing out of the unemployment situation. Only the Communists are really capable of organizing such a united front. But for that the party must also become integrated within the general movement. It must penetrate the broad workers’ organizations, particularly the trade unions.
 



III.
The enormous accumulation of capital in the United States, the gigantic growth of industry and of the process of concentration of production and of intensity of production, has pushed it ever more onto the world market. The credit system, so highly developed here, vastly accelerated the material development of the forces of production. In the early stages of the capitalist mode of production the expansion of foreign trade became a great aid to its development. Now, however, it has become an integral part of this mode of production through its need for an ever expanding market. This is particularly aptly illustrated by the position of American capitalism in the world market
The crisis broke first here, and its acuteness was undoubtedly to an extent due to the fact that this country gives the most credit to the world market and takes the least of it. The balance of payments, which had to be squared, was against it, even though the general balance of trade favored it.
It is estimated that the United States – today holds approximately $28,000,000,000 worth of foreign paper – that cannot now be paid. These vast credits granted and the mass of capital loaned to and invested in foreign countries, of course, demand their continuous returns. But the returns, generally speaking, as far as American capitalism is concerned, are not desirable in the form of commodities: that much the adopted tariff regulation alone shows sufficiently. So the problem of the returns still remains a rather vexing one. We mention this only as a reminder of the fact that the very question of American capitalism issuing out of the crisis is quite closely bound up with the world market problems.
At this point, however, there enter such questions as: reparations, inter-allied debts, retaliating tariffs etc. But above all there are the questions of the political stability of the various capitalist nations, the increased antagonisms – national antagonisms and class antagonisms – and the growing danger of war. Politics and economics are here quite inseparably interwoven. Their texture forms the basis of the crafty diplomatic maneuvering at the numerous world conferences which are being held right along. Each imperialist power struggles to increase or at least to maintain its share in world economy. The sum and substance of these conflicts presents a problem not at all easy to solve, not even for American capitalism.
A considerable portion, an estimated seven to eight billion dollars, of the American capital sent abroad represents direct investments in enterprises of production. It was exported in order to be employed in other countries at a higher rate of profit. In that sense it was the surplus capital although it may appear paradoxical to speak of surplus capital in the face of industries operating at a low percentage of production capacity and millions of workers unemployed – an excess population. But it will soon be found that surplus capital and such surplus population, exist side by side, and that the existence of one is the condition for the other.
Exportation of surplus capital becomes a means of promotion of the exportation of goods and of the acquisition of super profits. The effort is made, of course, to thereby monopolize both the sale of goods in foreign trade and the supply of raw materials. The foreign trade, by virtue of the fact that it makes possible an expansion in the scale of production, in general, thereby tends to cheapen the elements of constant capital. By simultaneously raising the rate of surplus value it then also tends to raise the rate of profit. This is, of course, at the bottom of the very intense struggle among the imperialist powers for control of the world market. But the expansion of production, due to foreign trade, at the same time hastens the process of accumulation and hastens the growing disproportion of constant capital (means of production), increasing more rapidly than variable capital (labor power) and therefore again promotes its own contradiction, the fall in the rate of profit.
American foreign trade, however, has today hit the lowest record in twenty years. But just about so, or worse, is the condition of world trade in general. At present 41 percent of the 1929 level constitutes that record of the combined 25 leading capitalist countries doing a total of 80 percent of the world’s trade. There is powerful testimony in this to the ravages of the world economic crisis. This, of course, is the picture of the capitalist countries only, and not at all of the Soviet Union.
According to the Department of Commerce the unit value of American exports for the first quarter of 1932 fell 37 percent when compared to the same months of 1928. The decline In imports was 56 percent. The comparative figures for exports and imports taking only the first quarter of each year were as follows in millions of dollars):



Year (Jan.–March)


 


Exports


Imports




1932


   459


   398




1931


   710


   398




1930


1,129


   893




1929


1,420


1,122




1928


1,203


1,069



The favorable balance of trade for this quarter (excess of exports over imports) was $61,000,000, compared with $111,000,000 in the preceding quarter and $142,000,000 in the same period of 1931.
We can easily comprehend the immense obstacles in seriously contracted home market which meets the American government’s “reconstruction” program to “break the backbone of the crisis”; but these obstacles become so much more strongly accentuated on the world market. While the sources of power of American imperialism are spread all over the world its contradictions accumulate ever more rapidly. Yet as far as the present situation is concerned it has been able not only to maintain the gold standard but even to strengthen the position of the dollar.
Since 1929 about $2,250,000,000 in short term funds lodged in this country by foreign central banks have been repaid by gold withdrawals from this country. At the early period of these withdrawals the gold holdings here, due to the favorable trade balance, nevertheless continued to increase to a record high, on September 16, 1931 of $5,015,000. But these foreign banks continued to convert their dollar holdings into gold, and since then up to the present time, the gold holdings here have decreased to about $3,900,000,000. The Wall Street bankers call these withdrawals which they estimate as about having come to a close a disturbing element now removed from the financial situation. In their view the lack of confidence is being removed, the dollar is emerging stronger.
It has been correctly asserted in these columns before that a new ascendancy for the capitalist system as a whole is not possible. We have already entered the epoch of capitalist decline and proletarian revolutions. The existence of the Soviet Union, growing constantly stronger despite its difficulties, testifies eloquently to this fact. It is being further reinforced by the growing revolutionary movements within the capitalist countries. But it is just as important to also remember that in the imperialist stage of the unequal development of capitalism has become more pronounced. And the question of the ability of American capitalism to issue out of the crisis on the backs of its own working class and at the cost of the status of other capitalist powers in world economy still remains. It is being confirmed by the powerful role it plays in the constantly recurring conflicts on questions of the war reparations, international debts and moratorium. Each of the international conferences held on these questions increases the importance of participation by the United States – whether or not the participation takes the form of presence or absence of official delegates. These conferences, however, also increasingly show the ominous signs of sharpening imperialist conflicts and of imperialist maneuvers against the Soviet Union. This reflects the fact that the world economic crisis is becoming ever more bound up with the question of war. In that perspective we cannot fail to notice the increasingly aggressive role of American imperialism.
While we take due notice of the enormous contradictions developing and of the future furious conflicts implied in the efforts being made to “break the backbone of the crisis”, it would not be correct to consider this crisis as a bottomless one. It would be wrong for us to assume that American capitalism, as a distinct national imperialist power, cannot issue out of it, or even that the present contracted mass of surplus value realized by it, by its exploitation of workers at home and abroad, will be the basis for “normalcy” in the future. It would still be too early to point to any such definite limitations to its future process of accumulation. What can be said definitely, however, is that in the next stage the conflict of the development of the forces of production with the existing property relations and the conditions of wage labor will sharpen manifold.
For the American working class, on the other hand, one part of the question of its perspective is already settled. That is the part which has relation to its future standard of living. The capitalist efforts to issue out of the crisis are entirely conditioned upon the saddling of its burden entirely onto the working class. In other words it will be at the price of a lower level for the working class. In the final analysis, therefore, the very question of American capitalism overcoming its crisis depends decisively upon the proletariat. And, on a world scale this is so much more the case.
Everywhere, within the capitalist nations, the crisis has unleashed tremendous forces. There is an army of permanently unemployed workers comprising many millions. The struggle to further reduce the working class standard of living will go on. The growth of the revolutionary movement is unmistakable. The future direction depends decisively upon the Communist forces.
 



In viewing the relationship of the revolutionary party to the trade union movement in the light of the events at the recent American Federation of Labor Convention, one specific feature stands out strikingly. And for the thinking worker there should be little difficulty in drawing a conclusion. We have, for some time, been faced with an unemployment situation pressing so acutely upon the working class that the Green bureaucracy found itself compelled to execute a change of front. The A.F. of L. became committed, though so far only on paper, to the important measures of unemployment insurance and the six-hour work day without reduction of pay. Yet the revolutionary party bad no direct influence in producing this change.
The best proof of this fact is furnished by the party’s own actions There assembled in Cincinnati, at the same time as the A.F. of L. gathering, a rank and file convention for unemployment insurance. It was sponsored by the official party, but, of course, without any apparent formal connection. It had up to 200 delegates in attendance, a few of them officially elected by A.F. of L. union locals. Its purpose was, as indicated by its name, to fight for unemployment insurance, to focus attention upon this issue alongside of the A.F. of L. convention, to expose the A.F. of L. stand and to serve as the true expression of the trade unions on this issue.
Yes, the party leadership had actually come down from its lofty perch of the third period dogma, from the “revolutionary upsurge of the American workers” – to speak to the A.F. of L. about unemployment insurance. From an adventurist position which had no foundation in reality to dragging entirely at the rear of events. This is the sum and substance of its recent course. But before the rank and file convention had even gathered, the hidebound reactionaries of the A.F. of L. had already framed their insurance policy and, in addition, made ready for the six-hour day proposal. The rank and file convention therefore became entirely overshadowed by the A.F. of L. action. It exposed primarily its own backwardness.
There is on the other hand, at least, a compensating feature in the fact that the A.F. of L. convention action has already served to influence the party views somewhat. Party speakers are beginning to use the term class collaboration unions instead of company unions. That marks an advance. Moreover, they will consider the advisability of the (six-hour day slogan and even state that it is necessary to pay attention to the question of trade union unity.
 
Will There Be a Change of Policy
In general the whole question of trade union policy, and in particular, the question of independent unions by splitting off minorities versus the issue of trade union unity is due for some serious attention by the Comintern and the various parties. That is not only indicated in the compelling force of developments of the class struggle but also in the shifting winds within the Comintern.
In Germany, for example, the official party has attained a mass basis. But it has, of course, pursued the Comintern policy of splitting the trade unions. The independent, “revolutionary” unions failed to attract the masses. Consequently the German delegation went to the fifth RILU congress with the slogan to “conquer Lozovsky but not to annihilate him”. They counted on the support of Piatnitzky. But that was before Stalin intervened. After that the idea of splitting and creating independent unions all along the line won out completely. One of the German delegates reproached Piatnitzky: “But comrade Piatnitzky you spoke yesterday in an entirely different vein.” Whereupon the latter answered laconically: “Yes, that was yesterday.”
But within the Comintern the turn toward the Right has since become more unmistakable. Many of the lesser bureaucrats, who want an end to the policy of trade union splits, are therefore again turning upon Lozovsky, not merely to conquer him, but also to annihilate him. The formula, by which he won them over in the past; that just as the revolutionary unions are schools for Communism so are the reformist unions schools for capitalism; that formula is now used as the noose with which to hang him and his policy. But such methods of change, of course, can not serve at all to educate the revolutionary cadres.
Should these shifting winds not fully succeed in affecting a change at this moment we may expect that the actual forces of class relations will soon exert a sufficiently strong pressure in that direction. We will not contend that the question of these independent, “revolutionary” unions and the liquidation of that kind of splitting policy is posed as acutely here as, for example, in Germany. Not at all. Nor do we attempt to draw a direct analogy. But we do contend that the increased speed of the class relations in motion compels much more serious consideration of this question than heretofore.
 
The Unorganized and the A.F. of L.
Such consideration involves primarily the question of attitude toward the two main problems: the organization of the unorganized and activity within the A.F. of L. Essentially the policy of organization of the unorganized adopted by the party in 1928, in the shaping of which we, who are today in the Left Opposition, had a considerable part, still remains correct. The potentialities in this field have not grown less today but nave rather increased That will be even more the case in the future period of rising struggles and therefore becomes decisive for our orientation. But this question cannot entirely await a future settlement; it demands a correct preparation today.
Today the only trade union base resembling a mass character is the A.F. of L. and the kindred unions of the railroad brotherhoods. It would be foolish to contend that things will always remain so. As a matter of fact, as the A.F. of L. has constantly become narrowed down toward embracing skilled trades exclusively, it is well to pay attention to the possibilities of organization within the basic and unorganized industries arising entrely as a new movement. That should also mean possibilities for a new militant base. But even that gives no reason whatever to assume that the A.F. of L. will pass out of existence. Nor should the revolutionary policy be predicated upon that. On the contrary, even the most favorably variant of future possibilities would still not eliminate the question of trade union unity. If the revolutionists are able to build up some strength within the unions they will also be able to participate in determining conditions for unity.
These, in general, were our views when we participated in shaping the correct party policy. But, subsequently, following our expulsion, the policy became completely emasculated. Instead of organization of the unorganized we had the withdrawal of the militant minority sections from the A.F. of L. unions. The TUEL was taken off its path as the center of the Left wing within the mass unions. It was transformed into a revolutionary center to organize “revolutionary” unions from the top down which all remained numerically small, sectarian and kept in leading strings. This could serve only the A.F. of L. bureaucracy leaving it in undisputed control. Generally speaking the reactionaries gained at the expense of the revolutionists. In the South, whatever unionism is left is in the hands of the A.F. of L. In the needle trades the A.F. of L. has gained. In the mine fields new independent unions have replaced the TUUL. And to complete the picture practically the same conditions obtain throughout the union field.
 
The Question of Trade Union Unity
This is the picture of devastation wrought by a false trade union policy. And it is from this that the Left Opposition proceeds with the slogan of trade union unity fully cognizant of the fact that the forces of class relations are in constant motion. Hence the process of unity cannot remain the same at every stage or in every sphere. While revolutionists have the general road to their goal definitely marked out, the method of making the curves encountered depends entirely upon the nature of the curves and territory traversed. We are not bound in advance, nor can we lay down in advance, any specific form or formula which will fit the various situation which arise. Our slogans, our tactics and our methods while fitting into a general strategy must also be so molded and applied that they harmonize with each specific stage of development.
Two years ago the Left Opposition advanced the unity slogan for the needle trades unions in the form of proposing a united front leading to a merger between the party directed industrial union and the ILGWU. Today we propose, as a step toward unity, that the industrial union should declare its readiness to re-enter in a body into the ILGWU on the condition of trade union democratic rights being guaranteed. In this there is no change of general policy; only the formula for realization of unity has changed and, of necessity, so as to correspond to the relation of forces which have become more favorable to the Right wing. The proposal of two years ago did not attempt to define in a direct sense the relations to the A.F. of L. while the present directly implies inclusion within it. Such questions, of course, must also be determined primarily upon the basis of the relation of forces in each specific instance.
In the minefields today, on the other hand, we have a situation of a different character. In the soft coal fields the U.M.W. of A. broke down, the rebel forces within became the majority and found no alternative but the formation of a new, independent union. Nevertheless the unity issue is posed there and has been advanced correctly by the Left Opposition. But it is an issue of unity not with the U.M.W. of A. but of the various new miners unions against it, and in this sense also against the A.F. of L. In this field, as elsewhere, the formula for the realization of unity must correspond to the existing conditions, because it is primarily determined by the relation of forces. But while the formula is quite different from that of the needle trades it is still essentially the same general policy.
To the party leadership these questions are still anathema. Can they remain so very long? Obviously not. It will also be compelled to take cognizance of the development of the relation of forces within the trade union field. In the future, the question of trade union policy will have more far-reaching implications.
If the revolutionary party is to have any influence upon the future course of the trade union movement it must, first of all, return to the policy of active work within this movement. It should now be in a position to draw a balance from its period of creation of new, “revolutionary unions”. The result will, of course, appear quite negative; but it can and should become a starting point for a new orientation, an orientation toward trade union unity. Within that general orientation should be coordinated the efforts of a correct policy of organization of the unorganized together with active work in building a Left wing within the existing mass unions.
 



The present storm and stress of the capitalist economic system begins to leave an indelible imprint upon the American Federation of Labor. It has produced a new view, which is advanced under pressure and solely for the record. In this respect the four years from the end of bourgeois prosperity to the present day widespread destitution and starvation, record a change of front on the key problem of unemployment. It is graphically illustrated in the last four annual conventions.
At the Toronto convention, in 1929, there gathered a galaxy of labor skates gaily partaking of the coveted liquid stream which flows so freely across the border. Their main subject of conversation, outside of the monotonous convention routine, was the latest quotations on the stock exchange. At Boston in 1930, some rumblings of dissatisfaction were audible; but the gathering denounced any schemes of unemployment insurance in customary reactionary terms. At Vancouver, in 1931, the rumblings became almost a storm; but the gathering remained adamant and only the phrase became radicalized. At Cincinnati, during the last couple of weeks, the delegates were compelled to debate serious issue and the convention adopted a policy of favoring unemployment insurance.
This change, of course, is not so sweeping when we consider the acuteness of the present crisis and the millions out of work. Moreover the view of the A.F. of L. leadership of the measure is purely a parliamentary legislative one. It is not so much its proposed scheme of insurance upon a state basis, although it absolves the federal government from responsibility, which is important. No, it is rather the fact that these officials can now foresee the possibility of capitalism actually being compelled to accede to a measure of unemployment insurance. They therefore found it necessary to give allegiance, at least in words. And what with the traditional A.F. of L. “non-partisan” political policy – which objectively is partisan to capitalism – as a legislative proposal only it can mean nothing but a continuation of begging capitalist politicians for favors. The working class, however, from a long range perspective, is confronted not only with the question of the necessity of obtaining this measure, it is confronted much more definitely with the question of strengthening its class position in the struggle for this immediate objective.
 
Toward Social Reformism
That the official A.F. of L. direction is making a bend toward social reformism is only further substantiated by the fact that the Cincinnati convention also went on record against the sales tax. It was branded as a device to soak the poor and then tor good measure the convention went on record to soak the rich by a proposal for increased income and inheritance taxation. But that this bend is essentially with the objective of more effective opposition to the advance of Communism was very well attested to in the unanimous greeting of the remarks of the American Legion national commander before the convention. He proclaimed that the Legion and the A.F. of L. would have to do the bulk of the fighting against Communism.
In this connection it is necessary again to examine the approach of the official party leadership to the trade unions on the question of relief measures for the unemployed. In that respect, the same as in regard to the general working class problems, it has proven true to its Centrist position. It has sown confusion and harm, combining the adventurists policy of isolation from the unions with a lagging behind, dragged at the rear of events. The party leadership did not approach the unions as living organisms, subject to changes dictated by the economic structure within which they function. The party leadership did not at all press forward endeavoring to take its part in determining and speeding the direction of the change. When it should have been pressing relentlessly upon the A.F. of L. and its leadership for a united struggle for unemployment relief, it continued the opposite course of seeking to withdraw these activities from the unions. Today when the party should be in the midst of building up strong Left wing groups within the A.F. of L. in preparation for the coming serious battles, it is still way behind, agitating from the outside in a manner which widens the separation of the vanguard from the trade unions. Meanwhile, this has facilitated the efforts of the A.F. of L. officialdom to again reinforce its position of domination over the rank and file membership by giving paper allegiance to progressive measures.
 
Are There Signs of Coming Struggles?
Outstanding today is the fact of the general trade union retreat in face of wage cuts, all along the line. Practically throughout, the officials have been the most active sponsors for acceptance on the general plea of hard times for industry and easy replacement of labor. But within the general retreat there are sufficient indications of what is coming. It is established by the fact of union membership refusal to accept wage cuts and strikes despite the easy conditions of labor replacement, as well as by the fact of oppositions crystallizing against attempted official sell-outs. Throughout the southern textile fields there have been during the recent months a wave of strikes against the inhuman conditions under which unskilled workers reach as low as $5.00 weekly wages. Thus while labor it still cheap in the south, the additional bourbon boast of it being contented definitely belongs to the past.
Undoubtedly the officialdom considers as a bad omen certain rumblings of revolt amongst unions of the skilled crafts. Therefore they feel the necessity of stepping a little livelier. In the New York Typographical local, the “Big Six,” very strong opposition developed to the international president Howard’s proposal to accept a wage cut. In the big electricians’ local [a] number refused to accept a wage cut sponsored by the officials. And to register their opposition further they carried through to victory their fight against the reactionary local machine of president Frank Wilson, despite its support from the international office. But largest of all is looming on the horizon of future indications the revolt of the Illinois coal miners.
These manifestations are small but they point to much more serious clashes with the continuing wage cuts and the ever more persistent demands from the employers for new and additional cuts. The large centralized banking corporations not only make these demands in more definite terms upon the interlocking industrial concerns but they also press the government into action, from the federal down to the municipalities. Hoover has already responded, setting an example in his message to congress, advocating a wage cut for all federal employees down to the lowest brackets, where it hits the hardest, to those earning $1,000 yearly.
 
The Six Hour Day Slogan
We have often repeated the contention that as a means of issuing out of the crisis the American capitalists will resort to further lowering of living. The proof of this contention is at hand. This proof forms a part of our conclusion of coming: serious struggles. And it is important to remember, that, though yet in retreat, the American workers have not been defeated. On the contrary. They can fully be depended upon to put their strength to the test in battle. It is in this connection that real attention must be paid to the proposal adopted by the A.F. of L. convention for the six hour day, the five day week, without reduction of pay.
As already mentioned, the resolutions adopted are only a paper allegiance so far as the reactionary leaders are concerned. Towards them it is necessary to be more vigilant and more watchful than ever. Not only to watch their resolutions but also to watch their fingers. Yet the resolution is of enormous importance both in respect to the condition which called for its adoption and in respect to the opportunity it offers. There is the possibility of making it a real live slogan, of making it a central slogan which will help to turn the workers’ retreat into its opposite, into the direction of the offensive. From this we can begin to perceive the enormous significance of this slogan from the standpoint of class relations, that is when this slogan is really taken up seriously and actively and pressed forward by the revolutionists and militants.
Even in what is indicated by the acceptance of the six hour day at Cincinnati, and despite how little it is taken serious by its sponsors, there is nevertheless a powerful substantiation of the correctness of the Left Opposition in proposing it as a central slogan. But what will it mean to the Stalinist leaders of the official party? Will, they insist that the A.F. of L. bureaucrats should make a little step backward and give lip service instead to a proposal for the seven hour day? It would be inconceivable to think that the party leaders should not want to have the trade unions adopt their slogans. The chief “theoretician,” Browder, last year, in arguing against our advocacy of the six hour day slogan, said that as against that the slogan for the seven hour day leads in the direction of the “revolutionary working class solution” of the unemployment problem. But why there is such a distinction, he failed entirely to make clear. And the reason is because it cannot be made clear. It cannot be defended any more than the general false Stalinist views of policy for the revolutionary and working class movement can be defended.
But the Stalinist party leaders have made the additional mistake of obscuring the shorter workday proposal in its present program of immediate demands. Is that accidental, or is that a part of their general failure to pursue a strategy in which the slogans of today become preparations for the struggles of tomorrow? Are they content to leave that field entirely to the whims of reactionary trade union leaders and the social reformists? Are they content to let that slogan rest in Green’s hands? That That would mean leaving it in the hands of the agents of the class enemy.
Green spoke strong words in its favor at the Cincinnati convention. He spoke for strikes to secure this measure. Other worthies seconded him. Is it then not time now to begin to call them to the test in action before the working class whom they are supposed to lead? The method by which to do this is through the building of a Left wing movement within the A.F. of L. The very least that this A.F. of L. convention action should call for from the Communists is to undertake now and in earnest the task of arousing the labor movement as a whole to an actual struggle for the six hour day, the five day week, with no reduction of pay.
 



Two measures of great significance were adopted at the American Federation of Labor convention just concluded at Cincinnati, Ohio. It went on record for the universal adoption, without delay, of the six-hour day and five-day week, to carry with it no reduction in pay. It indorsed with only five dissenting votes, the proposal for compulsory unemployment insurance, to be inaugurated by the various states, at the cost of the owners of industry by assessing the amount of 3 percent of their total payroll. Here we have a reversal of positions formerly held, particularly in regard to the latter proposal, with a speed which left this assemblage of portly gentlemen gasping at their own audacity.
 
Is A.F. of L. Leadership Turning Left
This presents a picture to our imagination of superannuated troglodytes who, when coming out from their ultra-conservative dug-out, are struck by the impact of a superior force and begin to march at a pace which leaves their whole past in the shade. The question immediately occurs to us: Is the A.F. of L leadership turning Leftward? The answer, which is an emphatic NO, must, to be complete, cover several important aspects of the present situation; but it can nevertheless be summed up under the general heading: “mass pressure”. Only, and that should never be forgotten, these labor “leaders”, when they move forward a few inches at a time, always in doing so, lag way behind the masses.
Basically we are confronted here with the question of the changing economic structure of capitalist society in its decay stage. This is beginning to leave its marks also in the United States. We have here an army of millions of unemployed the permanent aspect of which cannot escape even the trade union upper crust. Conditions have become rotten ripe for such measures as those accepted by the A.F. of L. convention. The historic significance lies not in the fact that they were accepted at this time. It lies in the fact that they could be accepted at all in this gathering in which a genuine rank and file worker would have as little chance of getting in as the proverbial snowball in hell.
These gentlemen have been used to think that the “dole” was a sad plight of Europe alone. They denounced it at their last convention held in Vancouver a year ago. They labelled it “unAmerican”. They have always held that the Amsterdam international was too radical. But in time they will even find out that revolutionary struggles are not confined to Europe. And that will likely dawn upon them much quicker than the snails pace at which they themselves move.
Essentially their fear of the masses moving Leftward is a genuine one and compels them to move. In this sense they see the handwriting on the wall. The repercussion of the capitalist crisis has already created considerable havoc within the union ranks. There is a marked and ominous loss of membership. Whole unions have been almost wiped out under the capitalist offensive. Many members were unable to meet the inflexibly heavy financial obligations imposed by the trade union bureaucracy. Many others left in utter disgust seeing none of the working class interests protected and becoming victims of countless sell-outs. The bureaucrats fear a situation of lean treasuries. They have had to face incipient revolts in many unions against their offhand wage-cut acceptances. They have witnessed militant hunger demonstrations which by the way could often have been bigger and much more powerful if the Stalinist leaders could relent from their blind stupidity and adopt the united front policy. There is no reason to doubt that these essentially reactionary trade union leaders understand quite well how to judge the latent forces yet dormant within the American working class which is, however, potential material for the revolutionary movement once properly aroused and properly directed.
 
The Fear for Safety of Capitalism
But this is only the one side of the picture. On the other hand the fear of these capitalist lieutenants for the safety of the capitalist system itself is undoubtedly equally as genuine. To them the question presents itself also in the form of a grievance. How can they lead the organized workers within “safe” channels so long as tie employers insist upon what they consider a too heavy price of wage cutting – too heavy because the workers appear to become unwilling to accept? They still remember the editorial in the Scripps-Howard newspaper chain three years ago, at the time of the Toronto convention. That editorial gave them a gentle slap: “You self-complacent officers are too easy in your swivel chairs while the job of organizing the workers in the South is left to the Communists. You must assert your leadership.” They then smarted under the sting. And now, although this is likely going considerably beyond the scope of the advice of that editorial, the swivel chair artists are aiming to show leadership in order to regain their previous position of being able to force concessions from capitalism sufficient to become again the trusted and well-rewarded lieutenants. That this can be fully substantiated there need be no doubt and it would be dangerous to fall into any illusions whatever as to anything else being expected from them.
Even the most sketchy analysis will easily bear this out. For example, the main sponsor of the unemployment insurance proposal was John L. Lewis. The very one who has long ago solved his own problem of security – crisis or no crisis. By his one-time first lieutenant, Frank Farrington, he was accused – and there would be little reason to disbelieve the accusation – of having accepted $100,000 from the Kentucky coal mining interests to keep that field working during the miners national strike of 1922. He was accused of having received $650,000 from the Harriman bank of New York for services rendered in Pennsylvania during that same strike when 60,000 Fayette and Somerset county miners found themselves betrayed and their new budding organization destroyed. He now more particularly feels the sting of the most recent revolt in Illinois where 30 to 40,000 miners have definitely parted with his wrecking policies and taken the direction of the Progressive Miners Union. Surely he has reason to make an attempt at staging a comeback and he will have not the slightest scruples in making it apparently via the progressive route. Even Matthew Woll, the chairman of the convention resolution committee, to whom no red-baiting method is too debasing and no ambition too elevated, just as long it gives him publicity, was “won” for the proposal. Not to forget Victor A. Olander, the secretary of the resolutions committee, often named the statesman of labor because of his ability to give a kind of lofty theoretical interpretation to the base position of serving capital within labors’ ranks, also was “won” for the proposal.
All have become “convinced” that drastic steps are required by the present unemployment situation. Undoubtedly they feel that they have been let down by their benefactors and are animated by the zeal of a “just” grievance. The New York Times quotes Green as hinting “force” at the A.F. of L. convention to get the shorter week. Yes he did speak very radically when he exclaimed:
“We say that we are going to strike for this great economic reform. Just as the carpenters led the fight for the eight-hour day, so the time has come for some militant union to lead the fight for the shorter work-day and work-week. I and my associates on the executive council are going to find a way out even though we may be compelled to resort to forcible methods to compel industry to yield. We will not be denied the realization of this great reform. It will be given to us in response to reason or we will secure it through force of some kind.”
Thus spoke the pious Baptist Green, but we are sure that we get a much better picture of him from one of his typical statements appearing in the Federationist of June 1931. He said:
“As depression has laid its paralyzing hand on the business of the world, bringing catastrophe to a quarter of a million of people, we look to gatherings of captains of finance and leaders of industry to find the way out.”
 
The Real Green
We still remember Green in his true role pledging at the Hoover conference, during the early part of the crisis, that there would be no strikes during this period of economic stress. We remember him speaking at West Point, close to that time, giving what was tantamount to a pledge of labors’ docile readiness for the next war. While there has been a change in phraseology, has there been any change in essence since that time? Hardly.
The old heads, if such a distinction can be made in the convention corridors, deplored the actions taken by the delegates. They were more intransigently standpat and could not see the reason for indulging in the luxury of such a modern maneuver. Listen to the argument of Furuseth, who by his own powers, guarded as the rock of ages, has succeeded in reducing the International Seamen’s Union to a mere shell. He exclaimed: “The insurance proposal will make out of a free man a pledging beggar who must go for his food to others.” Well, is that not already the position which he has helped the members of his own union so excellently to arrive at? Howard of the International Typographical Union – the one time “progressive” – and Frey of the Molders’ union were others opposing the unemployment insurance proposal. If these two latter are not amongst the older heads it would nevertheless be incorrect to accuse them of being more reactionary than any of the others.
As a matter of fact we do not at all claim a distinction or a division within this present coterie of unvarnished purveyors of deception. And yet, as it is false to lump all the A.F. of L. unions into a category of one reactionary mass so it could be wrong even to conceive of the officialdom as a homogeneous reactionary whole which is never subjected to the pressure of conditions of the masses. But this sort of confusion, and worse, is what springs from the Stalinist theorizings of “social-Fascist” unions and “social Fascist” leaders. In this connection it is well to remember first of all that the historical conditions for Fascism have not as yet arisen in America. Capitalism here can yet manage its affairs more effectively by the bourgeois democratic methods. Secondly to lump even the general A.F. of L. officialdom, the higher bureaucrats and the lesser ones, who are of necessity closer to the rank and file, into the category of Fascism or “social Fascism”, does not at all serve to make clear its essential role. On the contrary this object becomes obscured. Workers will not become convinced by that method. It is therefore now more than ever necessary to remain straightforward and to endeavor to educate the working class to an understanding that the role of the trade union officialdom is essentially the one of serving as lieutenants of capitalism within the ranks of labor. These officials have accordingly, in the past, while striving to gain collective bargain measures sufficient to justify their position, in every fundamental respect used the best of their endeavors to obstruct the working class advance on a class basis. They have used as their method cunning, deceit, violence and outright betrayal. Just now they feel it necessary to step in a progressive direction sufficiently to justify their official positions within the unions whose members they fear to be moving Leftward. They feel it necessary to propose reform measures in the sense of being a safety valve for the capitalist system. They feel it necessary also to capitalize upon the mass pressure to ask some concessions from capitalism in order to maintain their positions. The future may see the A.F. of L. officialdom in general becoming more closely integrated with a social reformist movement, for which there are still possibilities of growth in a limited sense in the United States. But in essence, even on the path of reformism, these reactionaries of today will serve in the same role as in the past – a barrier to working class advance.
There can, of course, from such considerations as these be no expectancy of the A.F. of L. hierarchy undertaking any fight whatsoever actually to obtain the measures adopted at the convention. Nevertheless the adoption offers an additional opportunity for serious Left wing activities within the trade unions. The economic pressure upon the masses will inevitably drive them in a Leftward direction. It will thrust forward serious and genuine progressive elements. It will bring new life, new spirit and new obligations to the present declining unions. But with that also new and additional opportunities for a Left wing.

Note – Another article taking up further the A.F. of L. convention will follow in the next issue.
 



The other day one hundred A.F. of L. “leaders” submitted a petition for Federal unemployment relief to President Hoover and to Congress. The one hundred marched one whole mile to the White House. It was not exactly a hunger march, this dandy crew of well-groomed portly per-capita absorbers. It must have been a rather grotesque looking affair, in the present unemployment situation.
But this is not the point. There is something else worth nothing in this whole affair. For the A.F. of L. high officials it represents a considerable change of front, since the convention held at Vancouver last fall. Above all, it is important to know the reason for this change of front.
First of all, it signifies further evidence of the slowly growing pressure within the unions, of discontent caused by the ravages of unemployment. The petitioners, so humble in this role, but insolenty haughty before their union membership, fear the signs of the coming discontent. They fear its becoming directed against the rulers Off a system which is causing unemployment and misery. They fear its becoming expressed in genuine class consciousness. Hence they hurry to head it off if possible.
We recall the traditionally reactionary A.F. of L. policy of servile cringing before the desires of the politically distinguished to Washington. It is this which has particularly distinguished its leadership as agents of capitalism. At the Vancouver convention the assembled high salaried business agents despite the changes in the phraseology of the orators, reinforced this policy in full. They frothed at the mouth against the “dole”. They went on record against unemployment insurance and any form of federal unemployment relief.
Would it now seem, in view of this petition, that the traditional A.F. of L. policy is undergoing a change. We fear it would be entirely too optimistic to have such expectations; but these gentlemen are quite alarmed at the prospects of seriously rising discontent. And that much their petition reflects very distinctly.
The petitioners ask for appropriations for direct federal relief; for cessation of wage cuts; for the five day week, for the enactment of the Norris anti-injunction bill and, of course, they also asked for the inevitable 2.75 percent beer. How disdainfully Congress ignored the plea of the humble petitioners, was shown by its adoption at this moment of a number of measures of relief to capitalism. There are the examples of the establishment of the two billion dollar reconstructing finance corporation, of the Glass banking bill, etc. On the very same day of the filing of the petition the Senate leaders girded their loins to defeat even the moderate La Follette-Costigan bill providing an appropriation of 375 million dollars for federal unemployment relief. Undoubtedly more attention would have had to be paid to the A.F. of L. heads if they had undertaken to lead a substantial section of the millions of unemployed in a march upon the White House. But that, of course, they had no intention of doing. It is precisely to prevent demonstrations, which can easily fan a flame of real protest and seriously advance demands, that the petition came forward, and came forward in the manner it did. The government need not at all take serious heed of such requests. It well knows the intentions and designs of its obedient servants.
There may be workers, however, who take this change of front at face value, thinking that it indicates a more progressive attitude and hoping that real leadership for unemployment relief can, be expected from the A.F. of L. high salaried officials. Such hopes, of course, are doomed to disappointment. It is true that even these reactionaries are subject to a change of front under compulsion and pressure. They may even under such conditions take steps forward and in a progressive direction. But by their position as defenders of capitalism and hopelessly reactionary make-up any such steps would always remain far behind the actual needs of the workers. Essentially they remain a brake upon the movement and looking for the first opportunity to betray. Nevertheless, the pressure upon them, by the deepening of the crisis and by extension of the wage cut drive, will increase. This pressure would be deliberately and consciously aided, organized and directed by Left wing militants. It should be made articulate and effective, not based upon expectation of results from the official flunkeys but, on the contrary, as a means of further drawing the distinction between these capitalist agents and the rank and file workers, as well as a means of moving the masses ahead to build the movement.
This petition for Federal unemployment relief and what it implies should offer an added opportunity to penetrate the ranks of the A.F. of L., in building the movement for a struggle for unemployment relief. As yet however, no serious efforts have been made to extend the movement to embrace the A.F. of L. unions.
The Daily Worker, in its issue of February 11th, says editorially in commenting upon this petition: “The workers’ answer should be a wider campaign for unemployment insurance, building up the fighting ranks of both employed and unemployed, fighting hunger and the rotten capitalist system which produces it. In the ranks of the A.F. of L., the movement for unemployment insurance should be made to sweep the fakers off their feet”.
This is absolutely correct. But it can be made a reality in only provided the party leadership pursues a policy of the united front in every sense of the word. The opportunity for it has been available; it is becoming daily more pronounced, moreover, its acceptance and practice has become an imperative need.
The efforts of the party in the struggle for unemployment relief, while having something on the credit side of the balance sheet (for example by way of dramatization of the issue) still carry a mounting record on the deficit side. The very demonstrations organized by the party, regardless of the militancy displayed, have constantly decreased in working class participation. The February 4th demonstration was smaller yet than the proceeding ones. That down ward tendency is also the status of the movement as a whole. This has become an ineradicable record of the working class attitude toward the party leadership and its policies. And this in a situation of growing pressure from mass discontent.
Is it not be clear that here a complete change of policy is necessary. Not merely a change on paper but a change in reality?
 



In the New York dressmakers strike, now on, the crucial issue is that of working class unity. But it will be attained only with a policy based upon that objective. And so far the exact opposite is the case.
Every working class action constitutes part of the historical laboratory testing the program and policies of the revolutionary party. No evasion of fundamental duties, no emasculation or counterfeit for these duties, however cleverly proposed, can circumvent this test. Its results will only be new confusion and strengthening of the enemy’s hands. That completely holds true also in this instance in the needle trades market.
How do matters stand in this strike? Last Monday the Left wing, the Needle Trades Workers Industrial Union, issued the call. Obviously that was in accord, with the policy of the official Communist party leadership which controls the union. For some time the union under Right wing control, the International Ladies Garment Workers, has been preparing for a strike and has made such a decision with the actual date not yet set. This decision, of course, is the direct result of pressure from the rank and file leadership. In the center of the demands of all workers stands the abolition of the sweatshop, improvements of the standard of living, enforcement of the reduced work week, and insurance for the unemployed. These demands are made by the workers upon their common enemy.
The condition of two unions existing within the needle trades is not one originating today and cannot be changed at will. To that extent the workers are naturally and of necessity divided. But it is precisely because of this condition that the problem of working class unity has become the crucial issue. For this reason the only policy of the revolutionary party which can stand the test in this situation is the one which is founded upon the united front of all workers involved in the conflict. This policy, which, in other words, is a fundamental duty of the revolutionary party, the Stalinist leadership has constantly evaded. It has constantly followed the opposite direction. It has pursued a course which culminated in a complete emasculation of the united front policy, in the establishment of a counterfeit – the so-called United Front Committee – which does not at all proceed from the two unions as its base. It does not provide a bridge for unity in strike action of the two unions but rather a preventative. Therefore it must be said unequivocally that in the crucial issue of working class unity, the policy of the official party leadership completely fails the test.
There need be no illusion of the strike intentions of the Right wing union leadership. They have gone as far as they have only under pressure from below. All past experiences prove its treacherous role and fully justify the most severe indictment. It would be foolish to expect it to have reformed today. Within this union, the Lovestone group occupies a peculiar position, though one quite in accord with its general orientation. Does this group now demand from the I.L.G.W. that it immediately decide upon the strike date in common cause with the workers of the industrial union who are already out? Do they take up the fight for a united front of all the dressmakers within that union? There is no evidence of either. Despite all of their clamor of participating now in a progressive movement the fundamental fact remains that when they unconditionally returned, to the folds of the Right wing controlled union, they deserted the Left wing and all it stands for.
It is a well known fact that the Right wing leadership have with every possible means resisted all efforts for a workers’ united front. That they will continue to do so need not be doubted for one moment. But their views and policies are not determined by the revolutionary party, nor is it responsible for them. Its responsibility rests exclusively with its own policies for which it must render an account to the working class as a whole.
It is true that the official party leadership has made progress from its one time position of the industrial union members staying at work while the members of the I.L.G.W. were out on the streets. But this progress is miserably small and far from sufficient in the present much more exacting situation. The requirements are much greater than that. The rank and file pressure for struggle has vastly increased. So much so that the Right wing officials are compelled to heed their demands.
But let us again recall the exact situation today. The workers of both unions are in a direct conflict with the common class enemy. It represents the immediately threatening danger. Its defeat is the common objective. Can that be accomplished separately at all, or are the possibilities better when united? Certainly the latter. Could the two unions, one following a Left wing policy, the other a Right wing policy, be completely united at once? Hardly. That will most likely proceed through several conflicts. But for the common strike objectives, for a practically identical set of demands and for the defeat of a common enemy, a united front could and should be established. There will be objectors, saying: the Right wing leadership are the out and out emissaries of capitalism. To this we answer: that is completely true, but how can these emissaries be defeated except by the unity of the workers. In a united front, the Left wing would, of course, not for one minute cease its criticism of nor its fight against these Right wing capitalist flunkies.
If the Communists should not endeavor to unite workers who should? Does a call upon those workers in the I.L.G.W. to leave their established, union bring unity? No, experience has shown that this is not the way. Another course must be found and the direction for that course is clearly indicated.
By far the largest section of the organized dressmakers are in the I.L.G.W.
The N.T.W.I.U. is a minority; but the Left wing spirit is by no means crushed within the former. Yet it is a matter of two distinct organizations; two movements. In this situation, the party leadership can square its responsibility to the working class only by sincerely and genuinely fighting for a united front on the common strike objectives. A united front from organization to organization, from movement to movement. Concretely, it would mean to fight for a joint strike; for a joint strike leadership to jointly work out the demands for settlements. The party leadership should tell the workers in the shops who belong to the I.L.G.W. not to leave their organization, not to forsake it for a counterfeit institution but to fight within for a united front. Undoubtedly, it would produce a powerful and favorable echo. This is the way to defeat those who have designs of betrayal. Incidentally it will also be the way to re-establish the seriously damaged prestige of the Left wing.
This policy, the Left Opposition has repeatedly emphasized. It is the policy of Lenin. In this decisive moment, in the face of a serious conflict, it has become so much more imperative.
We call upon all the dressmakers to heed the strike call, as far as the Left Opposition members are concerned, they will strike with the Left wing.
 



The opposition Communists who were expelled from the Proletarian Party are now facing the important issue of the next step to be taken. This the group proposes to approach through a national conference preceded by a discussion. That method is, of course, quite as it should be. If, in addition, the group centers its discussion on the questions which for its particular position become the most essential, it should be able to further accelerate its development in a progressive direction.
So far this is already indicated in various views expressed by some of these comrades. There have, for example, been recorded views in favor of the organization of a new party. In our opinion, the building of a new party could not at all be considered a problem facing this group. Moreover, it would be entirely incorrect to set such an objective. For Communists, in respect to this question, the problem is not the building of a new party, but the one of building a single party which will embrace all Communists and which will be capable of taking up its serious tasks. A second question which already occupied a prominent position from the inception of this group was the one of its further attitude to the Proletarian Party. In this respect it is true the group has a certain duty to perform; primarily to win the rest of the membership for progressive development. As a third question arose the problem of approach to the working masses which are now manifesting signs of awakening because of the effects of the crisis. It assumed an added importance by virtue of the endeavors of this group to get away from the Proletarian Party sectarianism and its insistence upon a struggle for immediate demands.
For a Communist organization this is always a problem and particularly so today. It is to be taken for granted so to speak. On March 11, 1889, in the period of formation of the Second Inter national, Engels wrote in a letter to Sorge: “The workers will follow those that know what they want and how to get it”. That, of course, for a Communist group, presupposes first of all that it defines its principle position and strategical objectives. And so it becomes necessary to conclude that the main issue just now confronting the Proletarian Party Opposition is the one of defining its principle position, that is, its orientation toward the existing currents in the Communist movement. Some Serious Progress Already Made The emergence of the Proletarian Party Opposition we have already characterized as a genuinely progressive step. It arose out of a struggle against the sectarian sterility of the P.P. It demanded revolutionary activity first by insisting upon an attitude toward and a formulation of immediate demands. Concretely, in the unemployment situation, it proposed a struggle for measures of relief. It demanded a Left wing policy for trade union work not to exclude co-operation with the C.P. in certain practical tasks. Particularly in regard to the Communist International – and that is important – did this opposition group denote its progressive direction as distinct from the P.P. It recognized the necessity of functioning in revolutionary activities with the world Communist movement, simultaneously with criticism of and a fight against the opportunism of its leadership.
In this respect, the background and origin of this opposition group assumes considerable significance. The P.P., from which it came, proclaimed itself Communist. As such it should have recognized that there can be only one Communist party. It gave complete endorsement to the C.I. and found no fault with the Stalin leadership, but refused to give the slightest recognition to, or have anything but condemnation for the American section. Its endorsement of the C.I. policies and leadership should have made obligatory upon it to unite with the official C.P. on the conditions laid down by the C.I. But despite its endorsement, it remained a second party outside the Comintern. It sought to replace the official C.P. In reality this became the sharpest reflection of its sectarian sterility and its narrow nationalist position. The remnants of the Proletarian Party may still endeavor to seek comfort for this position in the national socialism of Stalin; in the theory of socialism in one country, but this, instead of helping in the least, merely emphasizes its contradiction.
Can this group of Communist opposition comrades now conceive of emulating the P.P., from which it broke away, by proposing to also become a second party – by building a new party? If so, it can only become doomed to the same contradictions it endeavored to extricate itself from. It can only remain sectarian, separated and isolated from the revolutionary working class section. Evidently some of the members of this group have hopes of making the Workers’ League, organized by them, a basis for a new party. But what is a pure and simple unemployment organization. Its proposed program envisages a struggle for unemployment relief to be secured exclusively by levy on capital and large incomes, with the elimination of the present charity character, administration of the funds to include representatives of the labor movement and co-operating in its attainment with working class organizations on the basis of the united front. This as a foundation or a part make-up for a new party could at best only become a reformist one, despite the fact that many good militants may be found within its ranks. The Workers’ League should be properly conceived as a part of a general united front unemployment movement and as a bridge to the masses.
 
Will This Group Continue In A Progressive Direction?
But let us again return to the vital issue of orientation. That there are three distinct currents within the Communist movement today these comrades know and acknowledge. The currents have their organized form in factions. Can their group remain ideologically independent or neutral of these currents and still remain Communist? Obviously this is quite impossible. For the Stalinists, the problem appears to be very simple – just denounce and calumniate the others without any argumentation or endeavor to prove one or the other wrong. But these comrades are not mere Stalin puppets. At least this is the very method to which they have taken exception. Hence, there can be only one conclusion. They must define their attitude. They must orientate toward one or the other current. Finally they must become organically a part of the current whose position they adopt.
Some of these comrades may want to follow the method of the little P.P. bureaucrats of merely brushing this issue aside, of not adopting any position, or of maintaining a double position, at any rate for the time being. We hear some of them say: These are international issues, or even: These are only Russian issues, we will come to them later, first we must build right here. But the all decisive question is – to build what?
If the issue of the currents in the Communist movement is only a Russian one of what enormous importance would it still be with the U.S.S.R. occupying the position of the only proletarian dictatorship? We grant it is essentially an international issue but as such it affects the very root and foundation of the movement no matter in which country the specific problems arise. It is fully and completely interwoven in every major question of principle, policy, strategical objective and tactic of the movement here. It becomes part of every revolutionary problem here. It determines the building of the revolutionary cadres.
There can be no doubt that the first and most essential question for the Proletarian Party Opposition to decide is the one of its orientation toward the existing currents within Communism. Ideologically the group is not so far a homogeneous one and could hardly be when we recall its compromised background. There is no advance guarantee that it can determine its orientation unitedly and without splitting into various tendencies. But it has a revolutionary duty to put this issue at the very top of its pre-conference discussion agenda.
 



From the protracted negotiations for a new railway wage agreement, the millionaire magnates have emerged victorious. But that they accomplished only by the cunning servility of those with whom they negotiated – the union leaders. These rogues accepted the 10 per cent wage-cut while the 1,500,000 railroad workers were not consulted.
It would be difficult to expect any other outcome in view of what happened since the negotiations assembled several hundred local union chairmen in the Chicago conferences. According to one chairman who was present, only speakers designated by the official union hierarchy could obtain the floor. The standing refrain repeated by these worthies early and late was the one: “You will have to accept a wage cut.” That spelled defeat in advance.
The New York Times says, in commenting editorially upon the great good which is to accrue – not to the workers – but to business in general, to the life insurance companies and to the banks which have more than $4,500,000,000 invested in railway issues: “Union leadership has sacrificed an immediate advantage in order to obtain a larger, objective.” No, the leaders sacrificed nothing, not even their honor for such they never had as long as they occupied their official positions. The sacrifice is all on the part of the workers. To them it will mean a lower standard below the $2.88 per day which is now reported to be the average earning of all railroad workers counting both employed and unemployed. The railroad owners on the other hand will receive an additional plum of $215,000,000 to further line their pockets during the coming year, during which this reduction is to remain in effect. These servile, cringing union officials served them well indeed.
The railroad magnates could easily give glib promises of “reciprocity” to the demand for the so-called employment stabilization advanced by the union officials. This promise is just as meaningless as the manner in which the demand was proposed was futile. The promise offers only to endeavor to increase employment whenever practicable. And, of course, with the magnates now pleading inability to meet the payroll because of diminishing returns, this will never be practicable. But after all, as far as the union leaders are concerned they never intended their proposed “stabilization” schemes to be taken seriously. For them it served only as a smoke screen to hide their failure to heed the need of fighting workers – namely to secure the six hour day. A serious fight for this proposal would at least have served as a warning upon the railroad magnates that the workers are deeply concerned about finding some means of alleviating the ravages of unemployment and heavy lay-offs due to the advance of labor saving machine technic.
The railroad companies won this skirmish; but their real objective is a far greater one. They have now begun definitely to come to grips with the railroad unions and they will be certain to lose no opportunity to continue in pursuit of their objective to impose more wage cuts, to gradually undermine the position of the unions in preparation for their final destruction – if possible. This present wage cut was imposed even without the employers having to stop to utilize the rigamaroles of the arbitration machinery provided by the railway labor act. If it had been the case of a wage increase the workers would surely have been at least compelled first to run the whole gamut of this complicated machinery. But that is what it is for. To function as a brake upon the workers; to be at the service of the employers and to be entirely set aside or ignored when the employers feel themselves sufficiently strong to do so.
To the workers one important lesson should remain in respect to this phase of the matter. There should never again be any reliance placed upon arbitration machineries or proceedings. The workers can obtain only what they can actually take; what their position of organized strength will force the employers to give into.
What were the heavy compelling arguments which the railroad magnates marshalled to convince all and sundry? It was primarily their plea of inability to maintain earnings in face of the heavy competition from bus passenger transportation and from freight haulage by trucking. It is very true that new modern, and in many respects more competitive means of transportation) is to a large extent superseding railroad service. But this does not in the least supercede the dividends collected by the investors in railroad securities because it is the same bondholders in each case. As a matter of fact the existing bus lines are practically all owned by the railroad companies, as for example the Greyhound owned by the Pennsylvania Railroad, the Union Pacific system and the Chicago and Northwestern having their net of bus lines in the Western territory and so forth. The truck hauling is also rapidly being gobbled up by the roads.
The railroad owners thus clip the coupons and pocket the profits from practically all of these means of transportation. But for the railroad workers the situation is an entirely different one. They have been hit, in addition to the wage cut, with heavy unemployment, and lay-offs to the extent of about 700,000 being eliminated during the last decade. Many more are on a part time working basis. Their exclusive craft position in the higher brackets is entirely gone. They face an entirely new perspective for the future.
 
A Class Approach Necessary
The railroad workers are being reduced from their exclusive craft position. They are now in a more direct sense on an actual class level. Their problems are ever more becoming bound up with that of their class. Only an approach, no longer from the exclusive craft position, but from a class position can hope to begin to approximate a solution. In this sense there is a gigantic change in perspective.
It means new and enormous tasks for their unions and to this we will again return in a future issue. One may say there is some slight ray of hope for future prospects, in the fact that in these recent negotiations representatives of all of the unions were brought together and acted together despite the fact of the sell-out by the officials. These latter are, of course, not only still wrapped up in the exclusive craft position of the post, but as much as ever functioning purely and simply as agents of capitalism within the ranks of labor. Hence In any consideration by the railroad workers of future problems one thing at least remains axiomatic. A struggle for conditions, a struggle to maintain or to improve their standard of living, can be carried on only hand in hand with the most determined struggle against all traces of domination by these capitalist agents.
The capitalist offensive against the working class is still in full blast all along the line. It calls for the most determined resistance. Meek submission will only bring new and more ferocious attacks. The railroad workers have an organization, divided and split up along craft lines, repeatedly betrayed by their leaders, but nevertheless a powerful organization if brought into action. It is certainly incumbent upon the railroad workers to endeavor to lead in this resistance. But this requires a fighting program.
 



The wage cut drive in the building industry now initiated in several large cities simultaneously reveals a concerted plan of action. In the cities of New York and Chicago alone the demanded 25% cut will involve more than 200,000 workers. But the objective is a far greater one. The objective is to strike at this section of “privileged” workers, to more effectively pave the way for the reduction of the workers’ standard throughout. A devilishly well fitting complement to the much heralded Hoover Home Building Program.
The Building Trades Employers’ Association hardly awaited a reply to their proposed wage cut, it immediately became a virtual ultimatum. It was practically offered as: “Take it or leave it.” In this they counted on the effective assistance of the lashing whip of unemployment.
The extent of the increasing tempo of wage-reductions recently applied can very well be understood from the late reports made by the Department of Labor. Up to September 15, when the U.S. Steel Corporation took over leadership in wage reductions, there had been during 1931, 2,257 cuts involving 315,229 workers. In the ensuing two months alone there were 1,074 reductions, involving 290,082 workers.
With this ultimatum the wage cut drive is carried into the very centre of the A.F. of L. unions. For among the exclusive craft union make-up of the A.F. of L., the building trades still constitute the actual backbone. But it is also this exclusiveness of craft organization and craft ideology, terribly antiquated in conditions of modern class relations, which spells the greatest handicap to these unions.
What will be the answer of the Building Trades Unions to this ultimatum? Will they resist? It should be clear that failure to resist at the outset will soon start them on the toboggan slide with one wage cut following another. William Green and his A.F. of L. hierarchy have repeatedly made grandiose declarations that the unions will resist wage cuts. Now the A.F. of L. backbone faces the test. But there are no indications that this leadership will back up its declaration with preparation for action The Chicago union leadership has already offered a compromise. This is how much the grandiose declarations of Bill Green and his hierarchy mean.
For public consumption the employers have for some time held up in horror the example of the high wages in the building industry. The fact, however, that employment is extremely seasonal, that the building trades worker manages to keep a job only a few months out of the year is never mentioned. Though now, glib promises are being made that a wage-reduction will increase building and thus increase the jobs. Yet it is a well-known fact that the amount of building to be done does not at all depend upon the wage level of the workers in that industry. As one example we may cite the instances of cities where building trades wages have remained low, or where cuts have been accepted, that did not bring an increase in building. As a second instance it is well to remind building trades workers that the present crisis has already seriously diminished building requirements; and with a general reduction of the working class standard of living one could not at all expect an increase in residential buildings. Thus wage reductions will rather react in the reverse of the promises made.
Within the building trades unions the corrupt practice of business unionism flourishes. The miserable incompetence of the leadership stands out glaringly. A host of useless petty grafting business agents has infested these unions with the general result that the organized position is today very seriously weakened. The power of the organization is not at all maintained on the job. Workers find employment today in practically every instance only by accepting a wage considerably below the official scale. Some unsuspecting worker might think that it would be better to reduce the official wage scale to the level of what is actually being paid – and this is a quite widespread belief. They forget, however, that the minute a cut of the official scale is accepted it will be as much reflected in the wage actually paid. That will be immediately cut further also.
Thus the wage cut ultimatum looms as a real problem before the building trades unions. Added to this is the present heavy scourge of unemployment. Meek submission to the employers’ demands cannot at all solve the problem but only aggravate it. It can only result in a further reduction of the workingman’s standard. An aggressive attitude is necessary. The unions do not face a question of maintaining what is being charged to be a high wage scale but of maintaining a bare possibility of existence. Acceptance of a wage cut can never bring relief to the workers either for their maintenance of a standard nor for the problem of unemployment. To find a solution for these problems it is first of all necessary to prepare well to utilize all the power of the organization to resist the attack, to resist the wage cut. Secondly, it becomes necessary to give serious consideration to the reduction of the workday so as to actually help relieve the unemployment situation. This is where the six hour work day without reduction of pay should be particularly considered.
The building trades workers unions today constitute the backbone of the organized labor movement. As such they should show the lead in resisting the general attacks upon the workers’ standard of living.
 



Events are moving swifter than usual in the United States Congress. There hangs over it the threatening cloud of the huge unemployed army, growing more hungry, more sullen, and showing signs of restlessness, and for the relief of which the government has done abso lutely nothing. The swifter moves are undoubtedly inspired by the fear that is foreshadowed in the dastardly police shootings in Dearborn and in Melrose Park. The agents of privilege in the Senate and in the House are as deliberately arrogant, as were the savage “upholders of the law” when they faced the starving workers in these two places. The latter instances indicate the more concrete side of how the capitalist government really intends to deal with the unemployment problem. This is where capitalism revealed itself in its true nature.
Yet this fear is the outstanding motive force behind the events in Congress. With that follows the scurrying for special consideration and for special gains for the various privileged interests from any measure contemplated to restore “prosperity”. In addition, it is an election year, and the lawmakers have enough at stake to maneuver for the most favorable position.
There is a national treasury deficit now of over $2,500,000,000 giving incontrovertible testimony to the crisis in capitalism. The Congress is still struggling with the balancing of its budget Bipartisan alliances are made feverishly and broken up again. Clashes of special group interests bring forth epithets such as “dastardly lies” and “damnable lies”. Senators and Representatives vociferously proclaim their “honesty” in the face of the heavy lobby bribes.
The insurgents – the so-called progressives, headed by La Guardia, La Follette, Costigan, etc. – sponsoring the interests of the embattled petty bourgeoisie, were the first to become vociferous. The proposed manufacturers’ sales tax went down to defeat. It caused the majority leader in the House, Rainey, to declare gravely, with words to this effect: you gentlemen have gone further toward socialization of property than any nation outside of Soviet Russia. The administration omnibus bill was shaved down to leave almost nothing. And the deficit remains. Meanwhile the leaders of industry and finance, “suffering” under the crisis, and clamoring ever more loudly for their pound of flesh. So, now the heavy hitting artillery is moving forward in Congress. But mobilized are also the pitiable efforts of the reactionary trade union leaders.
Representatives of seven leading railroad unions have declared to the President that unless immediate steps are taken to increase employment and relieve distress, they, “will be obliged to demand a dole”. What a terrifying threat! And so, to apply immediately the necessary soothings, they come forward with the Smith Debt Plan. They propose the President to appoint a commission composed of five representatives, one for labor, one for the farmers, two outstanding business leaders and one financial expert. This commission is to restimulate trade and export from the United States. Their plan at once won the approval of democratic politicians. And why not? It is as cast in their own mold. Now these trade union flunkeys want to appear in the lion’s role. When facing the wage cut demands of the railroad magnates they were, however, meek as rabbits. But they have now again only the idea in mind of greater collaboration with the outright capitalist representatives in making the counterfeit relief measures seem palatable to the workers and help pull the wool over their eyes. Never for once would they entertain the idea of even calling upon their union phalanx to exert the pressure of their numbers or to utilize their strategic position, of moving the wheels of transport, to fight for their right to live, and to resist the onslaughts upon them.
The “relief” measures proposed in Congress are practically all of the same character. There is no real difference between the proposals of Senator Robinson and President Hoover. Both embody a $2,500,000,000 plan for “relief”. That is, only about $300,000,000 of this is to go to the various states and municipalities to be doled out in miserable charity rations. The fat morsel, the $2,000,000,000, is to become tax exempt bonds to be used for private profit making enterprises. Politely, they are called self-liquidating enterprises.
Here we have the outrageous arrogance of a capitalist government. The existing unemployment situation has long ago called for unemployment insurance for the millions of jobless and penniless workers. A few miserable charity crumbs to them is all so far. And there is no indication that actual relief, that actual unemployment insurance will be granted until the workers sufficiently arouse their latent mass power to compel consideration over the opposition of the capitalist politicians.
On the other hand, the tax exempt bonds advocated in Hoover’s proposal for investment for further exploitation, is to be handled through the Finance Reconstruction Corporation. What that will mean, is indicated in the very first “relief” loan granted by this institution to the Missouri Pacific railroad, half of which went to pay maturing loans to Wall Street bankers. It will mean investments to fatten dividends and strengthen the capitalists to administer further wage cuts.
Some of the more sceptical of Wall Street’s uncrowned kings predict that this new bond floatation will cause inflation. Not that they are opposed to inflation. These real magnates support the Goldsborough bill, which went over with a whoop in the House of Representatives and provides for authorization to the Federal Reserve to elevate the price level to the bourgeois prosperity period of 1921–29.
Truly the United States Congress is making headway toward its capitalist relief. Nothing could please this whole gentry more than to actually accomplish, by strengthened monopoly, a higher commodity price level. What with workers’ wages already drastically reduced and the coupon clippers strengthened to administer more cuts, the higher price level should seem doubly enticing.
One of the tasks of the heavier artillery, now moving forward in Congress, is to harmonize the conflicting capitalist group interests. An illustration of one of such problems is afforded in the proposed billion dollar tax bill in the Senate. It contains tariff clauses which immediately became controversial. Representatives of one set of capitalists clamoring for duty on certain products for their investment protection while others, who have the opposite interests, are opposed. This is nothing new. It has just become more glaringly expressed in their present political dilemma.
Yet, through all the clashing conflicts reflected in these higher governmental brackets emerges one common and united aim; namely, to advance the counterfeit relief measures, shielding the real ones for the investors, to ward off the working class drift toward the Left. Unquestionably Congress has so far succeeded in attracting the favorable attention of the more credulous among the masses. Will the capitalist politicians attain their aim of changing the working class leftward trend so as to more easily defeat its demands and crush its growing aspirations? That is the important question.
Much valuable time has already been lost by the failure of the official Communist party leadership to take the elementary steps to build a serious movement which would begin to unite employed and unemployed workers. But there is yet a rich opportunity available. There is now a better opportunity for the workers to learn, by actual experience, what can be expected from the bourgeois parliamentary talking shop. They will learn more concretely that the United States Congress, the same as all other capitalist parliaments, are institutions for the protection of capitalist interests and for the keeping of the workers in subjection.
 



May 5 is one of the notable days in the annals of working class history. That date, in 1818, inaugurated a period which closed with March 14, 1883, and embraced the life-span of the greatest thinker of our epoch, and for that matter of all times, the life-span of Karl Marx. It became a life-span of profound teaching, the significance of which we can begin to perceive today, but which remains to be fully recorded only by future generations.
Karl Marx belongs to the revolutionary proletariat. It alone can properly appreciate him and his life’s work. It alone can carry forward the great heritage which he has left it and which today enables it to stand erect, conscious of its growing maturity and of its true position as the life-beating pulse of mankind. It is that heritage which lends the directive force to a working class moving onward to higher goals.
Karl Marx, a towering giant in the realms of thought and action, was a product of his age. His birth almost coincided with the stormy ushering in of the capitalist stage of society. His life became dedicated to the elaboration of the theoretical system which bears his name. A system built entirely upon the dynamics of the material world and itself throwing new life-giving fermentation into human society and setting new forces into motion. A system which has stood the test in storm and in stress, which has been assailed by its critics, calumniated by its enemies and cunningly revised by the sleek soldiers of fortune who picked the proletarian movement as a fruitful hunting ground. But after each assault, after each effort to blunt its edge, it emerged again, bolder in conception and more clearly understood. This is because it is not constituted of scholastic or dead formulas, each one to be applied separately, because it is a live theoretical system covering the whole range of the social and revolutionary sciences. A theoretical system which cannot be understood when viewed merely in its separate parts, but only when viewed as a whole, as a solid structure from its foundation stone to the roof.
To understand properly the Marxian system it is necessary first of all to learn to approach its study with the Marxian method of viewing all material things in motion. The purely static, or scholastic approach will get us hopelessly lost. It is necessary that its thoroughgoing proletarian impulse and revolutionary spirit penetrate every fibre of our material and mental make-up. That must, so to speak, be in the blood.
The Marxian system took form and assumed life and blood during the first stormy period of the capitalist cycle, when capitalism rapidly developed toward a position of mastery, It had as its immediate background the two important events, the great French revolution and the industrial revolution in England. It therefore took form essentially as a summing-up of the developing conditions. The Marxian system, which, of course, takes into account the discoveries of certain preceding thinkers, is a logical conception of the main social and economic phenomena of the present epoch.
The tumultuous events of the class struggle during the active, mature life of Marx became the great historical laboratory, from which not only the proletariat emerged definitely as a class, but which also helped to work out and to test his theoretical system. Of these main events must be mentioned in the first instance: The revolutions and counter-revolutions on the European continent, the organization of the First International and the Paris Commune. Each step of development Marx followed, not as a mere onlooker, but actively intervening with clear and decisive counsel to the proletariat and with scorching criticism virtually burning up the adversaries. He attained to mastery of each situation and drew the fundamental lessons which became the future guide for the proletarian revolutionists. Today we can follow that counsel and trace its logical development; how it shaped and took form and was put to the test in the fire of these important events of the class struggle.
Marx kept in intimate contact with and studied the social and economic concepts and movements which had preceded him and of his time. He had early become influenced by French socialism and made himself acquainted with the ideas of the utopians. He utilized what was progressive in them but quickly settled account with their abstract “eternal truths” and “pure reason”. He assumed the leadership of the first international revolutionary organization of proletarians, the Communist League, which, when transformed from the Federation of the Just, had become converted to his views. It openly proclaimed itself a Communist organization, and finally settled with its old mystical concepts, when shortly before the February revolution of 1848 in France it accepted the program written by Marx, in collaboration with Engels – the Communist Manifesto.
Marx studied the conspirative proletarian organizations of France, and elsewhere, which were mainly influenced and inspired by the sentimental utopias of Fourier and the revolutionary gospel of minority, conspirative action of Blanqui. He soon concluded that these were not the tactics to be pursued. He had witnessed the development, both of the pure and simple trade unionism in England as well as that of the Chartist movement, which, during the brief period of its existence, embodied, in an abbreviated picture, the whole course of the proletarian struggle. The vehement conflict with the anarchist schools of thought – from the purely petty bourgeois idealist, to the more revolutionary but narrowly futile propagandists of the deed of Bakunin, and finally with the anti-authoritarians – forms some of the most strenuous chapters of Marx’s life.
While Marx had nothing but disdain and scorn for the vulgar economists of his time he set to work patiently at the herculean task of unraveling the economic laws of the various stages of society. For the study of these laws he made use of the discoveries already made by the classical school of bourgeois economy; which generally begins with William Petty in England, Boisguillebert in France and ends with Ricardo in England and Sismondi in France. He stripped this material of its idealist veil of the capitalist economic laws being “natural laws”, and presented them as laws dictated by historical relations of production corresponding to a given degree of development of the material forces of production. What had so much puzzled this school of economy Marx discovered and embodied in his concept of the production of surplus value.
But above all Marx participated in building the revolutionary proletarian party. From the founding of the Communist League and presentation of the Communist Manifesto, there is a continuous thread of building and teaching. It next appears in the lessons drawn from the fateful events of 1848–50. Again, in the theoretical and practical work within the First International, beginning with 1804, in the serious lessons drawn from the Paris Commune and finally, in 1875 in the criticism of the Gotha program. This criticism which can perhaps be termed the last outstanding act of Marx was occasioned by the program draft for the fusion congress of the two German socialist groups, the Lassalleans and the Eisenachers. Marx subjected that compromise program draft to a merciless criticism in which he again summed up in brief sentences the essence of his concepts.
Here we have, through a whole chain of events and activities, conclusions compressed, into a theoretical system, each part, of which forms a harmonious whole. The essence of Marxism stands out today as incontrovertibly as when proclaimed in the final paragraph of the Communist Manifesto:
“The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communist revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.”
We recall that many have been the attempts to construct a new system and invest it with the name of Marx by tearing out of their context some casual remarks made by Marx on episodic questions in order to destroy the real essence of the system itself. As a part of the general foul revisionism, we know, it brought disastrous results to the proletarian movement of the Second International. Most outstanding were the attempts to distort, to cover up and to repudiate the concept of the proletarian dictatorship and to substitute for it the peaceful democratic means at all costs. Often, in accomplishing this, was recourse, and for that matter still is being, taken to the observation made by Marx in the seventies on the possibility of peaceful revolution in England and in America, leaving out, of course, Marx’s qualifying clause. In the seventies, as we know, conditions obtained which could indicate these two countries as possessing certain exceptional characteristics; and it is from actual conditions, from the specific stage of capitalist relations that Marxian strategy and tactics proceed in each instance. The conditions of these certain exceptional characteristics no longer exist today. That gives the episodic character to such an observation which only reformist snivellers can still attempt to distort. Revolutionists will have nothing in common with that but will endeavor to comprehend the Marxian system in its totality and in its real essence.

Another article on Marx and Marxism is to follow next week – Ed.
 



Within its shell of moribund reformist ideology considerable divergences have been for some time developing in the Socialist party. At its just concluded convention these difference, came to stand out quite clearly. It was not a matter of revolutionary views struggling against reformist encumbrances. No, if it had been, their proponents would be obliged to find new fields of expression in some form of common action with the Communist movement, not within the polluted waters of the Socialist party. Yet these divergences reflect the pressure of a working class moving toward the Left.
Essentially the differences were expressed in the groupings which have quite clearly crystallized. There are, on the one hand, the “militants” who appear to have hopes that the S.P. can be made to play a progressive role as a social democratic party. They speak of achieving a “social and economic system for the benefit of the workers”, which would justifiably put down counter-revolution within a Socialist state through the use of violence, but strictly dissociated from class rule through the Proletarian Dictatorship. Hillquit characterized them as young, sincere and impatient – that is sincere to Hillquit’s “ideals” – people who will soon settle down to more “sane” views. That, evidently, is not far from the truth. Secondly there is the group of futile petty bourgeois liberals whose outstanding representative is Norman Thomas. It sees ever greater opportunities for its particular brand of “salvation” and conceives of the S.P. as a good instrument to further petty bourgeois liberation on a grand scale expecting it to be reinforced by the workers. Thirdly there are the so-called practical socialists, whom Hillquit also quite truthfully characterized as to their “noble” goal of building new sewers. Lastly, there is the old guard led by Hillquit and O’Neal. This is the most conscious group with a consistent program, deeply saturated with hostility to revolution. A group which cleverly manipulates reformist demands, clothed, when necessary, in Marxian phraseology, but as treacherously reactionary as its European brethren and as conscious in preparing the social reformist instrument to serve capitalism. With its deep seated hostility to the proletarian revolution it can pursue no other course. This group prevailed at the convention.
The S.P. claims a gain in membership of 8,000 in four years to a total of 25,000. In that is reflected in a sense the fact that some sections of the workers have taken the step away from the traditional bourgeois parties to social democracy. It shows also that what is at the basis of such growth reflects a pressure from which even the S.P. is not immune. This found its expression in the two extreme wings. In the “militants” striving for a new, a better reformist dressing for a decrepit body – all in an unblushing alliance with the petty bourgeois liberalism of Thomas and the “practical” new sewer socialists. Next it found its expression in the old guard sitting tighter on the lid but manipulating a few extra safety valves of concessions in phraseology. But above all, a large share of this growth must be laid at the doors of the Centrist zigzag blunder policy of the official Communist party leadership and its failure to give proper direction to workers moving away from bourgeois ideology and allegiance.
The adopted S.P. declaration of principles, for example, again contains lip service to a recognition of the class struggle. It declares: “Freedom, equality and plenty for the workers can therefore be obtained only by socializing the ownership and control of the productive wealth which is now held as capital.”
What is meant by such a declaration became clear when a credulous California delegate, who took it at face value, moved that the S.P. declares for confiscation of property. His proposal went down to defeat under the combined thunderclap of horror stricken “respectability” and the weight of the reactionary bureaucracy.
A survey of the S.P. convention, however, cannot leave out of account the new use to which the old guard of Hillquit and O’Neal put their ability of crafty maneuvering. Their new plan of organization contains two “united front” proposals. There is one for international “unity” professing to attempt to “bring together the Socialist and Communist Internationals (1) on the basis of democracy and civil liberties in Russia (?!); (2) In Fascist countries, a union of both parties to overthrow Fascism by any means possible; (3) in countries where there still is democracy (sic!), a union of both parties in an attempt to change the present system by peaceful means and by other means, if necessary.” The “unity” proposals for the home sector reads: “In cities where Socialists, Communists, the L.I.D., the Friends of the Soviets, the Civil Liberties Union and other similar organizations exist, a permanent committee be organized to bring them together in informal conferences to consider practical steps to be taken on matters of concern to all.”
The recent years of experience have amply proved that the social reformists, now a distinct anti-revolutionary force, do not at all intend to unite the working class, not even for reformist objectives. But pursuing their cunning design they do intend to utilize the popular unity slogan to deceive the workers into support of their instrument deliberately destined to serve and preserve capitalism. This cannot be defeated by mere denunciation. It must be exposed in the open. This can be done effectively only by counterpoising the policy of a genuine united front to attain the immediate working class aims as steps to the necessarily revolutionary objective. This is one of the particular tasks of the Communist party.
The future working class perspectives demand imperatively that the Communist party take up this task in earnest. The revolutionary objectives first of all demand that social reformist ideology be defeated.
 



Between 30,000 and 40,000 New York building trades workers went on strike May 1st because of a failure to arrive at a wage scale agreement. The building trades employers association had previously, arbitrarily posted notice of wage cuts ranging from 25% to 30%. However, the immediate cause of the strike was the fact that the elevator manufacturers broke ranks and made a verbal promise to the elevator constructors’ union of a day scale of $11.20 instead of the $10 announced in notices posted. The press carries statements to the effect that the leaders of the building trades council were otherwise prepared to accept the cut.
On Monday May the 2nd three unions still remained at work, the elevator constructors, the electricians and the iron and steel workers. But the following day the employers decided to make the shut-down complete and dispense with the service of these three union also. The officials of the bricklayers union evidently still expect to gain special favors. Their previous agreement carries a “no strike” clause, and they now insist upon arbitration.
How serious is the building trades union leadership about the strike? It should be remembered that it is not at all called in protest against the wage cut, but rather in protest against a verbal promise for special consideration for one union. Secondly, the leadership made no preparation whatever for strike. It has made no proposals to solidify the unions of the seventeen different internationals to resist the wage slashes. It has made no proposals for strike activities to prepare against possible scabbing. Thirdly, it made no efforts to establish some semblance of concerted action on a national scale. It is perfectly true that building cannot be transferred from one city to another, nevertheless the lack of concerted action has permitted opening wedges to be made in many cities where the building trades workers have already submitted to drastic wage cuts. Lastly, the union leadership was willing to accept the wage cut decree, had the employers remained united.
 
Conditions of the Unions
It is of course correct for unions to make all possible use of any break in the ranks of the employers; but such can be utilized only provided the organizations are prepared to make a serious fight. Of what there is no indication whatever.
The building trades unions in New York as well as elsewhere, have suffered serious membership losses. In the main, this has been due to the fact that, with the widespread heavy unemployment members have been unable to keep up their dues payments and the unions have failed to maintain closed shop conditions. To resist in a serious manner the present attacks upon the wage scale it is first of all necessary that real efforts should be made to regain what has been lost and to strengthen the unions. That strength, however, can be expressed effectively only when the unions arrive at a basis of unity of action. That such is not yet the case is amply demonstrated by the fact that three unions could remain at work after the strike was called. Moreover, there will be little possibility of preventing strike breaking unless such unity actually exists.
 
Must Prepare to Resist
It should be clear to the building trades workers by this time that a reduced scale of wages will not at all serve to increase the jobs. On the contrary, it is the continued unemployment and the surplus of bands available which is being utilized by the employers to reduce wages and thus reduce the standard of living everywhere. To this should be added, that acceptance of one wage cut leaves the road open for the employers to press for more.
No matter how much the building trades unions have suffered from their own inherent craft weakness, and from their corrupt leadership, they are still the best organized section in the country. In other words, this means that it is still up to them to lead the fight against the general wage slashing. The cuts already suffered should therefore become a serious warning that it is now high time to prepare to lead that fight and to prepare to lead it on a national scale.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



(Continued from last issue)
Karl Marx in his early youth became a disciple of Hegel. It is not our purpose here to attempt to take up the Hegelian concept more than to say that it represented one of the first serious and thorough endeavors to break with the philosophy of the past – particularly that of the middle ages – which conceived of all things as fixed, constant and eternal, and to formulate in its place a new logic in accordance with the universal process of evolution. The essence of this was the dialectic.
To Marx, the dialectic became the method of investigation of social and economic phenomena. Through it he formulated his materialist conception of history, which belongs entirely to Marx, and Engels. But with that discovery he also separated the dialectic method from the Hegelian mysticism and idealism. It became dialectic materialism. It revolutionized the science of history.
By the means of the materialist conception Marx was able really to explain the course of history, not only in so far as it relates to the past, but also its future stages. That became possible because this conception proceeds from the basis of the economic conditions of each society. It holds that the relations of production, of each given stage are the foundation for its social order, the foundation for its legal and political superstructure, as well as for its division into contending classes. Marx did not discover the existence of classes or the class struggle. That was known long before him. But he added the contribution that its existence is bound up with, and is the result of, certain phases of the material production. He added also the essential contribution that the oppressed class today, the modern proletariat, in achieving its own emancipation must thereby liberate society as a whole from class divisions. Now this will be accomplished through its various stages Marx stated in precise formulation in his letter to Weidemeyer, written in 1852, in part it reads as follows:
“... the class struggle leads necessarily to the Dictatorship of the Proletariat; this dictatorship is but the transition to the abolition of all classes and to the creation of a society of free and equal.”
There could be no clearer exposition of the materialist conception of history than this statement. It pictures the results of the relations of production, and the social organization necessarily following from it, traced to its logical conclusion. Yet it skips none of its stages, but clearly and decisively specifies the form of class rule of the proletariat during the transition period, the period between capitalism and Communism and the economic transformation of the one into the other. Truly, with the discovery of the materialist conception of history, Socialism became elevated to a science. Yet, how pitiful are those contemptible charlatans who claim adherence to scientific Socialism but reject the Proletarian Dictatorship – that is, under the guise of the common phrase, “it might be alright for Russia, but not in America.” The truth about them is that they do not at all accept the essence of Marxism – the forceful overthrow of the capitalist system. They do not accept this sum and substance of all Marx’s teachings – the Proletarian Dictatorship. There is not a shred of the revolutionary in them. Engels says of the Communist Manifesto, that “the fundamental proposition, which forms its nucleus, belongs to Marx.” Here is traced, distinctly in the light of the materialist conception, the historical development which established the capitalist system, from the serfs of the middle ages to the burghers of the earliest towns; and next, to the first elements of the bourgeoisie. Shattering the feudal guild monopoly emerged the manufacturing system.
“Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionized industrial production. The place of manufacture was taken by the giant, Modern Industry ... Each step in the development of the bourgeois was accompanied by a corresponding political advance of that class ... the bourgeoisie has at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market, conquered for itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive political sway.”
The Manifesto could therefore lay down the postulate that the class struggle is essentially a political struggle and that the proletariat must elevate itself to become the ruling class led to this goal by its revolutionary vanguard.
To this we shall here add further only by quoting the proposition:
“In place of the old wants, satisfied by the productions of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal interdependence of nations.”
Apparently forgotten, within leading circles of the Communist parties today, are these words. Apparently forgotten is also the conclusion which Marx drew of the social, the international character of the proletarian revolution. In its place has been substituted the theory of Socialism in One Country with disastrous consequences to the world Communist movement.
Viewing the developments in the great French revolution in historical retrospect Marx noted its continuous upward progress. The rule of the Constitutionalists was followed by that of the Girondists and then by the Jacobins. Each advancing force needing the indispensable support of the next succeeding one. “When each party, in turn, had conducted the revolution as far as it could or dared, and wanted to cry halt, it was pushed aside by the bolder spirits who had hitherto supported it, and cleared away by the guillotine.” But the proletariat, as Marx observed, had not yet emerged as a separate and distinct force out of the third estate.
In the fateful events of 1848–50, and proceeding them, in the July days, 1830, in France as well as the large scale strikes in England in 1842 and in Silesian weavers’ insurrection in 1844, the proletariat had emerged as a distinct class but still remained an appendage of the middle class parties. Marx noted that these movements, inspired by Communism on the continent and by Chartism in England could no longer be looked upon as chance pheoniena, but were an expression of the aspirations of an oppressed class. And, after the June defeat in France of 1848, Marx could draw the conclusion for the proletariat which groups itself “more and more around revolutionary Socialism, around Communism.” ...
“This Socialism”, he said, “is the declaration of permanent revolution, the establishment of the Class Dictatorship of the Proletariat as a necessary step towards the abolition of class distinctions in general, towards the abolition of all the conditions of production on which class distinctions depend, towards the abolition of all the social relations which depend on these conditions of production, towards the revolutionizing of all ideas which emanate from these social relations.”
Once again we can add, that here we have, on the basis of the concrete proletarian experiences, the materialist conception of history applied and set down with an indelible imprint for the future.
The revolutionary events during Marx’s life time closed with the Paris Commune. The proletariat had then reached a distinct independent class position, though not yet, as Marx observed, a position of revolutionary maturity and preparation. It had not yet created its revolutionary party. Its heroic attempt to maintain a proletarian regime was circumvented essentially because of these weaknesses. And it was on this experience that Marx, in his address to the General Council of the International, made his masterful analysis, culminating in the terse statement: “But the working class cannot simply lay hold on the ready made state machinery and wield it for its own purpose.” In these words are again forcefully reiterated the conclusions from the realistics of the material world. Today they serve as the proletarian revolutionary strategy.
Our task is today, clearer than ever, to proceed on the foundation of Marxism and to fully comprehend what Marx embodied in his thesis to Feuerbach: “Up to the present the philosophers have but interpreted the world; it is, however, necessary to change it.”
We witness today the completion of the process of a dialectic cycle in human society. We have reached the last and final period of the capitalist epoch. The blood and tears in which the pages of the history of its birth were written is again being shed at this stage of its violent decay and collapse. It is giving birth to a new and higher stage. The world is being changed. A glorious beginning was made by the proletarian revolution in Russia. In that we saw the theoretical system of Marx applied and brought to its first victorious conclusion. But in that we found also the closest approximation to the life long revolutionary friendship of Marx and Engels in the unshakable friendship and harmony of views, during the decisive revolutionary events, of Lenin and Trotsky.
The gigantic vision, the enormous and all embracing perspective unfolded in the closing paragraph of the concise statement of his materialist conception of history which Marx embodied in his introduction to the Critique of Political Economy, is about to be realized. It reads as follows:
“The bourgeois relations of production are the last antagonistic form of the social process of production ... the productive forces developing in the womb of bourgeois society create the material conditions for the solution of that antagonism. This social formation constitutes, therefore, the closing chapter of the prehistoric stage of human society.”
 



The May Day demonstrations organized by the Communist Party this year, when taken throughout the country as a whole, were bigger and more impressive than any before in its history. Even when we discount any wildly exaggerated figures of numbers participating and accept a realistic estimate of, for example, about 40,000 in the New York march, 20,000 in Chicago and 8,000 in Minneapolis, it affords a good cross section of the splendid working class response. First of all, this, of course, bears testimony to the effects of the yet deepening crisis moving the American workers toward the Left. But it is also worth noting that, while the Socialist Party this year ventured into street demonstrations of a sort in several cities, it attracted only much smaller numbers. In this comparison we exclude Milwaukee, where the Socialist Party is in control of the city administration.
We have, therefore, in politically backward America a growing response to Communism, a distinct growth of Communist influence. That is clearly expressed in the May Day demonstrations. Also we have an ever more distinct expression of the fact that the new forces set into motion gravitate toward the official Communist Party That is in the nature of things and holds bright prospects for the party's future. But it should be a telling answer to those disappointed "revolutionists" who persist in looking for revolutionary awakening separate and apart from the party. They will themselves only remain hopelessly outside of the movement.
In practically all of the major cities the party further affirmed the right of the working class to demonstrate for its demands on the International Labor Holiday. In this sense the demonstrations were militant turnouts. And we can say this, even when discounting the disgraceful scene of attacks upon Left Oppositionists in Minneapolis. But yet, compared to these turnouts, the party weaknesses as an actively moving force in the class struggle are all too apparent. Such a comparison reveals an enormous gap which must be closed.
 
Experience from Recent Struggles
The gap is revealed most glaringly in the fields where the party leads actual struggles. We are not speaking in this instance of the question of militancy displayed in such struggles—though that is important in itself and cannot be disputed—but we are speaking here purely in the sense of how does the party lead and what support has accrued to its leadership. We will mention only some of the outstanding examples. There is first of all, the Pennsylvania and Ohio miners strike of last year. A splendid struggle with excellent militancy displayed. Yet it did not result in a strengthening of the miners positions, organizationally or otherwise. It failed entirely to unite the Left wing and progressive forces in the mine fields. Today there is very little of the National Miners union organized in these districts. We experienced the Paterson and Lawrence textile workers strikes. The party, through the T.U.U.L. union had the leadership of a section of the workers in both places. Yet it conducted a strike policy which resulted in a comparative strengthening of the A.F. of L. forces and a weakening of the Left wing. Practically the same situation has resulted from the recent strike of the New York needle trades workers. To this should be added the fact that the struggle for the unemployed, despite the very large demonstrations at the beginning of the crisis today, has narrowed down to a movement almost exclusively of the conscious vanguard alone.
 
What is the Policy Pursued?
How can such a contradiction be possible? We witness a splendid response to the May Day demonstrations organized by the party while in actual struggles it fails to really win the working class confidence and loses ground. The reason for this must be sought essentially in the policies and methods the party leadership pursues. It is not to be sought merely in the question of insufficient party contacts in the factories, nor in the smaller items which are being brought out in so-called self-criticism. Voluminous theses and resolutions have been written on these questions without, however, striking at the essential issue. With a correct policy and a correct orientation these difficulties—although they are considerable—could nevertheless easily be overcome. What is involved is essentially the failure of an orientation which will unite the workers in struggle.
The important question confronting the Communist Party today is particularly the one of a correct united front policy. We have no intention at all to propose that a united front policy is a universal solution for all times and under all conditions. On the contrary we think that the method pursued in the May Day demonstrations of a purely formal united front appearance does not at all serve the purpose. May Day demonstrations have become a revolutionary tradition and should be so maintained. It would be far more correct for the party to conduct these demonstrations in its own name, also in the formal sense, and call upon the working class to give its support on that basis. For the participation in the coming elections this is more so the case. The party has the duty of presenting a Communist program and entering Communist candidates and appeal for the working class support to Communism. To assume a formal guise of a united front election activity is merely to confuse the essential issues and does not help in the least.
The matter of actual struggles for the elementary needs of the workers is, however, an entirely different affair. And that holds true under politically advanced conditions as well. In Germany today, the threatening danger of Fascism demands imperatively the working class united front. In the United States today the conditions of the working class struggle demands it just as imperatively.
This has been amply demonstrated in the very strikes mentioned above. The building of a serious Unemployed Movement s quite inconceivable without an approach to the existing workers organizations for united pressure to obtain the demands which in reality involves the employed and unemployed alike. A serous movement for the liberation of Tom Mooney, the Scottsboro boys and all class war prisoners requires this tactic. And above all, the defense of the American working class in the present reactionary onslaughts upon their elementary rights and conditions demand a definite change toward employing the united front tactic.
 



Delegates of the national unemployed hunger march are converging upon Washington to demonstrate at the opening of the coming short session of congress. They are going to demonstrate to give a great emphasis to the need for working class relief. They are the advance guard in a struggle which, of necessity, must develop into much larger proportions. Every ounce of working class energy should therefore be thrown into the scale to support this demonstration.
These hunger marchers represent something very real regardless of their present limited credentials. They represent millions of workers thrown onto the social scrap heap by a protracted and growing unemployment crisis. No security whatever for these millions has so far been provided by those who, today, rule us all. On the contrary, the changing economic structure of the country works in the opposite direction. Today, decaying capitalism throughout the world, transforms millions of workers into hungry, homeless tramps. And it is an important sign for the future when especially in the United States a section of them clearly show that they chose not to submit, but prefer the road of fighting resistance, in this sense the hunger march is a great harbinger of the future. But so far it represents directly only the militant working class section.
In a small measure the hunger march is another test to decide the future direction of working class struggle. Reform or revolution. This test will have an influence on the coming decision which the class must make. But it is also a test of policy which, in the end, will determine our success and victory. It is not the revolutionists alone who are recorded in favor of unemployment relief. The distinction between the reformists and revolutionists cannot be made that way, as the official party leaders have so often attempted to do; nor in the amount of dollars and cents demanded for relief, as they have also done. The reformist leaders of the Socialist party long ago, began speaking for the needs of the unemployed, for relief, for a measure of security through unemployment insurance. Now even the A.F. of L. leaders speak in favor of a system of unemployment insurance. But actual struggle for its attainment is the test of the sincerity of these proposals. There has not been one step taken or proposed by the Socialist party leaders, nor, of course, by the A.F. of L. hierarchy, to obtain this mere reform measure. These elements are bitterly hostile to hunger marches and to any fighting demonstration for relief. Is not this the surest proof of their game of deception?
Actual relief can be won only by a determined fight against the opposition of the capitalist rulers, and we are here confining ourselves solely to the question of amelioration of unemployment, and not speaking at all of its solution. In this determined fight the national hunger march plays its important part. Moreover, when correctly pursued it can, in a measure, become one of the stepping stones toward reaching the revolutionary solution of the unemployment problem.
But to have any significance at all in this respect and to really play an important part in the struggle for relief such hunger marches must become an expression of the working mass as a whole, not merely of one small section. The workers under social reformist influence should be drawn in The workers of the A.F. of L. and all unions should be drawn in. Most certainly the success of efforts in that direction will determine the success in getting relief for the class as a whole. This was very clearly demonstrated in Chicago where the official Communist party, despite its present false views of the united front policy attained a great temporary success.
It is pertinent to ask: are the Socialist party leaders, are the A.F. of L. leaders to be allowed to record themselves formally in favor of relief without being formally, in reality and in every other respect, put to the test in the struggle which is necessary to obtain relief?
The official party has nothing to gain from confining the unemployment demonstrations to the section of the working class which it influences or controls. On the contrary, it must take the opposite road. The way to do that is through the united front policy which brings the workers’ organizations together, with their leaders, or in spite of their leaders, in unity of action for specific objectives.
 



At this moment there is a new and perceptibly growing wave of sympathy and support to the Left Opposition in America. It is taking on a form distinct from the past slow process of winning a worker here and there who became convinced by individual propaganda. Those who have followed The Militant attentively will also have noticed that, in entering the fourth year of its existence, its contents begin more directly to reflect the struggle toward revolutionary developments in the country. That itself is a material expression of the growing support coming in the direction of the Left Opposition.
The reasons, of course, lie in the very conditions of the working class movement. The economic crisis is producing a new orientation. It is generally speaking a Leftward one. A working class force is beginning to emerge in the United States. It is emerging slowly, painfully, with much stumbling and with many bitter experiences in its course. But for the actual proof of its emerging one needs only to cast a glance at the election campaign just concluded. Willy-nilly, of the main contenders, the capitalist parties, the working class issues
forced themselves to the fore. The conditions created are also beginning to put the various working class and, revolutionary currents more definitely to their test. This, however, will be far more marked in the coming period of more intense struggles. But already now there is evidence that the Left Opposition is commencing to rind its place on the solid grounds of the class struggle. And we can say today that an estimate of the significance of this new wave of support quite decisively indicates our future much greater role.
 
Some Examples of Growth
We have at this moment a series of new contact established, which are becoming included within our active ranks. A new branch of the League is organized in Davenport, Iowa. Branches are in formation in Des Moines, Iowa, in Pittsburgh, Pa., and in New Castle, Pa. Our existing branches with but few exceptions, are in the process of growth.
The enormous advantage of a correct theoretical foundation – a Marxian foundation – belongs to the Left Opposition. But we are compelled to carry on by the most primitive means, made so by the isolated position from which we began and by our sadly limited physical resources. Every step toward our objectives therefore of necessity had to be modest ones.
In both respects, both in regard to a correct theoretical foundation as well as in regard to our limited means the four years history of The Militant, furnishes eloquent proof to our contention. But while the latter is apparent, it is the former, which in terms more convincing than we could possibly utter, has attested to its enormous advantage. Just look at the healthy contrast between four years ago and today.
Then we had a handful of comrades coming forward with an unshakable conviction, having from the past received a certain preparation for their position, but also carrying over remnants from the past which still caused some unclarity and lack of experience in applying the International Left Opposition platform to America. We made some mistakes; we must, of course, record shortcomings. Yet we are justified in giving emphasis to the healthy transformation which has taken place. We are justified in taking pride in the accomplishments. The Militant reflects today an organization small in numbers but functioning actively in the endeavor to attain a Marxian platform not only by theoretical discussion but also in the realities of the life of the class struggle.
 
Some Trade Union Experiences
We have mentioned our organizational growth, yet it is such experiences as those recorded in the Illinois mine field which begin to indicate both substance and form to our organization. We do not at all boast of control of the movement there or any section of it – a contention which we are repeatedly accused of by the scribes of the official Lewis-Walker organ and which they so hypocritically curse as a shield under which to continue their nefarious schemes of regaining control in the only sense understood by them – in the sense of autocratic domination. We did not contest the official party for control. But we did contest it in the struggle for correct policies and if anything then more definitely so do we in this sense contest the reactionary forces at work within the new union. We have in the past, we do today, and we will continue tomorrow, to counterpose our views to theirs and will seek further, on the basis of practical experiences, to convince the miners that they should follow these views.
In this sense we have achievements to record which will multiply in the future because they indicate already today certain substantial proofs of the correctness of our views. This is first of all measured by the actual results. And here we can definitely record the fact that the only force fighting directly for a Left wing union position at the Gillespie convention were those delegates who supported the views of the Left Opposition. They had earned the right to do so by their past record of struggle and by their leadership given to the strike. Numerically this force represented only four actual delegates. Thus it will be seen that our beginning is modest from the point of view of numbers but significant in political content.
 
The Working Class Orientation
Proceeding from this the important question occurs as to what it signifies for the future. The Leftward orientation within the working class ranks flows today in two main directions. It is away from the capitalist ideology and toward both the Communist and the so- [line of text missing here] the latter has so far gained the most.
It is well to remember the definite contrast between the two. Communism is based upon the proletarian revolution and struggle to achieve this goal. Reformism has no such objective and therefore lands in the position of avoidance of actual and serious struggle. Within the Communist movement contradictions from false policies come quicker to a head. This is so because of its decisively marked out objectives and the heavier class pressure upon it. This has in the past, and it inevitably will in the future also, cause disappointment within the ranks and result in members leaving the party while others are repelled
before becoming members. But, as particularly the recent experiences have proven, this also offers additional possibilities of clarification with the result that the actual revolutionists turn toward the Left Opposition. Within the social reformist camp, however, the most decisive disillusionments are still to come and at an accelerated tempo in future struggles.
That there will be such struggles in the period we are now entering is clearly indicated by all developments to date. Is it to be assumed that Centrism, which is a basic phenomenon and not a mere chance one produced by a certain situation, can change and avoid its contradictions of false policies? On the contrary. As the class struggle develops in intensity it will become the more deeply involved in these contradictions with a cumulative effect. On the other hand, when we pose the question of the party to extricate itself from Centrism, that, of course, is an entirely different matter which cannot be decided in advance. This is not a question merely of individuals but of a system of leadership. Thus it has its important relations not only to the members now within the party ranks but also to the workers who are coming in the direction of Communism.
 
On Future Contacts
It follows from this, that is provided we continue to pursue a correct course, that our future contacts will be recruited much more directly from the class struggle. That itself presupposes that we become an ever more important factor within it. In this respect the experiences from the Illinois coal fields should furnish important material for study. But that also, aside from the general conclusions at which we will arrive therefrom, points to the importance of the role that the trade unions will play in the future struggle. Hence it is so much more significant that one of the milestones in our most recent development of growth is so closely connected with the realities of the trade union question. But from this the further steps must lead in the direction of much deeper penetration into the trade unions.
At this time of the fourth anniversary we see the road of the Left Opposition clearly marked out. We have attained a basis. A modest one but a significant one. While we do not forget the fact that the international revolutionary developments work in our direction with accelerated speed, it is nevertheless correct to say that our future growth and developments will be achieved at a pace corresponding to the degree with which we more actively engage ourselves in the class struggle.
 



The presidential elections have once again rendered devastating proof of the paradox of a politically terribly backward working class in a highly developed industrial country. That is shown on the face of the returns. But it is still necessary to probe a little deeper to enable us to find the trends which are indicative for the future.
Here we have a situation of more than three years of acute economic crisis and yet we have reached no further than the Democratic party, one of the very important cogs of the system itself, being able to corral an overwhelming majority on the promise of “a new deal.” It is indisputable that the issues of the economic crisis pressed forward, overshadowing everything else in the elections. But the results, insofar, as they were expressed in elections, were only the fact that the Republican administration and Hoover received the blame for the crisis and the democratic party marshaled by and large the mighty, but blind protest vote.
 
Discontent and Radicalization
Are we to conclude from this that there is not as yet any visible radicalization of the American workers or any visible Leftward trend accelerated by the effects of the crisis? Let us say at the outset that we do not at all proceed from the fundamentally false estimates of radicalization made by the official party leadership. With that we have nothing in common. Nevertheless it would be incorrect to conclude that there are not yet tendencies of a Leftward development of the American workers.
No one could fail to notice the enormous discontentment as revealed by the elections, and revealed clearly also in demonstrations outside the elections. But it is still groping. Politically, in the main, it is still harnessed within the traditional channels, flowing from one capitalist party to another. This is the one side of the picture, on the other there is the growth of support enjoyed by the Socialist party. In this instance that does represent a swing away from capitalist allegiances of the past, despite the fact that its historical meaning becomes something else. Also, in actual numbers, here is a growth of the Communist vote in such instances where the official party managed to get on the ballot. A growth, however, which is entirely too insignificant to be commensurate with the opportunities which were at hand. But that is, as has been said before in these columns, particularly due to the failure of the official party leadership to conduct an election campaign in such a manner and to pursue a policy in the day-to-day struggles which will win for the party at least a measure of confidence of the discontented masses.
Above all one must remember the political background of the American working class. The European tradition of independent political action has not yet been established. The American workers, regardless of their many heroic examples of strike struggles, have not yet learned to act as a class in a political sense. That, of course, is expressed also in the parliamentary elections. Hence its blind protest vote became entirely undistinguishable from the conscious capitalist vote. Hence also the support of the Socialist party and the Communist party is the only material expression of opposition to the capitalist parties, recognizing, however, the limitations of a parliamentary elections in actually registering the working class sentiment. Moreover, when we speak of the support to the Socialist party in this sense, it is particularly important for us to remember that, while this was undoubtedly in the main a working class support, it could be recorded for its ticket also primarily because of the failures of the official Communist party leadership to indicate clearly the revolutionary direction. In this instance the reformists gained at the expense of the revolutionary party. Historically, this can only mean in opposition to the revolutionary party.
But in the United States today the economic basis for an ideological and political regrouping of class forces is already established. American politics will become Europeanized. It would at this moment be difficult to forget that the decisive economic factors which have long ago pricked the bubble of national self-sufficiency are also very strongly expressed in politics. As one small example we might mention the claim made by the various debtor nations, immediately after the elections, to get in on “the new deal”. They want a suspension of the present payments due and a general downward revision of debt payments to the United States. This, of course, only testifies to the increasing role played by American imperialism in world affairs. Its struggle for hegemony, its struggle to supplant the bourgeoisie of the other capitalist nations and simultaneously its efforts to save the whole of the capitalist system from the further extension of the October revolution, will in the main be determining for future political developments at home.
But within the United States the dialectics of class relations, resting upon the economic basis already created, is also at work performing its task of transforming the political backwardness of the working class into its opposite. There need be no doubt that on a historical plane the traditional two capitalist party system holding exclusive sway, will give way to parties contesting along class lines with a working class acting politically independent of the capitalist parties. That we know will be the direction. But it is not yet decided to what extent and for how long it may assume forms of social reformist political action. In that decision the Communist vanguard will play its part. And it is in consideration of this that the support recorded by the Socialist party deserves serious attention.
There have been tendencies before in the United States toward a break-up of the two party system, horizontally and along class lines. We had the various blocs of which the farm bloc and the “progressive” bloc became the most outstanding. They represented mainly the middle class elements from both parties seeking a way of combination against the big bourgeoisie. This is temporarily arrested by all of these forces more or less being corralled behind Roosevelt as far as the elections were concerned. It is quite clear that the majority of the workers still followed this leadership of the middle class. But it is just as certain that the process of break-up cannot be arrested for very long.
Then will not the Socialist party become a more formidable political contender? Its growth is significant, not merely by the votes recorded which appear to be less than what was recorded by the Debs candidacy years ago; but it is significant from its position of almost non-existence a couple of years ago up until its ability today to enlist the support of considerable sections of the Leftward developing workers. It is taking on political form and its leaders are more skilfully manipulating the issues.
 
Problems of Social Reformism
This has its important bearing upon the question which still confronts us namely, to what extent social reformism in general will develop in the United States and how to most effectively combat it and turn the tide in a revolutionary direction. We are not making any futile attempt at guessing whether social reformism will actually come into power, but merely concerning ourselves with its prospects of sway for a time within the working class. And in this respect, considering the general trend as well as the position of the Communist party, it would be difficult to deny such prospects. It is necessary to acknowledge the objective possibilities for social reformist developments, and to take them into account in our revolutionary strategy. Whether they will assume the form strictly speaking of a labor party, based upon the trade unions, or the Socialist party actually mustering the forces under its banner, is not yet certain. That depends upon many factors of future developments. But that social reformism will exist only as an opposition force to Communism is as certain as the fact that the rapidity of developments of capitalist contradictions will also serve to limit its existence.
As an imperialist power the United States faces the problem of further expanding its productive forces within a decaying capitalist world. Its very first steps in attempting to issue out of the crisis its reorganization and greater concentration of industry, its greater centralization of capital, its intensified exploitation of labor and general lowering of the standard of living narrows the margin of concessions which can be given to social reformism. And social reformism can in the final analysis exist only on such concession crumbs. Its possibility of functioning in the United States at all as a historically progressive force are becoming enormously lessened. The solution which American imperialism is seeking, in a historical sense, becomes at best a breathing spell which itself increases the social antagonisms. This embodies greater prospects for the revolutionary party. It is our task to fight at every step of the road against social reformism.
 



The New York Times of March 19th carried a Duranty dispatch, reporting a front page headline in Izvestia, “Rumors about intention of the United States to recognize the Soviet Union.” The rumors are based upon statements emanating from London reading about as follows:
“It is stated here that certain circles in Washington feel that recognition of Russia may establish an equilibrium of forces in the Far East.”
And then, if these rumors should be confirmed, the first step would be “the sending of a commission to Russia to discuss a trade agreement.”
While this dispatch occupied a rather obscure place Walter Duranty is nevertheless known as one of those reporters who keeps his ear to the ground and is “wonderfully” well informed. It should not be understood in this case to mean actual possibilities of recognition. One need not put much credence is such rumors. But Duranty has proven his sagacity in representing the Stalin views as something entirely palatable to the capitalist interests and particularly to guard these interests in presenting the views. However, for the moment that is beside the point. Let us rather dwell for an instant upon the two questions of importance raised in the dispatch.
 
American Imperialist Aggression

The question of possible recognition to establish an equilibrium of forces in the Far East.
 
The question of steps following a possible recognition to discuss a trade agreement with the Soviet Union.

On the first proposition. Does the interest of the United States and of the Soviet Union in the Far East coincide, or even remotely suggest that sort of an equilibrium? Of course not. While both are opposed to Japanese aggression in China obviously it is because of entirely different reasons. The Soviet Union is opposed to Japanese imperialist aggression in China, not only because it may become a threat to its borders, but primarily because it is opposed to all imperialist aggression. The Soviet Union is the opponent of further partitioning in China and a friend and supporter of the revolutionary awakening, of the Chinese masses. This is not at all the case of the United States. As far as this most powerful and most reactionary imperialist power is concerned it has one main object in view in attempting to counterbalance the Japanese aggression in China; namely, to, as far as possible, reserve this field for its own ruthless advance to the exclusion of all others. It has its eye on a future Chinese market, in order to climb out of the crisis on the knuckles and bones of the Chinese workers.
It is with this aim in view that the United States endeavors to appear in the hypocritical role of the friend of China – as a “defender” of a defenceless nation. Once more it is attempting to extend its imperialist domain under the mask of being a champion of peace, while feverishly preparing its armed forces for war.
With this enormous difference of policy in the Far East of the United States and of the Soviet Union, how much more hypocritical must sound the rumors of recognition as a means of an equilibrium of forces. It is therefore much more necessary to call out to the American workers, and to the American Communist in particular, not to fall into the trap set by the pacifist “defender” of defenceless nations. The official American Communist Party has been carrying on a campaign of demonstrations against Japanese imperialist aggression in China. Naturally Communists are opposed to, and should fight against, the Japanese partitioning of China and the suppression of her people. But above all American Communists must tear this deceptive pacifist mask of the American imperialist aggressor. It is well for us to remember that the most powerful and most reactionary imperialist enemy is at home.
 
The Question of Soviet Trade Relations
The second important question intimated in the Duranty dispatch is the one of trade relations with the Soviet Union. Undoubtedly there are powerful American capitalist groups who turn their eyes toward the vast market in the Workers Republic; the same as there are powerful groups struggling against any relations whatever. In regard to the latter, we need only recall the recent demand made by a group of members of Congress for an embargo on all products of the Soviet Union. But to discuss this question it is necessary first of all to discard also in this instance any belief of possible overtures for trade relations as “peaceful overtures” even though they may here also carry the cover of a hypocritical mask of pacifism.
With the crisis growing in intensity it can be expected that the American imperialist will look for markets everywhere. Capitalism has no scruples. It will trade with the devil himself but will try to cheat him as all robbers do. In turning their eyes toward the Russian market these gentlemen do not for one minute fail to keep in mind their simultaneous effort to break down, if possible, its proletarian regime; to forge an armed ring around its borders. But this is precisely one more reason why the American workers should not only recognize their common interest with their brothers of the Soviet Union but in a most effective way fight for the protection of these common interests. The Soviet Union is compelled to rely on trade with the capitalist world. It needs credits in an increasing measure to continue to build its industries.
 
Demand U.S. Credits to the Soviet Union
American trade with the Soviet Union grew rapidly up until the end of 1930. From a figure, both export and import included, of $5,998,000 in 1923, to $138,785,000 in 1930. Due to lack of credits from the United States this figure dropped in 1931 to a total of $116,800,000. It stands to reason that only an extension of credits will again increase this figure.
Undoubtedly the first step for American workers to take to counter any mask of recognition as a cover for imperialist designs is to increasingly voice the demand for extension of large scale credits to the Soviet Union. Recently the official Communist party has become compelled to accept the Left Opposition slogan for such credits. But so far only in half-hearted manner. It should be made a live slogan.
It could be made so if the party would set to work seriously and begin an active campaign. We could well conceive of the first steps being taken through the calling of conferences throughout the country of all workers organizations, specifically including the A.F. of L. unions, and to place the proposals before them to demand the extension of credits. With unemployment pressing ever heavier upon the American workers, the prospect of increasing trade would be welcomed by them. A prospect of increasing trade with the Soviet Union, of American factories producing in increasing quantities for the Soviet market and of goods being shipped to help build the industry controlled by the workers there would have double effect here. It would powerfully emphasize the community of interests of the workers in both countries. It would thus also lay a more effective basis for actual working class defense of the Soviet Union in the present situation of ever growing war preparations. The Party should not delay in taking this step.
 



A tour of the country today reveals particularly the stark picture of the realities of unemployment. Cities like Chicago and St. Louis, one can say, are taking on a desolate appearance. The Illinois government itself admits 1,049,000 unemployed in the state, or 15½ per cent of the total population. Yet everywhere the signs of a live virile unemployment movement of a mass character are quite absent, although a number of councils have been organized in the various cities. Throughout the official party there is an immense turnover of membership. As many as join the party ranks, pressed by the realities of the crisis, leave it again in just as large numbers. As a matter of fact most of the new recruits leave its ranks after a very brief sojourn. Upon the party this turnover is making its indelible imprint.
In the Left Opposition branches this is not the case. We are gaining new members slowly, the new recruits remain in our ranks, but our members are still small. What then becomes of these many “visitors” to the party ranks? Most of them take leave again because of being repelled by the existing bureaucracy or specifically by its blundering mistakes. Some of them learn a valuable lesson in the process and come toward the Left Opposition. A few become so disgusted that they are browbeaten back into their former apathy, but most of them unquestionably remain within the movement, sympathetic to Communism. In this sense the movement as a whole has certainly experienced growth. But within the party itself the ideologically low level is particularly apparent. The political life within the units is reaching zero.
In the Illinois mine fields this condition is reflected as well as is also the fact of the party’s failure to employ the united front policy. Compelled by the power of job control concentrated in the hands of the union officials, and by the agreement reached between the John L. Lewis and John H. Walker cliques, the Illinois miners are again all back in the U.M.W. Now they may expect a wage cut, at the expiration of their agreement in April. But testifying to the opportunities which have been available is the fact that in several local sections progressive elements still have considerable influence. The National Miners’ Union is non-existent in that field. Its attitude of boycotting the rebel movements and its failure to meet them on a united front basis brought this result.
 
Meetings in the Mine Field
Naturally we presented this criticism at our meeting in Staunton, Ill. Present were the party organizer in the mine fields with some of the party members. In the discussion they had very little to say about this question, the organizer had something else in mind. He asked the direct question: “Do you support the hunger march to Washington?” The answer was in the affirmative. He then, after first voicing his agreement with our general analysis of the capitalist crisis, attempted to prove that our position was the opposite. In support of this contention, he quoted the following from our open letter to the party on the unemployment question: “It is false to center the unemployment program, and the activities and demonstrations, around the deceptive opportunist petition campaign to Congress ...” For us it became quite easy to verify, not only that this was still as correct as when written, but also that the hunger marchers themselves declared that, they did not come to congress to present petitions but to make definite demands. The audience present voiced no doubt of our further statement, that the workers will obtain only what they are ready to fight for.
 
St. Louis Crowd Responsive
The city of St. Louis has very little of a revolutionary movement or of Communist activities. Naturally our Left Opposition branch there is small. Still, a splendid meeting gathered for our meeting. In fact, we were greeted by the hearty applause of a typical American audience composed of workers who evidently had so far had very little contact with the Communist movement but nevertheless had received one object lesson from the capitalist crisis. A couple of Stalin supporters took exception to our views, but it came in the form of merely repeating old slanders of Trotsky always having been a menshevik. Unfortunately for the objectors, a person who evidently had strayed in by accident very fervently took up the cudgels for the capitalist system which was under indictment of the whole audience. And despite our efforts to make the distinction clear, it quite naturally turned its scorn almost equally against all three objectors in common.
 
The Tour Further West
In Kansas City we met a different kind of opposition. The party functionaries spared no efforts to keep the workers away from our meeting. Members from the unemployed councils were warned to stay away. Those who had distributed our leaflets were labeled “dangerous to the working class”. But there was no evidence that the workers took that very seriously and those party members who came to our meeting greeting the first remarks with a snicker, soon became attentive and listened very carefully.
In both of these cities there are good opportunities for the movement in general and for the Left Opposition. Our units, however, are as yet weak numerically, a condition which we must, of course, endeavor to overcome. In this respect comrade Clarke, who went to Kansas City to stay for a period, is doing good pioneer work. Our St. Louis branch is taking up much more effective work. Perhaps there could be no better tribute to this fact than the panicky fear with which the party bureaucrats have gone about destroying the Mooney united front movement which was beginning to develop in Southern Illinois particularly through the assistance of our St. Louis branch.
 
Minneapolis Movement Growing
In this respect we have had similar experiences in Minneapolis. There, our members have for years been deeply rooted in the labor movement and established real prestige for themselves among progressive and Left wing workers. Naturally our members would be of serious account in a Mooney movement actually organized on a united front basis. Because of this, the petty party bureaucrats worked overtime maneuvering to keep our branch representation out. By a little trick it was accomplished at the first conference, but with the result that all representation, outside of the party and its auxiliaries, dropped near the vanishing point. This, however, can soon be remedied and the Mooney movement rebuilt.
Our Minneapolis branch had not less than four public meetings arranged for the tour with a banquet thrown in for good measure. But it occurred just during the period of the Christmas holidays which to an extent accounted for the fact that these meetings were not as large as they should have been when organized by a live and strong branch. Nevertheless the elements mostly attracted were those with a militant record in the local labor movement. Because of that, the discussions following each lecture became very thorough and fruitful.
A portion of the Minneapolis stay became devoted to the problems of our branch and its function. It has succeeded in adding quite substantially to its ranks. Its activities are generally organized in a thorough manner, particularly centering in the trade union field. Just now it is renewing its efforts to put more active life into the local railroad council to organize a fight against the pending wage cuts.
 
Excellent Meeting in Chicago
The Chicago Left Opposition branch made one important step forward in acquiring permanent headquarters. It has become a place full of life, meetings and study classes take place regularly and generally speaking, quite successfully. For our tour, one public meeting was held at the headquarters and one in the down town section. The latter proved highly successful. It attracted a good-sized audience and brought out so many questions which in sum and substance amounted to almost a full review of the Left Opposition platform.
This branch has some recent gains to its credit, particularly among young workers. Those comrades who a short time ago were expelled from the Y.C.L. because of their fight against the system of bureaucracy have continued their logical development and adhered to the Left Opposition platform. They are now active members of the Chicago branch, comrade Satir is already busily engaged teaching other young workers. While there have been periods of a certain let down in active work carried on by this branch in the past, its future prospects of steady growth are already quite well assured.
 
Winding Up in the East
In the Eastern section, we held public meetings in Boston, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Youngstown. In the latter city we will hence forth have a functioning branch. It begins its activity with small numbers, but that is no deterrent; it has been the history of our whole movement including those branches which are today very lively. In Cleveland we have also taken steps toward the formation of a branch. When we reach the point of recording the gain of a few young recruits in that city, a live existence will be assured.
The efforts made by the little party bureaucrats in Pittsburgh, to break up our meeting and by similar individuals in Youngstown to create friction, our readers already know, came to naught in a rather inglorious fashion. In all of the meetings there was a good sprinkling of party members present, at several instances asking questions and participating in the discussion. Throughout the tour good collections were made to aid us in further activities. As one example in this respect, we might mention that from seven comrades alone, in Boston a total contribution of $50.00 was made.
All in all the tour brought splendid results. First, in again bringing forward in public meetings the Left Opposition views of problems of the class struggle. Secondly, in strengthening our branches everywhere and lastly, but perhaps foremost, in knitting our organization as a whole more closely together.
 



There will be another unemployment day with nation-wide demonstrations for unemployment relief on February 4th. It should receive the undivided support of the working class everywhere. But it is imperative that it become more than just one other demonstration.
Can it become more than that? We believe it can. There can hardly be any question that with a real substantial section of the millions of unemployed workers actually and seriously participating in a movement for relief it can. But that is essential. Under all conditions the workers will obtain nothing more than they can take themselves and certainly not more than they are seriously ready to fight for.
All the demands – and the pleas – so far made by the army of unemployed have been rejected with scorn by the Hoover administration and similarly by the state and municipal governments throughout the country. Whether the governments were Republican or Democratic made no difference whatever. The capitalist class as a whole feels itself sufficiently strong to confine the unemployed millions to the charity crumbs which they have seem fit to set aside. And sufficiently strong to overcome their fears of a rebellion from those they so haughtily scorn. Maybe, though, they are wrong in this feeling of security. It is certain at least that a real serious and determined movement would soon make them change their mind. It would soon bring the unemployed masses within reach of obtaining actual relief.
 
Possibilities for Movement Growing
But there is not yet such a serious movement it would be foolish for Communists to close their eyes to this fact. It is precisely because of this that such mountebanks, official dispensers of dope, as the Pittsburgh Catholic priest, Father Cox, can step on the scene and rally thousands of unemployed upon a program of pleas to congress. The purpose of his appearing is, of course, to act as a preventive for a real movement by leading the attention off into such futile channels. But a movement learning to know that the workers will get only what they are prepared to fight for would leave no room for such quacks.
 
Failures Should Be Recognized
The Communists lead whatever fighting unemployment movement there is. The official Communist party is by far the main factor in this. It therefore also carries the main responsibility for the opportunities not being utilized. As the objective conditions mature further this responsibility becomes heavier and the party failures become real obstacles in the way. Its failures have been apparent in the slogans presented in its attitude of approaching the unemployment situation mainly as a field for maneuvers and advertising stints. Its failure has been apparent in the utter lack of efforts for a class education, in the bureaucratic methods of restricting the movement as well as in pursuing a course apposite to the one of uniting the workers in action. This, of course, is all inherent in the policy and methodology of the Stalin agents everywhere.
The direct results to the organized unemployment movement, whatever there is of it, have been that the councils lead a precarious existence out of proportion to the possibilities available. Their scope is restricted by bureaucratic division of the workers and elimination of all who do not submit to the mechanical party control which is imposed upon them. They do not sufficiently attract the workers and those who join come and go.
 
Some Practical Stops Proposed
It would be a good beginning for the party to consider rounding out its demands for unemployment relief by adding the practical slogans which can appeal to the broad strata of the workers, including those now employed. We have in mind, as we have often emphasized, to add to the slogan for unemployment insurance also the ones of the “six hour work-day without reduction in pay” as well as the slogan for “extension of long term credits to the Soviet Union.” That it would offer better possibilities for the building of an actual movement can hardly be disputed.
It might also be appropriate to propose to the party that the unemployment demonstrations be no longer conceived purely as objectives and means of advertising but on the contrary to be conceived primarily as an integral part of agitation and organization activities to build a movement. The demonstrations themselves will not become effective unless actually sponsored by a serious movement. Not until then will the capitalist class and its government pay serious heed to the demands made.
It certainly should be in order now also to really begin to remove all the bureaucratic restrictions from the unemployed organizations. At present there is no broader appeal to the working class than the one concerning the various measures for unemployment relief. Around this the greatest extension of elementary class unity could be attained. It should ring out to all workers organizations regardless of how reactionary their leadership, as well as to those entirely unorganized. On this basis serious efforts could be made for working class unity of action.
But above all it should be necessary to pursue a thorough method of class education. That is not to be content with merely what directly and immediately concerns the spontaneous movement but rather to proceed from that to teach the workers in regards to the far more serious problems they must face to reach their revolutionary goal.
None of these proposals, however, can be approached with the method of bureaucratically maneuvering and playing with a movement. They require first of all the attitude of serious minded revolutionists.
 



Strikes are once again spreading through the coal fields. In the Pennsylvania anthracite region a large number of the black towering breakers are shut down as thousands of men have left the collieries. It is what in called an insurgent strike. The combination, of an insurgent movement and a powerful strike, has thrown both alarm and fear into the whole of the enemy camp. As it gained day by day during its first week it met the most terrific opposition from the united forces of the operators, the state cossacks and the United Mine Workers officials.
So far this opposition has not been able to stem the tide. While the state troopers are massed in the territory ruthlessly breaking up “insurgent” meetings and making wholesale arrests, more collieries join the movement.
First of all this strike is caused by the terrible unemployment, the widespread starvation and the operators demands that the collieries sign separate agreements with loss of conditions. Out of the little more than 100,000 miners in the territory at least 60,000 have remained unemployed ever since the crisis began, though largely as a result of increasing mechanization, speed-up and closing down of what is called unprofitable mines. But this is only one side of the picture. On the other hand the strike is an outright revolt movement against the corrupt administration of the U.M.W. One need but recall a few incidents which make up this recent history of rebellion.
 
Vote Stealing and Convention Packing
At the last elections held in district 1, the opposition slate headed by Maloney undoubtedly carried the majority vote; but to no avail. It was counted out. At the district convention following, this opposition again asserted itself but was squelched with strong arm methods. There is the one incident at the Silver Creek colliery near Pottsville in district 9 where on Feb. 21 a meeting attended by about 3,000 miners unanimously went on record to demand equalization of work, condemned their officials and demanded a special district convention. To these incidents can be added the last U.M.W. convention at Indianapolis where a packed audience steam rolled every demand and every grievance of the membership. This is, of course, nothing new in the history of the United Mine Workers under the Lewis regime but the constantly accumulating conflicts between the membership interests and the reaction of the officialdom is rapidly approaching a breaking point.
The outstanding demand of the anthracite rebel movement is the one for equalization of work. It particularly reflect the needs growing out of the acute unemployment conditions but it falls short of a program that can fully unite the employed with the unemployed. The movement itself is by no means a Left wing movement. It still harbors much confusion. Its leadership is not at all ready to break with the corrupt traditions of the union bureaucracy let alone to endeavor actually to found the movement on a class basis. But that only demonstrates the need of, and the possibility for real Left wing permeation.
 
Mine Strikes Elsewhere
We said before that strikes are again spreading through the coal fields and we can add that yet more are in prospect. The anthracite at this moment is merely the most outstanding case. In the Hocking Valley soft coal territory of Ohio a number of mine tipples have been idle since February 1st. Now this strike is also taking on bigger proportions, with more miners walking out in protest against wage cuts. As an indication of how drastic these cuts were one need but cite the example of the Hanna coal company announcing a reduction from $4.30 to $3.20 a day.
In both of these instances, in the anthracite and in the Hocking Valley, the coal miners are fighting a determined battle. The most splendid militancy is displayed on the picket lines. There has been no lack of perfidious efforts to undermine and to split their ranks. That is the job which the operators have assigned to their agents in the union office swivel chairs. But their other weapon is being wielded just as freely. In Pennsylvania the state troopers, in Ohio the national guard are applying the brute force to suppress the revolts.
 
Rumblings of New Revolts
Down in Eastern Kentucky and parts of Tennessee the coal miners have fought tenaciously against almost overwhelming odds. Yet, when a comparison is made the Northern oligarchs have been able to maintain themselves on an equal footing with the Southern bourbons in staggering the odds. These recent Kentucky and Tennessee strikes remained entirely isolated and could not hold out when the full weight of the brutal enemy forces began to bear down upon them. These workers are now compelled to drift back again to take up whatever work is being handed out on the same old starvation conditions, or worse.
Yet, how far this is from settling the issues becomes very apparent in the added rumblings of new revolts. Such are coming from Illinois. There the coal miners were from, their recent opposition of the Edmonson rank and file movement again driven back into the folds of the U.M.W. It was a temporary setback but not a settling of the issues. By April first the Illinois miners' contract with the operators expires. The latter's efforts to reduce the present wage scale are presented in the open, and in the Southern section it is just as openly conceded that the miners will resist. Thus there may be another spontaneous rebellion in the offing having also a double direction. For while the thieving office squabbles between John L. Lewis, for the International, and John H. Walker, for the district, are not at all settled it cannot be expected that either will sanction a strike. Not even one against a wage cut.
 
Revolts Localized – Not United
All in all, a look at the mine fields at this moment give ample evidence of signs of stiffening workers resistance but as much proof also of the terrible weaknesses: of almost numberless spontaneous rebellions and strikes, localized, confused and, while militantly fought, still lacking both perspective and organization. This is precisely as true for the Kentucky and other sections, under the leadership of the Left wing National Miners Union, as it is for the U.M.W. revolt movements; and, for that matter, also for other independent unions such as the West Virginia organization headed by Frank Keeney. One characteristic nevertheless practically all of these movements and strikes have in common, and an important characteristic, namely the fact that they represent the unanimous but sadly divided efforts of the rank and file to direct their struggle equally against the operators and their corrupt agents of the U.M.W. bureaucracy. That alone should indicate the growing consciousness among the coal miners to the treacherous role of these officials and their growing readiness to combat them In other words it offers the increasing opportunities for the Left wing to find the common base for these movement and through them to unite for the common immediate objectives.
Of such steps there is no sign whatever. The official Communist Party, which is the potential force to give this direction, is, when considering this as the essential task, failing just as miserably as the other confused and opportunist groups. The National Miners Union, which it leads, has not yet at any time pursued a policy genuinely aiming at uniting the rebellious movements. It has thereby, in the same manner as the other groupings, been hemmed in within the localizing barriers of each separate struggle, confining itself purely to the spontaneous movement of the workers themselves, lacking perspective, failing actually to organize and losing ground so that it still commands only a few scattered, small and ill-functioning locals Under such conditions the militancy it displays, the working class and revolutionary propaganda it spreads, becomes entirely too much negated.
 
A National Perspective for a United Front
While the series of localized spontaneous miners struggles from the past to the present have certainly served to advance the miners to higher levels of experience and consciousness they have most often in their direct implication resulted in defeats and weakening of their organization. The John L. Lewis administration pursued that method as a deliberate policy to serve the operators. But it should have taught us all that when local strikes are so often defeated the object must be the national extension. With the present trend of the struggle, directed, and of necessity so, equally against the U.M.W. official treachery, the national objective must, of course, stand out so much more clearly.
But this is only one side of the question. The other is the need of the actual unification of the rebel movements. Here lies the real task for the revolutionary forces, for the official Communist Party. To talk about establishing “independent leadership” in these struggles, as it does, or to talk about furnishing a program for them without taking into account this burning question of the necessity of a speedy united front of the rebel movements becomes pure nonsense. To proceed to build committees of independent leadership within them endeavoring to struggle independently and in opposition to them is wrong. It is particularly erroneous to endeavor to build the National Miners Union within these rebel movements of the U.M.W. What is needed there is a Left wing of these movements, firmly established, working as part of, and with the movements, criticizing and fighting against opportunist leaders, and working in the closest possible co-operation with the Left wing forces in the National Miners Union. Proceeding from such a basis it should not become an all too difficult task to build a united front in reality of these various movements struggling in common for the common immediate objectives; to dislodge the influence and control of the Lewis machine and for better working conditions. In such a united front movement the Communists would certainly play the main role of leadership provided they pursue Communist policies. They could thus become a much more important factor in uniting the working class against the common enemy.
 



The New York dressmakers’ strike came to an end with the workers returning to practically the same conditions as before – that is, to the sweatshop. This was not because of the lack of a fighting spirit on their part. On the contrary. At a time of general working class acceptance of wage cuts without resistance, these dressmakers set a glorious example by walking out and bringing a considerable number of workers along from the unorganized shops. Their ranks were solid. But their officials of the dominant union, the International Ladies Garment Workers, were primarily concerned about not inconveniencing the jobbers and manufacturers. They themselves proved to the hilt our often repeated warning, not only to watch their declarations but also to watch their fingers signing new agreements. Yet it must be said: Above all, this strike demonstrated the disastrous weakness of a situation where workers are divided in struggle.
Inevitably this situation is reflected in the settlements made by both unions. The I.L.G.W., for example, agreed with the jobbers and inside manufacturers upon certain measures of when and how to fix prices of piece work, but without any guarantee of the demanded minimum price amounting to $1.10 per hour. The employers’ demand for a 10 per cent reorganization right was rejected, but still leaving provisions at their command for reduction of the working force at the end of the season. A certain form of union recognition is granted, but it amounts in this case to facilitate the ironing out of conflicts between the various strata of bosses. The jobbers association has agreed to confine their work to members of the contractors association. The union obtains the right to protest any working in the shops over and above the five day week, but even that is left for final decision of the impartial chairman. On a whole, no practical change from conditions before the past agreement expired, but leaving plenty of loopholes for further connivance between the employers and their union agents.
Did the Left wing forces in the industrial union fare better in regard to actual strike gains? In this situation that could hardly be expected. As a matter of fact it had to rest content with agreement obtained one by one in individual shops, generally speaking also on practically the same conditions as prevailed prior to the strike.
 
The Serious Weakness of Two Separate Strikes
Such is the balance sheet of another settled conflict in which the workers, again forming the battling ranks, became the mere object of maneuvers. Their grievances were identical. All were working in the same industry. Yet there were two strikes, called separately, conducted separately and settled separately despite the unity obtained on the picket lines. This could not be conducive to wringing great concessions from the bosses. That the industrial union – that is the Left wing – side of the fight was conducted in the name of a united front committee altered nothing but brought more confusion to the serious objectives of actual workers’ unity.
The actual situation in the New York dress shops is now, as before, one in which working conditions and piece work prices are practically the same in unorganized shops, in shops controlled by the I.L.G. and in shops under industrial union control. That, of course, is no great inducement for workers to organize. After all, to the rank and file the most telling argument for organization is one of conditions obtained by the union. That is true even for the dressmakers who have such a splendid fighting tradition. In the same measure it must also be emphatically stated that, while it cannot be expected that the Left wing industrial union, as a minority organization, can forge far ahead in gaining conditions, if it cannot at least advance a policy which stands out clearly as superior to that of the Right wing officialdom it forfeits its possibility of winning the masses. Mere propaganda for the Left wing position in its abstract sense is not sufficient. When it degenerates to pure and simple demagogy, as is now the case of the official party leadership of the industrial union, it becomes actually harmful, because the result is that the workers lose respect for the Left wing and lose confidence in its ability. Moreover, the gentlemen in charge of the I.L.G.W. are far more skilled in the art of demagogy and have proven alert in maintaining their hold upon the workers on that basis: In this strike the Left wing union, under immediate party direction, did not at all show superiority of policy or in leadership of struggle. Here was a plain problem: Workers of two organizations struggling against a common enemy, against conditions commonly abhorred and commonly hated. What was the burning need, if not that of common struggle and common working out of the immediate objectives in such a way to help frustrate sell-outs. This was a plain duty confronting the revolutionary party and the industrial union leadership.
What did the official party leadership propose? It established a shibboleth which it called the united front committee. It called upon the dressmakers to support this committee, informing them that they did not need to belong to either of the two unions. What argument is that for unionization? Is a substitute for either, or both of these two unions, what is needed? Obviously that could not be the need and ultimately it would negate the very right of the industrial union to exist.
The revolutionists among the needle trades workers must first of all tell them categorically that union organization is the vitally necessary instrument of struggle for their everyday needs. Next they must make clear what kind of union is required, certainly stressing the superiority of the industrial form. They must in actual practice help demonstrate the tactics of a militant policy as a substitution for the treacherous connivance with the employers. But the most powerful weapon of the revolutionary party remains the one of unification of the workers against the common enemy and against the treacherous influence of the yellow leaders. That, of course, would in its first step mean a united front of the two organizations and final trade union unity.
In some cases there is no other way out but by separate unions. That was so at the time of the formation of the industrial union. At the present time, however, the question of trade union unity looms as a serious one, and particularly in the needle trades. That at least should be a lesson from the strike.
Consequently the Left wing should urge the workers in the I.L.G.W. to remain there and to fight for unity. We do not propose this slogan of unity on the basis of whatever conditions the reactionary officials may desire to lay down. Not at all. It is a fighting slogan and implies a simultaneous fight for certain definite conditions. We do not propose unity merely in its abstract sense but for the attainment of specific working class objectives.
Despite the present situation of the sweatshop still obtaining in the garment industry future growth of the I.L.G.W. is not precluded. But with that also growth of the problems of this union for satisfaction of the demands of the workers. Certainly this implies possibilities of formation and growth of a Left wing within the union. With equally as much certainty we can also point to the prospects which are available for growth of the industrial union provided it proceeds correctly. To that can be added the general prospects of a developing workers’ resistance to the enemy onslaughts which is destined to assume real proportions for the future. From this must be concluded that on a whole the need and the possibilities for trade union unity of these organizations who are rivals today will increase. This contains a warning which must be heeded.
 



When young comrades, who are too much impressed with their own importance, express it in supercilious scorn for the revolutionary classics, it is time to issue a serious warning. There is only one short step from such an attitude into either the camp of the useless petty boulrgeois intelligentsia or else into the foul pollution of the most abominable revisionism. This latter is precisely what happened to one of our young comrades in an article entitled Honor Bolshevik Leaders and appearing over his signature in Young Spartacus, No. 2. He stepped with both feet into that foul pollution.
It is said in that article:
“Rosa, in her inaugural address, again investigated the new problems brought forth by the conditions of the war and post-war period. She re-examined the teachings of Marx and Engels on the questions of armed insurrection, guerilla warfare, force and violence and concluded that history had once again placed on the agenda the tactic advocated by Marx and Engels in the Communist Manifesto in 1847–8, but later proclaimed by Engels as outlived. (Emphasis ours – A.S.)
In criticizing Rosa Luxemburg Lenin once quoted two simple lines from a Russian proverb: “It sometimes happens to eagles that they descend lower than chickens but chickens never succeed In mounting as high as eagles”, and he added, “she was and remains an eagle”. In its reversed form this would apply to our young comrade. The outrageous statement emphasized above looks too much like the attempt of a chicken to mount even higher than the eagle.
In ascribing these views to Engels our young comrade cites in parenthesis, evidently as his proof, the introduction to The Class Struggles in France by Marx. Perhaps he was unaware of the fact that long ago evidence has been unearthed of how this introduction, when appearing n print by the Berlin Vorwaerts, was miserably garbled by the German social democrats of the revisionist school, notably by Bernstein. The extent of this garbling became clear when Ryazanov discovered the original Engels manuscript, of which he has since produced photostats, showing the important deletions which had been made. Some of the results of his findings Ryazanov published in Unter dem Banner des Marxismus (Vol. 1 No. 1, German edition). In English these findings were reproduced by Trachtenberg in the Workers Monthly for November 1925.
What Engels himself thought of the printing of the introduction and of the garbled version becomes quite clear in his letters to Kautsky (then still fighting revisionism). First in his letter of March 25, 1895, he says:
“My text has suffered some because of the scruples of our Berlin friends, due to timidity over the anti-socialist laws which, under the circumstances, I had to consider.”
Again in his letter to Kautsky dated April 1, 1895, Engels said:
“To my astonishment I saw today printed in the Vorwaerts, without previous knowledge, an extract from my introduction so dressed up that I appear as a peaceful worshiper of legality quand-meme (in spite of all). The more pleased I am that now the whole appears in the Neue Zeit, so that this shameful impression is obliterated. I shall tell Liebknecht very definitely what I think of this, and also those, whoever they may be, that gave him the opportunity to distort my meaning.”
Engels spoke in a similar vein, of the “mean joke” played on him, in his letter to Paul Lafargue, dated April 5, 1895. [1]
It is perfectly true that Engels, in this introduction, draws a sharp distinction between the conditions of 1848 and those of 1895. This is as it should be. And it is particularly in this respect that the deleted parts assume their enormous significance, we shall quote only one.
In drawing the sharp distinctions of difference in the two periods Engels says:
“Does this mean that the street battles will play no part in the future? Not at all. It simply means that conditions have become far more unfavorable for the civilian fighters since 1848, and far more favorable for the military forces. Street battles in the future may be successful only if this unfavorable situation can be neutralized by other factors. Such fights will therefore be far less usual in the earlier stages of a great revolution, than in its further course, and will have to be fought with greater resources of strength. Such battles will rather resort – as in the great French revolution, and as on September 4th and October 31st, 1870, in Paris – to open attack than to the defensive tactics of the barricades.”
Is there in this powerful testimony any evidence of Engels having proclaimed the tactics of the Communist Manifesto as outlived? None whatever. On the contrary, the letters quoted contain the wrath of the revolutionary teacher against the monstrous falsifiers.
Such accusations made against Engels become a blot upon the Communist movement which we must eradicate. With our modest means we must hold aloft the banner of Marxism and particularly so in the Left Opposition. We can well afford to be humble students endeavoring to learn from our great teachers. We must guard against this supercilious, know-it-all attitude which steps with both feet into the foul pollution of social reformism. Comrades guilty of such an attitude must be called to order sharply.

Footnote by ETOL
1. The actual date of the letter to Lafargue is April 3.
 



On Sunday, March 13 elections of enormous historical consequences are taking place in Germany. Behind these elections stands the mobilization of forces to decide the issue of who shall prevail, Communism or Fascism. Its historical consequence lies not so much in the direct outcome as to which candidate will win; but in the expression these elections give to the line-up and the strength of the class forces involved.
In its purely parliamentary aspect the present line-up represents itself as fellows: To the Right the extreme reaction of Fascists, (Nazi) nationalists and steel helmets, in the Center the bloc around the candidacy of Hindenburg of the various capitalist center parties and social democracy, to the Left the Communists.
Thus while the blurring of the class lines is still expressed in the fact of workers under social democratic influence being swung into the camp supporting Hindenburg together with outright capitalist reactionaries the two forces on either side of this grouping remain distinct. The strength of these two forces will be decisive for the immediate future. Fateful indeed will this event be for the German working class.
As to how decisive for the future this coming recording of strength of class forces will be is amply testified in the pre-election campaigns. There are already the evidences of the conflict being transferred ever more out of the purely parliamentary field into sharp street battles. In this respect violence against the workers is on the increase. But there are also the accompanying hopeful signs of increasing working class unity in such skirmishes against the Fascist reaction. On the other hand Fascism is now more clearly proclaiming Communism as its real enemy.
 
The Working Class Divided in Two Main Groups
As already indicated in this fateful situation the working class is still in its main aspect divided, by organization and by ideology. Today they appear in two main groups under the, for the actual situation, rather sumptuous names the “iron front” and the “red united front” In the former is included the trade unions, the Social Democratic party, the republican Reichsbanner and the labor sports organizations. Their leaders are the social chauvinists of S.P.G. It has of course nothing in common with a workers’ iron front, but represents an attempt of the treacherous social democratic bureaucrats to swing these workers into a servile support of the reactionary capitalist government of Hindenburg and Bruening – for the maintenance of the capitalist system. Yet these organizations who make up the “iron front” embrace the bulk of the German working class. The “red united front” is under the leadership of the official Communist party, but unfortunately it is not a united front. How could it be with all the other workers organizations mentioned not included. The “iron front” embraces the workers who are still under the influence of social democratic ideology. The “red united front” embraces the workers won for the Communist ideology. A serious division in face of a dangerously vicious common enemy bent upon the destruction of all vestiges of working class organization.
The Social Democratic party bureaucracy is about to complete its course which passed through deception and treason to complete depravity. No longer even useful to rule on behalf of German capitalism they face the final test of ability to sell the workers whom they influence for Judas’ silver. Their leadership over so many years has brought the ultimate result of enormous retreats for the workers of Germany. Today wages are cut to the very bone. It is estimated that 7 to 8 million workers are in the ranks of the permanently unemployed army, while starvation and misery stalks the land. The social democratic bureaucrats have given up their last shred of pretense of fighting for a reform program. Their whole course of abject servility is now reaching its culmination in the fact that they have prepared all the prerequisites for a victory of Fascism. But that is also their most severe test. The workers are rapidly extricating themselves from their ideology and domination. The Social Democratic youth has long shown dissatisfaction with their toleration policy.
 
Growth of Fascist Reaction a Threat to Whole Working Class
In elections held during the last couple of years throughout Germany the Fascist gains have mounted at a dizzying speed. That gives expression to their menacing strength. Moreover, in a rapidly sharpening revolutionary situation, its role as the final means of maintaining capitalist rule becomes so much more pronounced. And so it is now. The Nazis can count on growing numbers of direct supporters amongst the great monopoly institutions.
Its true character as the darkest force of reaction, combining its aims of brutal working class suppression with a philosophy of adopting pre-capitalist forms of economy, was expressed, perhaps unwittingly, by a reporter of the New York Times of March 1. In describing the economic program of the parties to the Right he said:
“All three groups (Nazis, Nationalists and Steel Helmets) fervently believe Germany should adopt a policy that they call ‘autarkic’, or economic independence. They admit this would be difficult, but think Germany in the long run could succeed in cutting herself off from Western Europe and feeding herself from her own land with the help of the Eastern European agricultural states. It would involve writing off parts of the vast capital Germany has put into her industrial plant, with a view to following a course exactly opposite to flooding the world with manufactured goods. It would involve an economic revolution and a terrific strain on the nation.”
Here we have, though not yet clearly formulated, a theory of capitalist national self-sufficiency with an implied aspiration to become the spearhead of armed intervention for subjugation of the Soviet Republic. A return to pre-capitalist forms of production and exchange of commodities, squeezed in within national boundaries. A return to barbarism with the “terrific strain” to. rest upon the shoulders of the working class.
 
Is the Way Out Through a Fascist Dictatorship
Today there is no way for Germany from her present economic dilemma on a capitalist basis. It exists within an economically declining capitalist Europe, ever more receiving the imprint of being put on rations in world economy by the more powerful American imperialism. German capitalism, after its re-stabilization following the events of 1923, has accomplished two successive waves of rationalization of its industry. Existing within a declining capitalist Europe and cut off from its former colonies, its economic problems become today that much more acute. Even a temporary relief for German capitalism through a Fascist dictatorship could, of course, only serve to further intensify these contradictions. However, the menacing threat in such a temporary way out for German capitalism is the sinister prospect of the crushing of the German working class movement, and with that the enormous danger to the whole world’s working class movement – above all to the Soviet Union and the Communist International.
To German capitalism, and to world capitalism, the crushing of the German working class and, in the first instance its revolutionary section, has already become a life and death necessity. The German revolutionists must recognize this fact. The issue is more than ever Communism or Fascism.
 
Communist Party Fails in Great Possibilities
What is the position of the German Communist party in this situation of menacing threats? Strenuous efforts are being made by the S.P. bureaucracy to swing the bulk of the working class, under the sumptuous name of the “iron front”, into support of the Hindenburg candidacy, into support of capitalism and, in its ultimate sense, into support of preparation for the Fascist regime. Obviously, this latter aspect is not yet clear to these workers. They are being held under the illusion that at the moment their support to Hindenburg will offset the Fascist advance. To what extent and by what methods has the official Communist party endeavored to shatter this illusion?
Undoubtedly here was an excellent opportunity to split the working class forces away from the Center block of reaction now supporting Hindenburg. But that would presuppose the Communist party genuinely offering a united front embodying the serious immediate objectives of working class struggle. There should even have been no objection to serious efforts to find the common grounds for unity around one working class candidate as a means of utilizing these elections to further stem the tide of Fascist reaction.
At the 1925 German presidential elections there were three candidates, the Communist, the social democrat and the capitalist. Hindenburg as the latter candidate, supported by the extreme reactionary parties, signified the monarchy hovering over Germany. The E.C.C.I. then wrote correctly pointing out to the German Communist Party 10th congress, held July 10th, 1925:
“The 10th congress of the Communist Party of Germany must frankly admit that the party committed an error by not following the advice given by the Executive Committee of the Communist International after the first presidential ballot and before the election of Hindenburg, namely, to signify to the German social democrat that the Communists were prepared to withdraw their candidate in favor of the social democratic candidate on certain conditions. Such errors and delays are unforgivable in politics and always costly to the party of the revolutionary proletariat.”
Germany 1925 is, of course, not Germany 1932. Today there is an objectively revolutionary situation in the country: Today there is the yet more serious and more direct menace of Fascism hoovering over Germany. Today so much more is the question of working class unity, of a united front from organization to organization, from movement to movement, of workers under social democratic ideology and those of Communist ideology against Fascism, the vital issue of the moment. It is not yet too late. The German proletariat is still in a powerful fighting position. It has created a powerful Communist Party; but the supreme need is for the party to understand how to apply this essential united front tactic on a genuine and honest basis.
 
German Left Opposition Appeals to Party for United Front Policy
This our German comrades of the Left Opposition have already proposed in a very concrete form embodied in its appeal to the official Communist Party in addition to putting forward a worker’s united front presidential candidate also to create:

Committees of Action consisting of representatives of factories, trade unions, political groups and other workers’ organizations.
 
A Joint Council of Action to be constituted at a congress of delegates from these Committees of Action ... to represent the proletarian concentration against the concentration of the reactionaries.
 
The congress must be organized in advance as the proletarian counter-parliament in the event of a Fascist Reichstag, or against an extra-parliamentary or parliamentary Fascist government.
 
The congress must solve three tasks concretely:





the preparation of the general strike to prevent the seizure of power by Hugenberg and Hitler;
the formation of one common, non-party workers’ defense corps;
the elaboration of a common minimum program with regard to the next steps to be taken by the Committees of Action.




 



Central Executive Committee
Communist Party of the United States:
The Daily Worker of August 23, contained a direct frame-up charge of murder against the Communist Left Opposition. This was repeated by you in a number of leaflets issued as well as in subsequent issues of the Daily Worker.
We could consider this only as a vicious attempt to incite a black hundred pogrom campaign against us in lieu of the failure on your part to answer politically a single one of our arguments on vital working class problems. We so branded it in our public declaration published in The Militant of August 27. We also declared our readiness to have the facts of the situation, which you turned into a dastardly frame-up, fully investigated at a public working class hearing. To this effect we addressed a letter to the following central organizations:



Communist Party of U.S.A.
Trade Union Unity League
American Civil Liberties Union
Conference for Progressive Labor Action
Communist Party (Majority Group)
Industrial Workers of the World



You failed to answer this letter, and so did the I.I.D. and the TUUL which you direct. The other organizations declared themselves ready to participate in a public hearing. To us this is the most convincing proof that you were not at all prepared even to make an attempt before the eyes of the working class to make good your charge. You found that your foul attempt of incitement did not succeed and you were compelled to back down.
In view of this retreat from a false and unsubstantiated position on your part we intend not to make any further request upon the other organizations mentioned for a public hearing. Your fear of meeting the issue squarely before the working class has therefore closed this phase of the incident.
We do declare, however, that this contemptible effort on your part, stooping to the worst methods of reaction, served to open the eyes of many serious Communist workers and render them more willing to listen to what the Left Opposition has to say. Of this we have received ample proof by growing sympathy for our ideas. We shall not fail in the least to continue our political hammer blows for a return of the Communist Party to a Leninist basis.



 


Communist League of America (Opposition)
— Arne Swabeck, Sec’y.



 



Dear Comrade Allard:
Your letter of August 31 (published as an answer to the party bureaucrats in last week’s Militant) calls for some clarification. First of all let us say that we fully recognize the enormous provocation from the bureaucratic party leaders to which you have been subjected over a period of time. You have acted as a militant on the firing line and in the leadership of a mass movement fighting for correct policies. This is the reason for the provocation. In view of this your reaction is understandable: but your conclusion is faulty.
 
The Party and Its Errors
Our attitude to the party we must define correctly and precisely. We defend the Communist party at all times, but we defend none of its mistakes. Our defense presupposes a fight against the false views, tactics, methods and policies of its leadership. In this sense we make a distinction between the party and its bureaucratic leadership, and only in that manner can we correctly defend the party.
This is not a new conclusion which we have come to just recently. On the contrary, it has formed a basic principle of the Left Opposition platform since its inception, and all experiences so far have fully substantiated its validity. This conclusion proceeds from our recognition of the great role assigned by history to the Communist party. The proletarian revolution is inconceivable without the leadership of the Communist party. To prepare for the attainment of that goal the everyday working class struggles require the active intervention and direction of the Communist party. In order to illustrate this latter point we need only cite the situation at present existing in the Illinois coal fields.
You have there a powerful movement now marching in a progressive direction. It is made up of workers who have learned many bitter lessons and who have therefore broken with the past. Its leadership is composed of elements of various views and tendencies, ranging from the outright conservative of capitalist ideology to the Communist view. These various tendencies will pull in different directions with the conservative ones applying the brakes upon the progressive development which is so necessary, and driving the movement backward. While a solid rank and file control is essential for the success of the new union it is just as necessary that it have a leadership conscious of its tasks and capable of pursuing a genuine progressive course. Is there any possible way of guaranteeing this without a Communist nucleus functioning actively, constantly exerting its influence and clearly showing this direction. You will readily agree with us that all genuine Left wingers should function in an organized manner within this mass movement to help insure a correct course. But that would also be a hopeless task without the initiative of a Communist nucleus. Needless to add that in general, in the decisive struggles which will face the new union, this responsibility of the Communist forces only multiplies. These examples we believe are sufficient to emphasize the role, the duty and the tasks of the Communist party in the revolutionary perspectives as well as in the every-day working class problems.
 
Blunders of Stalinism
However, and here we come to an extremely important question, it is precisely in this role and in these duties that the Communist party has failed most glaringly since its leadership fell into the hands of the Stalin regime. We have repeated time and again the examples of the fatally false policies pursued by this regime in the Chinese revolution of 1925–27, in the British general strike of 1926 and now being repeated in the extremely critical situation in Germany today. It is repeated again in workers’ struggles of today in America, though on a smaller and less decisive scale. From these false concepts and wrong policies flow the bureaucratic method and practices which not only stifles the party and renders it impotent, unable to develop and grow in objectively favorable situations, but strangles its activities and the movements it influences and controls. This prevents the party from fulfilling its groat historic mission, it prevents it from functioning as an active factor giving correct direction to the every-day struggles. It alienates the workers from the party.
Despite all this, or we may say particularly because of this, our duty becomes the more clearly outlined. We recognize that the Communist party can fulfill its historic mission and its tasks of today only through a correct Marxian orientation. We know how essential the Communist party is, and that it is the only workers political party. This is why we make the distinction between the Communist party and the mistakes of its leadership. This also defines our attitude to the party. We do not assume to function in its place in the sense of taking over the duties of the party. But we must combat the wrong reactions of workers who, because of these mistakes, turn against the ideas of Communism. We must uphold the banner of Communism, and hence, to regenerate the party, to restore, it to the basis of Marx and Lenin becomes the fundamental objective. Combining this with our active participation in the class struggle, in the solution of the everyday problems of the working class, we will carry forward the banner of Communism and fight for the realization of its ideas. This is our task to which we must devote ourselves in earnest. It proceeds through the kind of struggles in which you and others of our comrades are now so actively engaged.
 
Question of United Front
It is in direct accord with the above that we also want to correct the statement in your letter of invitation to “the rank and file of the National Miners Union” (for a united front). Maintaining this attitude would be to imitate the mistakes of tho Stalinist bureaucrats, in reversed form. The National Miners Union we consider as a bona fide workers’ organization. Moreover it is a Left wing union. Our attitude to this union as well as to the other unions named by yon must be that of a genuine united front. Hence we must approach these unions, and especially the Left union, officially, in our united front policy, as an organization to be invited through its elected leadership, simultaneously urging the rank and file membership that the invitation be accepted.
Hoping this will help to clear up these few points. I remain



 


Fraternally yours,
Arne Swabeck



 



In the present crucial battle of the Illinois miners one question stands out of decisive importance for the future of the American labor movement. It is the question of life or death to the last solidly organized section of the miners union in the soft coal territory. But it is so especially by virtue of the fact that we are here concerned with a basic industry, once well organized, and a union, once attaining to a high degree of militancy, composed entirely of basic proletarians as separate and distinct from the skilled strata of which most of the at present remaining unions are composed. In view of the enormous retreats made by the existing trade unions on every field, both in regard to loss of wages and working conditions as well as in loss of organized strength, this Illinois miners battle becomes decisive for the future.
It becomes decisive in more respects than one; but particularly by what is already clearly indicated, that a victory in this strike must necessarily open up a new chapter laying the basis for an entirely new method and practice of unionism. It must be a final and complete separation from corrupt, treacherous practices of the past and from corrupt officialdom.
A mere victory on the wage proposition with union conditions and leadership remaining as before would at best be only a short truce to be utilized for preparation of new betrayals.
 
Union Future Hangs in Balance
This strike has gone beyond the bounds of a mere ordinary shut down. There are virtual armies arrayed with mass picketing on a scale never witnessed before. There is additional importance in the miners being the very spearhead of workers resistance against the wage cut onslaughts, and in the double objective of their fight – to also decisively defeat the wrecker’s from within. It is a struggle of gigantic proportions.
The future of the Illinois miners union now hangs in the balance. To estimate its prospect it will be well to note some of the experience of the past, and particularly the all important question of policy pursued by the revolutionists. In this respect a comparison of the views advanced by the Left Opposition and the policy and practice of the official Communist party will prove illuminating.
The Illinois miners do not stand alone. There are sections in rebellion against the U.M.W. of A. administration in every field, some having already definitely split away. The question of future unity of these sections, as a temporary measure, at least a united front on minimum objectives, is still a crucial one. It was therefore completely in accord with the fundamental principles of working class interest and proceeding from a basis ot revolutionary policy that we, at the time of the Pennsylvania-Ohio miners strike of last year urged a united front of these various sections to fight for their common immediate objective. The Pennsylvania-Ohio miners struck under the banner of the party controlled National Miners Union. The West Virginia miner’s were simultaneously on strike under the banner of their independent union, and the Illinois miners were in revolt against the U.M.W. of A. officials. Our united front proposal to be organized through a conference of these sections was rejected by the official party. Now such a step is becoming an ever more pressing duty.
We can go back further into the history of developments. At the time of the Illinois miners break with the Lewis administration, cleverly utilized by the Fishwick-Walker-Howatt combination, we warned against any false illusions toward this combination but at the same time emphasizing the need of the Left wing continuing the struggle within this mass movement. The official party pursued the opposite course and isolated its forces from the movement and from the union.
There was a repetition in the revolt following shortly after headed by the Edmonson forces. Once again a mass movement, though practically leaderless, a new opportunity. The course pursued by the Left Oppositionists in participating in that movement and to point toward the right direction for the future is now bearing its fruits. The Left Opposition Communists has now all the prospects for, and is taking shape as a force in reality, fighting for a correct direction to the present gigantic movement. The official party policy of boycott of mass revolts not entirely controlled by it has led it to its present fatal isolation from the Illinois miners.
This can be repaired still; but only by the official party 1eadership rectifying its mistakes and changing its attitude and policy. The course, which it must adopt has been very clearly indicated by the position we have taken. The correctness of this position has been fully vindicated by the event. The logic of the party position adds only one additional sad commentary further reinforcing this lesson.
The present Illinois miner’s struggle must start a new chapter in the history of their organization. Only a complete break with the past, with the corrupt union bureaucracy, can secure the victory they have set out to win against the operators, against the armed state forces and against the official traitors. The Left Opposition is developing a force in this struggle capable of constantly more serious intervention, and it will show the way.
 



The Illinois miners’ struggle has sustained its first victim. Joe Colbert, president of Local 303, Orient, Illinois, was murdered in cold blood by Lewis-Walker gunmen firing from an automobile in front of his home.
Joe Colbert was known as one of the staunchest militants. He held a long record of fight against the corrupt Lewis machine. He acted as chairman of the miners revolt mass meeting at Benld, Ill., at which the present strike found its organizational initiation. Colbert held his post in the ranks to the last. He died fighting. All honor to the fallen militant!
The Illinois coal fields are again seething with revolt spreading throughout the various sections and directed against the most brazen official treachery yet recorded. A powerful rank and file movement has sprung up in which the young militant miner Gerry Allard is one of the leading spirits, gigantic mass meetings have been held from which marches are being organized to close down the mines which reopened under the operators’ reduced scale of wages.
Since April first, the Illinois miners have been on strike refusing to retreat from the basic wage scale of $6.10 per day formerly obtaining. The operators called it a suspension and meanwhile prepared to have their trusted agents in control of the union, John L. Lewis and his handmaid, “weeping” Johnny Walker, make all arrangements ready for the treacherous sell-out. A new contract with a reduced basic wage scale was offered. It was submitted to a referendum and defeated by a vote of more than 20 to 1. But this did not at all deter the official leeches. They had more ways than one to attempt to defeat the will of the rank and file and pursue their deadly work of destroying the union. So they arranged to have the tabulated tally sheets of the referendum vote stolen, declared an emergency, signed a new contract providing for a $5.00 a day basic wage scale and manipulated a counterfeit referendum vote, which they now “confidently expect to be carried.”
 
Life of Union At Stake
It is this new outrageous action which gave the signal for the present revolt movement. The rank and file is once more taking matters into their own hands. They know only one method and when set into motion they do not hesitate. Their method is the one of militant fighting fully recognizing their class enemy. In that lies their strength. They have learned from many bitter experiences that the union officials have long ago become part and parcel of the enemy class, ready, at every favorable opportunity, to do its bidding and yet, these officials, skillful in the art of treason, have succeeded again and again to circumvent their militancy and to inflict heavy defeats upon them step by step reducing the union. Now it is the very life of the union itself which is at stake.
The Illinois coal fields harbor the last stronghold of the United Mine Workers of America, and practically the last of the organized miners’ movement which, thoroughly proletarian in composition, has established such a glorious tradition in American labor history. It is due to the indomitable spirit of the rank and file, despite wreckage of treason inflicted upon them, that they have been able to preserve an organization. But the biggest job still lies ahead of them.
There can now be no thought whatever of further preserving the union until that job is finished, until the whole crew of corrupt officialdom is completely cleaned out. In this sense the movement must be clear on its double aim, viz: To defeat the attempts of the operators to further reduce the now miserable standard of living prevailing and to clean out, root and branch, their agents in the official union positions.
 
Extent of Present Movement
There are good indications that such is actually the aim of the present movement. Despite the great confusion deliberately provoked by the whole method of defeating and betraying the referendum vote, the opposition to the sell-out is rapidly organizing. Reports at this stage of developments are still somewhat unclear, but it appears that everywhere the local unions are meeting and deciding to reject the put-over agreement and to prevent the mines from resuming operation by throwing strong picket lines around them. In rapid succession the locals are falling in line with most of the sub districts remaining solid on strike.
A mass meeting in Benld had an attendance of 10,000 revolting miners, similar big meetings have been held in Springfield and elsewhere. At the time of this writing miners are marching upon Taylorville where the Peabody Coal Company is making desperate efforts to reopen its four mines. Though the miners march without arms this company has already succeeded in making a virtual armed camp out of their little community. One press dispatch says: “Businessmen and members of the American Legion wore recruited into a hastily formed home guard to repel any invasion.” This town was also the scene of military forces moving in rapidly during the ill-fated strike of the National Miners Union in 1929.
The rebel movement is feverishly organizing its forces knowing that quick and decisive action is imperative. It has entrusted the leadership to an elected policy committee. Petitions have been placed in circulation among the local unions calling for a special state convention to abrogate the put-over agreement, and, as inevitably must follow, to clean out the traitorous officials. Meanwhile John L. Lewis is doing his bit for the operators sending proclamations to the miners’ locals that “picketing and mass meetings must cease”, and that opposition leaders are to be penalized. In this he is in complete accord with the agencies of the capitalist forces, including the government. It is reported that the young militant leader Gerry Allard was “quickly cut off the air by radio station WEBQ when he launched into a vehement attack on union officers who supported the $5.00 agreement.”
This was under date line of Aug. 12th. The reports are that Gerry Allard and his wife, Irene, have been arrested in West Frankfort. Such, of course, are the celebrated capitalist methods – to strike the heavy blows at the militant leaders. There need be no doubt that a powerful answer will be given by the rebel movement.
 
Illinois, Scene of Many Revolts
The history of the Illinois coal fields is replete with rank and file revolts dating back to the days of the Verdin battle and even farther. Here was often found the backbone of the fight to break the stranglehold of John L. Lewis upon the union. But this is yet an unfinished task because of the various ways in which the miners were time and again switched off the path by their resistance being insufficiently organized, by leadership which faltered in the decisive moments or by other groups of corrupt elements capitalizing on the situation leaving the miners to suffer new disillusionment.
In the above is contained a serious Howatt combination, ostensibly in opposition to Lewis, proved a disastrous deception and illusion. The revolt led by the Edmondson-Musteite combination, which lacked backbone and a clear progressive program, failed utterly. But the results in both of these instances is to be accounted for in large measure by the failure of the Left wing under the official party leadership to penetrate these movements and its subsequent complete isolation.
Now the Illinois miners are marching again. The deep-seated discontent is again flaring into a mighty flame. Tenacious struggles against the lowering of the standard of living are in progress also in the Indiana coal fields and the Mahoning Valley, Ohio.
In the above is contained a serious lesson of what the revolutionary forces must not do. It is the policy pursued by the official party which led to isolation and impotence of the Left wing. Its mistakes in this respect began with the stupid boycott of the revolt movement which found its expression in the Walker-Fishwick-Howatt combination, and repeated toward the Edmondson-Musteite-led revolt. The serious consequences of these stupid tactics are not to be measured alone by the shortcomings and failures or betrayals of the revolt movements but more so by the isolation and final disappearance of an organized Left wing movement.
 
Duties of the Revolt Movement
It, is yet time, however, to make good in a measure on the mistakes made and to regain the time and opportunities lost. The present revolt movement has a very serious duty to perform for the success of which the Left Opposition supporters in the Illinois coal fields will bend all their efforts.
To make the present strike state-wide is, of course, imperative. That is the direction of the present movement. In this the Illinois miners are now carrying the brunt of the burden of leading the working class as a whole forward in resistance upon the attacks on their standard of living. Closely bound up with this must be the completion of the long overdue task of cleaning out the treacherous officials and saving the union from destruction.
However, as once more a situation exists of the miners battling separately in several territories with their several organizations struggling alone for their life preservation, the creation of a united front is more pressing than ever. There is now an opportunity for the Illinois revolt movement to perform a real duty by leaving no stone unturned to endeavor to unite their immediate aims and their immediate struggle with those of the National Miners Union, with the Miners Union of West Virginia with the battling miners in Indiana and Ohio.
But these are objectives the complete fulfillment of which can be conceived of alone on the basis of creating a strong Left wing, conscious of its task within this movement. This is the duty of the hour for’ all revolutionary miners.
 



The Progressive Miners’ constitutional convention, which meets at Gillespie, Ill., Oct. 3, has a mighty job in hand and a great duty to perform. Its actions will undoubtedly have far reaching consequences for the future working class movement.
First on the agenda, if not in numerical order, then at least in importance, is the task of solidifying the union foundation in a working class sense, to secure its progressive direction and clinch the objective which establishes its militant character. Translated into the language of its practical problems that means to defeat the corrupting influence of the reactionary Lewis-Walker clique and to strengthen the fight against the operators’ wage-cut drive.
Your way to victory is the one of militant struggle. That is your one main weapon and a powerful one. Of this the past has furnished ample proof to you. It is therefore logical that you should draw the conclusion of first of all securing the class basis for your union by a recognition of the class struggle and the initiation of the practical program of action which flows from this recognition.
 
Rank and File Unity and Conscious Leadership
It is the class struggle that you are now engaged in. Only the blind could fail to see this. It is the bitter realities of the class struggle which determine every step you are taking and upon which your future is conditioned. Hence the necessity of its bold recognition. But the realization of the program of action demands the completest possible unity of all the forces within the union, supplemented by the widest working class democracy and freedom of expression of minority opinion. Given such unity the first steps are secured. Others will follow from them, which demand that this unity be extended to a national scale embracing the other miners’ rebel sections, the National Miners Union, the West Virginia Miner’s Union and similar groups. First, in the form of unity of action in ways and means to obtain better wages and working conditions and to smash the Lewis machine. Secondly, in ways and means toward complete unification in one national militant union. The road to its accomplishment is through rank and file control plus a leadership conscious of its tasks.
 
Who Raise the Bogey of the “Reds”
The bogey of the “Red” issue is raised in order to swerve the miners from their progressive path. “Stay clear of the ‘red’,” says the operators’ propaganda designed to catch the weak-kneed fellows who fall subject to this propaganda in the delusive hope of gaining favors by appearing as “good boys” to the operators. But a serious struggle cannot be won that way. The Lewises, the Walkers and their henchmen are much better boys to the operators and a thousand times preferred by them. Your road to victory is the radical road, the road of the “Reds” which is forged through the power of your class forces in militant array. That is the road which the Communist Left Opposition proposes.
We do not forget the fact that the many blunders and false policies of the official Communist party Stalinist leadership has helped to make it possible for such propaganda to appear. But beware of those in your own ranks who use it. We are not unmindful of the fact that these blundering mistakes have temporarily served to turn the miners away from the Communist party in disgust. But it should be remembered that it was the party of Lenin and Trotsky which secured the first serious working class victory – the establishment of the Soviet Republic. Under the Stalin regime the party has departed from the basis of Lenin. But that gives us only so much more cause to strive to restore it to its rightful position.
 
Which Is the Political Party of Labor?
In your deliberations at the convention and in your future course, you will likely meet the sleek office seeking careerist. You know how ta deal with him. You will meet the kind of “labor” politician who tells you to cater to the capitalist party in power in order to gain favors; or to support the democrats, in order to realize its “opportunities”. It is an election year, and some of you will perhaps think your path should be toward a labor party, while others may lend an ear to the plea for support from the Socialist party. But it is well to remember that the parties in power, whether Republican or Democrat, have always been the bosses’ tools willing to call out police and the military forces on the side of the operators. Remember that the Socialist party has not only failed to support your struggle, but some of their leading spokesmen like John Hindmarsh, Richard Glover, Jack Reed and Adolph Germer are right in the midst of the Lewis camp working hand in glove with these traitors. The path of the miners is not through the labor party but through the revolutionary party, that is the Communist party. Its mistaken policies today we must correct. And it is because of these mistakes that the Left Opposition assumes the duty of pointing the revolutionary road.
When given the prerequisites of militant unionism, resting on a class foundation, your best guarantee for victory in this present strike struggle is at hand. Even in the Southern part of the state the terror will be forced to relinquish its hold. The present added oppression is now so much more surely preparing the rank and file revolt there. It is your tusk to send in there your best organizers to perform their quiet function in preparation for another mass picket line. Stand fast for the basic $6.10 wage scale and division of work. Continue your fight for the six-hour day and for tolerable working conditions. In that you will be sure to have the full and unstinted support of the rank and file everywhere. Militant unionism accepts compromise only when it is weak and will never trade off the mere favor of union recognition as a substitute for these essential conditions because without them the mere recognition would be an empty victory.
 
Progressive Miners of America Can Show the Way
Your future tasks are enormous and there are great difficulties in your way. But given a class foundation, a rank and file membership imbued with the will to win, the spirit to fight to the last and the readiness to sacrifice for the cause; given a courageous leadership, conscious of its class position, you will be able to overcome the greatest obstacles.
The constitutional convention of the Progressive Miners of America has a great duty to perform to the Illinois miners, to the miners of the United States and to the American working class. It is coming about as a serious revolt against the murderous employers’ wage cutting offensive. It has the opportunity of taking the first steps toward leading the working class forward to a serious resistance against this offensive and to support the forces charting the road toward working class freedom from capitalist oppression.
 



Political elections at this stage of development in the United States offer, from our point of view, opportunities for revolutionary propaganda and activities. It is because of this that they can be utilized to advance the working class political level. More than this we should therefore not expect from them.
Elections do not decide the important issues of the working class which we approach in the sense of being essentially issues of power. That is, as the issue of which class shall hold power in society. There is no other way to approach it.
But elections can become stepping stones for working class advance only when they are correctly utilized to help make clear the existing class relationships. The collisions of the conflicting interests between capitalism and the workers are manifested daily in the shop, in the unions, in demonstrations and on the picket lines. There the economic basis is established. In the elections they can become the focusing points around which the workers can express their Interest from a class point of view and to that extent further prepare themselves for the struggle for power.
 
Reformist or Revolutionary Objective?
In that particular objective the essential difference between a reformist and a revolutionary policy becomes apparent. The reformist policy can never educate the workers to the concept of power, nor can it serve to advance them in that direction because that is not at all its objective. It is definitely circumscribed by the limits of the existing capitalist society and conforms to the rules of the capitalist state. It cannot step beyond these limits because that would lead to a conflict with the state power and lead to revolutionary conclusions, which is something the social reformists would never permit. The logic of the class struggle, however, presses inexorably beyond these limitations and the social reformists, fearing the revolutionary conclusions, betray the interests of the working class and give up even the struggle for reforms.
 
What is the Right Wing Position?
The revolutionary policy, on the other hand, does not at all reject the struggle for necessary reforms. On the contrary, considering reforms as by-products of the revolutionary struggle, it takes the everyday needs of the working class as the basis of its immediate demands. But it sets for itself the objective of change in the class relationships, the objective of replacing the capitalist power with the working class power, the objective of revolution. Only when this is made clear in political elections by the revolutionary party, will it fully perform its duty and only on that basis can it fully justify its participation in them.
It should follow from this, that the Communist party in a political election is also duty bound to appear before the working class directly under its own banner, planted solidly upon a revolutionary platform. With this, the Right wing Lovestone group is in total disagreement. True to its opportunist position in every respect, this group proposes a “united labor ticket” for the New York mayoralty elections. The fact that it is advocated for New York should not deceive anybody for if it is correct for that city there should be no particular reason for its being wrong elsewhere.
In the Workers Age of September 24, a leading editorial, in addition to waxing extremely indignant at the “tin box” corruption of Tammany Hall and in the City Hall, gives precisely such advice. To make sure of no misinterpretation, we quote directly from this editorial:
“The job of the labor movement in this situation is clear: to unite all its forces and all its organizations in support of a UNITED LABOR TICKET (emphasis in original), standing foursquare for the interests of labor and determined and able to make a clean sweep of the whole dirty mess.”
Which labor movement is here referred to? Perhaps the trade unions are taken into account. Be that as it may, there need be no doubt that the editorial aims at the Socialist party and the Communist party as both are mentioned in this connection – a united election ticket of the reformist party and the revolutionary party. Only from a politically degenerated group could such a proposal emanate, despite its attempt at still covering itself with the name of the Communists.
 
A United Front or a Reformist Sham?
We have often in these columns commented upon and emphasized the necessity of a working class united front for specific and limited objectives of struggle. We have important historical experiences of working class unity of action in the sense of revolutionary and reformist organizations or parties joining forces to attain specific and limited aims upon which members of both were in accord and which were of general interest to the broad mass movement. The threatening Fascist menace in Germany still demands the united front of the Communists, the social democrats and the trade unions to defeat that menace. A united front in this country for the struggle for freedom of political prisoners is a vital necessity. A united front of the Communist forces, the socialist forces and the trade unions in the struggle for the immediate needs of the unemployed would be entirely correct, and help to put the social reformists as well as the reactionary leaders of the trade unions to the test on their professed claim of favoring actual relief measures from capitalist society. But political elections are an entirely different matter. None of these issues is decided by elections. They are decided only by actual struggle.
Where is the common point of interest between the two parties in an election? To propagandize and to rally the worker’s for the attainment of reforms or for the working class revolutionary objectives? To win expression of support for the candidate voicing the reformist program or for the candidate voicing the aspirations of the revolutionary program? To educate the working class in an election campaign, to obtain reforms under capitalism or to educate to the concept of the struggle for power? Obviously there can be no point of common interest between the two.
Among the brethren of the various reformist stripes there would be no obstacles in the road to unity in elections. Their objectives in essence coincide. The Lovestone group should therefore have confined its proposal to that camp where they could find full harmony. Their group would only complete the circle, that is, with the exception of the workers within, it who still see the revolutionary objectives, who will separate from it and march with the revolutionary sections.
 



October the third undoubtedly turned the attention of thousands of miners toward Gillespie, Ill. Even from far away Nova Scotia, where the miners have completely broken with the Lewis regime, taken matters into their own hand and organized the Amalgamated Mine Workers, greetings go out to the constitutional convention of the Progressive Miners of America. That is understandable. Illinois represents almost the sole solidly organized miners section of some real substance left in the field. But whether this constitutional convention can make a serious beginning toward the solution of the all important problems, remains to be seen.
The mine fields today in an organizational sense present a picture of frightful devastation. In 1921 when John L. Lewis was solidly entrenched on his throne in Indianapolis the U.M.W. of A. reached its highest point of growth with a total membership of 515,243. By Dec. 1928 the number, including Canada, had been reduced to 172,632, of which 83,446 were in the anthracite and 53,088 in Illinois. Reports from the U.M.W. of A. of actual membership have been very scarce since; but obviously the drop has gone considerably further downward. In other words while in 1921 about 75 percent of all the soft coal hoisted was mined by union labor there is today less than 10 percent of the total tonnage union mined. What a frightful trail of destruction!
 
How the Miners Were Eliminated
The method of its accomplishment becomes somewhat clear when one recalls how John L. Lewis in the 1922 strike betrayed the 60,000 miners of the Fayette and Somerset counties in Pennsylvania. These miners had just been organized but were in the settlement left to shift for themselves and disappeared as an organized factor.
Frank Farrington, who was then President of the Illinois district, charged’ John L. Lewis with having received bribes to the tune of $750,000 from interests closely associated with the Pennsylvania and Kentucky operators, to break the strike. This accusation was made in repayment for the Lewis’ charge against Farrington of having received $27,000 to break the 1919 Illinois strike. Undoubtedly both, gentlemen were entirely correct. And certainly both instances exemplify, though these alone only ih a small measure, what the miners had to endure during this kind of a regime.
To the uninitiated it may appear as if the present break in Illinois occurred purely on the question ot the wage scale, that is, the maintenance of the basic $6.10 a day scale or the sell out agreement of Lewis-Walker for the $5.00 a day scale. This is only one of the manifestations. To the miners, though, it becomes a quite important difference when one considers that an employed miner in the soft coal field is quite lucky to average about two working days in a week, aside from the large number totally unemployed.
The fundamental cause is naturally far more deep-seated. It is the very question of union organization which is involved, and in that sense thousands of miners may justifiably turn their eyes toward the Gillespie constitutional convention. In that sense also the responsibility of that convention becomes a far greater one.
 
The Parties and the Miners
It is not at all strange that the Socialist party officially takes the position of neutrality and non-interference in the break the Illinois miners have made with the Lewis-Walker clique. That was to be expected. First of all, and this may be the smallest consideration, that position enables them to have their members in both camps to fish for votes and support in both directions. But essentially this cover of neutrality enables the Socialist party to give its support in reality to the reactionary camp and help stem the Leftward tide of the new movement. That part of its role will become Increasingly clear with future developments.
But there should be no less concern over the attitude of the official Communist party. From a letter issued by Joe Tash, the U.M.U. and party organizer in the Illinois field, dealing with the foundation conference of the P.M. of A., we take the following excerpts: “However, it should be obvious just from a glance that the leadership of the conference succeeded in putting over another betrayal of the Illinois miners ...” And further, “This further means splitting the ranks of the miners and defeating the splendid unity of the Illinois miners. It is the same policy that Walker and Lewis are known for and which smashed the U.M.W.A. as a fighting union ...” If this be true, then there could be no distinction between the new union and the old gang. In that respect the party is duty bound to change its attitude. It is duty bound to turn its attention toward the unification and further development of all the progressive forces, maintaining its criticism of the conservative and reactionary elements within them, but to support the movement in its rebellion against the Lewis-Walker crew.
 
Those Who Condemn a “Split”
The Right wing Lovestone group chips in its bit with regard to the Illinois miners situation. It says in sum and substance in an editorial in the Workers Age of Sept. 24, that any idea of uniting the anti-Lewis groups outside of the U.M.W. A. would be false and share the same fate as the N.W.U., and that a new union should not have been organized. In other words, according to this advice the Illinois miners should be driven back again to the U.M.W.A.
Is this reactionary attitude any better than that shown by the Socialist party? Not one whit. The figures cited above, giving the present status of the U.M.W.A., in addition to the well-known long series of betrayals by of its officialdom, prove, if anything, that conditions have long been rotten ripe for a definite split away from this corrupt clique. But up till now the subjective factor, the membership itself, was not sufficiently matured to carry it through. Attempts were made, but mostly on a false basis. Now, it appears to be conclusive, and at least with prospects of heading in the right direction.
Unity of the mine workers throughout the field is the essential problem. That can no longer be accomplished within the bounds of the remnants of the U.M.W.A. controlled by a reactionary clique of capitalist agents of the Lewis-Walker types, whose objective is exactly the opposite. The place of the revolutionists is undisputably with the rebel movement, fighting for its necessary Leftward direction and for unification outside of the deadening grip of the reactionaries.
 



From the day the Progressive Miners of America began to take on organized form it was clear that the real tests of its existence as a union, and particularly as a militant union, were still ahead. These tests, of course, could not be expected to be easy ones. It could not be merely a matter of going out to line up the membership and collecting dues. No, the job is a far more serious one. The existence of the new union will be conditioned upon its ability to give battle and its ability to fight to win. That also presupposes a much greater degree of clarity of views as to what really constitutes a militant union – one which can actually win over the combined enemy forces, the Lewis-Walker clique and the operators.
Only a few weeks have passed since the day of formation of the union, and the test is already beginning. The operators have extended their line of the battle front against the new union. In this they have obtained some measures of success, at least temporarily. That this could be possible, there need be no doubt, is due to some of the weaknesses displayed by the new union leadership at the Gillespie convention and since.
 
Carrying the Offensive to the Miners
In Franklin County, it will be remembered, the powerful Peabody company had, at the time of the convention, with the help of the Lewis-Walker clique, plus the terror of unheard of proportions, succeeded in preventing the strike and compelling the miners to submit to the $5.00 scale and with it to submit to the UMWA. These efforts had been extended to Taylorville, but there the miners were still fighting on the picket lines and solidly with the new union. U.S. soldiers were on guard at the Peabody mines there. U.S. soldiers also invaded Canton, in the Peoria territory, to break the strike. And now the mass picket lines appear to have been given up entirely by the new union.
This question of the picket lines is, of course, not the only point at issue. That itself is merely a part of the general strategy pursued. But for a new union, for a progressive union, which has to meet the enormous obstacles of all the enemy forces combined and merged into one, the question of stratgy becomes a real problem. The rank and file will and readiness to fight can be depended upon but the strategy of the fight must be a superior one. It must be one which will outwit the combined enemy forces.
In this respect it is necessary to note the very first weakness represented by the acceptance of the $5.00 scale at the Gillespie convention. For this those leaders who advocated its acceptance are fully responsible. The weakness lies not merely in the sense of its immediate effect but more so in the fact that the operators jointly with the Lewis-Walker clique are bound to take advantage of it. They will use it in this situation to strengthen the Lewis regime. They will be on the offensive, further extend the attacks to new territories and prepare for new and additional wage cuts. Naturally we are not unmindful of the fact that the logic of these measures inevitably brings their own conclusion in new and greater contradictions, new and greater antagonisms between the miner’s and the operators But in this respect also the direction and the leadership given by the new union becomes the decisive question.
 
Organization of the New Union
The now union starts out with the disadvantage of the retreat to the $5.00 scale. This part of the basis is thus equal for both unions. Which one will prevail? That question is more fundamental than the wage scale. It is now an open direct struggle between the two. But the strategy to be pursued must take into account the conditions existing in the various localities. It is not a matter of a direct head-on collision everywhere. It is clear that in Franklin Co. the process of winning the rank and file for the new union is by no means completed. Their strike was broken, they are still in the UMWA. For the Progressive Miners of America the task is therefore the one of working from within to strengthen its foothold, to regain what is lost and to prepare for the complete break with the Lewis-Walker regime.
The Taylorville and Canton territories, on the other hand, present a different picture. The new union is solidly rooted there and has already replaced the U.M.W. The issues can be settled to its advantage, its interests can be maintained, only in the direct collision with the enemy forces. Any relenting in this respect will surely react by the latter gaining ground, if not gaining the upper hand. This will surely hold true wherever the operators extend the battle front into the new union territory.
The Left wing must particularly make this clear to the mines. It is a part of the process of building a militant union. The issues, the conflicts can find their solution only through struggle against the enemy forces and not at all through collaboration with them. From the opposite direction the Peabody interests, which are the dominant interests in Illinois, have assumed this kind of an approach and are attempting to advance in head-on collision everywhere. This company is the main controlling factor in machine mining. As such it represents the crux of the problem of job control and union control. The Progressive Miners will in this respect have to meet the Peabody company face to face on its own ground.
The Lewis-Walker clique is perfectly aware that the danger to their regime refraining its former position does not come from the conservative elements in the new union leadership but from the Left wing. In the Illinois Miner, the sorry sheet which functions as their official organ there is a constant barrage against the Communists. Formerly it was directed against the official party, now the main guns are trained against the Left Opposition. This sheet, while attempting to define, as it puts it, the Right wing Communists, the official party, and the Left wing Communists, the League, warns against our “flirting with the Progressive Miners of America” and against our “doing the best to get control of it.” This sheet further concentrates its attacks upon Gerry Allard attempting to reduce his position purely to the one of holding down a job. Of course, to this kind of scribbler no other motive is understandable than the one of holding down a soft job. They complain that Gerry was first with the National Miners Union, then with the UMWA and now with the Progressive Miners.
Such efforts to discredit a Left wing leader will not get very far with the miners, however. To them Allard’s position as a militant and as a revolutionist gaining in the ability of pursuing a correct class policy is becoming increasingly clear. Nor will the rank and file miners be much disturbed over their warnings against the Communist League of America. We have taken our position squarely with the new union, as is the duty of all revolutionists, not at all in the sense of supporting the direction which the reactionary careerist elements attempt to impose upon it; but on the contrary, to help the rebellion against the enemy facing the miners in combined force and to help develop it into becoming truly a militant class union. That is the direction which our comrades and supporters in the field pursue.
 



The Progressive Miners constitutional convention, just concluded at Gillespie, Ill., had before it, as its main job, the matter of laying a militant union foundation. Second in order came the question of the wage scale. The break with the decrepit Lewis-Walker clique, which led to the formation of the Progressive Miners of America, ostensibly occurred over the issue of the betrayal by the former of the basic $6.10 a day wage scale. In reality, of course, it had a far more deep-going cause. Nevertheless the question of the wage scale, the manner in which it found its “solution” at the convention and the consequences which will flow from it in the future are of real importance.
It is in respect to this that we can say confidently that the correctness of the fight made by the delegates of the Left wing, by Allard, Fraser, Steed and others against a retreat will be more than vindicated in the future. The convention, however, concluded by accepting the reduction to the $5.00 a day scale, recorded in a vote of 98 to 47.
But even in this retreat the true revolutionists and the proven militants in the field will know their duty. Their sympathy, their warmest and unstinted support, their every ounce of energy and ability of sacrifice as well as their resources of strength extends to and belongs to the cause of the new union. That we can affirm even with the knowledge that the future course of the union cannot yet be foreseen. We know today that it is a union created by the will and determination of the rank and file to have forever done with the corruptionists, fakers, grafters and capitalist agents of the bygone days. They have taken measures to draft their constitution so as to give the utmost possible guarantee against a repetition. It is a union belonging to the miners and it can become the harbinger of a real militant national coal diggers union.
 
The Left Wing Position
The Progressive Miners of America now constitutes a serious challenge to the rule of corruption and servility to the operators of the Lewis-Walker combine. That is its great capital which it is duty-bound to preserve. But it will be faced with a serious combat to survive, to strengthen itself and to grow.
It is from this point of view that the fight made by the Left wing against a wage cut retreat assumes enormous significance. There was serious substance to the arguments made by Alex Fraser, showing that under the $6.10 wage scale the Illinois operators had gained 9.4 percent in coal markets; that the operators could afford to pay the $6.10 was demonstrated by more than 100 independent mines signed up on the above scale with the P.M. of A. prior to Oct. 3; that it was not the P.M. of A. but the Belleville operators who had called for the scale conference which showed their desperate circumstances and that a definite attitude and an intensive drive would also force Peabody to his knee.
But the Left wing did not carry its point and it would be wrong to argue that the convention was not made up of delegates at least a majority of whom were directly from the pits and knew the question involved. Undoubtedly even the majority of those 98 who voted for the retreat were rank and file working miners. The convention was an affair mainly observing the rules of working class democracy. We gather that it particularly felt the weight of a situation essentially created by the traitorous action of the Lewis-Walker sell-out. But there were two aspects to the question which influenced the convention decision, deserving some special attention.
 
The Opportunists Favor Retreat
First of all, the opportunist elements within the leadership, who glaringly showed their timidity and lack of moral courage wore essentially animated by fear of courting the displeasure of capitalist society. Their cry was: “We must not soil our hands with the Reds”. The logic of their position drew the conclusion to avoid any sharpening of the struggle by any means. Their arguments showed clearly that they did not even approach this question from the point of a temporary retreat compelled by a situation over which they had no control and to be overcome again by a renewed and strengthened offensive under more favorable conditions. No, their position was rather the one of admitting defeat in advance for the sake of collaboration with the enemy at all costs, and to remain respectable in his estimation.
Such was the essential character of the position taken by Pearcy, Keck Jones, Picek, Humphries and others. By this they were marking out further their Rightward course. They were speaking to a young movement, as yet inexperienced in conducting its own union, and the false position carried its weight in influencing the decision for a retreat. There should be little doubt, however, that the miners in general will look upon it only as a temporary one and turn their attention toward speedy preparations for a new offensive to regain what has been lost.
But there was another factor of at least equal importance playing its part in the decision. It was expressed in the numerical weakness of the Left wing. Those among the delegates in agreement with the position we have advocated, had to make the fight alone. The comrades of the Left Opposition proposed to the leaders of the official party, who were on the spot, a united front for the Left wing program of militant unionism, including a fight against proposals to accept a wage out retreat. The party leaders refused this offer. They thus bear the responsibility for the weakening of the Left wing.
 
To the Right or to the Left – Which?
The new union is now starting out with a handicap. Only fools would contend that it cannot be overcome, or that what is lost cannot be regained. But the success of this depends entirely upon the course the now union will steer in the future. So long as the Lewis-Walker machine will be able to maintain the remnants of the U.M.W.A. intact and bolstered up by the favors of the Peabody company, so long will the new union be in a position of a rival union. There should in that very position be many factors at work which will press it in a Leftward direction. As far as the objective conditions are concerned such is undoubtedly the case, but the union course is not decided by the objective conditions alone. Much depends upon the union leadership. And it is time to say with all possible emphasis that the degree to which the opportunist elements are permitted to hold sway in the leadership to that degree the danger of a backward direction increases. A sentiment, as expressed by them today, for collaboration with the operators rather than struggle will tomorrow become a sentiment for rapprochement and collaboration with the Lewis-Walker clique as well.
It is in this respect particularly that the miners must watch themselves on the road of retreat which they have chosen. With a militant union leadership, one step backward, which sometimes may become unavoidable, will mean only preparation to gain two steps forward later. Given this condition the Progressive Miners of America will be able to perform its duty. But a militant leadership is still to be created and the experiences which will inevitably How from this retreat will help the rank and file miners in making their selections.
 



Do Marxists suffer from an “Hegelian metaphysical jag”? Some feel that Dialectical Materialism has been rendered obsolete by the new discoveries of the physical sciences
DOES the Marxist philosophy, or more particularly, does the method of dialectical materialism have any validity as a philosophy of science? This question, since it was first propounded affirmatively by Marx and Engles, has frequently been debated by serious students of theoretical thought. It is not surprising that Studies on the Left should carry an echo of these debates.
However, the contribution by Gerald Dworkin entitled, Dialectics: A Philosophical Analysis, is a rather crude echo. Apparently the author has gained a great deal of knowledge, both useful and useless, without the aid of the dialectic, and feels entitled to his assumed superiority. In fact, he not only attempts to detract from and deprecate the subject matter, but he concludes his essay on dialectics on a distinctly derisive note. His concluding paragraph deserves to be quoted in full:
“It was said of Spinoza that his God was a hangover from an earlier religious jag. I suspect that for the Marxist much of dialectics is a hangover from an earlier Hegelian metaphysical jag. The sooner he sobers up, the sooner he will be able to work more fruitfully on the difficult and crucial problems of our time.”
Some of these difficult and crucial problems come readily to mind. There is the threat of nuclear war, the continued and varied manifestations of world crisis, and the deprivation and hunger in large areas of the world. On home grounds we have such problems as civil rights, civil liberties, unemployment and capitalist exploitation. But the question arises: if sobering up from a hangover of an earlier Hegelian metaphysical jag enables more fruitful work on these problems, why are not the many leading lights of the bourgeois world, its academic circles, its economic, social and political areas, or its agents in labor’s ranks – why are not these able to do so? They do not suffer from such a hangover. They have never been attracted to or seduced by the dialectic because they view it as an abomination. Yet, any attempt to measure the fruitfulness of their work on these difficult and crucial problems would most likely turn up zero.
It is my contention that fruitful work in these areas requires as a first prerequisite the application of the dialectical method of thought. But before entering into this aspect of the debate, let us consider the questions posed by Dworkin: Are the laws of dialectics the most general laws of motion and development and do they provide a useful methodology? He answers both questions negatively. I shall try to defend the affirmative position.
In contemporary physical sciences the comprehension of the world not as a complex of ready-made things but as a complex of processes, of changes and transformations, finds increasing acceptance. Hardly anything is regarded as given or fixed. Moreover, implicitly, if not explicitly, the great progress made in this field has been materialist in nature. To get a clearer picture of this development we need only recount some of the important discoveries. While contributing to the theory of knowledge they also splendidly illustrate the dialectical laws of natural events.
Let us start with Becquerel’s discovery of the radioactivity of natural elements. It occurred at the turn of the century. Through further research by Pierre and Marie Curie it was learned that atoms of the heavier elements were breaking up, or decomposing spontaneously, expelling with incredible speeds particles and radiation, or rays, of such intensity that they penetrate thick metals and destroy living tissues. In the process atoms of these elements are converted to atoms of other elements.
Later it became possible to explain this phenomenon in terms of nuclear forces. In the very heavy atoms where many protons and neutrons are packed within the nuclei, the forces that hold the nuclei together are inadequate and the atoms are unstable. These atoms were breaking up physically in a shower of bullet-like particles and destructive radiation. And it was the great energy of the expelled particles and rays that brought forth the realization of the tremendous source of energy that is locked within the atomic nucleus.
Thus, in the flash of radioactivity these elements were shown to be anything but immutable. They pass through a transmutation and release energy in the process. The qualitatively different characteristics of the natural elements are determined by the quantity of their atomic weight. However, with the alteration of the proportion of particles in the atomic nucleus, the character of the element is changed. Quantitative change in the discharge of particles produces a qualitative difference. Spontaneous radioactivity thus revealed these simple dialectic laws of nature at the very foundation of matter.
Here we have a concrete example of the fact that our dialectic thinking grows directly out of the dialectics of nature, and having its roots in objective reality, the dialectic method is thoroughly materialistic in character.
 
FURTHER objective evidence of the dialectic laws of nature has been accumulated through more recent discoveries. Particularly striking are the data gained through artificially induced nuclear fission and the resulting chain reaction. Listen to the report made by a scientist prominently associated in this venture, H.D. Smyth. In substance he stated the following:
There are two principles that have been the cornerstones of the structure of modern science. The first – that matter can be neither created nor destroyed but only altered in form (the law of the conservation of matter). The second – that energy can be neither created nor destroyed but only altered in form (the law of the conservation of energy).
“These two principles,” says Dr. Smyth, “have constantly guided and disciplined the development and application of science. For all practical purposes they are still so, but it is now known that they are, in fact, two phases of a single principle for we have discovered that energy may sometimes be converted into matter and matter into energy. Specifically, such a conversion is observed in the phenomenon of nuclear fission of uranium, a process in which atomic nuclei split into fragments with the release of an enormous amount of energy.” (Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, p.1)
In this discovery, the dialectic celebrates a great triumph. Matter is affirmed as existing only in motion as the dialectical materialists .have always maintained. There is no motion without matter. (Motion as applied to matter is not the mere change of place; it is to be understood in its widest sense of changes and transformations, quantitative and qualitative, etc.) Matter and energy are interconnected and both are interchangeable. Matter is affirmed to be itself and at the same time something else; it is not simply identical with itself as demanded by formal logic. Energy has mass and mass represents energy; they are interchangeable and both exist within the one identity. Mass and energy are different, yet they are the same. That they are different is only half the truth; that they are simultaneously the same is the whole truth.
By nuclear fission a quantitative change produces a qualitative difference. A part of the nuclear mass is converted into nuclear energy. Moreover, the neutron released as the effect of one nuclear fission becomes the cause of other fissions, and in the chain reaction cause and effect continue to change place merging and dissolving in action and interaction. Which nucleus a neutron hits is accidental, but its action lies in the necessity of the thing itself, the necessity of its motion. The accidental and the necessary, while opposites, interpenetrate and supplement one another.
It is now a well known fact that uranium #235 is fissionable; but it is very scarce, whereas uranium #238, which is more abundant, is non-fissionable. In the atomic pile uranium #238 is subjected to bombardment by neutrons, which penetrate the nuclei, remain within them and produce a transformation from uranium to plutonium. In this process the addition of quantity – the neutron – produces a new quality: the conversion of one element into another, from non-fissionable uranium to fissionable plutonium. Man produces the dialectical transformation.
 
WHETHER we observe nature’s own process of transmutation of the elements of radioactive matter, or the man-made transmutation by the controlled chain reaction of the atomic pile, the dialectic laws of motion and change are illustrated with compelling force.
The quantitative content of the process passes into a qualitative content. In both instances, not only is part of the nuclear mass converted into nuclear energy, but the atoms affected are converted into atoms of other elements.
The greatest contributions to a theoretical understanding of the relation between matter and energy, and their reciprocal interaction, were made by Einstein in his special theory of relativity and in the quantum theory by Max Planck. Einstein’s views caused a revolutionary upheaval in scientific thought. The theory of relativity overturned the concepts of classical physics, but only to re-embody them in a new synthesis at a higher level of scientific knowledge. In the words of Einstein and Infeld:
“The new theory shows the merits as well as the limitations of the old theory and allows us to regain our concepts from a higher level.” (Evolution of Physics, p.158.)
This confirms the Marxist contention that scientific knowledge unfolds in its successive stages, not in a mechanical but in a dialectical manner. Facts, observations, ideas, arise in opposition to prevailing views and generate seemingly insoluble contradictions. These contradictions become the motive force of scientific progress, of energetic thinking, study and research. They are finally resolved by a synthetic theory which makes room for the positive reality of both sides of the contradiction but eliminates the one-sided form in which they first appear.
The quantum theory marked a distinct departure from classical mechanics. Where continuity had previously reigned supreme, the quantum theory introduced the concept of discontinuity. Not only the energy of radiation but matter and electricity are viewed as having a granular structure. Electrons, the elementary particles of matter, were henceforth to be regarded as elementary quanta of negative electricity.
Einstein indicated a wider scope for the quantum theory in its application to the phenomena of light. This he based on the assumption that homogeneous light is composed of energy grains, or light quanta called photons. The assumption found support in the observational evidence that a beam of light bends in a gravitational field. A beam of light carries energy and energy has mass which is attracted by the gravitational field. But the wave theory of light had been previously established; the different wave lengths had been measured. So here we had, declared Einstein and Infeld, “two contradictory pictures of reality; separately neither of them fully explains the phenomena of light, but together they do!” (The Evolution of Physics, p.278.)
Why these contradictory pictures of reality should, in the words of Dworkin, cause “more confusion” or lead to “despair or irrationalism” is somewhat of a mystery. Tacitly, if not formally, the Einstein-Infeld statement supports the dialectical interpretation of natural phenomena. It is the contradictory aspects of reality, everywhere and in everything, that constitute its fundamental feature.
 
CONCERNING continuity or discontinuity, either concept by itself alone is, of course, one-sided. In reality both exist simultaneously. Rather, continuity and discontinuity should be viewed as an interacting process. Nature, in its general and multiform manifestations, is both continuous and discontinuous. Can we not say that this is particularly the case with the phenomena of light, i.e., the light that we receive from the sun and the stars? Aside from the contradictory pictures of waves and particles, we should note the existence simultaneously of continuity and discontinuity. These opposites interpenetrate one another.
From the standpoint of the wave theory, light must be said to be quantitatively continuous. A beam of light consists of a continuous flow of waves in space. Light is qualitatively discontinuous, however, since it exists in a variety of qualitatively different wavelength forms composing the spectrum.
From the standpoint of the quantum theory, light must be said to be quantitatively discontinuous. Light is emitted in the form of a stream of discrete units of quanta (photons). On the other hand, light is now qualitatively continuous, since the photons all consist of the same form of radiant energy.
The separation and opposition of continuity and discontinuity exist only within their unity and interconnection. All that moves is contradictory, and this arises out of the contradictory nature of reality itself. In this the contradiction is not the end of the matter but, as Hegel insisted, it cancels itself.
“Motion itself is a contradiction,” says Engels, “even simple mechanical change of place can only come about through a body at one and the same moment of time, being both in one place and in another place, being in one and the same place, and also not in it. And the continuous assertion and simultaneous solution of this contradiction is precisely what motion is.” (Anti-Dühring, International Publishers, p.132.)
But Dworkin denies that contradictions have any relation to reality. He states categorically: “It is nonsense then to say that contradictions exist in the world. Contradictions are properties of statements, not objects.” By a strange coincidence – or perhaps it is not so strange – this statement corresponds almost word for word with the position of Herr Dühring, against whom Engels polemicized. Said Herr Dühring:
“Contradiction is a category which can only appertain to a combination of thoughts, but not to reality. There are no contradictions in things, or, to put it another way, contradiction applied to reality is itself the apex of absurdity.” (Quoted by Engels in Anti-Dühring, p.131.)
Having thus unwittingly aligned himself with some of Herr Dühring’s notions, it is not too surprising that Dworkin attacks the observation made by Engels: “Life is also a contradiction which is present in things and processes themselves, and which continually asserts and solves itself.” Surely this, says Dworkin, “is anthropomorphism run wild.” How so? What Engels clearly defines as the contradiction of organic life is the continual cycle of accretion and destruction. He shows that the simultaneous building-up of cells on the one hand and their decay on the other, constitute the basis, the condition, for the process of life. Organic life is properly pictured in its dynamic state, as a self-completing process of constant chemical reaction, according to which the existence of a delicate balance between breakdown and synthesis is precisely what life is. Most certainly contradictions are objectively present in the world and when contradiction ceases life itself comes to an end. What these observations have to do with anthropomorphism still remains to be explained.
Dworkin laments what he calls the lack of definition of the term opposite, and how opposites are related. Again, one may ask, how so? Consider the example just mentioned above. We have in that a clear definition of opposites, the building-up and the breaking-down. Dialectically, these opposites are so closely interconnected that the one cannot exist without the other. Not only do they not exclude one another, but in their interpenetration they mutually condition each other.



A Confirmation
“The well established view today is rather that everything – anything at all – is at the same time particle and field. Everything has the continuous structure with which we are familiar from the field, as well as the discrete structure with which we &laquo;re equally familiar from particles . . . The difficulty, in all cases equally great, of combining these two so very different character traits in one mental picture is still the main stumbling-block which causes our conception of matter to be so wavering and uncertain.”
 – Erwin Schroedinger, What Is Life?
“Closer investigation also shows us that the two poles of an antithesis, like positive and negative, are just as inseparable from each other as they are opposed, and that despite all their opposition they mutually penetrate each other.”
 – Friedrich Engels, Anti-Dühring



TURNING from motion and development in nature to the social arena, we find that contradictions become even more pronounced. Outstanding is the example of the class struggle in society. It has been the connecting link in successive stages of civilization; now it reflects primarily the contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation. But even aside from this aspect, capitalism is not a stable system. Although its development is determined by objective laws, contradictory tendencies are deeply embedded in its foundation and these become part of the objective laws. From a fairly early stage, elements of growth and expansion unfolded side by side with elements of crisis and decline. These tendencies interpenetrate one another and are in constant interaction. Because of this a sustained equilibrium and smooth vectors of movement are not possible. Capitalist production begets a vicious circle. Economic cycles alternate between boom and crisis; a glutted market leads to depression, an economic upturn creates new glut which again plunges the economy into depression.
During the early stages of capitalist development elements of growth and expansion predominated over those of crisis and decline. But they did not prove enduring. A whole set of explosive changes acted to turn the early progressive features into their opposite. Elements of crisis, of decline and decay, came more to the fore and became predominant.
Let us consider next the question posed by Dworkin: if the laws of dialectics are actually the most general laws of motion, “we should expect to find physicists, chemists, biologists and sociologists making use of them every day. The fact that they do not can hardly be attributed to class bias.” Of that I am not so sure. Some scientists do make use of these laws, but their numbers are few. Some scientists even do so unconsciously. Why the overwhelming majority do not, I still believe to have been anticipated by Marx when he wrote in his preface to the second edition of Capital:
“In the mystical form (the Hegelian form – AS) dialectic became the fashion in Germany because it seemed to transfigure and to glorify the existing state of things. In its rational form it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension an affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same time also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and revolutionary.” (Capital, Kerr edition, Vol.I, pp.25, 26.)
What Dworkin calls the last law of the dialectic seems to arouse his greatest indignation. Incidentally, this leads him also the farthest astray. “The last law,” he reveals, “inspired by the famous triad of Hegel – thesis, antithesis, synthesis – is in my opinion the most obscure, useless and mystical of them all.” Referring to the application by Marx of this law of the dialectic to the course of capitalist development, Dworkin declares:
“It is the characteristic of always finding the exemplification of dialectics in events after they have been explained by other methods that casts grave doubts upon the whole procedure.”
Let us see what Marx’s position was – according to Marx, not Dworkin:
“The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production produces capitalist private property. This is the first negation of individual private property as founded on the labor of the proprietor. But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It is the negation of the negation. This does not re-establish private property for the producer, but gives him individual property based on the acquisitions of the capitalist era: i.e., on co-operation and the possession in common of the land and of the means of production.” (Ibid., p.837.)
By the logical method of treatment (the logic of the dialectic) Marx at this point analysed the transition from feudalism to the capitalist mode of production, which negated the individual private ownership by the workers of their means of labor. The deductions made, he. verified by the facts of history. From this analysis Marx drew the conclusion that “capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation.” This is not at all, as Dworkin tries to make us believe, “always finding the exemplification of dialectics in events after they have been explained by other methods.” Quite the contrary. By means of the dialectical method Marx was able to predict from his analysis – I repeat predict – the negation of the negation, the expropriation of the expropriators, the transformation of society. Without doubt, this was the most monumental and the most far-reaching prediction ever recorded in human history.
In terms of exceptional clarity, Marx and his collaborator, Engels, explained the evolution of human society. Every historical period, they maintained, develops its own contradictions. Whenever one order of things becomes dominant within one particular stage, it has already given birth to a new tendency, an opposite tendency.
Thus, for example, in Europe during the Middle Ages small-scale production was general, and existed on the basis of the private ownership by the producers of their means of labor. But the great maritime discoveries of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries stimulated world-wide commerce and the steady growth of a market for manufactured goods, which could not be satisfied by the dwarfish, scattered, limited and individual means of production. This contradiction had to be resolved, and it was resolved through the transition from handicraft to manufacture and to large-scale industry. The new productive forces thus set in motion became incompatible with feudal forms of organization, and these were therefore annihilated. Individualized, scattered means of production were transformed into socially concentrated ones. The pigmy property of the many became the huge property of the few. The great mass of the people were divorced from their means of subsistence and from their means of labor. Capitalist private property, which rests on the exploitation of the nominally free labor of others, negated individual private ownership by the individual producers of their tools and instruments of labor.
Out of this development a new system of society, qualitatively different from its predecessor, arose – the natural effect of an accumulation of quantitative changes in the old society. The contradictions that arose became the crucial factors around which centered the transformation of the whole entity to the next stage. Thus the historical process and its contradictions were enabled to develop dialectically.
 
UNDER capitalism, Marx and Engels explained, large-scale industry develops not only the material forces of production, but also the antagonisms and conflicts between the classes born of it. Centralization of the means of production and socialization of labor collide with capitalist appropriation. The increasing proletarianization of the mass of the people is matched by an ever greater mass of unsaleable goods. Overproduction with unemployment and want existing simultaneously – this is the absurd contradiction which makes the liberation of the productive forces by means of the socialist transformation an imperative necessity. And the development of the productive forces at last reach a point where they become incompatible with their capitalist integument. “This integument is burst asunder. The knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated.” This is how Marx foresaw the negation of the negation.
Entirely aware that the crucial problem was not merely to interpret the world, but to change it, both Marx and Engels saw in the development of the productive forces the material conditions for the solution of the contradictions of capitalist society, and the means by which this solution becomes possible. The laws of social development, which they had discovered, created the opportunity for effective and consciously directed social action.
And so it turned out to be in 1917. The Russian Revolution took the first step toward the socialist transformation of society. The expropriators were expropriated. This signalled the beginning of the transition to a qualitatively new historical stage. The limitations of the capitalist mode of production and its contradictory relations found their solution in a higher mode of production founded on nationalized property and state planning in the Soviet system of social relations. Revolutions in China and Cuba have since followed the same example.
In the Russian revolution the Bolshevik party was victorious primarily owing to the comprehension and application by its leadership of the method of dialectical materialism. Conversely, by this victory the concepts of Marxism were brilliantly confirmed. But the Bolshevik party itself arose out of the contradictions that had beset the working class movement. This party, in fact, became the positive and the conscious affirmation of what Dworkin concedes to be the triad of Hegel; the party’s existence and its revolutionary position exemplified the negation of the negation in working class political development.
Initially the socialist movement had been inspired by the revolutionary ideas of Marx and Engels. But the powerful and dynamic expansion of capitalism exerted a corrupting influence. The working class grew in numbers, socialist votes mounted at elections, resulting in greater representation in parliaments; the parties became mass parties with growing and prospering institutions. Democratic reforms, and other concessions, that capitalism could afford to give, the moTe conservative members were anxious to preserve. Social reformism found nourishment in this soil. The leaders, whose influence grew with the growth of the parties adapted themselves to the needs of capitalism; they became anxious to preserve the political status quo. Under their direction the practice of class collaboration replaced the policy of class struggle. Losing sight of the socialist objective, the leaders set about reconciling the workers to capitalist rule. This culminated in their support of the imperialist government in World War I. Thus was negated the revolutionary essence of the early socialist movement.
The contradictions to which this gave rise created an inevitable opposite current. Out of the betrayals a left wing movement developed and it took on concrete form in the Bolshevik party. Thus the revolutionary essence of Marxism was restored to its rightful place in history, and restored on a higher level – the level of working class victory. With this victory, the Bolsheviks broke through and demolished the social-reformist barriers to working class advance. And as the development of social-reformism had in the preceding stage negated the revolutionary essence of Marxism, so this was, in its turn, negated. As a result of this negation of the negation the Bolshevik party became the most important link in a whole chain of historical developments. Its aims, its objectives and its program expressed the interests and the welfare of the working population, and it led the way to the realization of this program.
By their action the Bolsheviks taught the world a great lesson. They applied the Marxist analysis of history to the solution of the difficult and crucial problems of their time. There need be no doubt that the same methodology will provide equally fruitful results in dealing with the difficult and crucial problems of our time.
 
Editor’s Note
1*. This article is a reply to an attempted refutation of dialectical materialism by Gerald Dworkin, appearing in Studies on the Left, Vol.2 No.1, 1961. The editors published only a part of the reply; the last section dealing with social developments being entirely omitted. We think the student of Marxism would be interested to read the whole reply by Arne Swabeck published in this issue.



The steel strike has been postponed. None of the issues which gave rise to the strike plans have been settled. None of the demands made by the union have been met by the steel masters or even given serious consideration by them. In other words, a test of strength is held in abeyance. None of these issues can be considered settled until the union is recognized as the authentic spokesman of the workers – that means when it actually exists as a factor capable of enforcing the demands of the workers. At the Pittsburgh convention of the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers, held last week to take final action on the strike proposition, the delegates accepted a proposal for a retreat submitted by William Green. This meek Baptist deacon from Conshochton, Ohio, appeared before the steel delegates and delivered what is said to be the strongest plea of his career. His plea was against action, against a test of strength, against a strike to obtain the demands made by the workers. When appearing in such a role Bill Green seems growing in stature. His plea was not challenged, otherwise he would easily have become rattled and incoherent. As it was he could convey to the delegates his idea to put their faith, not in the power of organization, but in President Roosevelt.
 
Bill Green’s Proposal
That was the proposition accepted by the steel workers’ convention. It recommends the setting up of an impartial board of three members to be appointed by President Roosevelt. This board is to: Adjust complaints of violations of the code for the Iron and Steel industry; mediate and conciliate disputes between employers and employees; undertake to arrange for a conference for collective bargaining with the employers; arbitrate labor disputes submitted to it voluntarily; hear and determine matters of discrimination against the workers. In addition this board is to have the authority to hold elections in the steel plants to determine workers’ representatives for collective bargaining.
The proposal accepted by the convention finally declares that in the event the above recommendations are accepted by all parties the strike was to be declared off. Such was the proposition offered by Bill Green, and, of course, he could not give the slightest assurance as to whether it would be accepted or even considered by the steel corporations. In sum and substance this proposition is the same as the infamous automobile settlement which he helped to put over.
What will the outcome be? To the steel trust it means that the threat of a strike is removed and it can go ahead with its unbridled exploitation, fearing no challenge to its coercive methods of company unionism. It can permit itself an even greater defiance than before and help stiffen the backbone of the struggle against union organization elsewhere.
 
What Was Lacking?
To these workers a union of their own, firmly established, will have real meaning. But the surrender made at the Pittsburgh convention will undoubtedly have a disheartening effect. At the same time however, the union lacked actual preparation for a serious contest such as a struggle with the powerful steel trust of necessity would be. A contest of this character would first of all require that the membership have confidence in the union and in its ability to protect their interests. To build up such a confidence a militant leadership constantly alert, giving constant attention to training and development of understanding of organization its objectives and its discipline is indispensable. A policy that is militant through and through is required. The Amalgamated union has neither such a leadership nor such a policy.
The creation of the rank and file committee at the previous convention of the union, the demands advanced by this committee, and the straight-forward manner in which they were presented was undoubtedly a progressive move and registered an advance for the union. It was a great change compared to what had existed before. A lifeless union ruled by a corrupt, incompetent bureaucracy had begun to take on new life. But it stopped short. The leadership has again become practically completely identified with the reactionary machine of Mike Tighe and his lieutenants.
 
Steel Workers Should Not be Deceived
An enormous reservoir of strength exists amongst the hundreds of thousands of steel workers and can be drawn upon for the creation of a powerful union. To become a factor, to become an authentic spokesman of the workers, and to become a real fighting instrument, the union must be able to show to the membership that it dares to meet the enemy face to face in the field of battle. And in this respect the retreat also has its serious dangers. Many steel workers will perhaps turn away from the union in disgust.
If we are to accept the Stalinist claims union workers are now caving the ranks of the Amalgamated Association and joining the T.U.U.L. Such a turn of events could only prove disastrous for the steel workers. The T.U.U.L. union n these recent developments could nowhere assert itself as a union. It could only follow as a tail-end, repeating the demands made by the Amalgamated Association, adding no demands of its own, and it could at no time make a pretense of ability to enforce these demands or even make a serious fight for them. It does not have the possibilities to attain to such a position because it is based essentially upon a policy of splitting away elements individually from the unions having the mass basis. It can therefore function only as a disruptive force, hampering the developments of the building of a real union in the steel industry.
 
The Battle Remains Inevitable
What will the Amalgamated Association do next? It has presented its demands to President Roosevelt who turned the whole matter over to the Secretary of Labor. There it will get a hearing. It will possibly get a board as proposed. But that cannot mean any gain at all to the workers. The experiences of the automobile industry and the infamous settlement accomplished there is sufficiently fresh to remind us of what it meant to the workers. The essential issues remain. First of all amongst them are union recognition. In no case can that be expected to be granted voluntarily by the steel trust. Only the force of the thousands of steel workers, firmly welded together in a compact union conscious of its position, of its great task, and conscious of the great reserve strength at its disposal can accomplish that. This means a battle of titanic proportions, a battle for which the union under any conditions must prepare. One important step in this direction is for the steel workers to have no illusions whatever that anything can be won for them except what they are able to take through the power of their own organization.
 



In the May Day issue of Labor Action we are informed by comrade Sidney Hook that: “One of the most significant features of the Draft Program of the A.W.P. is that it breaks with the fetishism of terms in the revolutionary tradition.” We take this to mean, that new terms are being used for certain ideas already accepted as correct. And since it is a program that is under discussion the question of whether these correct ideas are actually maintained becomes the essential one.
In his answer to this question comrade Hook says: “For the first time in the history of the American revolutionary parties an attempt has been made to present in intelligible fashion the essential meaning content of such terms as ‘dictatorship of the proletariat’, ‘Soviets’, etc.” Further, on in the same article we are admonished that it is, “high time to abandon the linguistic fixations which obstruct clear thinking.”
After that follows the explanation of the term used in the A.W.P. program in presenting what it assumes to be the meaning and the content of the dictatorship of the proletariat. And here we arrive at the crux of the problem. What is presented as a break with the fetishism of terms is a substitution which changes, or certainly at least, completely obscures the correct idea. Instead of the dictatorship of the proletariat as a characterization of the workers’ state during the period of transition from capitalism to communism the term “workers’ democracy” is used.
It is this substitution that comrade Hook defends in his article entitled Marxism and Democracy in which he uses a Marxian terminology but distorts the essential “meaning-content” of Marxism.
In its defense comrade Hook says: “Today for historical reasons it is necessary to stress more than ever before the facts that the workers’ state is a workers’ democracy.” And further on he adds: “The workers’ democracy must be counterposed to the capitalist dictatorship in its representative liberal form as well as its fascist form.” Of course, under a fascist regime and against fascism, democratic demands and demands for workers democracy assume unusual importance. But that is primarily in the sense of agitation and tactical approach to the masses. That, on the other hand, the dictatorship of the proletariat as a transition period signifies a broader democracy than hitherto known is absolutely correct. It signifies a workers’ democracy in contradistinction to bourgeois democracy. This is an essential part of that form of state.
“But that alone does not characterize the content of the workers’ state. It is only one of its aspects. The workers’ state, to maintain itself in power, must suppress the exploiters who held power before and take away their private property in the means of production as well as eliminate them from the government. It represents a new class rule which makes workers’ democracy possible. It is because of these facts that in describing our conception of the workers’ state we use the term “the dictatorship of the proletariat.”
Is it not correct to say that the spirit of Marx’s teachings consist of the doctrine of the dictatorship of the proletariat? It is also assumed that the A.W.P. aims to become a Marxian party. But how does it come, that it is precisely on this vital point that its presentation in “intelligible fashion” so closely approximates Norman Thomas when he argued against the left wing in the Socialist Party. He put it this way: “Even in a transitional period the ideal to hold up and to work for is workers’ democracy rather than a dictatorship of the proletariat, which means the dictatorship of one party.”
The comrades of the A.W.P. want to distinguish themselves from the social-reformists and from their conceptions. Comrade Hook will argue that this conception has nothing in common with what he meant. He has also told us before what he thinks Marx meant. He is well acquainted with Marx although his view is are very far from being Marxist views. Comrade Hook and the other A.W.P. comrades will point to the section in their draft program which says: “The revolutionary government must be prepared to meet the violence of the overthrown but still dangerous capitalist dictatorship. Against the forces of reaction, seeking to recall the old order, the workers must light with every weapon to establish their own democracy. Against capitalist legality ... must be set revolutionary legality ...”, etc. And how is this to be achieved? According to the Draft Program of the A.W.P. “a time will come when the major sections of the population will support the principles of a workers’ democracy. As a measure of defense against the suicidal course of capitalist dictatorship, the workers will take power.”
This sounds simple enough. But what is lacking here in strategy flows from the conception the authors have of the workers’ state. However, the question of strategy we leave aside, for the moment. What is said here about the workers’ state, we grant, reads better than comrade Hook’s interpretation; nevertheless its shortcomings are demonstrated more clearly by these interpretations. It is just such interpretations and such ambiguities which make possible for those in the A.W.P., who say openly that they are opposed to all dictatorships, to stand with those who claim to be revolutionists on the same program. Thus what is presented as abandoning “linguistic fixations which obstruct clear thinking” is in reality a lack of clear thinking, or to be more precise – a lack of revolutionary thinking. The intention of the authors may have been the best but “the road to hell is paved with good intentions.”
In the program of the revolutionary party ideas and terms must be defined with absolute exactness. We would say that this must particularly apply today to the question of the proletarian dictatorship; and there are good reasons for that. A look at the world movement will convince us that this has become the burning issue with socialist workers adopting a leftward course. On the question of the proletarian dictatorship, they begin to express their break with the whole concept and heritage of social reformism. In all of the recent European experiences this is one of the issues which stand outthe most clearly. The leftward moving socialist workers begin to give an evaluation of the proletarian dictatorship and counterpose it in name and essence to the social reformist concept of defense of bourgeois democracy which helped to strangle the proletarian revolution. They witnessed the perfidious part played by social reformism in these European events and they also notice the Stalinist bureaucratic apparatus measures which distort the character of the workers’ state. In view of this, a party proclaiming itself to be revolutionary, can least of all permit the real meaning of the proletarian dictatorship to become obscured.
Marxism constitutes a generalisation of all working-class experience. This means that for Marxists it is necessary to absorb every new experience gained. If we fall to learn from the most recent ones, from those most fresh in our mind, we shall not be able to learn at all. The A.W.P. cannot proceed as if there were no such experience before it appeared on the scene. Most certainly it cannot assume to be a revolutionary party when proceeding in that way.
Comrade Hook says that the great mass of American workers are non-political and that they must therefore be shown the true democracy – workers’ democracy – against the false democracy under capitalism. That is well and good insofar as agitation amongst the masses is concerned. In that it is necessary to adapt one’s methods to requirements of existing conditions. But the revolutionary program is an entirely different matter. It is the guide to action and its primary purpose is therefore the education of the party itself. Accepting comrade Hook’s interpretations, the shortcomings in the A.W.P. Draft Program become really a matter of adaptation not in methods and approach but adaptation of position. It becomes an adaptation of the program to the prejudices of the backward workers. The result will ie neither a revolutionary program nor a revolutionary party. It will repel the advanced workers, and fail to educate the backward workers for they can be educated only through the advanced workers, through the revolutionary section.
The most important historical instrument in the epoch of wars and revolutions is the party of the proletariat. But it can attain its objective only on the basis of its own clarity of principle.
 



The speech delivered by Vice Chancellor von Papen before the German University Union at Marburg, on June 17, has aroused comment and speculations overshadowing by far all other recent political events. Its importance derives not so much from what was said, but from the situation which it reveals.
Mere speculation in political conjunctures and turns has nothing in common with a basic analysis of the objective historical processes. The speculation which leaves these factors out of account are worthless. Thus, for instance, headlines of the New York tabloid sheets had the German Reichswehr ready to overthrow Hitler and to set up a military dictatorship. But the Stalinists were no more fundamental in their approach to the question. From that source we are informed that we “stand on the threshold of the German proletarian revolution.”
 
Worthless Speculation
The one speculation is as deceptive and as worthless as the other. While the Stalinists, speculating with such criminal frivolity, proclaim, purely out of their own wishes, the arrival at this moment of the crucial hour in Germany, they are utterly oblivious to the imminent approach of the crucial hour in France. Or, it is because of their false conception that fascism “speeds up” the proletarian revolution that the same policy, applied with such disastrous consequences in Germany when Hitler came into power, is to be repeated in France? So it seems, because it is precisely that same treacherous policy of capitulation which we now witness in face of the growing French fascist movement. If, on the other hand, a correct and revolutionary strategy would be pursued in France that would undoubtedly improve the prospects all over Europe of beating back the fascist hordes. It would help to set the German workers into motion again. But this cannot be expected from the Stalinist organizers of defeat.
In Germany the objective historical processes follow at the present moment a course contrary to the Stalinist prognosis and not at all influenced by it. The von Papen address brings testimony to that fact. He speaks for a special class interest. He speaks for the masters of finance and industry and the large landholdings. In the “famous” address of June 17, prefaced by the remark that “the ultimate truth lies only with God”, he proceeded to offer what is now called courageous criticism of the fascist regime. He insists that claims to “revolutionary” or national monopoly must not be held by any one single group and that no one single class must seize governmental power and raise totalitarian claims. There must be no annihilation of popular freedom, for a people cannot be united by terrorism, he said.
But that was intended for popular consumption. The real essence of von Papen’s warnings lie elsewhere. “Leadership will have to watch out”, he admonishes, “lest a new class struggle revive under different colors.”
 
Von Papen’s Program
“I have outlined”, says von Papen, “the problems of the German revolution and my attitude to it so sharply because there is no end of talk of a second wave, which is to complete the revolution ... Nor is it clear where such a second wave should lead. There is much talk of the coming socialization. Have we gone through an anti-Marxist revolution in order to carry out a Marxist program? For every attempt to solve the social problem by collectivization of property is Marxism.
“Would the German people do better by it, would anybody do better, except perhaps those who scent booty in such a pillaging raid, Social problems certainly exist, but they can be mastered only when property is again put under responsibility – not through making collective irresponsibility the ruling principle.”
This is clear and precise. The danger conjured up by Von Papen is not the danger of the proletarian revolution in Germany, for even he knows that this would not be possible without a revolutionary proletarian leadership and least of all without a revolutionary international party. He is speaking directly for the benefit of the fascist guardians of the capitalist system. His task is to remind Hitler and his lieutenants that their first essential service has been performed. With their petty-bourgeois and plebian fascist hordes they destroyed the German labor and revolutionary movement. They liberated their masters from the fear of strikes, revolts or proletarian insurrections and put the working class in chains. The many fists in the petty-bourgeois and plebian army was the dagger was their only value lo the exploiters.
 
Too Many Fists
But von Papen is now calling attention also to the danger lurking in the many upraised petty-bourgeois and plebian fists. Too many of them have taken seriously the demogogic pledges that were embodied in the fascist program in order to rally the mob and to create a mass movement against the proletariat. Too many of them still remain under the illusion that they can cash in on these pledges. At he same time even the Fascist eaders cannot fail to take into account the present enormous strain on the German national economy, the reduction of the whole standard of living of the German masses, including the middle class and, as a result of this, the enormous dangers of a seething discontent.
Certain points in the Nazi’s demagogic program, declared to be unalterable for all time, still remain imprinted in the minds of the plebian brown hordes. Point 13 of the official program reads: “We demand the nationalization of all businesses which have been up to the present formed into companies (trusts).” And, further on, point 7 reads: “We demand land reform suitable to our national requirements, confiscation without compensation of land for communal purposes and the abolition of interest on land loans.”
These points were inserted to attract the masses, particularly the urban and rural middle class. It stands to reason that they were never intended to be carried out. The Fascist army was not created for any such purpose. It came into being at the time when German capitalism could no longer function on the old basis, when the masses could no longer be held in subjection even by a regime of social reformism and when the continued existence of capitalism required the ruthless extermination of all working class organization as a prerequisite for increasing the intensity of exploitation.
 
What the New Program Means
That function was performed by the fascist army, tempering its artificially instilled hatred to Marxism in a ruthless campaign of terror. But the demagogic pledges advanced in order to create this army also served to instill into its mind the subsequent demand for the completion of the fascist revolution Because of that the fascist leaders are compelled to give heed to the peremptory ultimatum of German capitalism, as now advanced by von Papen, that the regime base itself more exclusively on the reactionary state bureaucracy and put a brake on the petty-bourgeois and plebian demands for completion of the fascist revolution. In accordance with this steps are being taken to reduce the numbers of the brown army, and thereby disarm many of its unreliable elements. This is the real meaning of the present movement. Hitler, however, hurries his assurance that what is developing now is not a change in the fascist regime.
In his special interview given to the New York Times reporter of June 24, thumping his fist on the sable, he said: “At the risk of appearing to talk nonsense I will tell you that this movement will go on for a thousand years. The people are more behind me today than they were a year ago. They follow me wherever I go and will continue to do so.”
This is his boast and it is easy to affirm that it has as little to do with the objective historical processes as has the Stalinist prognosis of standing at this moment on the threshold of the proletarian revolution in Germany. Hitler’s greatest difficulties are still ahead, of him. But that subject win have to be left for another article.
 



In the first round of feverish attempts to avert the nation-wide steel strike the union has stood its ground. But the powerful combination of capital in steel is just beginning to show its teeth. At this moment delegates from the union lodges, now established throughout the important steel centers, are meeting again in convention in Pittsburgh to hear reports of the reception given by the American Iron and Steel Institute to the union demands. Will the outcome lead to another presidential settlement like in the automobile industry or will the: union feel sufficiently strong and determined to fight it out? That remains to be answered at this convention. The action it takes will be decisive for the future of the union.
From the Steel Institute the union has received what its rank and file committee spokesmen characterize as a “brazen company union proposition” and “an insult to every worker in the country”. That is about what could be expected from the rulers of the steel domain. It is accepted as a challenge. But to what extent will the union be ready to take up this challenge and fling it hack into their teeth? Undoubtedly if has a strong foothold in the industry and can speak authoritatively for the workers. Moreover, the steel workers have before them the glorious example of Minneapolis and Toledo.
 
Steel Trust Names Its Own Board
The Steel Institute made a proposal to the NRA administration declaring its readiness to accept the establishment of an industrial relations board similar to the one created for the automobile industry. But it specified that on that board, of the men representing labor, one would have to be a company union designate. The other, to be appointed by President Roosevelt, could not be a member of the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers. The steel masters are definitely committed to the maintenance of the company union, they declare, and they will not yield an inch on this point which they consider a vital point.
Meanwhile the steel trust is rushing its preparations to meet a strike situation. No reports are forthcoming from the Steel Institute as to what these preparations are. It remains silent. But the underlings, the professional strike-breakers, the armed guard hirelings and the steel trust appointees, who in the most brazen and high-handed fashion rule the little towns clustered around the mills, know what to do. They have their orders.
One Mr. Bergoff, with offices at 2 Columbus Circle, New York, proclaiming himself to be the dean of strike-breakers, brazenly announces that he is now working for three or four big steel companies. His preparations include, according to his own statements, selection of 10,000 extra armed guards, purchase of arms and ammunition, erection of barriers, purchase of searchlights, erection of commissaries, buying of cots – all the preparations for regular warfare, at a cost of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
“As to those 10,000 armed guards”, he declares, “most will be sworn in by local sheriffs. We have a tentative understanding with local sheriffs, as has any large agency like ours that knows its business.”
Yes, the steel trust has the forces of the State at its command.
But this is only one aspect of the employers’ strike preparations. For them works also the government, its NRA administration and their own agents within the union ranks. President Roosevelt and leaders of both branches of Congress have gotten their heads together and devised a new scheme. A substitute for the Wagner Bill, to be rushed through Congress immediately. It provides for arbitration in all disputes under the direct supervision of the President. Well, the President handled the automobile workers’ situation and what came out of that the steel workers’ rank and file spokesmen have already declared is what they do not want.
 
Reactionaries Prepare Treachery
Mike Tighe on the other hand, is moving all the forces at his feeble command to find some ways of a compromise which he hopes will save his face. At the sell-out game he is an old hand. He is working in two directions. One of his ways is to win the rank and file spokesmen to his ideas of what is acceptable – that is, a presidential settlement like the auto workers got. The other method is to denounce these rank and file spokesmen as irresponsible and representing nobody but themselves, so as to prepare the ground for treachery and to take matters entirely out of their hands. It is ominous that no word has been spoken in this greatest of impending conflicts for union recognition and living working conditions by the upper A.F. of L. hierarchy. The truth is that all of them fear a test of strength in the steel industry, as they fear any strike which brings forward, the powerful latent forces of American labor.
That the American workers will fight has been shown in Minneapolis, in Toledo and in many other places. Their great reservoir of strength has not been tapped. It to hardly touched. The hundreds of thousands in the steel industry – not to speak of those) other thousands who would possibly make common cause with them – form a mighty army whose challenge strikes fear into the hearts of exploiters and labor reactionaries alike. But it is necessary to say to this mighty army beware. There are many danger signals on the horizon. The cunning and conniving from the bigger and lesser Tighes in their ranks who represent the steel workers as divided la preparation for treachery.
 
Rely Only on Your Own Mass Power
Nothing would suit them better than to be able to make an about face and retreat like John L. Lewis did in 1919, when he declared that he could not fight the government. When pressed hard from their union membership they have often resorted to their favorite method of declaring strikes to be outlaw. That is one of: the serious dangers facing the steel workers. But by now, even though their union is new and has not yet received its baptism of lire, they should! have learned that in the final analysis there is nothing else they can rely upon but their own mass power. They constitute a mighty battalion of labor. Theirs is a key position in heavy industry. A retreat, or a surrender, would be a serious setback. The stabilization of a steel workers’ union, its recognition as an actual fact and as the sole representative of all the workers in the industry, vigilant, determined and ready to secure their demands for living conditions would be an enormous gain for the whole of the American working class.
 



ONE of the great American contradictions finds its expression in the backward ideology of the working masses existing alongside of the advanced technology of the country. But the crowning height of this contradiction is attained by the official Communist party. An examination of its position made in the light of a comparison with the gigantic tasks of the American revolution will reveal it beyond a shadow of a doubt as the one party in the Stalinized Comintern which is the least equipped with the indispensable weapons of Marxism.
It is necessary to remember that Marxism both interprets the world and teaches how to change it. Without the Marxian interpretation and estimate of world events, there can be very little hope of finding the correct road for the change. Nor will there be a possibility of deepening and extending the revolutionary practise. Lacking these prerequisites the official party has already become a force of disorientation and working class defeats in the day to day struggles as well. Marxism does not exist in its theory or practise, neither in the sense of interpreting the world nor in the sense of teaching how to change it. It would be difficult to conceive of a party which more stupidly parrots the trite formulae, devoid of revolutionary realism, of Stalin, Manuilsky and Molotov. The pernicious mistakes of the Third International on a world scale it duplicates on the national scene – and in worse form. All that is needed to prove this is furnished by the party itself.
With the world crisis, American capitalism arrived at a fundamental turning point in its political history. The economic self-sufficiency formerly proclaimed and the American provincialism which resulted from it, together with the celebrated “rugged individualism”, are, historically speaking, at an end. In their place we will have a more centralized monopoly capitalism assisted by a definite system of attempted governmental control of class relations. This change is perhaps most clearly typified in the contrast between the Hoover regime and the Roosevelt regime. The Hoover regime was the last staunch representative of the past while the Roosevelt regime represents the beginning of new methods in the course of American capitalism toward its more complete world hegemony.
From this the question arises: To what extent has the official party taken notice of or made a theoretical analysis of the deep going changes in class relations that this new situation presents? Has it taken notice of the vast new problems facing the working class vanguard? It has, of course, been cognizant of the increasing misery and lowered standard of living imposed on the working class by the crisis. It is true that it has also recognized the increasing and multiplying difficulties that now confront American capitalism. But that is still far short of a theoretical analysis of the fundamental changes involved. Such an analysis would be obligatory upon a revolutionary general staff, for without it there can be no correct conclusions at all for the tasks that are pending. This, however, cannot be expected from the official party which in all of its practise remains entirely true to the empiricist methodology of the epigones.
Instead of an analysis we have the pompous proclamation of the discovery of Fascism in both the Hoover and the Roosevelt regimes. In the Fascism of the Hoover regime was included, according to the seventh convention thesis of 1930, the AF of L, the Socialist party and the Muste group. The latter two, said the thesis, were covering their Fascism with pseudo-revolutionary phrases. It may be granted that the party is now trying to make a distinction by specifying the Fascist methods of the Hoover regime and the Fascist economic system of the Roosevelt regime. But that is only so much nonsense. Of course, the official party qualifies its “theoretical” conclusions by saying that it is not speaking of developed Fascism, but Fascism nevertheless. In this respect the American party leaders only repeat the fatal errors of the German party and the Stalintern as a whole. And from such premises it would be impossible, even in the remotest sense, to make a sound estimate of what Fascism actually is, of the conditions under which it arises, its special characteristics as a social phenomenon of a certain epoch, or its historical role.
In view of this, the speech made by Browder to the party plenum in January 1934, is not at all surprising. After the usual attempt at justifying the capitulation of the German CP by explaining that the social democracy still held the majority of the working class under its influence, he projects the question, which he says has been asked by many: Why did the German party not lead the revolutionary section of the German working class in struggle against Fascism? And listen to the wisdom of his answer: To hold such a position, he says, would mean
“nothing but capitulation to the social democracy. It is a complete acceptance of the social democratic understanding of the significance of the rise of Fascism and of Hitler. Along with it necessarily goes the view that the victory of Hitler inaugurates a protracted period of Fascist reaction and long time defeat of the revolution”.
Browder has no such view, and he could therefore declare nonchalantly to the Cleveland convention in discussing the question of the rise of Fascism in the United States,
“it [Fascism] destroys the moral base for capitalist rule, discrediting bourgeois law in the eyes of the masses; it hastens the exposure of all demagogic supporters of capitalism, especially its main support among the workers – the Socialist and trade union leaders. It hastens the revolutionization of the workers, destroys their democratic illusions, and thereby prepares the masses for the revolutionary struggle for power”.
What is said here is full of false and dangerous propositions. It is the covering of one’s tracks in the most treacherous manner. It is said to justify the criminal capitulation in Germany and to maintain the fiction that the German party is consolidating and strengthening itself as a political force. According to this statement, Fascism does not denote a new period existing on the ruins of the working class organizations, requiring entirely new methods of struggle, particularly the struggle for the democratic demands, and under much greater difficulties. Fascism is a mere incident. It is really not different from any preceding regime, except that it hastens disillusionment and speeds up the revolution. That the proletariat will conquer ultimately, even in spite of Fascism, is incontestable. But what Browder is attempting here is an advance justification of the capitulation of the party to Fascism. There is really no point to the Leninist demand for the united front to crush Fascism before it overcomes the proletariat and destroys its organizations.
In regard to the question of changing class relations in the United States the official party position is no less astounding and no less stupid. Already in 1930 it saw a “revolutionary upsurge of the working masses of the United States”, which was “opening the road to the Communist party for organizing and leading these masses into struggles”. This was evidenced among many other things “by increasing militancy of the workers in resisting the violent suppression of strikes and demonstrations ... by the mass interest in revolutionary trade unionism” and “by the rapid growth of the Communist party in membership and influence”. This is quoted from the seventh convention thesis presented in March 1930. But at the eighth convention, held recently, we are informed that the party at that time did not grow at all. And what the interest in the “revolutionary unions” amounted to at the time might as well not be mentioned. It was nil. Suffice it to recall that the “revolutionary upsurge” had been announced by Molotov when he inaugurated the “third period” at the tenth Comintern plenum, and this upsurge therefore had to be discovered everywhere, including the United States. Such was the “theoretical” analysis and evaluation of class relations made by the official party in 1930. Would we not be justified in assuming that conclusions for a general strategy should have been made therefrom which would be in accord with this perspective of revolutionary upsurge? Marxism would impose such a duty upon a revolutionary party leadership. But the perspective was false and Marxism was non-existent in the party. History completely refuted this perspective. Apparently, then, so much the worse for history. The adventurist commands which were issued for the “capture of the streets” in the daily “revolutionary” practise of the official party led only to futile and isolated exercises.
In the thesis of the eighth convention the official party outlines the same perspective as in 1930, even though in foundation it is stated a little more circumspectly. Meanwhile, gigantic events have intervened on a world scale: the conquests of Fascism in Germany and Austria, its growth elsewhere, and the collapse of the Second and the Third Internationals. However, in the eighth convention thesis this is not even mentioned. Not the least trace can be found to indicate that a single lesson has been learned from these world-shaking events. Again it is necessary to remember that Marxism both interprets the world and teaches how to change it. That is the weapon which is already forged. Actually applying Marxism, however, would mean first of all to learn the bitter lessons from all of the criminally false policies and the final capitulation which helped Fascism come into power and brought about the destruction of the workers’ parties. The party bureaucracy could not even begin to permit that. It would have meant its own undoing. Therefore it pursued the opposite course and with worse consequences to the party.
In view of this it would be ludicrous to expect a correct theoretical analysis of the changes now taking place in class relations in the United States. The crisis has been a great levelling process, reducing economically the various working class strata much nearer to one common low level. The turn in the economic cycle finds the masses entering the trade unions in numbers running into hundreds of thousands with the unions extending into the very heart of the basic and the mass production industries. There is a surging revival of the AF of L unions, a radical change in its position and composition and new processes are beginning within its ranks. Back in 1930 the official party proclaimed the AF of L a company union and moribund. It had only one regret, that it “did not sooner clearly analyse and characterize the open Fascism of the AF of L” (1930 convention thesis). From this it drew the conclusion that its “most fundamental task in mass work is the building of the revolutionary unions of the Trade Union Unity League”.
The party had entirely forgotten the warning of the Communist Manifesto that: “They [the Communists] do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to shape and mould the proletarian movement.” History has made a mockery of the official party prognosis. A whole series of false policies foisted upon a party membership which has been denied the elementary right and privilege of inquiring into reasons, and has lost the ability to distinguish, has brought its cruel retaliation. While the mass unions are experiencing new growth and, regardless of the desires and policies of the reactionary leaders, are drawn into the vortex of new great class battles, the TUUL unions remain paper institutions, devoid of life, an obstruction in the path of working class advance. In the present sharpening of class lines in the United States events in the trade union field are of a decisive character. The question of correct trade union policy is at present the key to the working class problems. A workers’ party which cannot approach a solution of this problem cannot be counted upon at all to lead the proletarian revolution in America. It will function instead as a brake and a force for disintegration and defeat.
Is it any wonder that the official party is now compelled to bewail the results of its handiwork in the following admission penned in the eighth convention thesis?
“The leadership of the party in the trade union work remains extremely weak despite the Open Letter and control tasks adopted by the CC and the Districts. The majority of the party members remain outside of the unions in most of the districts (including such concentration districts as Chicago, Detroit): in the party as a whole the important progress made was with but a small section of the party membership active in the economic struggles. Communist fractions, without which there can be no real leadership by the party in the work of the trade unions, remain weak and receive little attention.”
Further proof – if further proof is needed – of the bankruptcy of the party is furnished in the Open Letter referred to above (July 7, 1933). There we are informed that:
“The clearest expression of the failure to carry out this concentration is the fact that during the past year the majority of strikes were led by reformists ... In fact the reformists in Eastern Ohio, a concentration district of the party, succeeded in taking over the leadership of miners who had previously carried on a heroic strike under the leadership of the National Miners Union.”
Finally it must be said that in the splendid class battles of most recent date, in Minneapolis and Toledo, the official Communist party was no political factor at all. The inspiring influence and conscious direction given came from other political forces in the country. The official party appeared as far as these battles are concerned only as a demoralizing and disorganizing factor.
A comparison today between Stalinism and social democracy will reveal that within the latter, including the American Socialist party, serious repercussions have been produced by recent world events. New tendencies and new groupings are emerging which acknowledge the defeats and the collapse of the workers’ parties. Hazily some of these groups are beginning to draw conclusions in a revolutionary direction. Within the official Communist party, however, “unanimity” prevails. Its theoretical level is unquestionably the lowest ever recorded. With implicit faith the celebrated “general line” is adopted again and again no matter what history records. Utterly incapable of reasoning otherwise than according to its own bureaucratically constructed dogmas, alien to Marxism, but accepted by the membership in a spirit of religious fervor, the party stumbles into ever greater contradictions. While the American workers in ever greater numbers become attracted to Communism, thousands leave the official party ranks. From 1930 to February 1934, Browder admits in his eighth convention report, the party had recruited 49,080 new members, but the actual membership in this period rose only from 7,645 to 24,800. These figures attest the membership turnover. But there would be little grounds for accepting the announced gains at face value when we recall that the 1930 convention thesis estimated the party membership to be, not 7,540 but “approximately 15,000”.
The bureaucratic triumph of the little epigones recorded at the eighth convention climaxed in the one and only infallible general secretary, apparently presents the party as having reached new and hitherto unknown heights. But stripped of all the pompous convention trimmings, the exact opposite is revealed. What remains is a picture of theoretical decline, bankruptcy and degeneracy. It is high time to clear the road for the new revolutionary party.
Arne SWABECK



VIEWED superficially the November 6 election returns would indicate a glorious victory for bourgeois democracy. Apparently President Roosevelt sits on the top of the world. Certainly his administration is strengthened by the verdict of this national plebiscite on his popularity. His party has had its face lifted and many of its representatives who held firm to the President’s coat-tails were carried along by the side.
With sixty-nine seats in the Senate, a gain of nine, and a representation in the House of 322, an increase of thirteen, with several new governorships, numerous conquests of minor offices and extended means of patronage, it is confirmed in power. But this does not at all reveal the real significance of the elections. The trends that are still hidden below these surface indications are of far greater importance.
These elections were proclaimed far and wide as a test of the “New Deal”. It was taken to the country, so it was said, and it found an overwhelming approval. Is that really the case ? Can the outcome of a parliamentary election be considered a sufficient verdict of a set of policies affecting in a fundamental sense the future course of American capitalism? Hardly. For a real test of the “New Deal” policies it is necessary to view the whole of the economic and political relationships existing since these policies were inaugurated. In the first instance must be noted the disputes over code regulations and collective bargaining agreements, the conflicts of company unions versus trade unions and the widely extended strike movements – in a word, the issues of the class struggle. And there need be little doubt that when taken as a whole, the test does not at all signify the overwhelming approval indicated on the surface of the election returns. It is this apparent contradiction that needs be explained.
The fact that these were the first national elections held since the recent changes in the national economic structure and its new relationship to the political state began, invests them with unusual importance. At the economic base these changes took shape in rapid form. The sweeping reorganization climaxed by the N.R.A., the strengthening of the main pillars of the structure to prepare American capitalism for new world conquests stimulated the process of transition. But the ideological regroupments that were bound to follow came at a much slower tempo. On the working class side they are manifested so far chiefly in the growing consciousness of union organization and the great, militantly fought strikes; but this has not yet crystallized into political consciousness or form. Due to this situation a political equilibrium was still possible in which, motivated by different and in some respects opposite reasons, the decisive sections of the big bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie and the working class found themselves united in the elections behind the Roosevelt administration. In this is summed up the enormous contradictions of the highly advanced technology and political backwardness of the masses still existing within this mighty empire.
However, within its framework the process of class differentiation is already expressed in the trends hidden below the surface of this unanimous election verdict. It is possible to demonstrate ton the basis of the returns: firstly, that, monopoly capitalism is entrenching itself and strengthening its fences of reaction; secondly, that the middle class, the largest single voting bloc, is moving Leftward and only partly adhering to the political leadership of the big bourgeoisie; thirdly that the working class has entered a process of radicalization leading it toward a separate identity as a class. In other words, behind this apparent election unanimity the real process of ideological regroupments and class differentiation is beginning to take form.
We do not propose to dismiss the Republican party from consideration. But for the purpose of this analysis it is of less consequence inasmuch as from a fundamental class point of view it offers no distinction from the Democratic party. Its defeat undoubtedly became so much more smashing due to its present position of negative criticism when action is expected. The proposed overhauling or liberalization of the GOP is not due to give any further stability to the traditional two-party system. It is much more likely that this tradition will be broken up into new third party formations, or labor party formations, or both, not to speak of a coming Fascist crystallization. However, it is not the purpose of this article to make an attempt to delve into the future prospects of political constellations nor to probe into the possibilities of social reformism as such.
Owing to the past uninterrupted advance of the forces of production and the widening sphere of capitalist exploitation, capitalism, and together with it the parliamentary state, acquired a lasting stability. In the United States the institutions of parliament enjoyed an unusual prestige due to the widely extended right of franchise and the generally accepted idea that the son of the humblest citizen can become president and that this sovereign citizen can change conditions to suit himself by his power to cast a ballot on election day. Parliamentarism as a state system became the “democratic” form of the rule of the bourgeoisie which needed the fiction of a national representation to represent outwardly an organization of a “national will” standing outside of classes, but in reality functioning as an instrument of oppression and suppression in the hands of the ruling capitalists. It performed a certain progressive function as the weapon of developing capitalism. The American workers would fight their exploiters militantly on the industrial field but politically they would support, except for certain temporary interruptions, the perpetuation of the capitalist two-party system and remain under the sway of bourgeois ideology. The bourgeois politician set himself the task of balancing the various forces against one another. It may be said about President Roosevelt that he has raised the bourgeois parliamentary system to its highest point of perfection and accomplished this under new and more difficult conditions than heretofore. Today it appears as if the political state stands out more distinctly as the arbiter between the classes. In reality, it is, if anything, more completely an instrument in the hands of capitalist economy, which has assumed new functions in support of monopoly capital, and supervision of industry and class relations. In other words it is more distinctly an instrument of oppression and suppression in the hands of the ruling class. But American capitalism does not exist separately and independently. It is inextricably bound up with world capitalism as a system and the decay of this world system shows its disintegrating tendencies also in the American structure. American capitalism faces today the problem of emerging from its crisis at the expense of the other competitors in the world market and at the expense of its own working class. It does not yet need to resort to Fascism as a form of state, but it needs a government that can resort to strong measures to overcome the dislocations in its economy and resort to certain reform measures to appease the brewing mass discontent. It needs a strong government in the sense of one able by demagogic means at its disposal to rally the necessary popular mass support.
Roosevelt, or the Roosevelt system, has been characterized openly as the savior of American capitalism, as the lone barrier against radicalism. Before the November 6 elections many of his liberal friends and advisers put the question in voices of anxiety: Will he go to the Right, or will he go to the Left? It is now reported that he himself thinks he is still a little Left or Center – that is, the bourgeois Center. Where he actually stands, in the opinion of the bankers and the industrialists, they have demonstrated by the confidence bestowed on his regime by the election of his supporters.
The Roosevelt program resorted at first to measures of the contemplated economic recovery and secondly to measures of social reform legislation. In governmental circles the terminology of the past of inspired lofty principles of abstract bourgeois democracy has become replaced by a terminology of economics. The “New Deal” is called planned economy. But it is an attempt at planned economy under capitalism, not based upon the supplying of the needs of the masses of the people in particular, but based upon capital investments in the branches of industry where the rate of profit is the highest. The enormous government expenditures, while aiming at the desired stability of purchasing power of the masses, had for its primary purpose the objective of lifting the loads of the crisis sufficiently to forestall a collapse of capitalist economy and set the wheels of industry into motion so that the flow of capital and the increase in the total aggregate capital, under new forms of intensified exploitation and an already vastly reduced standard of living of the masses might serve to check the tendency of the falling rate of profit. The increase of commodity prices was designed to help restore the profit inducement and together with the code regulations to safeguard “fair competition” and strengthen monopoly capital. Thus the program as a whole had for its primary purpose the restoration of the confidence of capitalism in the process of capitalist reproduction. The collective bargaining clause, which was made a part of the NRA, was thrown in for good measure to create a complete equilibrium, or to create the conditions for an “All American Team”, as President Roosevelt expressed himself before the American bankers’ convention.
Second in order followed the Roosevelt program of social reform legislation. For the present, however, this is to be limited, in addition to the already accomplished relief expenditures, to a state-controlled system of unemployment insurance to be financed by local contributions and not out of taxes. It is a social reform program inaugurated by capitalism without the assistance of a social reformist party. It cannot be denied that this is one of the unique American ways made possible by the strength still possessed by American capitalism and expressing as well the political backwardness of its working class.
In his recent interview with Stalin, H.G. Wells, called the Roosevelt program socialism in the Anglo-Saxon sense. He said: “The effect of the ideas of Roosevelt’s ‘New Deal’ is most powerful and in my opinion they are socialist ideas.” Sure it is that this program has served to put the socialist party in a pathetic position and.condemned it to a pitiful showing in these elections. Lacking any real semblance of a revolutionary program, the reform platform it advanced for the elections could be very easily and effectively outdistanced by the Rooseveltian politicians. Any further development of the latter’s social reform legislation, taken together with the growing working class radicalization, will play its part in intensifying the internal contradictions of the socialist party. No less pitiful was the position of the Stalinist party in the election returns. In the general process of radicalization of the masses is discernible a trend towards communism. But this trend is not assimilated by the Stalinist party, neither in the sense of the new members who join its ranks and leave as rapidly as they enter, nor in the sense of furnishing a crystallizing pole of attraction in political events and least of all in influencing the trade union or strike movements. The Stalinist party lacks a realistic revolutionary policy. It repels the trend toward communism and heap discredit upon the name communism. The “self-criticism” applied to elections by the party’s Political Committee, published in the December Communist, will in no way serve to cover its disgraceful debacle. In sum and substance this “self-criticism” once more asserts the infallibility of the line, but the unit organizers, the section organizers and the district organizers failed to do this or that sufficiently. As far as the official AF of L leadership is concerned, it accepted its place on the “All-American Team” and pinned its hopes on the present capitalist controlled equilibrium. It supported, of course, the Rooseveltians in the elections and it is now attempting to make this support more real by carrying out its secret pledges to the no-strike-truce.
The banking fraternity, the directors of the Chambers of Commerce and the manufacturers’ associations accepted their place on the “All-American Team” and went to bat in the elections in a big-way. President Roosevelt started his regime by chastizing the bankers, digging up the old epithet of “money-changers” who knew only the “rules of a generation of self-seekers”. He proceeded to pillorying them by the investigations of Wall Street and sponsored restrictive banking legislation. This became popular with the mass of the voters. And, as is now clear since President Roosevelt appeared before the bankers’ convention shortly before the elections, it helped to execute the grand manoeuvre of whipping the numerous clans of small town bankers (those left over from the terrific slaughter of the crisis) into line behind the directors of the great metropolitan financial institutions. The whole fraternity is now more firmly committed to the “New Deal” policies and the Roosevelt regime sits more firmly in the saddle. But it sits there on the definite promise of recasting the NRA along lines favored by the owners of industry with less restrictions, less price-fixing and more emphasis on codes to strangle the small competitor; a treasury refinancing plan along conservative lines; a balanced budget, less government spending, lifting of bars against export of currencies and prospects of a return to the gold standard, together with just enough social reform legislation to preserve the capitalist class rule. In so far as the attitude to the working class is concerned, the directors of monopoly capital have already received their assurances in the various labor settlements, notably the automobile settlement, and the government’s appearance in its real and authoritative expression in strikes, in the form of policemen’s clubs, gas and guns and steel-helmeted soldiers. There need be no doubt that monopoly capital has become further entrenched.
The popular mass of the citizenry declared in these elections in unmistakable terms for the system of government spending. The large middle class bloc of voters showed its Leftward trend not only by this token but much more so by the examples of California, Wisconsin and Minnesota. Upton Sinclair rolled up over 800,000 votes for his diluted EPIC program. The La Follette new “Progressive” party swept the state of Wisconsin. Governor Olson, despite his abominable record in the Minneapolis strike, overwhelmingly defeated both Republican and Democratic opponents.
What of the working class radicalization ? It is not yet crystallized into political consciousness. Certainly the workers did not vote for all of the implications of the “New Deal” policies. That is too clearly shown in the militant clashes with the armed forces of the state during the recent second strike wave. But the working class still follows in the main the capitalist political demagogue. It has not yet been offered the attraction of a decisive revolutionary force. It has not yet really tested its power. What will happen when the “New Deal” begins to show its teeth more sharply and the contradictions growing out of the present efforts to save capitalism come much more to the fore to upset the present equilibrium, as they inevitably will in the very near future? New big struggles are now looming on the horizon and the American working class can be expected to begin the writing of a new page in its history.
Arne SWABECK
 



IN THE program of action adopted at the convention giving birth to the Workers Party the central point is its trade union activities. That is a job which the party intends to tackle in earnest in order to become a factor of influence in the trade union movement.
Thoroughly realistic, this program of action sets out objectives that are within reach of a live active force. Following further in the same fashion the initial steps are now under way to organize the party itself, its members who belong to trade unions, and to cement a firm contact with the progressive elements who are eagerly awaiting a lead to chart a new course in accord with the needs of the trade union movement today.
A trade union department has been set up. The party trade union fractions are being organized and the first steps taken to contact the live wire progressives in the various localities. Information will be exchanged mutually between the branches and the center, taking up such questions as: How to start the trade union activities; the function of the party fractions; the organization of local progressive groups; the problem of organizing in unorganized shops; the burning issues in the trade union movement; the essence and meaning of the party's trade union policy, etc. These are, of course, only preliminary steps to get, the machinery into motion iu order to take up the bigger points on the order of the day.
 
Basic Tasks
The program of action for the trade union work centered around two basic propositions. The first and foremost is the creation of a national progressive movement in the trade unions. The second presented the idea of selection of a couple of concentration points, the section of the textile industry in New Jersey and Eastern Pennsylvania and the automobile industry in and around Detroit, Toledo and Cleveland.
Insofar as the first proposition is concerned, the crying need for a national progressive movement does not have to be emphasized to militant workers. In fact it represents to them a long felt need; but the forces to actually tackle the problem were not at hand. There is today not such a national movement in existence. Excellent examples have been set of what progressive and left, wing policies mean and what can be accomplished when a group of determined militants begin to act in an organized fashion. We need mention only Minneapolis and Toledo. But these examples had so far mainly a local character.
Many other examples could be adduced of how not to conduct left wing or progressive policies or organizations. For the present, however, we do not intend to enter into a discussion of these questions. They will be taken up in subsequent articles in the New Militant dealing more directly with the purposes of the projected national progressive movement in the trade unions. At this moment our first task is to get the wheels into motion and to begin the first steps in our activities. To this end we are discussing this question directly with a number of outstanding progressive trade unionists.
 
Concentration Points
The idea of selecting a couple of concentration points for our trade union work has to do with our initial party stage when with limited forces it would not be advisable to attempt to spread over the whole field at once.
But this is not the only reason. In the two particular concentration points mentioned issues of the most important character are accumulating and great struggles are in prospect. The issues are of course not the same character in both instances and to that extent the approach to the problems differ. In the Detroit automobile area for example the real problem is still the one of establishing a union organization. But that also is a job for the militant forces. And so, with the initial preparations on the way our party will proceed to the bigger issues confronting it.
 



The recent march of events conjures up again and again, and in ever more menacing proportions, the horrible spectre of a new imperialist holocaust. At the present moment the war clouds appear most densely packed in Europe. Will the outburst begin there? That no one can predict. It is certain, however, that the sanguinary massacre of the Austrian workers brings the war question much nearer to monstrous reality. But elsewhere along the artificially created national boundaries the sparks are flying in an atmosphere already excessively charged with rapacious imperialist contacts. In the language of capitalise diplomats it is no longer a question of “whether” the war will come, but “when” and “where” it will begin.
The United Press reports a formidable concentration of Italian troops along the Austrian borders. Henri Berenguer, head of French Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, publicly proclaims the necessity of dispatching armed forces to Austria – to “safeguard her independence”. This may be merely symptomatic of general situation. Much more ominous, however, is the spreading of fascist reaction at a breath-taking speed and the efforts to annihilate the working class movement and crush its spirit of resistance.
War is a continuation of politics by other means. Politics between imperialist powers knows no other language than that of the marauders’ capture of spoils. Armies, fortified by the latest developments in mechanized warfare, deadly poison gases, and composed of millions of humanity, are marching up in array to engage in a new death battle for redivision of the earth amongst the ravenous exploiters.
The mask of disarmament has fallen. In place of it there is now an open race for armaments. The League of Nations, created, in the language of capitalist diplomatic hypocrisy, as an instrument to preserve peace between the nations, has sunk into disrepute even amongst its own creators. As a decoy it is not needed right now. The disarmament conference, in the words of its last remaining “faithful friend”, the sleek Arthur Henderson, is in pretty bad shape. All the capitalist powers, large and small, have armed to the teeth. But most powerfully loom the gigantic war preparations of the American imperialist colossus. Wherever the war clouds may begin to unleash their torrents, wherever the powder magazine of capitalist conflicts may be ignited, one thing is certain – the United States will play a major role in it.
It is in anticipation of these furious armed conflicts that the United States prepares. Coldly and deliberately it pursues its course towards imperialist war. Its enormous capital resources must find new fields of exploitation, not only as a means of issuing out of the crisis, but also as a means of reducing the share of the competing powers in world economy. A favorable decision in this contest it will seek through the force of arms Hence the feverish strengthening at this moment of what are called the forces of national defense. The United States today leads all the other powers in the open race for armaments.
The greatest navy in the country’s history has been voted by the house of representatives in passing the Vinson Naval Replacement Bill providing a program to cost $475,000,000 to $570,000,000. Coincident with this program approval was secured for building of 1,184 new naval aircraft. Announcements for the expansion of the Army Air Corps is awaited. “The sky’s the limit”, said Representative Hastings of Oklahoma in the House debate on the naval program. “This program may cost a billion dollars.”
But that is only half the picture according to figures marshalled by Representative Bierman of Iowa. According to him, Congress and the P.W.A. are already appropriating $1,039,000,000 this year for the navy. Meanwhile the prices on securities having direct relation to war industries soar on the stock exchanges in anticipation of huge pro-its to be cleaned up out of the coming slaughter.
“If the war would be fought to a finish without inner movements (i.e., revolutions – A.S.), a state of exhaustion would result such as Europe has not experienced for two hundred years. American industry would then win all along the line and would set us all before the alternative: either a relapse to pure agriculture for our own needs (American grain forbids any other kind), or – social revolution.”
Thus wrote Engels in a letter to Sorge, Jan. 7, 1888, foreseeing the world war. The “inner movements” did occur. Revolutions broke out before the world war reached the point of complete exhaustion. But only one remained victorious, that of the Soviet Union. The others were defeated. The world proletariat has suffered new and terrific blows. Meanwhile American industry is already able to assert its superiority, both in peace and war. Therefore the prediction of Engels still holds good. For the future there still remain the two alternatives. Only this much should be added. The possibility of social revolution is, of course, not confined to one continent.
 



Seventeen hundred delegates attended the thirty-third convention of the United Mine Workers held recently at Indianapolis. The majority gave the John L. Lewis administration a vote of confidence, cheered his pompous convention verbiage and bestowed a goodly portion of the acclaim upon his retinue of mediocre horn-blowing lackeys who constitute the pillars of his high-handed regime.
A whole coterie of officials had come direct from the anthracite coal fields where they had been instrumental in breaking the backbone of the strike conducted by the “insurgent” union. That suited the hand-picked delegates who constituted the majority in the convention. Strike-breaking has become their trade. Lewis ruled supreme at the convention. Opposition was squelched. Progressive proposals were defeated hands down, shelved in committees, or so garbled in formulation that after their adoption they will remain dead letters.
 
An “Industrial Statesman”
Since the recent revival of the U.M.W., John L. Lewis has been hailed far and wide by the press – which is always on the side of the enemies of the miners – as the outstanding example of labor-industrial statesmanship. But this praise did not refer to the union revival, but to such instances as the strikebreaking in the anthracite and elsewhere. The revival was due to the indomitable spirit of the rank and file miners and their fight for union organization. Lewis enters to collect the check-off.
His career of “industrial statesmanship” began many years ago as a petty official systematically looting the treasury of the Panama, Illinois’ local union. Through that he learned the first lessons in the shady art of buying henchmen. In the highest office of the union he made it into a system. He reinforced this with the methods of deliberate vote stealing, frame-ups, and slugging of opponents. Martin Ryan who led the powerful strikes for union organization in the Pennsylvania coke region sat in jail during the convention, framed up on a charge; of assault and battery. Removing regular elected officials In the various union districts or sub-districts who in any way be came recalcitrant to the Lewis regime, and the institution of what is called provisional government, became a celebrated method. Today most of the union districts are under such provisional government. The appointive power enabled Lewis to make general organizers out of all his decrepit henchmen who were defeated in regular union elections. Today there is a host of such appointed organizers throughout the coal fields Who were at hand to “manage” the convention elections. There was rich opportunity to secure the hand-picked majority of the delegation which claimed to represent a total membership of 360,000.
 
The Conciliation Hoax
The convention had as its outstanding feature a note of conciliation peace and harmony to be extended to the operators. But when delegate Sloan from Westville, Illinois, dared to make a fight for freedom of political opinions within the union, for the right of union members to choose their own political affiliation, including Communist affiliation, he was threatened with ejection from the convention hall. To affix the seal of “honest” and peaceful intentions upon the proceedings, the secretary of the National Coal Association, the operators’ organization, addressed the convention. But what is the real significance of these declarations of conciliation? Are they intended to secure peace and harmony in the mine camps with a filled pay envelope and a “full dinner pail” for the miners? That is not the motive.
The cringing pledge of these “industrial statesman” before the coal operators is an effort to guarantee that there will be no fight for improved wages and working conditions made by the miners so that Lewis may secure formal recognition of the union and collect the check-off on the dues payments. The operators of the Pennsylvania captive mines, that is, the United States Steel Company empire, showed Lewis that they could beat him at his own game of vote stealing, intimidation, frame-ups, and bludgeoning. They had told the NRA labor board to keep hands off while, by these methods, they carried the elections in their mines for the establishment of their company union. Lewis did his best to betray the miners who struck for recognition of the U.M.W. Now he promises that there will be no strikes so that he may thereby obtain the check-off.
 
No Strike Assurances
But the convention went on record for higher wages, for the six-hour work day and for the five-day week. Yes, but on this point also, Lewis hastened the assurance that there would be no truculence in the attitude of the union. He warned the delegates not to raise false hopes back home that such desires could be obtained. “We do not wish to cripple the industry or embarrass the federal government or the recovery administration,” he said – There must be no strikes, according to Lewis. In glaring contrast to these assurances, however, it is necessary to recall the fact that never in history have any serious gains been recorded by the miners except by fighting for them, by using the powerful strike weapon.
The most brilliant pages of American labor history carry the story of the valiant fight of the coal miners. But they also record the innumerable betrayals perpetrated by Lewis during the administration covering almost two decades. The Insurgent Unions
In 1925 he made his infamous proposal to drive 350,000 miners from the industry. The scourge of unemployment and the increase of machine mining aided this nefarious plan. Where once upwards of 800,000 coal miners worked in and around the mines, there are now 400,000 men employed. Many revolts against the Lewis regime have occurred, and insurgent unions have been created. There is today an independent union in the anthracite claiming 50,000 members; the Progressive Miners Union in Illinois, which lays claim to 30,000 members. New unions have sprung up in Washington, West Virginia, and Nova Scotia. But the independent union in the anthracite, headed by Cappelini and Maloney has not differed essentially in its methods from the U.M.W. The so-called progressive leaders of the Illinois union have adopted all the bureaucratic methods of expulsions and frame-ups of the Lewis machine.
However, the indomitable spirit of the rank and file coal miners has remained. It is due to their vitality and fighting ability that the U.M.W. has revived and today represents perhaps the strongest union in the country. There are still great latent forces hidden within the smoke-filled mine fields. There is no reason to believe that the policies which prevailed at this Indianapolis convention mark the inauguration of a new epoch. On the contrary. The spirit of rebellion will again assert itself. The economic pressure upon the miners will call forth their resistance against the continuous and increased enslavement. This resistance will reduce the deceptive conciliation and peace proposals to naught. In the mine fields are excellent prospects for new and more serious rebellions and for much more serious contests against the treacherous Lewis machine.
 



There is an unmistakable trend in the trade unions today which foreshadows the tempestuous developments to come. It is shown in its boldest outline in the steel workers’ union and came particularly to the fore at the recent convention. The rank and file delegates delivered some severe blows to the president, old “Grandmother” Tighe, and rode rough shod, breaking down all the fences he had so carefully built up. The trend is shown in the newly constituted federal unions organized in several of the mass production industries where a struggle is beginning for a status of industrial unionism. It was shown in the automobile workers situation, where at one time Collins had to wield his gavel heavily to prevent a representative delegate conference from taking strike action for union recognition. Yes, also, the change of front of the railroad union executives in actually presenting demands to the carriers, reflects the pressure upon them from the workers.
 
Leaders Under Fire
The high-priced labor leaders sense the quickening tempo. Some of them are already hit squarely by the impact and fear themselves riding the whirlwind. Others are trying to adjust at least their language to the pressure from the workers. All of them are endeavoring with might and main to hold back and to keep the movement within safe channels behind Roosevelt and the New Deal.
Bill Green, who is still a deacon in the Baptist church of his native Coshochton, Ohio, were he used to teach Sunday school, released a May Day forecast in which he says:
“Labor believes that notwithstanding this refusal a concentrated drive should be made to compel, through the use of forceful methods if necessary, an immediate reduction in the hours of labor. There is no other remedy available.”
Of course, he has said that before. We do not harbor any illusions that he, or any of the others in exalted positions of leadership, are becoming militant. Not at all. But the truth is that they all find themselves confronting new conditions.
 
New Forces in the Unions
New forces in large numbers are coming into the unions. They are mainly proletarians from mass production and basic industries. They look upon the unions as instruments of struggle and as means of protecting their interest. They mean to use them for this purpose. They bring forward the basic interest of the class as a whole, themselves representing its lowest layers.
We are no longer in the conditions of the past where the most powerful unions concerned themselves almost purely with the interests of privileged sections of skilled crafts. Concessions could be wrung from the employers for this privileged section on the basis of keeping the masses of unskilled and semi-skilled without organization and on a low standard of living. These concessions became the breeding ground for bribery, graft and corruption amongst the officials. The exclusive craft unions became the instruments to keep the rest of the working class in subjection. Now new problems begin to face these union officials.
The convention of the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers is a good example of these new problems. The union has witnessed a considerable influx of new members, rising from practically nothing to what, in the various estimates, range between a membership of 50,000 and 100,000. Its president, Mike Tighe, counted upon his office as a life-time job and always relied upon his good friends amongst the owners of the means of production.
 
Rank and File Revolts
To his consternation at the convention the rank and file delegates began to take charge. First they overruled his ideas, that delegates coming from local lodges who had not paid their per capita tax because of unemployment due to blacklisting of union members should not be seated. Secondly, they saved the convention from the disgrace of listening to “puddler” Jim Davis (the senator from Pennsylvania) and forced him off the floor. The actions of this powerful opposition delegation culminated in the convention adopting the following program:

Immediate presentation of demands to the Steel Companies for Union Recognition and a substantial wage increase.
 
To give a ten-day ultimatum to the trust, with preparations for a general strike if the demands are not granted.

For good measure the delegates decided to set up a special convention committee to be in charge of the “offensive action”. This drew a declaration from Tighe, that he “washes his hands of the whole business”.
 
Officials in a Dilemma
Mike Tighe may yet try to defeat and nullify the convention action. Sell-outs are not merely a thing of the past but can be expected to be repeated on a more serious scale. But this is an entirely different matter now that the workers are in motion toward a higher level of class consciousness. “Outlaw” strikes and “outlaw” movements can be expected to occur. Today, however, such are not so easily defeated. The union officials are in a dilemma with the company unions pressing from the one side while on the other side hangs the shadow of more militant organization and action by the workers.
In the automobile situation the union officials accepted the Roosevelt agreement which legalizes the company union; Bill Green’s “greatest strike in history” was won for the time being by the auto bosses. The union officials accepted the special mediation board whose duty is to forestall and defeat action. As a result an “outlaw” movement is already in its inception. It started from St. Louis where the union locals proposed secession from the A.F. of L. and found support from locals in other parts of the country.
 
Danger of Premature Splits
In this action, however, there is a great danger of a premature split which can be isolated and led into the void. The center of gravity of the trade union movement is still within the A.F. of L. A continuation of its policies and betrayals will unmistakably lead to the possibilities of new militant unions emerging. But such moves can become successful only after the rank and file thoroughly absorb the experiences after a period of crystallization of forces and a better understanding of the purposes and tasks of militant unions. Above all it can become successful only under the direction and influence of a conscious left wing movement. Nevertheless this trend shown amongst the automobile workers is highly indicative for the future.
Within the federal unions trends in a progressive direction are visible. At a conference in Washington the latter part of January delegates representing almost 100 federal unions with an estimated membership of 250,000 formulated demands to the effect:

That the organization of federal unions be continued aggressively.
 
That the members of the federal unions be not segregated into craft unions.
 
That a bureau be established within the A.F. of L. to “aid and stimulate the formation of such industrial unions”.
 
That where “a reasonable and sufficient number of such federal unions form a national organization and apply for a national or international charter, same shall be immediately granted”.
 

Trend Toward Industrial Unionism
Here the trend is very definitely toward industrial unions to be established on a national scale for the respective industries. Unquestionably, that trend will take further hold and finally take on the form of a definite movement which it will be difficult for the reactionary officials to check or to defeat.
The workers from the mass production and the basic industries, who are now joining the unions in great numbers, have lost some of their great illusions about the NRA. They propose in the main to rely upon the power of their organization. In this they press the union officials for action. They put the officials to the test and the failure to head their demands will be clearly demonstrated before the eyes of the rank and file.
On the one hand preparation is made for many of them to be swept into discard. On the other hand, the militant currents become strengthened. Already today these new mass numbers in the unions are in the position of defending the unions, of fighting for their recognition and of driving them into action on a large scale against the leaders who yield to the company unions and accept the class collaboration basis instituted by the NRA. The trends which are now in the making point toward a new stage of militant unionism.
 



A second powerful strike wave is in the making. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, from Maine to the Gulf of Mexico strikes are now in progress, involving longshoremen, automobile workers, iron ore and copper miners, coal miners, textile workers and many others.
These strikes have penetrated deeply into the industrial South, centering in Alabama. New strikes can be expected to break out soon in the steel industry as well as where the main supply of iron ore is produced, in the Messaba Range. The ardent attempts of the auto bosses, their labor boards and their labor agents to confine the strikes in that industry to a minimum “so as not to interfere with the orderly progress of the industry”, as Mr. Collins puts it, will hardly succeed. The American workers are getting into a fighting mood. The splendid militancy already displayed by the many new recruits in the trade union movement is something quite unequalled in recent American labor history. The strike wave now in the making is likely to break all previous records.
 
Pitched Battles
In the Alabama strike area Negro and white workers fight together shoulder to shoulder. Pitched battles provoked by company thugs, police and national guards, have resulted in several killings and many injuries. But the casualties were not all on the side of the workers. The governmental authorities are now straining every possibility to raise a red scare. Workers’ meetings have been banned and an injunction is issued against picketing. Still the striking ranks are solid against the campaign of suppression, defying the murderous attacks.
Quick work has been made of scabbing everywhere in these strikes by powerful picket lines. In Seattle, Washington longshoremen raided eleven ships and took the scabs ashore. On all of the struck piers teamsters have refused to handle scab cargo and railroad workers have declined to lend their services. In Butte, Montana, teamsters, blacksmiths and electricians joined the copper miners in a solid strike front. In the southwestern bituminous area strikes are spreading and picketing is concluded in defiance of the militia which has been called to protect scabs.
 
Two Strike Waves Under NRA
The first strike wave since the inauguration of the New Deal rose to its highest point last September. According to the figures of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, which are obviously inadequate, there were in that month a total of 180 strikes involving 235,071 workers, with a total number of man days lost of 3,642,431. This strike wave subsided, reaching its lowest point in December last year. But these figures, even at the high point, may be dwarfed in comparison to what is now approaching.
The first strike wave represented in the main the efforts of the unions to enforce the provisions of the NRA. Now the situation is different. A great deal of disillusionment with the NRA has set in. Simultaneously the pressure of an ever rising cost of living, mounting more rapidly than any of the few wage increases, sets the workers into motion.
Index figures from the same source quoted above inform us that in the 89 industries covered by its survey employment rose in March, 1934 to 81 percent, with the same month a year ago showing 59 percent (1923–25 equals 100). On the same scale the payroll increased from 37 to 65. The actual per capita earnings of the workers is supposed to have increased 15 percent in this period, according to the same source of information, while the cost of all food commodities increased 20 percent and clothing 25 percent. It is certain at least that these statistics are not twisted in favor of the workers. Added to this direct economic pressure is the increased intensity of the speed-up system, causing an enormous resentment amongst the workers.
 
Issue is Organization
Still this tells only part of the story. The main issue in the present strikes is the struggle for organization and the struggle against the company union monster. The demand for union recognition and the struggle against discrimination for union activities stand out directly in many of the strikes. The perfidious automobile agreement, arrived at by the mutual connivance of the auto bosses, President Roosevelt and the A.F. of L. officials some time ago, while allaying temporarily the storm that was brewing then, has since served to bring the conflicts to a head.
This agreement legalized the company union. It attempted to sweep into the discard all that organized labor had previously gained. The big corporations, stiffened by this direct encouragement decided to make an end to any further union advance and began to apply the iron hand and discriminate against union members left and right. The struggle has become a struggle for the future of unionism. The government is called upon ever more to execute the wishes and orders of the capitalist monopoly concerns. It mobilizes its troops, police and courts which, together with the private gunmen of the corporations, attempt to suppress the strikes. These present struggles are becoming ever more political in character.
Militancy, turbulent clashes with the forces of the capitalist government and increased hostility to the NRA – these are the outstanding features in this present strike wave. It centers entirely around the A.F. of L., the so-called revolutionary unions of the T.U.U.L. being in evidence only in the statements they issue from their paper organizations. No effort is being spared by the A.F. of L. officials to sidetrack the movement and lead it to defeat. But for the real militants this can only spur them on to greater vigilance.
 



(Continued from Last Issue)
We recall Marx speaking in the Eighteenth Brumaire of circumstances and relationships that “enabled a grotesque mediocrity to strut about in a hero’s garb”. And truly, at times of back-wash of the mighty waves of history, the second or third-raters often occupy the most exalted positions. But only until the rise of the new wave again weeps them out.
Browder has apparently earned the spurs bestowed upon him from above. He became one of the early and very ardent exponents of the fallacies of Stalinism in this country. In 1929, at the time of the formation of the C.P.L.A., he pompously informed all those willing to listen that: “We will no longer waste our energies and time in disastrous attempts to work with these fake progressives”. He entirely ignored the fact that it was the work with the progressives, both the mild and the more advanced types, which had made it possible for Communists to connect themselves up with large masses of workers.
 
New “Federation of Labor”
But Browder thought it quite useless to monkey around with the conservative mass trade unions and he became the particular exponent, also in 1929, of building red trade unions all along the line, together with a new national trade union center, the T.U.U.L. Today he sponsors a new idea of enlarging the T.U.U.L. to also embrace the independent trade unions and constitute a single Independent Trade Union Federation. But this is the same old red trade union policy in an enlarged format. And the main trouble with that is that only paper unions came out of the disastrous split policy which isolated the militants from the mass movement. This new version cannot fare any better, particularly when its execution is in the hands of an ever more bureaucratic Stalinist leadership.
It is in these wrong positions that Browder has shown his most “magnificent, brilliant and remarkable, etc.” qualities. Perhaps that was the particular quality the writers of the New Masses were looking for when bestowing their praise in an even more intellectualized way than the humbler Daily Worker reporters. They predicted that America will also produce its Stalins and its Molotovs.
With the enormous bureaucratization of the Stalinist apparatus rising pyramidically to its pinnacle of the General Secretary, which is what the official party convention hullabaloo signifies, there is a rush to get on the band wagon, for all the lesser bureaucrats it is not at all comfortable to contemplate an unstable and too often changing regime. Then there is also the constant fear of becoming scape-goats. Hence the Stachels and the Amters sing their praise in unmeasured terms of the infallibility of the leadership of the general secretary.
 
Fluctuations of Membership
A more real picture of the official Party is afforded in certain figures presented by the general secretary. He reported that from 1930 until February 1934, the Party had recruited 49,050 new members. But he admitted that two of every three had not been retained by the Party, claiming for it now a membership of 25,000. We, of course, understand the degree of reliability which can be placed in figures issued by the Stalinists. But even taking these figures at face value there is something ominous in this enormous fluctuation. By no means all of those who left are the poorest of revolutionists. Many of them revolted against the bureaucratization of the party and its false policies and tactics.
The Stalinist Party has today become the crowning height of the contradiction in the United States between an advanced industrial development and a backward political ideology of the masses. It reflects all the vices of international Stalinism. It is unable even to attain the virtues of a mass movement The American Stalinist party has become a serious force of disorientation and disorganization. It can not lead in the revolutionary tasks For that a new Communist Party is required.
 



Industrial recovery is now under way with “irresistible force”, says Alfred T. Sloan Jr., president of the General Motors Corporation, in his report of the corporation’s business for 1933. He also added that the labor section of the NRA must be clarified “or there is the certainty of industrial strife the equal of which this country has not yet seen.”
Nobody needs to doubt that Sloan spoke from the point of view of his class. As the president of the General Motors corporation he represents the most hard-boiled section of monopoly capitalism. They definitely oppose union organization in any form, save the company union, as long as union organization can possibly be prevented. But that is not exceptional. All employers do; only they are not all equally as able to resist as the General Motors corporation is. Yet in face of this fact – which nobody will deny – Section 7a of the NRA, which was sponsored by the Roosevelt administration, recognizes the right of collective bargaining to the workers. Does this mean a conflict of viewpoint and policies within capitalism?
 
The NRA Illusion
From official A.F. of L. circles this is actually the way in which the matter is presented. According to these labor agents of capitalism, the Roosevelt New Deal is a new deal for labor. According to them the policies of his administration are friendly to labor and fighting for its rights against such hard boiled concerns. At the inception of the NRA this presentation; was accepted among the broadest working class strata. They had implicit faith in the NRA.
Now practical experience teaches them something else. The automobile workers learned to their regret that there were no great differences at the recent Washington conference. The automobile manufacturers and President Roosevelt, together with their special agents, Green and Collins, succeeded in spiking the automobile workers’ strike for a union, at least for the time being. And since then the President appointee on the automobile labor board cooperated consistently with the manufacturers to stall the movement further until the busy season is over and thereby disorganize its attempts to get action.
 
Unionism the Issue
Throughout the whole of the NRA experiences so far the main issue of ever sharpening conflicts concerns the question of union organization. Today it is most acute in the automobile industry, tomorrow it will come to a head in other industries. Everywhere the mechanism created by the New Deal program, the industrial codes, the labor boards and the arbitration schemes, appear in operation as means to harness the labor movement within definitely laid out channels. In that there is a specific function assigned to the reactionary trade union leaders.
During the crisis the general wage standard had become vastly reduced, as was the standard of living for the working class as a whole. How to maintain this crisis level – or keep near as possible to this level – while advancing commodity prices in order to restore he profit inducement and finally set the wheels of industry into motion, – this was the problem which the owners of capitalist monopoly concerns set out to solve in their reorganization for “recovery.”
Peaceful class relations would be the main prerequisite. Restlessness from the millions of unemployed had to be allayed, actual convulsions ensuing from their desperate position had to be prevented. Some measure against a resurgence of labor militancy had to be found. But the general levelling process by which the formerly privileged skilled sections became further reduced, left the conservative unions, composed almost exclusively of these skilled crafts, almost entirely out of the picture.
 
Role of Craft Unionism
In the past their officials could be relied upon to uphold their end of the system of cooperation with capitalism. They had been able to turn the conservative craft unions into an instrument to hold the rest of the working class in subjection by attaining special privileges such as higher wages for their specific crafts, by keeping the unskilled without organization and, thereby, also on a much lower wage level.
These officials have not changed; but on the old narrow union basis they could no longer furnish the guarantee of holding the masses in check – a condition required for capitalism to issue out of the crisis on the backs of the workers. It therefore! became necessary to permit a broader scope of the conservative unions in order to make possible the extension of the system of class collaboration and make of it a permanent institution. That is what is really meant by Section 7a of the NRA. The labor agents of capitalism were given a wider Held in which to function as salesmen for the New Deal.
 
Basic Policy of Capitalists
It is this social relation feature which is the most fundamental aspect of the New Deal Program. While the hard boiled monopoly concerns, such as now the General Motors corporation, put the most stubborn resistance to union recognition – for that is what Sloan means when he demands “clarification” – this cannot shield the fact that there is agreement in the main amongst the various capitalist representatives in the matter of basic policy towards labor. While each section will fight for special advantages and special modifications for their own benefit, in principle they will support the idea of recognizing and extending the conservative A.F. of L. unions as a means of preventing more militant organization and action.
In permitting the general extension of the conservative unions it is hoped thereby to draw a line of division more effectively between the employed and unemployed workers. The class collaboration system of which these union officials are to be the guardians is to become a more effective instrument to check the unemployed and keep them in subjection.
Force for Union Organization
But intent is one thing, the realities of life may be another. With the first steps toward a turn in the business cycle the economic pressure upon the workers increased enormously and rapidly. That itself was a powerful motive force for union organization. The workers entered the unions in masses but for quite different objectives than those intended by the NRA. For them it was a matter of regaining a standard of living.
And while today the masses from the very heart of basic industry flock into the existing unions, at the same time, due to the changes in the business cycle, the NRA regulations begin to impose severe restrictions upon them. Resentment is held back only by still lingering hopes, or it is diffused by the various mechanisms of arbitration. But this can succeed only in postponing the decision of what course the working class will take. The resentment is bound to accumulate and is due to be let loose in a series of explosive class battles. The longer they are postponed the more turbulent the explosions will be.
 
Unions at Crossroads
The conservative unions will be at their crossroads. Recently they have had a big influx of proletarians from the heavy industries. Their composition is being transformed. In that same measure the general working class interests will become more directly reflected within the unions. The more this is held back the more the resentment will accumulate within the unions.
At the same time every collision with the NRA code regulations and every conflict with the state forces, which are now much more integrated with the economic organs of capitalism, will be reflected within the unions in collisions between the rank and file workers and the reactionary officials. To the extent that the unions fail to adjust themselves, in objectives, in policy and in organization forms and methods, explosions will occur within them. But with that also a formidable basis for new unionism will develop.
 



The Eighth Convention of the official Communist Party and all its artificial ballyhoo is over. According to the Daily Worker it is to live in the minds of posterity, epitomized by the “excellent”, the “masterly and historical”, the “clear and forceful analysis”, the “masterfully applied Marxian combination of clear and general statements with concrete examples”, the “brilliantly outlined”, etc., etc., report of Earl Browder, the “best report ever made at any time in the history of the Party”, together with his “remarkable final speech”.
This report, if we are to believe Sam Don, “influenced the work and the discussion of the convention, from the first to the last session”. And Jack Stachel, in recounting the “progress” made by the Party, testifies that it was all “made possible under the leadership of the General Secretary of our Party, comrade Browder” (enthusiastic applause).
 
The Events of Four Years
Our expectation grows irresistibly to its natural climax. What did this report say? What does this Party leadership propose?
Between the Seventh and the Eighth Party convention almost four years have elapsed. Four years of world-shaking events, chief among which, as far as revolutionists are concerned, must be counted the catastrophic defeats inflicted upon the proletariat in Germany and Austria. Four years in which the wave of reaction rolled on with a powerful sweep, crushing and smashing a working class movement in its wake. A period which more than ever exposed the perfidy and corruption of Social-Democracy, and also demonstrated the bankruptcy of the Comintern under the Stalin regime.
But, at the same time, a new and powerful ray of hope appeared in the very last of these events, in the magnificent battle of the Austrian Socialist workers, standing out all the more in contrast to the dismal capitulation of the Communist Party and the Social Democracy of Germany. Who would dare deny that precisely in the events of this period is embodied the lessons to which a party, to be worthy of the name revolutionary, was duty bound to apply the most incisive analysis, the most critical examination, and draw a balance sheet.
They Learned Nothing
All that was entirely absent from the Stalinist convention. And as far as future history is concerned this convention can only denote an empty space. Marxism, as a living doctrine is a generalization of all working class experience, constantly drawing its strength from every new experience. A party calling itself Marxian, which fails to absorb into its very marrow the lessons of these recent decisive events, and fails to learn from them, can in no case escape the disintegrating tendencies that brought Social-Democracy into its stinking swamp of decay. It cannot at all be counted upon as a leader of the masses in a crisis. It will collapse as ignominiously as did the German Communist Party.
Instead of drawing a balance sheet from these great lessons the misguided workers at this convention were served the same “general line” which lead to the catastrophic defeats.
The delegates were told in the “magnificent” etc. speech that the New Deal “is not developed Fascism. But in political essence and direction, it is the same as Hitler’s program”. Thus is being prepared the same fatal disorientation as in Germany and the same justification for capitulation. In Germany the revolutionary workers had drilled into their minds the ideas of the Bruening fascism, the Von Papen fascism, the Von Schleicher fascism. When the real fascism, by this disorientation, was able to ascend to power, they could not distinguish it from the previous regimes; they could not fight it; the Party was paralyzed. The German revolutionists were filled up with the spurious ideas of “social fascism”.
 
Repeat the Old Errors
At the Cleveland convention this was not only repeated but glibly elaborated into various shades and degrees of right and left fascism. In such a maze of confusion the various working-class tendencies could never be properly distinguished nor could the false ideas be guarded against. But such an exposition of the question by the bureaucratic leadership is not merely a matter of confusion as far as they are concerned. It is a mirror of their own degeneracy. It is an effort to cover up their own failure to meet all other tendencies within the working class on the basis of a revolutionary program as real party leaders would do. Such covering up, however, becomes the worst form of disorientation and, in carrying it to its logical conclusion, the Stalinist leaders stoop to the lowest levels.
To shun the honest workers away from an objective examination of what the actual revolutionary current in the movement stands for, all the Browders, in their deadly fear of it, can only repeat their usual base slanders. Lumping us among their various brands of “social fascism”, although they have previously pronounced us dead at least 27 dozen times, they say: “Too many of our members still do not understand that Trotskyism and the Trotskyists are not a ‘branch’ of the Communist movement, but rather a police agency of the capitalist class”. What would they answer if any worker was to take them seriously at their word and say: Give us the proof so that we can properly substantiate the contention!
But this is all empty bravado handed out to cover up their own failure to meet our Marxian arguments. For the heavy blows of defeats suffered, due mainly to their own false political orientation and dismal incompetence, the Stalinists increase their slander of the revolutionary current. Simultaneously every possible measure is drawn upon to elevate a hand picked’ bureaucracy artificially to a position of infallibility with a Browder sitting on the very pinnacle.
(Continued in Next Issue)
 



Part I

Part II
 



The Provisional Organizing Committee
of the American Workers Party
Comrades:
After a thorough-going discussion of the results of the Pittsburgh convention of the Conference for Progressive Labor Action, the National Committee of the Communist League of America (Opposition) has decided to address the following communication to you for your consideration and action.
Your convention voted to take the measures it considered necessary for the founding of a new revolutionary party in the United States. “The revolutionary struggle of the masses against the capitalist system which more and more depresses their standard of living, takes various forms,” declares the report of your National Executive Committee adopted by the convention. “The primary form is the economic struggles of the worker and farmer. The struggle is, however, inspired, coordinated, carried to its goal of taking power, by the revolutionary political party.”
Our organization, having itself formally adopted the decision in September of last year to work for the creation of a new revolutionary party in this country and a new International throughout the world, is consequently directly concerned with and interested in the decision adopted by your Pittsburgh convention. We stated our position in our declaration four mouths ago and we take the liberty of calling your attention to the following essential paragraphs:
“The Communist League, as it is at present constituted, does not consider itself a party and has no intention of anticipating the real establishment of the new party by proclaiming itself as such. The task now is to recognize firmly that our role as a faction striving to reform the party of official Stalinism is exhausted, to strike out on a completely independent path, and to prepare, in cooperation with all other groups and organizations moving in the same direction, for the formation of a new party.
“In the course of its struggle to reform the official party, as a faction of it, the Left Opposition worked out a program, consolidated a cadre of principled militants and formed the skeleton of a national organization. These accomplishments can be regarded now as part of the capital of the new movement; not all that is necessary for the formation of the party, but contributions to it.
“What is needed now is the coming together of the various groups of revolutionary workers who have broken, or who are In the process of breaking, with reformism and centrism as well as those dispersed individual revolutionists who have been repelled by the Stalinist bureaucracy and remained without affiliation. It is self-evident that the working out of a common program and the eventual concentration of these forces into a single party must be preceded by an exchange of opinion and discussion and, very probably, will involve a transition period of cooperation before the final fusion.
“Whatever form the next development may take, the Left Opposition is ready now, to enter into open and comradely negotiations and discussions with other groups which seriously set for themselves the same goal. After its long and unrelenting struggle against the arrogant bureaucratism and ultimatlstic methods of Stalinism, the Left Opposition least of all can seek to impose anything on others or to demand the acceptance in advance of its proposals, its program or its ‘leadership’.”
It is with these ideas as our point of departure that we approach the question of our relations to the American Workers Party which your convention decided to launch. We are striving to build up in this country a genuinely revolutionary party of the working class whose final goal is the establishment of a classless society. We consider the founds ing of such a party the central and most important task of every true revolutionist in the United States today. Your declarations assert that you have the same aim in mind. There are grounds, therefore, for assuming that a serious effort can and should be made by the two organizations to unite their forces and energies towards a harmonious accomplishment of the task they have set themselves. Two organizations with the same objective in view would obviously be militating against their own common interests if they were to pursue two different and separate paths towards that objective.
Your declarations speak of the need of a new revolutionary party in this country, organizationally and politically independent both of the reformist Socialist party and the degenerated official “Communist” party. By a revolutionary party, we understand a Communist party – one deserving of that name, and not a bureaucratic caricature – with a fundamental Communist program. These are, as you know those who, in speaking for a new party, have in mind one which seeks to reconcile, or to oscillate between petty bourgeois socialism, on the one side, and Marxism on the other that is, social democracy and Communism. Far from dignifying such a party with the name “revolutionary”, we would consider it an elementary duty to fight against it in the interests of strengthening a truly revolutionary, or Marxian party. If by a revolutionary party you have in mind a conception that harmonizes with ours, we see absolutely no reason why we should not join hands for the purpose of forming it. Quite the contrary, there is every reason why our efforts in this direction, as well as those of any other group holding similar views, should be exerted in common.
Without in the least holding any narrow prejudices which would result in creating an abortive sect divorced from the life of the masses and their daily struggles and interests, instead of a vigorous, active militant party of the vanguard which has no interests separate and apart from those of the working class as a whole, we nevertheless lay the greatest stress on the question of the program of the new party.
We consider it futile, and even harmful, to proceed with the formation of a new party without having first laid down the solid foundation of a revolutionary Marxian program. It is only on the basis of a program, and the activities of the party which flow from it, that the creation of a new party distinct from the existing ones can be justified in the eyes of the working class. In our declaration, printed in the Militant of September 30, 1933, we outlined our conception of the programmatic basis of the new party.
On this score, we are obliged to state that your position is not entirely clear to us. Without any intention of anticipating in this communication the imperatively necessary preliminary and comradely discussions on this matter which we propose, we cannot, nevertheless, refrain from declaring that in many respects your position on the program for the new party appears to us to be marked by an ambiguity which can only weaken the new party before it is fairly launched. However, it is precisely because we believe that there is still an adequate opportunity to submit such questions to an objective discussion, in which neither side attempts mechanically and arbitrarily to impose its standpoint upon the other side, that we are addressing our proposals to your Committee.
Assembled and united on a sound and lasting foundation, the various revolutionary groups in this country which aim at forming a new party, would constitute a serious and substantial force. Unnecessary divided and apart from one another, their efforts might prove detrimental to the movement for a new party. We need hardly emphasize to you how urgent is the need for such a party in the ranks of the American working class, how valuable a factor is time and how little we can afford to lose any. In view, therefore, of all that has been stated above, we present for your consideration the following proposals:

To select a committee from your organization to meet a similar body from our ranks for a preliminary discussion of our relations, for the purpose of determining the extent to which joint action for the formation of the new party is possible.
 
As a next step, to make those arrangements which are considered necessary for the broadest and most democratic discussion by the membership of both organizations of their respective views. As an indication of what we have in mind, we would mention at this point the exchange of representatives ot the membership meetings of the two bodies; the convening of joint membership discussion meetings; the publication of an internal bulletin for which we are jointly responsible and in which discussion articles on programmatic and practical problems of the proposed party may be published; etc., etc.
 
To invite other groups having a similar objective to participate in these arrangements and discussions.
 
In order that this period shall not be confined merely to discussions to the detriment of the practical work which must be carried on at all times in the class struggle, we propose that immediately, without waiting until complete agreement is reached on every disputable point, the closest collaboration should be established between the two organizations in those fields in which a sufficiently common view already exists. We have in mind specifically the great possibilities for joint work of the two organizations in (a) work in, the trade unions; (b) the struggle against anti-labor persecutions, the manifestations of Fascism which are already visible in this country, and for the defense of class war victims; (c) work among the unemployed millions. Cooperation in these fields would not only be fruitful in itself, but would actually facilitate the discussion on undecided questions of program.

While we consider that these proposals are necessary preliminary steps in the work of forming a new revolutionary party in this country on a firm and healthy foundation, we are of course prepared to consider any alternative or supplementary proposals which your Committee may find it appropriate to present to us. We are animated in our views and our actions by a desire to consolidate the efforts of all those who are striving in a common direction.



 


Fraternally yours,
National Committee of the
Communist League of America (Opposition)
Arne Swabeck
Secretary



 



Speaking before the Soviet Congress on December the 29th, Litvinoff said: “Inasmuch as she herself is deeply interested in the preservation of peace, America has become by contact with our union one of the most powerful factors for peace and is cooperating with us to that end”. Further on in his report he added: “It must not be thought that all capitalist governments are aiming at war. For many of them, that is far from being the case, which is why we who earnestly desire peace are eager and ready to cooperate with genuinely pacifist countries – and sections of public opinion in any country, where we find them.” (New York Times, December 30th) Among Litvinoff’s “genuinely pacifist countries” the United States is apparently to be counted.
Just the day before this report was given President Roosevelt proclaimed at the dinner of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation: “It therefore has seemed clear to me as president that the time has come to supplement and to implement the declaration of President Wilson by the further declaration that the definite policy of the United States from now on is one opposed to armed intervention.”
 
Pacifism to Screen War Aims
Both statements, if taken at face value, are of the kind which can serve only to deceive the working masses. But they should not be taken at face value because neither statement is true.
For President Roosevelt the purpose of his declaration is clear. It is meant to shield the actual preparations now being made for the coming furious imperialist conflicts in which the United States will set out for definite conquests on a large scale.
Coming from Litvinoff the declarations quoted carry a devastating disorientation to the revolutionists who have not yet learned to distinguish between the politics of the Stalin regime and those of Lenin’s leadership. We need recall only one paragraph of the resolution adopted at the Bolshevik party Congress on May 9, 1917: “Our party will explain to the people with patience and preciseness the truth that war is always bound up indissolubly with the policies of certain definite classes, that this war may only be terminated by a democratic peace if the government powers of at least some of the belligerent countries are handed over to the class of the proletariat and semi-proletariat who are really capable of putting an end to the bondage of capitalism.” U.S. Imperialist Designs
Not withstanding Litvinoff’s declarations to the contrary, the time has come particularly to emphasize that in the actual and now much more open maneuvers and preparations for military conquests of new markets, for the redivision of the world, American imperialism plays the dominant part. It is already laying the basis to become the greatest aggressor. At breathtaking speed it is moving forward to the point where the ordinary imperialist pillage and thievery coupled with increasing political intervention becomes transformed into conquest by other means – by means of the most ingenious war implements modern industry can devise.
That is the only correct explanation to the Roosevelt naval construction program for an American Navy “second to none” By September 1 last year a total of 39 war ships, to cost $238,000,000 had been contracted for; construction began immediately under the aegis of the “New Deal”. That is also the explanation of the discovery by General McArthur, chief-of-staff, that the strength of the American army is far below the ordinary margin of safety.
 
The Game of American Imperialism
Those who control affairs in the United States pursue their own aims toward the Soviet Union and in relation to the Far East. No one should be deceived by the alleged peaceful intentions of Soviet recognition. It was calculated on gaining access to the huge Soviet market. But as far as the American government is concerned it was also hastened by the unbridled advance of the Japanese in Manchuria. Japanese imperialism puts its claws into a juicy morsel covering some 500,000 square miles, a land rich in natural resources and having a population of 40,000,000. Recent reports from the Far East reveal that in the North China market American trade is now below 15% of the total at Tientsin as compared to 42.2% in 1929 while the Japanese trade accounts for more than 40% of the total.
In which direction is Japan headed? It is pilfering sniping, intimidating and terrorizing at the Soviet border. Its military forces are pointed toward the maritime province of Vladivostok. But in any event it will also pursue the objective of further intrenchment in China. There it will encounter in the main the opposition of the United States.
 
The U.S. versus Japan
China is today the most coveted booty. The fewer countries that are left in the world today into which the imperialist powers can export capital profitably, that is, colonies and dependent nations, the more bitter is the fight for the subjugation and partition of such nations. It is a life and death matter for American imperialism to find these fields for greater subjugation and partition. Hence its attention is now turning more directly to the Far East.
The Japanese imperialist diplomats and military leaders understand this perfectly well. They never fail to make it clear. They never fail to mention the role of the United States in the same breath when they hurl insults against the Soviet Union. Their statements abound in belligerency. General Araki, the fire eating supreme leader of present day Japanese affairs, declared recently before the Japanese Supreme War Council that China is being supported in its anti-Japanese policies by the United States. He points to the fifty million dollar wheat and cotton loan as proof. “There is no telling what America will do,” declared Araki, “when her navy is definitely superior to Japan’s after 1935.” In the same speech the general conjured up the spectre of concentration of the red army in the East. The Japanese foreign minister, Koki Hirota, two days after he assumed office, on September 14, declared: “The United States should keep her hands off eastern affairs.”
 
Japan Moving against Soviet Union
In this furiously developing tension in the Far East the part played by the American government should not escape our attention. It has very special objects in the Soviet recognition in relation to this situation. It goes without saying that the Soviet Union on its side has much to gain from American recognition. But that Is not what concerns the American government. The Red Army stands at the far eastern Soviet ready to defend it. The Soviet Union seeks no conquests in China. But American imperialism does, and it will contend with the Japanese for mastery as it will contend with the other powers there to strengthen its own sphere of influence and lay hold on the vast Chinese territory.
The Japanese diplomats and military leaders, as is known, are preparing for an assault on the Soviet border. They envision the Soviet Union becoming strengthened by American credits and are undoubtedly anxious to strike before this takes place. But does the United States extend recognition and credits in order to strengthen the Soviet Union? Is this a sign of a friendlier attitude? Not at all. The imperialist government at Washington understand the Japanese intentions at the Soviet border as well as the Japanese imperialists understand the intended American invasion of China.
 
Far East Tension Increases
Both aim at the further partitioning of dismembered China and the further subjugation and exploitation of the Chinese masses already bled white by the imperialist robber bands. The Japanese war lords show their growing inclination to strike northward against the Soviet I’nion at the earliest possible date and before the latter can strengthen its industrial structure by means of closer trade relations with the United States.
Unquestionably this fits right in with the Roosevelt policies. It holds the prospects of speeding up American exports to the Soviet market and, above all, the prospects that the Japanese war lords may break their teeth at the Soviet border. After that, the possibilities of American mastery in China would increase. In this sense the American recognition of the Soviet Union undoubtedly tends to accelerate the Japanese war plans.
But this will also show the more clearly why we should not be deceived about the peaceful intentions of the American government in granting recognition. It is plainly a matter of ruthlessly advancing the most direct interests of American imperialism. It brings the danger of imperialist war as well as the danger of an attack upon the Soviet Union much nearer.
When President Roosevelt recognized the Soviet Union the capitalist press of the country drew a clear line of demarcation between the present Stalin leadership and the former leadership of Lenin.
American imperialism remains the chief enemy of October.
 



The Demagogy of Roosevelt Program
On the first anniversary of the New Deal four thousand gentlemen in control of industry and finance gathered in Washington to be harangued and cajoled. “We must consider immediate cooperation to secure increase in wages and shortening of hours”, said President Roosevelt. Verily, that must have been spoken entirely in defense of the forgotten man – at least so it appeared.
Before the same gathering General Johnson argued against the company union. But he made his reasons perfectly clear.
“We know”, he said, “something about what is toward in this country – the worst epidemic of strikes in our history .... I would rather deal with Bill Green, John Lewis, Ed McGrady, Mike MacDonough, George Berry, and a host of others I could name, than with any Frankenstein that you may build up under the guise of a company union.
“In fact – take it from me and a wealth of experience – their interests are your interests and under the law and in this modern day, it is the best and quickest way to economic peace.”
 
Fear Collapse of System
That is the rub. Essentially these statements are all motivated by the fear of decay and collapse of the capitalist system. They mean to convey the idea that it is time to do some serious patching of the kind which will reinforce its basis, consolidate its most essential parts and strengthen its whole structure. This, at times, can be accomplished most effectively by means of apparent concessions, presented in the terms of glamorous demagogy. Keep the workers at a level where they can endure exploitation without too convulsive revolts. Work closely hand in hand with your agents in labor ranks, the respectable labor leaders, and discard your company unions lest you actually pave the way for new and more serious strikes and for militant unions. Such was the real character of these admonishments.
To say bluntly that these statements are motivated by fear of the decay and collapse of the capitalist system may seem entirely unsubstantiated. Are not the authors of the New Deal enjoying the confidence of the vast majority of people from all walks of life? Is not the President still extremely popular even in the humblest of working class homes? Does he not seem to represent their fears and their desperate hopes? Undoubtedly this must all be answered in the affirmative. But it does not in the least settle the question of what the New Deal is, for whose benefit it operates, and the motivation behind it.
 
The Ballyhoo Technique
One of its brilliant critics has said that it is suggestive of an adventure on a rocking horse, that it is unreal, and that it does not remove the causes of “social injustice” Standing alone, that is of course not sufficient as a characterization The New Deal is not intended to remove the causes of “social injustice”. Only the successful conclusion of the class struggle can remove this. And here is the important question: What does the New Deal mean to the workers? To understand this it must be examined in its economic aspect, from the point of view of its function in social and class relationships, as well as from the point of view of its ballyhoo and demagogy, expressed both in words and action, which is intended to maintain illusions in the workers’ minds. Each one of these aspects requires separate treatment. In this article we confine ourselves to the demagogic as pect, leaving the others to subsequent articles.
While the New Deal machinery creaks and groans as it is put into motion, there is a certain revolutionary flare attached to its basic philosophy. It is acclaimed by some as “a new social order”, by others as “disciplined democracy” President Roosevelt calls it “an economic constitutional order”. It has even elevated to a basis of respectability the method of abbreviation of names by initials, formerly considered to belong only to the Bolsheviks. We have now the NRA the AAA, the PWA, etc. An ingenious middle-class mind has suggested the addition of a tax-payer’s SOS.
 
Not a “Revolution”
Donald Richberg, the counsel for the New Deal, says that it is “a revolution not in purpose but in method.” Such statements are intended to catch the gullible worker discontented with things as they are. The New Deal could, of course, not be a revolution in purpose, a revolution which does away with capitalist property rights and the power of exploitation. This is the only revolution which means some thing to the workers. Such a revolution is not engineered by the capitalist rulers themselves. They are its bitter opponents. Nor do revolutions come about peacefully Those in possession of the capitalist property rights and the powers of exploitation do not yield them without a struggle.
President Roosevelt declares that social conditions had previously been permitted which allowed vast sections of the population to exist in an un-American way, which allowed a mal-distribution of wealth and of power. In his book Looking Forward, he says:
“I believe that the government, without becoming a prying bureaucracy, can act as a check or counter-balance or this oligarchy (the ‘few hundred corporations’ and ‘fewer than three dozen banks’ which control our economic life) so as to secure initiative, life, a chance to work, and the safety of savings to men and women, rather than the safety of exploitation to the exploiter, safety of manipulation to the manipulator, safety of unlicensed power to those who would speculate to the bitter end with the welfare and property of other people.”
 
Wall Street Not Really Disturbed
And so we have the New Deal, supposed to check and counter-balance the oligarchy. Moreover, has not Wall Street been investigated? Was not a whole section of this crew of capitalist pirates headed by J.P. Morgan summoned to appear before a senate investigation committee and tell why they had evaded tax payments to the government? That is perfectly true. But it is one thing to investigate Wall Street and dress the investigations up in radical sounding demagogy in order to catch the uninitiated. It would be quite another thing to attempt to dislodge Wall Street from its economic power.
This, of course, is not at all intended by the investigations. On the contrary, we shall be able to prove that in every respect Wall Street has been strengthened, and its power and all it stands for has been consolidated, by the advent of the New Deal. President Roosevelt said in his anniversary address: “No one is opposed to sensible and reasonable profits.” This means that profits are to be rationalized. In other words, the right of exploitation is to be stabilized on a basis which will insure it against too violent disturbances and shocks.
 
The Big Interests and the Codes
We are not unmindful of the fact that the big fellows, the steel trust, the automobile corporations, and others like them, resisted the industrial codes of the New Deal. But they resisted them in order to obtain the modifications they desired, to insert their company union clauses and merit system clauses, by which they could more securely maintain their power of exploitation and prevent counter-action by the workers. Even now the apparent pressure put upon them to give up their company unions presents the substitute of reliance upon their own agents in labor’s ranks – the Greens, the Lewises, and the Berrys – as a more effective means of keeping the masses in subjection.
On the whole the demagogy woven around the New Deal policy has a distinct purpose. It is under its cover that the real measures to salvage the badly dislocated capitalist system of production are being put over. In the make-up of this policy and amongst its executors, including the ‘ brain-trust’, there is very likely a mixture of various currents. One of them is made up by the traditional radical liberalism which becomes so indignant at the effects of “social injustice” when they fear that this may bring retaliation from the workers, but fight might and main against the abolition of its causes. They believe in the soundness of capitalist economy, but want to save it from the few “bad” and “greedy” men who have brought it out of gear. But another, and far more important one, is the hard-headed current of aggressive capitalism, of ruthless capitalist expansion ready to crush all opposition which stands in the way of a greater capitalist empire. That is the current which, in the final analysis, determines the policies of the New Deal. In this sense its main features are of a permanent character and will count in the shaping of the future economic developments. But as the realities of life remove its demagogic smoke-screen, the working masses will become entirely disillusioned. That process began already during the first year of the New Deal.
 



Article II
“The program comes from the American people,’” said President Roosevelt in his message to Congress on the New Deal, January, 3rd, 1934. And why not blame the American people. They have been blamed for so much anyway.
It is quite clear that the American people, to use that term, that is, the exploited and exploiters alike in their overwhelming majority, supported the New Deal program. But as it swings into operation on a large scale, the attitudes toward It begins to divide on class lines. Issues of labor unions versus company unions arise. Code regulations tie the workers to the crisis level of wages. And, besides that, the economics of the New Deal with its general inflation schemes hit the workers below the belt. It increases the money available – for those who own the means of production – by forcing the rate of exploitation of the workers upward due to the lowering of their real wages. The workers come face to face with the realities of a stronger monopoly capitalism functioning under governmental regulation and support.
 
Aid to Big Financiers
The very first steps in the New Deal program constituted an aid to the big financial overlords who had “suffered” so much from crisis and deprivation. Hoarding and exportation of bullion or currency were prohibited under presidential emergency powers. The Emergency Banking Act reopened the closed big banks and authorized their issuing new preferred stocks to obtain additional capital. Following on the heels of this came a whole series of legislation.
First, the Securities Act which established federal supervision over sales of investment securities. Then came the project to refinance farm mortgages on the plea of helping the farmers. It was well known that there could be no more farm foreclosures because such would hurt the bankers more than the farmers. The bankers had already too much farm property on their hands, so it was much better for them to obtain refinancing and interest on the farm mortgages. Next followed the Home Owners Loan Act to secure the interest payments to the bankers on outstanding mortgages due from small property owners. Then, the Bank Insurance Act which established a guarantee on bank deposits. It also provided for expansion of credits and authorization to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to invest one billion dollars to “strengthen the banks and make it possible for them to respond to the credit needs of the country.”
But, as they many wailings and lamentations have since proven, the bankers cashed in on the dough but tailed to “respond.” They refused to lend unless they could see something profitable to use their money for.
 
Government Money Flows
Government money began to flow easy and all the pilfering pirates were gathering to get their share of the loot. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation was also authorized to aid the “hard-pressed” insurance companies, who gobble up the small savings of the gullible investors. Railroad companies am other monopoly enterprises got their heavy share until this orgy of credit expansion, through the R.F.C. subsidies and loans, reached the stupendous sum of six million dollars at the end of 1933.
The suspension of the gold standard and the dollar devaluation climaxed the series of inflationary schemes. They were all designed to raise the commodity price level at home and thus to reestablish the profit inducement for capital investments. In addition they also become preparations to facilitate the competition of American capitalism in the world market. Such is the picture of one side of the New Deal in operation. An enormous flow of easy money for finance monopoly institutions with the resulting inflated credits and rising price level for the things the workers need.
The slow moving index of 784 commodities compiled by the Bureau of Labor Statistics has advanced 23% and the more sensitive index of The Analyst 33% during the first year of the New Deal. Since farm prices, helped by the outright destruction of wheat, meat, and cotton, have risen more than those of non-agricultural products, it is quite easy to get an idea of the advancing cost of living which means a lowering of real wages to the workers.
 
Standardizing on a Lower Level
We have presented to us the New Deal program as a means of restoring and stabilizing the purchasing power of the broad masses. But this is, of course, to be on a distinctly lower level than the former “prosperity” equilibrium. It hovers around the industrial code minimum wage of $11 to $15 weekly. Is this not distinctly the crisis level of wages? Is it not a wage level as low if not lower than that of 20 to 30 years ago?
Quite cleverly, the first of the codes to be adopted was that for the textile industry. In that industry wages had always dipped the lowest. The code provides for a forty-hour week, the magnificent sum of twelve dollars in the South and thirteen dollars in the North. Being the first code adopted, it tended immediately to become a standard for wages and other provisions, from which other codes proceeded with as little variation as little variation as the exploiter could get away with.
Now we can add to this wage standard the combination of increased commodity prices and the devaluation of the dollar. As a consequence unbearable conditions have become the lot even of those workers fortunate enough to have a job. For the working class as a whole, and that includes the unemployed millions, the total income remains vastly reduced.
 
Unemployment and Reduced Hours
How do matters stand in regard to the other aspect of increased purchasing power of the broad masses by the spread of employment through a reduction of working hours? In administration circles much has been made about the shorter work day. Each reduction of hours made in any code regulation was widely advertised. But, as it turns out, only a few codes go below forty-hour weekly maximum and many remain above the forty-hour maximum.
As compared to 1929, when the average work week was forty-eight hours, this would even have some significance, but when compared to the crisis, none whatever. The average working hours of the first five months of 1933 in manufacturing industry, for full time workers and part time workers put together, were 34.7 weekly. Thus the code regulations of working hours attained so far could not appreciably increase employment. With the Civil Works schemes at an end, the unemployed army, according to all reliable estimates, will remain about as large as before.
Statistics on unemployment have become exceedingly scarce since the drop which followed the early flush of business revival, artificially stimulated by the various NRA schemes. Now whatever statistics are available are being manipulated. Facts and figures are turned upside down, inside out, and squeezed until they bleed from every pore. Yet they cannot hide the enormous numbers on the unemployment market. With the NBA in operation and the suspension of the anti-trust law, there is in motion a greater concentration in industry and a greater centralization of finance, all at the expense of the workers. What was formerly spent by big concerns for high pressure sales and for advertising purposes tends to go into so-called scientific management and elimination waste, which in reality means more speed-up and further elimination of labor power necessary to the productive forces.
 
The Real Aim of the New Deal
There should be little doubt left in the minds of the thinking workers that the New Deal represents a series of measure to save the capitalist system which was so badly dislocated during the crisis. The economic part of these measures does not aim to improve the conditions of the workers regardless of what temporary advantages they may offer. In the objective results of these measures the workers face a reduced level of real wages, an intensified speed-up system, and increased rate of exploitation. Mass unemployment remains in permanent form, and the workers are brought face to face with a stronger monopoly capitalism. That, of course, is the real aim of the New Deal.
It means a reorganization of American national economy to restore and increase capitalist profits. In the program as a whole are embodied the active preparations for further imperialist expansion. For that, tranquility of class relations is required. But this is another aspect of the New Deal program, to be dealt with separately. Meanwhile one important lesson must sink deeply into the; minds of the workers:
Preparations for further imperialist expansion as a means of issuing out of the crisis lead directly on the path of war. That, we can rest assured, is taken fully into account in the New Deal program.
 



Part I

Part II

Part III
 


 ON THE twentieth anniversary of the beginning of the first world war, the conquest of power by the Russian proletariat stands out as the only achievement of the epoch. From this highest point humanity has traversed half of a new cycle to its lowest depth, to the conquests of the Fascist counter-revolution.
This is the stark reality of today. Instead of the victorious development of the revolution of 1917 on a world scale, the new epoch has witnessed a series of defeated revolutions culminating in the smashing of the German and the Austrian proletariat. As a most immediate consequence of these terrible calamities the capitalist encirclement of the Soviet Union is more tightly drawn, the mortal danger to its existence increases daily, and humanity faces the volcanic eruptions of new imperialist wars.
At the approach of these new stormy developments, the Soviet Union finds itself right in the danger zone next door to the main stage of the coming imperialist world conflict for the possession of China and India. In the West it faces the most consistent organizers and inspirers of national aggression in control of a chain of Fascist and semi-Fascist states.
The diplomatic relations between the two antagonistic systems, the Soviet Union and the capitalist powers, is of necessity a compromise relationship dictated by historical circumstances. In no sense can it be conceived as a stable equilibrium. One or the other must finally assert its supremacy and the present compromise relationship is therefore essentially a question of relationship of forces. But this relationship of forces cannot be determined merely on the basis of two solid entities as represented by the nations or their respective governments. In the determination of this question must be taken into account, on the one hand, the forces within the Soviet Union that are weakening its proletarian basis and, on the other hand, not only the elements of conflict among the capitalist powers, but above all the forces within capitalism antagonistic to its system.
To illustrate the point it is well to take an example from the everyday process of the class struggle. The working class is compelled to enter into constant compromise relationships with capitalism. Only its victorious revolution changes this situation. At one moment one section of the class is able to forge ahead and strengthen its position while another may be forced to retreat. At no time is there a lasting, stable equilibrium. The relationship of forces decides which side may advance. But here it is necessary to add that at no time is this decided merely by the relationship of the separate sections, but primarily by the position of the conflicting classes as a whole. And so long as the accumulation of capital remains the economic law of motion of modern society the class existing on the appropriation of surplus values will remain the aggressor.
On the international arena this question of relationship of forces of the classes as a whole is even more decisive in its importance. From this flows the inescapable conclusion that the relations between the proletarian Soviet republic and the capitalist powers is constantly influenced by and in the final analysis determined by the strengthening or the weakening of the position of either class on a world scale. We are therefore compelled to proceed in our estimate today from the fact that the proletariat has suffered catastrophic defeats in one country after another, with the result that the Soviet Union today stands badly isolated. Its most important allies are crushed. In view of this situation the foreign policy pursued by the Soviet Union has become a question of fundamental importance.
During the time of Lenin this foreign policy proceeded as an integral part from the basic strategy of the world revolution. Even its main measures of execution were worked out by the revolutionary general staff. But the policy of the Comintern of Lenin is no longer the foreign policy of the Soviet Union. On the contrary. The Soviet foreign policy of the Stalin bureaucracy is the policy of the Third International today. It flows from the theory of socialism in one country and means in actuality the abandonment of the world revolution and the ignoring of all of its problems. This theory assumes that the capitalist and the communist systems can coexist peaceably. Thus the compromise relationship which was necessitated by historical circumstances, due to the feebleness of the world revolution, which in turn due to a great extent to the previous mistakes and blunders of the Stalinist regime, shifting constantly to the disadvantage of the Soviet Union, is being raised into a universal system of international relations. It is called the peace policy of the Soviet Union.
Naturally the proletarian republic desires peace and strives for peace; it is the only power capable of conducting a peace policy. But in a world of capitalist relations this question of war or peace, of the offensive or the defensive, must be determined by revolutionary criteria, which means that it must be determined by the interests of the strengthening of the proletarian republic and not by the interests of the maintenance of the imperialist status quo as defined by national boundaries artificially imposed by force. Moreover, the strengthening of the proletarian republic, nay, its very life and existence, is bound up with the question of the extension of the revolution. Universal peace in a world of capitalist relations is a Utopia and it can not, of course, be secured at all through diplomatic pacts signed by the capitalist robber nations. Such a policy represents an adaptation to the methods of the enemy class. The course through the diplomatic pacts to the joining in the deceptive cry for disarmament ñ under capitalism ñ and the equally deceptive cry for mutual rejection of aggression, has proceeded in pace with the disastrous defeats inflicted by capitalism upon the world proletarian forces. With each new defeat, greater illusions are created in the inviolability of the pacts with capitalism. So long as this policy prevails, paralysis of the proletarian allies, the debilitation of their parties, the preparation of new defeats on a more colossal scale, isolation and encirclement of the proletarian revolution within the national framework of the USSR and, without the victory of the proletariat in the leading countries, doom to failure all the successes of socialist construction in the USSR.
The fatal concept that the two systems, capitalism and communism, can coexist peaceably emanates from the highest source, from the infallible General Secretary. In his interview with Eugene Lyons, published in the New York Telegram on November 24, 1930, Stalin said: ‘It is possible, and the best proof is that they have lived peacefully side by side since the conclusion of our civil war and the intervention period.î In a second interview, given to Walter Duranty and published in the New York Times on December 1, 1930, Stalin added dryly: ‘They have not fought for ten years which means they can coexist.î And while pointing out that all the bourgeois powers would ‘readily crush a weak enemy if it could be done with little or no riskî, Stalin intimated that the risk was now too great: ‘They might have tried it against the USSR five or six years ago,î he said, ‘but they waited too long. It is now too late.î
In this period capitalism has not been strong enough to launch an armed attack against the Soviet Union in the same sense that the international proletarian revolution has not been strong enough to conquer. Meanwhile, however, the capitalist powers in Europe, directly aided by the failure of the parties of socialism and with the direct assistance of Fascism, proceeded to decimate the most important sections of the proletarian forces and violently to exterminate their parties and trade unions. Alongside of this devastating slaughter, the armaments race has increased at a furious pace. All of the capitalist nations are today armed to the teeth. While Germany under the Weimar republic fell behind, it is now, under Fascism, feverishly making up for lost time.
The exponents of the pacifist foreign policy of the Soviet Union, instead of rallying to the support of the proletarian allies and mobilizing all their forces to smash Fascism before it could destroy the German proletariat, capitulated to Hitler and sacrificed its proletarian allies. In the strategic line of a revolutionary world general staff, the fact of this changed situation, so overwhelming in its importance, would of necessity mean; the retracing of a number of steps; but not so to the directors of present day Soviet diplomacy. In the career of Litvinov, this policy is focused upon his exploits in Geneva and elsewhere. In 1931 he proposed complete disarmament if acceptable or partial disarmament if more practicable. Neither could be a road to peace among capitalist powers whose industrial technique can always provide for rapid rearmament, nor could it be acceptable to them. Such proposals, presented as means to peace, can serve only to mislead the workers and create illusions among them for the sake of a common front with petty bourgeois pacifists. These illusions are further broadest from the Soviet Congress. The proud body that once accepted the new revolutionary power in its name listened to Litvinov reporting his achievements at its session December 29, 1933.
The question of the United States recognition granted by the Roosevelt administration, held the center of Soviet diplomacy. Litvinov reported his appraisal as follows:
‘We must say in justice to the clearsightedness of President Roosevelt, that soon after he assumed office, and perhaps even before that, he had realized the fruitlessness of further struggle against us on behalf of capitalism, and saw the benefit to American state interests and the interests of world peace, of the establishment of relations with us.î
Evidently this sort of appraisal by the epigones is handed down to the proletariat as a compensation for the heavy defeats suffered; but it is treacherously deceptive. The real situation presents an entirely different picture. We are not concerned here with the accomplishment of the United States recognition itself, but purely with the appraisal made by the directors of Soviet diplomacy. And it is not difficult to discern that the motive force in recognition by the American imperialists, for whom Roosevelt is now the official spokesman, were not at all those stated by Litvinov. For them the unbridled advance by the Japanese in Manchuria posed in a sharper form than before the question of the struggle for supremacy in the Pacific, and thereby hastened the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Washington government and the Soviet Union. Behind these diplomatic relations the American imperialists will seek to provoke the conflict between the USSR. and Japan at the opportune moment in order to weaken both and to prepare for itself a territorial base in China so as to raise the question of the ‘liberationî of India at the next stage. The peaceful motives attributed to Roosevelt in reality furnish the cover for military aggression on a colossal scale by the United States which is seeking to restore its economic equilibrium on a far more extensive world base. Soviet diplomacy can naturally have no interest in furthering such plans, but an appraisal that declares this to mean gains to the cause of world peace shows the frightful degeneracy of Soviet diplomacy. It is reduced to the level of petty bourgeois pacifism. This appraisal was not a mere slip of the tongue for in the attitude of the butcher of the Italian proletariat Litvinov found similar qualities. He reported on the conclusion reached by Signor Mussolini and himself
‘after exchanging opinions on questions of current politics and the best methods of preserving peace. Our desire simultaneously to support and develop relations with all the big countries is no small contribution to the cause of universal peaceî.
In passing it might be mentioned that Litvinov, in his report on Soviet diplomatic relations throughout the world, found no occasion to mention Soviet China. He said:
‘Unfortunately, China is still suffering both from foreign invasion and from profound internal discord. While strictly adhering to the policy of non-interference in the internal affairs of China, we are watching its struggle for independence and national unity with the greatest sympathy.î
National unity under what banner? Oh, our innocent opponents may argue: This was reported to the Soviet Congress and not to the Third International; you know that is not the same thing. No, this is the essence and content of Soviet foreign policy within the framework of which the Third International vegetates in a miserly existence.
The Soviet government is now in the process of changing its course with regard to the League of Nations. Stalin in his interview with Duranty, published in the New York Times of December 25, 1933 said that
‘if the League is even the tiniest bump somewhat to slow down the drive toward war and help peace ... it is not excluded that we shall support the League despite its colossal deficienciesî.
Litvinov added in his report to the Soviet Congress:
‘it may be assumed, however, that that tendency which is interested in preserving peace is gaining ground in the League of Nations and this, perhaps, explains the profound changes which are taking place in the composition of the Leagueî.
Surely the composition and position of the League of Nations fluctuates, but essentially it remains as characterized by the Third Comintern Congress, the League ‘of victorious states for the exploitation of the vanquished and the colonial peoplesî. To consider it today or in the future as an instrument of peace is to poison the minds of the masses.
Almost seventeen years after the conquest of October the Soviet Unions finds it necessary to seek a rapproachment with the League, demonstrating the substitution of conservative criteria for revolutionary criteria that has taken place within its leadership. But, when we use the formula ñ finds it necessary ñ this needs be explained, and the explanation is, that this is the result of the defeats and the weakening of the international proletarian revolution and the international position of the Soviet Union itself. Within the capitalist world, in the case of war, one cannot exclude in advance the possibility of the Soviet Union making a combination with one or the other of the conflicting powers, equally hostile to it in essence, if necessitated as a means of self-preservation. And it is not this or that step of rapproachment that is exclusively to be condemned; but the whole policy which has helped to bring the Soviet Union to its present weakened position.
The dangers of a new world war are manifest. The causes of these dangers are inherent in capitalism and have been bared by Marxism in irrefutable fashion. To revert to or to hide behind pacifism in the face of this menace, regardless of whichever brand, idealist, social democratic, petty bourgeois or purely imperialist pacifism, is the most dangerous political poisoning of the masses and means in reality to give up the struggle against war. Yet, this is what is being practised by Soviet foreign policy in its international relations and in relations with the world proletariat. The Third International in its ‘struggleî against war has capitulated to the pacifists, to the shady types as well as to the honest types among them, and has given them the initiative in what became anti-war masquerade conferences, composed mostly of individuals, groups and organizations without social weight or influence. The abdication of the Third International as the organizer of international revolution is virtually acknowledged by formal renunciation. Its sections are transformed into mere pacifist frontier guards for the defense of the Soviet Union. The very first consequence of the transformation of the original policy of the Comintern into its dialectic antithesis is reflected in the relations between the Soviet government and the Third International as they exist under the Stalin regime. The Third International itself has become transformed into an appendix to suit the needs of the Soviet foreign policy of Stalin.
We repeat, a workersí state has every right and even a duty to utilize for the benefit of the proletariat the differences existing among the various bourgeois groups and powers; it has every right to effect compromises with them as traders, even to the point of concluding defensive alliances when necessary. But this must be subordinated to revolutionary politics on the international arena, to the life and death necessity of weakening the class enemy and strengthening the proletarian forces. Above all, the revolutionary parties must be built up independently of these alliances or combinations and remain free to perform the mission assigned to them by history.
Arne SWABECK



What happened to “Operation Dixie” and the organization of white-collar workers? While labor officials vie for favor in business circles, new union-busting laws spell fresh danger
SCARCELY three years ago the AFL and the CIO joined forces in a united organization. Ostensibly, this action was inspired by the compelling need for common defense against the trend of punitive and oppressive labor legislation which had become so painfully apparent with the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act. But now, while punitive and oppressive legislative measures have been building up to a formidable threat and even before the merger has been fully consummated on the local levels, the body so recently united has again split wide open.
This split has none of the progressive features that characterized the turn of events during the great struggles of the thirties. The division that took place then was motivated fundamentally by the irresistible urge for organization displayed by millions of workers in the giant mills and factories across the nation. The major segment of ossified craft-union leaders was utterly incapable of facing up to this task; the craft-union form of organization was hopelessly inadequate; so the CIO arose outside of the parent body.
This time, however, the split has been engineered exclusively at the bureaucratic top levels. It has been compounded by corruption, racketeering, and criminally irresponsible disregard of the pressing need for labor unity to head off the mounting attacks by Big Business and its governmental agencies.
Less than a year ago the 1,500,000 member Teamsters union was expelled from the AFL-CIO. Shortly thereafter followed the expulsion of the Bakery Workers union and the Laundry Workers union. The unscrupulous crooks and panderers at the head of these organizations had been hauled before the McClellan Committee as a part of its effort to discredit the labor movement. Even though Meany and Reuther, sounding off for the bureaucratic hierarchy, could not avoid recognizing the anti-labor bias of the committee, their reflex action was instantaneous.
Above all they were concerned with the question of bourgeois respectability. Facing up to the committee’s challenge was farthest from their thoughts, Instead they resorted quickly to the only measure they seem to know – punitive action against the unions already victimized by the pandering parasites.
Subsequently, the expelled Teamsters union entered a series of mutual aid pacts with a number of AFL-CIO affiliates. Among them, the Retail Clerks union is deeply indebted to the Teamsters for aid in obtaining a union contract with Montgomery Ward & Company. And in cooperation with other unions the Teamsters are now tackling the organization of workers in the far-flung Sears Roebuck commercial chain.
The expulsion did not impair the patently powerful strategic position occupied by the Teamsters union. This is the union that moves things to the mills and plants, to the construction sites and to the commercial establishments, reaching into every hamlet of the nation. This invests the Teamsters union with exceptionally potent economic bargaining powers vis-à-vis the employers. Its strategic position in relation to a large number of unions is no less pronounced. This derives from the fact that the latter, in their efforts to hold the union line, whether it be in struggle for wages and working conditions or to expand organization, are most directly dependent upon the support of the men who drive the trucks. The teamsters have won renown everywhere for their aggressive and militant union action. They come closer than the members of most other unions to living up to the indispensable working-class principle: Never cross a picket line.
That the Teamsters union intends to take further advantage of its strategic position is clearly indicated. Hoffa, who succeeded Beck as president, did not escape too successfully the heavy corruption charges levelled against him. Perhaps he now feels that he holds office on probation, so to speak, and is eager to strike out along new paths. At any rate, bold and audacious plans for a huge transportation union combine have come out of Hoffa’s sumptuous headquarters at the Teamsters Palace in Washington, D.C.
The plans envisage the welding of all land, sea and air transportation unions into a grand alliance, which could, if successful, embrace some fifty unions, both inside and outside the AFL-CIO, with a present combined membership of about 3,500,000 workers. If successful, it could also open up prospects of ending the debilitating disunity, conflicts and rivalry which have racked the unions engaged in transportation. This fact alone suffices to mark its distinctly progressive nature.
Signing a document on July 3, embodying the ideas of the alliance and projecting a conference of all unions concerned, were Hoffa for the Teamsters, Joseph Curran and William Bradley for the National Maritime Union and the East Coast Longshoremen’s union, respectively. It was further reported that the president of the Seafarers International Union had agreed to become one of the initiators of the conference on transportation unity.
It will be recalled that Curran, who is a vice-president of the AFL-CIO, was one of the hatchet wielders in the ostracizing of the Teamsters less than a year ago. He now breathes defiance at any threat of interference from his former partners in the hatchet job. The East Coast Longshoremen’s union had been previously expelled; but its membership defeated in three successive elections repeated attempts by Meany and company to set up a rival organization.
Anticipating the opening of the St. Lawrence seaway, preliminary steps have already been taken for an all-out drive to organize an estimated 200,000 Canadian dock and transportation workers. Decision to go ahead with the campaign “almost immediately” was reached at a recent meeting in Montreal of union representatives from both sides of the border, and sponsored by the initiators of the conference on transportation unity. The meeting received assurance of Canadian Labor Congress support.
 
“I Never Went on Strike in My Life!”
Not so here in the United States. The grandiose plans and projections from the Teamsters headquarters provoked a violent reaction. The mouthpieces of Big Business and its Washington political representatives opened a barrage of denunciation: “It’s a monopoly; it’s outside the pale of the legitimate trade-union movement; its power could paralyze the nation,” they screamed in a rising crescendo of vituperation and abuse. And George Meany joined the chorus in his own way and with his own bluster and threats.
Immediately upon his return from a month-long visit to Europe, Meany declared war on the spreading network of pacts between Federation units and truck drivers. Like John Foster Dunes, Meany has a penchant for the “art of brinkmanship.” But it must be said in justice to Dunes, that while he retreats, under compulsion, to meditate on agonizing reappraisals, Meany, on the contrary, rushes ahead.
Meany lost no time letting it be known that he would press for the expulsion of affiliated unions joining “any alliance to build up the strength and prestige of exiled organizations.” Commending Meany for his stand, Labor Secretary Mitchell raised the threat that unions may be put under anti-trust regulations if the proposed alliance of transportation unions succeeds. Chairman McClellan hurriedly summoned Hoffa and other Teamsters union officials for another round of Senate Committee “investigations.” Counsel to the Committee, Robert F. Kennedy, declared the projected alliance to be “far, far more dangerous to the US and its economy than all the Mafia and secret criminal organizations combined.” Overtly or covertly, measures of collaboration to prevent the unity of transportation workers have thus taken on wide ramifications. Implicit in these combined efforts is the threat of a deeper and more debilitating split in the AFL-CIO, further undermining its present precarious position.
Meany’s attitude is not at all surprising. His craven surrender in face of the obviously anti-labor objectives of the senatorial “investigations” is in perfect harmony with his arrogant and arbitrary schemes for a completely housebroken union structure. In this scheme labor militancy is to be shunned. Conversely, that type of structure leaves no room for trade-union democracy; much less does it enable the labor movement to accept what should be its natural role – that of leading champion of democracy in the nation.
Proceeding on this path, the AFL-CIO Executive Council, at its midsummer meeting, ordered all unions in the federation to cancel their pacts with the Teamsters. At the same meeting Meany filed charges of corruption against the Hotel and Restaurant Workers, the Meatcutters and the Carpenters unions. No thought was given to the idea of appealing to the rank and file members to clean out the crooks and racketeers. Such action is anathema to this bureaucratic hierarchy.
In every respect Meany personifies the bureaucratic upper crust, who adapt themselves in thought and action to the philosophy of the capitalist profit system and succumb in practice to all its implications. Meany never passes up an opportunity to affirm his faith in the capitalist system, including its present imperialist cold-war policy. Officials of the Hoffa type differ from this bureaucratic hallmark only in their greater and more reckless proclivities for pandering and pilfering.
In December 1956 Meany appeared as guest speaker at the convention of the National Association of Manufacturers. Evidently he had accepted the invitation as an opportunity to demonstrate how reliable and how indispensable he and his fellow bureaucrats are as “petty but active stockholders” in the capitalist enterprise, its plans and programs at home and abroad. Here is how Meany stated his qualifications for partnership:
“I never went on strike in my life, never ran a strike in my life, never ordered anyone else to run a strike in my life, never had anything to do with a picket line ...
“In the final analysis, there is not a great deal of difference between the things that I stand for and the things the NAM leaders stand for. I stand for the profit system. I believe it is a wonderful incentive. I believe in the free enterprise system completely.”
Most assuredly, the profit system is a wonderful incentive for those who were assembled in the NAM convention. It is the source of their fabulous power and wealth. But it is also the source of wars and crises, of exploitation, of unemployment, of inequality and insecurity. Under the profit system, the only maxim considered worthy of note, by those who reap its bountiful harvest, is to sell as dearly as possible and to buy as cheaply as possible – including the buying of labor power. Living up to this maxim, the manufacturing monopolists, the same as capitalists everywhere, resist wage increases, improvements of working conditions and recognition of workers rights with all the means and forces at their command. It is this that forms the basic content of the class struggle.
There is no evidence that the hard-boiled employers of the NAM accepted Meany’s assurances as sufficient qualifications for partnership in the capitalist enterprise. They will permit Meany to pick the crumbs from their banquet table while demanding that he translate his faith in the partnership into concrete terms of squelching any notions of militant action by the workers. But, in the final analysis, they are the conscious class enemies who give no quarter. And, just now, when the trade-union movement is beset by the ravages of unemployment, these monopolists appear determined to strike the blows that they hope will reduce its great potential powers. The rank-and-file workers therefore owe it to themselves to take another hard look at Meany’s qualifications for labor leadership.
 
“We Don’t Believe in the Class Struggle”
Reuther’s nimble shopkeeper type of opportunism supplements Meany’s rock-ribbed conservatism in the AFL-CIO leadership, imparting to it an appearance of well-rounded flexibility. Reuther recognizes as a guiding policy only whatever seems to him to be dictated by expediency. He fancies himself a “social engineer” and he has often displayed an ability to advance slogans, demands or lofty social ideals. In most cases, however, these have remained stillborn or been whittled down to such an extent as to be bereft of serious content.
In the realities of capitalist life, this is what happened to Reuther’s more recent proposals. The much-advertised “guaranteed annual wage” was reduced to meager supplemental unemployment compensation, honored by some states, rejected by others. The high-sounding profit-sharing plan was conveniently forgotten.
Admittedly, Reuther was catapulted into his present prominence by the dynamic rise and growth of the United Automobile Workers union, which itself had its origin in one of the most stormy periods of the class struggle in the United States. Yet he is now at great pains to repudiate that authentic history. The New York Times of March 28, 1958 quotes Reuther as saying: “We don’t believe in the class struggle. The labor movement in America has never believed in the class struggle.” But the class struggle catches up constantly with both Meany and Reuther.
Too often they mistake themselves for the labor movement, attributing to it their own views and beliefs. Meany’s turn to do so was last year when his message to the Big Business-sponsored Industrial Development Conference declared: “American labor believes that private enterprise has been and can be a great force for economic and social progress.” That was said just before the private enterprise system brought its present “recession,” leaving millions of unemployed workers to subsist on relief.
Thus by their own repeated declarations of views and beliefs these preachers of class peace provide a measure of judgment of the present-day American labor leadership. Their actions as well as their failures, furnish even more conclusive evidence. The labor leadership, so closely tied in words and deeds to the capitalist system, has become a distressingly true reflection of the decay and degeneracy of this system. The movement it leads suffers from the corrosive effects of these influences.
 
Why Have the Unions Stopped Growing?
The stinging observation made by Fortune magazine (April 1953) rings tragically true today:
“US labor has lost the greatest dynamic any movement can have – a confidence that it is going to get bigger. Organized labor has probably passed its peak strength ... Since 1946 the working population has expanded but union membership has remained stationary.”
While some unions like the Teamsters claim to have increased their membership, trade-union growth on the whole, judging by available evidence, has not kept abreast with the growing labor force. Most generally the officialdom lays the blame for this situation upon the union-busting Taft-Hartley Act and similar repressive labor legislation. However, as we shall see later, while there can be no denying the sinister effect of such legislation, this is not at all a complete explanation; much less can it serve as a justification for failure.
Indeed, the first decade of the Taft-Hartley Act has proved costly to trade-union organization. This, is further aggravated by enactment of the misnamed “right to work” laws which virtually outlaw the union shop – in not less than eighteen states, several of them located in the North, including the extensively industrialized state of Indiana.
Among examples of the impact of such legislative measures on labor organization, the case of the hosiery workers is perhaps the most extreme. Over 100,000 workers are employed in this industry, and it is one of those industries which are heavily affected by plant migration to the South. “Today union influence in the industry is at an ebb,” says a special report issued by the Industrial Department, AFL-CIO. Between September 1947 and September 1957 the union membership dropped by 76.5% and whole local branches were completely wiped out.
Another indication of decline in the ratio of union growth is presented by collective bargaining elections conducted by the National Labor Relations Board. In 1937 unions won nearly 95% of all elections, and about 87% of those voting favored the unions as bargaining agents. Of the elections conducted in 1955 the unions won 68%, whereas in 1957 the figure had dropped to 61%. Among those participating in the elections in 1953 about 79% voted for the unions; but in 1957 only 63%. In other words, the percentage of collective bargaining elections won by the unions shows a constant decline, and the same holds true for the percentage of workers favoring the unions as bargaining agents.
It is of course not to be expected that the trade-union movement should be able to keep on growing numerically and in terms of quality and power at all times and at the same ratio. Nor can it be expected under any and all circumstances to gain improvements for the workers that will ease their conditions of exploitation. Unions are instruments of struggle but their own internal dynamic remains at times dormant, only to explode and display a new spirit, vitality and strength at certain economic and political junctures when workers needs become particularly pressing. This is what happened during the thirties when the workers made a giant leap forward from the most backward to the most modern trade-union movement and did so on a grand scale. This complete transformation foreshadowed its immense potentialities for the future. By the same token this movement can fail to take advantage of its possibilities; it can fail to respond to its duties as an instrument of struggle; or it can retreat in the face of attacks at the cost of serious impairment of its own moral fibre and the undermining of its special economic and political position.
Precisely in this lies the real explanation for the pitiably weak and disoriented position of the trade-union movement now. The evil consequences of repressive labor legislation tell only a part of the story. Far more distressing is the dismal failure of the AFL-CIO leaders to pursue an active policy of organizational expansion.
There can now be no doubt that these leaders are as insensitive to the pressing needs of organizing the unorganized as was the pious Baptist deacon from Coshocton, Ohio, who preceded Meany in the presidency of the AFL. Moreover, if the builders of Rome had shown no more vigor and alacrity in their task than do these labor officials today, the streets would be still unpaved.
Plans for organization campaigns have been announced with a fanfare of publicity that has become so characteristic of the firm believers in the free-enterprise system. First it was “Operation Dixie” – a campaign to organize the South. Next came plans for a campaign to organize the white-collar workers. Both died a-borning. Not even a whisper can now be heard about such ventures.
Meanwhile the South remains a haven for the open shop and runaway plans. Enactment of “right to work” laws has proceeded virtually unchallenged. And the more intense exploitation of workers under open-shop conditions in the South, reinforced by these vicious laws, presents a constantly greater threat to the labor movement everywhere.
Among white-collar workers about 84% are still not in the unions, leaving a potential reservoir for organization of thirteen to fourteen million workers. Any economically peculiar position that white-collar people may think they occupy, says C. Wright Mills, is now practically a thing of the past:
“All the factors of their status position, which have enabled white-collar workers to set themselves apart from wage-workers, are now subject to definite decline. Increased rationalization is lowering the skill levels and making their work more and more factory-like.” (White Collar, p.297)
But unorganized white-collar workers have no power of collective bargaining. This deficiency has not been without effect on their economic status, especially during recent decades. The income level of the great mass of office workers and sales people has tended to decline relative to that of organized industrial workers. All these factors should indicate that conditions in this field cry out for organization.
 
Myth of the Well-Paid Worker
Against their failure of organizational expansion, it may seem from superficial observation that the unions have at least managed to uphold the wage level pretty well. But this is more appearance than reality. Wages have not kept pace with the rising cost of living; and wages always tend to lag behind output and profits. The US Bureau of Labor Statistics calculates that as of April 1958 a city worker with a wife and two children (the average American family) needed a minimum income of $90 a week for a “modest but adequate” standard of living. But the average weekly wage in manufacturing, after taxes, reported by the Department of Labor for June 1958 was $75.55. The average factory worker’s family thus falls nearly $15 short every week of a “modest but adequate” standard of living.
Some startling comparisons between wages and profits have been presented by Leon Keyserling. He says that during the period 1953-57 total dividend payments increased 80% faster than total wages and Salaries, and personal interest income about 110% faster. Comparing the first three quarters of 1957 with the like period of 1956, Keyserling finds that profits of the large automobile and steel corporations increased three times faster than wage rates in these industries.
Questions such as these become particularly pertinent in view of the growing employer resistance to wage increases, a resistance that is motivated entirely by the urge to maintain swollen profits, in callous disregard of the continually rising cost of living. Moreover, the hands of the employers are immensely strengthened and the unions are correspondingly weakened by the mounting anti-labor legislation, by Labor Board rulings increasingly hostile to labor and last, but not least, by the public scandalization of the unions before the McClellan Committee.
It is therefore not surprising that resistance to wage increases, and resistance to union organization, finds the corporations and the employers organizations more united than has been the case in the past: Witness the solid front presented by the Big Three in the automobile industry against the UAW. Who can deny that their ruthless abrogation of all former contract provisions has struck a formidable blow at the union? At the moment the trucking concerns in the eleven Western States are attempting, by united action, to enforce a total lockout of all union truck drivers. Its effects were felt immediately, idling workers far beyond these states and beyond the trucking industry. These are danger signals for labor.
 
The Legislative Assault
What Trotsky pointed out in his penetrating study, Trade Unions in the Epoch of Imperialist Decay, is now very much apropos.
“Monopoly capitalism does not rest on competition and free private initiative but on centralized command. The capitalist cliques at the head of mighty trusts, syndicates, banking consortiums, etc., view economic life from the very same heights as does state power; and they require at every step the collaboration of the latter. In their turn the trade unions in the most important branches of industry find themselves deprived of the possibility of profiting by the competition between the different enterprises. They have to confront a centralized adversary, intimately bound up with the state power.”
This is evidenced on every hand. “Right to work” laws already enacted in eighteen states are now up for referendum vote next November in six additional states, including California and Ohio. Needless to mention, these initiatives are actively supported everywhere by the National Association of Manufacturers, with which Meany expressed identity of views and objectives; they are supported by Chambers of Commerce, banks and utility companies.
The relatively moderate Kennedy-Ives bill of regulatory union control seems sure to be shelved for this session of Congress. The reason is, however, that Big Business made its opposition clear and demanded a more definitely anti-labor bill, with teeth in it.
Meany and company, acting on behalf of the AFL-CIO hierarchy, supported the passage of this bill. With their craving for bourgeois respectability, they are ready to submit to further government regulation of the unions. That is, regulation by the government which they themselves have at times been compelled to accuse of favoritism to Big Business. This is the same government that they charged with failure to live up to its responsibilities concerning the present recession. It is the government that wields the club of the Taft-Hartley Act. This executive of the whole capitalist class is also the promoter of imperialist ventures so repugnant to the common people everywhere; ventures that are too often fraught with dangers of atomic annihilation.
What we witness now is the culmination of a decade of retreat and surrender by the present labor leadership. Since the enactment of the Taft-Hartley Act a whole series of blows have rained down on the unions. And, from their erstwhile demand for repeal, the AFL-CIO chiefs have come down to the level of lobbyists pleading for further union controls. Their constant retreat and surrender served to embolden the centralized capitalist adversary while simultaneously disorienting the workers. The adversary has made full use of the opportunity to unite his forces more firmly, while the labor chieftains have been preoccupied with the deepening and widening of the split in the so recently merged AFL-CIO.
However the trade-union movement did not arise to promote the “wonderful incentive” of the profit system but to fight it; to fight against its injustices, its inequality and its abuses. The trade-union movement is a living organism, subject to change under the influence of changing conditions, under the influence of pressure from the class struggle.
The trade-union movement possesses its own internal dynamic which, though long dormant, will most assuredly be again manifest in new vitality and militancy. Its present equilibrium, held together by a heavily bureaucratized superstructure, lacks a stable foundation. This equilibrium may well be upset by the open and brazen utilization of repressive state powers by the centralized capitalist adversary.
For the trade-union movement, one choice may then hold out the greatest hope for restoring its position as a serious and mighty social force – entry onto the road of independent political action in the interest of all those who toil.
August 1958



Was the steep decline caused by “severe winter weather” and the “Russian sputniks”? The pundits explain why prosperity is still around the corner
THE fervent hopes and optimistic predictions of an early economic upturn, so widely expressed at the year’s beginning, have gradually faded away. Good evidence to sustain them has been lacking. Temporary fluctuations have suggested the glow of a silver lining, but these served only to illuminate more sharply the downward movement of all major business indices. The “experts” are confounded; uncertainty, confusion and conflicting views predominate.
Some optimism still prevails. But it is an optimism of simple faith rather than one based on facts. In this vein the renowned British economist, Colin Clark, recently assured a New York audience that “there are a number of beneficial factors which will pull the economy upward again.” “The recovery,” he said, “so far as we can now see, will begin before the end of 1958.”
Among the beneficial factors Clark named the “new phase of population growth” in the United States and the American farm problem which “at last appears to be within sight of solution.” Predictions based on such an anticipated “solution” can hardly be well founded.
In contrast, a survey conducted by the National Industrial Conference Board frankly admits that operation “at full capacity” for a number of major industries may not occur until the early 1960’s. The survey asserts that the boom years resulted in such a build-up of productive capacity that many industries have facilities to turn out products at a rate far outstripping present demands. An example cited is the estimate that the auto industry has the capacity now to produce 10 million cars and trucks per year. This is double 1957 sales.
But Sumner H. Slichter, professor of economics at Harvard University, flatly rejects any such notion. When interviewed by the editors of US News & World Report (April 4), he declared: “The view that we have today a general over-capacity is an illusion.”
Admittedly, all bourgeois economists work from the same basic set of relevant facts, and factual material is available in abundance; but they come up with widely different answers. Perhaps the reason is, as pointedly remarked by The Magazine of Wall Street: “Many are able, others are superficial and still others are paid propagandists.”
Rare indeed is the economist who seeks a deeper insight into the economic process as a whole and attempts to understand its laws of motion and development. Few show any desire to do so, while the great majority are simply engaged in apologetics designed to obscure the realities of class society and to justify the capitalist regime.
Even those who now recognize the symptoms of a serious recession, join with government and Big Business in affirming their faith in the “inherent soundness” of the free-enterprise system. Faith does not impose great mental exertion. All it requires is a few simple homilies such as were contained in a recent address by Arthur F. Burns, former chief economic advisor to the President.
Speaking before the management conference of Chicago University, Burns declared:
“Each setback of economic activity in the past has been succeeded by renewed expansion which, in time, carried our economy well beyond its earlier best performance.”
In other words, the normal operation of economic laws, under the system of free enterprise, will always project the economy to higher levels. According to Burns, this is the natural order of things, for he assured his audience:
“The basic forces that have shaped our extraordinary economy are still with us, and we can reasonably count on vigorous growth in the future.”
But it is precisely this contention that requires to be demonstrated. Neither. Burns, nor anyone else, has attempted to do this. Moreover, a serious examination of the inherent contradictions of capitalism, now appearing in sharpened form, will prove the opposite to be the case.
 
In Comparison
Before discussing this aspect of the question, it may be well to take note of the extreme concern about the relative positions of the American and the Soviet economy that now enters more openly into all forecasts emanating from capitalist sources. The deeper the recession here, the more painfully apparent are the tremendous forward strides of Soviet production capabilities. In government and Big Business circles every comparison of these positions arouses apprehension. Soviet economic expansion is viewed as a serious peacetime threat to the moral and political influence of the United States on other nations.
Burns, whom we quoted above, shares this apprehension. In the address mentioned, he cried out in anguish:
“In the present international situation, the continuance of prosperity in the United States is essential – indeed, absolutely essential – to the economic, political and military strength of the entire free world.”
This plea brought a crushing rejoinder. It was contained in the latest comparative economic data of the two major powers presented by the chief of the Central Intelligence Agency, Allen W. Dulles. He emphasized the following points:

Soviet industrial production in the first quarter of 1958 rose 11% while, according to the Federal Reserve Board index, U.S. production declined 11%.
The Sino-Soviet bloc in the same period produced more steel than the United States.
Soviet machine-tool output is about double that of the United States, and Soviet economic growth, measured by gross national product, is twice as fast as the American.

The technical competence and progress of modern industrial nations is reflected in the way they apply nature’s resources to productive purposes. On this score Dulles could have added a good deal of salient factual material, which is readily available and need not be unearthed by secret intelligence. He could have mentioned, for example, the giant hydroelectric power developments in the USSR, the vast irrigation projects and applications of nuclear energy to peaceful purposes. All these surpass in their integral planning and magnitude similar projects in the United States. To this could be added the tremendous progress of Soviet education, both technical and academic, compared to which American efforts seem puny indeed.
It is significant, however, that the data furnished has primary reference, in both cases, to the dynamic sector of the economic structure – the capital goods industries that turn out the means of production. This sector is the fundamental factor in a sustained economic development. Its condition is a sure reflection of economic advance or economic decline.



Monopolized Cushion
One of the “cushions” which capitalist economists have boasted will help absorb the impact of any recession is the savings of the American people. The real score, according to Labor’s Economic Review (May 1958), is that the rich are sitting on most of the cushion:

“Most of the truly liquid personal savings – in the form of bank deposits, US Savings Bonds, postal savings and savings and loan and credit union shares – are actually held by a small minority of families. A close look reveals that at the beginning of 1958, eighteen million of the total of 57 million families in the United States (consumer spending units) owned only from $1 to $499 of these savings; another 14 million families owned none.
“Early in 1957, before the recession began, the average skilled and semi-skilled worker had $212 in these holdings and 26% had none. The average for unskilled and service workers was $6; 49½% had none.
“Actually, one-tenth of our families own about two-thirds of all these liquid personal savings.”




How does the proclaimed “inherent soundness” of the free-enterprise system stand up in the face of these comparisons? Can this telling contrast between the two systems be considered a temporary phenomenon? On the contrary! The continuous and exceptionally high rate of expansion of Soviet industrial production, without interruption by recessions or depressions, is a fact now universally recognized. Recurring economic crisis, on the other hand, is a permanent and inescapable feature of capitalism. The glaring contrast furnishes a concrete example in actual life as to which is superior – the property relations of Soviet society or capitalist free enterprise.
 
Anarchy Versus Planning
As the contrast between the two economic systems becomes more pronounced it will attract ever greater attention among the peoples of undeveloped countries who see industrialization as a solution to their economic backwardness. Soviet factories humming to the tune of full capacity production and full employment cannot fail, in the long run, to have a powerful impact upon the unemployed workers in the United States and other capitalist nations. Increasingly it will appear to them as the vital difference between the socialist type of planned economy and the capitalist anarchy of production.
Production in capitalist society depends upon profit, upon the accumulation of capital and increasing opportunities for profitable capital investments. Profits are realized surplus value produced by labor; these are converted into capital and provide the basis for further accumulation. Expansion or contraction of production is determined primarily by profit possibilities and not by social needs; nor is production carried on for the benefit of the society of producers.
Capital is invested in industry in order to build new plants or modernize old ones and to create more efficient machinery and tools that will provide for higher productivity of labor, thus lowering production costs and thereby increasing the magnitude of profits realized. Full utilization of the means of production promotes fresh accumulations of capital. These become available for reinvestment in the process of production and provide the basis for further economic expansion.
But the realization of profit depends also upon increasing markets to absorb the commodities produced. Consumption is supposedly the ultimate objective of production; but in capitalist society consumption is an entirely subordinate consideration. Consumption by the overwhelming majority of the population can remain at a high level only so long as satisfactory profits accrue to the few who are the owners of industry.
During its decades of growth the dynamic process set in motion by the accumulation of capital operated with full force in the American economy. It did not, and could not, maintain a smoothly sustained equilibrium. But it did carry the economy through each low valley of cyclical breakdowns to new and higher peaks of prosperity. A constantly expanding market kept pace with the growing forces of production. It absorbed the rising output and this permitted the full realization of profits. However, the great depression of the thirties, by and large, marked the end of the growth phase and the onset of capitalist decline in the United States.
The great depression was overcome only by the creation of an artificial market linked to war production and the armaments race. The internal economy did not expand organically as in the past; it had to depend on fictitious means. This restored temporarily the dynamic sector of the economy. Fabulous profits were the fruits of enormous military expenditures, and these promoted an accelerated accumulation of capital. New opportunities for profitable investment drew capital resources into further expansion and the development of more efficient plants and equipment.
The results are now here in plain view for all who want to observe the process of capitalist production objectively. Excess productive capacity shows up to the extent noted by the National Industrial Conference Board, with the many industries having facilities to turn out products at a rate far outstripping present demands. The auto industry has an estimated capacity to produce twice the number of cars sold in 1957. The steel industry is limping along on an output less than 50% of capacity.
 
Was Marx Right?
Out of the enlarged scale of production arose the exact opposite: curtailment and contraction. Because of the contradictions inherent in this system of free enterprise the dynamic sector of the economy generated the limitations of its own development.
The tremendous expansion of the productive forces engendered by the armaments economy now acts as a fetter on the further movement of accumulation, of employment and of prosperity. There is excess capacity of production while people’s needs remain unsatisfied. Factories, mills and mines stand idle, or operate with a reduced labor force, while millions of unemployed workers subsist on relief handouts.
Fully confirmed here is the Marxist analysis of the capitalist mode of production. From the general tendency of capitalist development – the increase of constant capital (machines and raw materials) at the expense of variable capital (labor power) – Marx drew the conclusion:
“The greater the social wealth ... the greater is the industrial reserve army ... the greater the mass of the consolidated surplus-population ... the greater is official pauperism. This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumulation.”
The present economic slump is not the result of miscalculations or mistakes in policy; it is the inevitable outcome of the capitalist mode of production. The forces of production have been developed beyond the capacity of consumption because of the limitations imposed on the latter by the profit system. Profits always tend to race ahead of wages, and wages fall relatively to output and profits, thus restricting the purchasing power of the workers. The capitalist mode of production “comes to a standstill at a point determined by the production and realization of profit, not by the satisfaction of social needs.”
This is the essence of the present recession. Whether it is called a recession or a depression matters little; the objective results are the same. It is centered in the dynamic sector of the economy which is related most vitally to its future expansion capabilities. As it deepens, the effects will spread in corresponding measure through the whole economic structure. In other words, the basic forces still counted upon to provide renewed and vigorous growth are now seriously impaired, the smug declarations emanating from capitalist pundits and politicians to the contrary notwithstanding. This very fact gives to the recession a significance far greater than most of them are prepared to admit.
Equally serious is the fact that the economic downturn occurs amid the general decay and crisis of the capitalist system as a whole. Economic decline in Western Europe is now further aggravated by the depressive currents flowing across the Atlantic Ocean. On the world market capitalism no longer wields its former unchallenged control and direction. More than one-third of the world has been definitely withdrawn from the capitalist orbit of exploitation. In what remains – a very much constricted world market, its equilibrium disrupted, its currency system debased – competition tends to grow more and more fierce. Trade barriers and tariff walls, born of competition between nations, now act as obstacles to the necessary free intercourse. These contradictions arise out of a condition wherein capitalist productive forces have long outgrown private property relations and restrictive national boundaries.



Let’s Pray
In response to a question at his press conference May 28 on whether he sees a “perceptible start” toward economic revival, President Eisenhower offered the following opinion, which we wish to commend for its accurate reflection of the thinking of the monopolists who run the country:

“Well, I say this. This is certain of the little, of the indices that look that way, but just as one swallow doesn’t make a summer, I am certainly not going to take, show that a slacking off of the new applications for unemployment insurance and all that sort of thing, that those do not yet, to my mind, warrant a flat prediction that now we are on the upper leg. I want to see a few more things to happen. I say that we are weathering it well, and I believe of course that the prior boom had a great deal, had a lot to do with the recession. Now I think it has largely spent its force. I certainly pray so.”




The enormous accumulations of capital in the United States, which have saturated the home market, impart special urgency to the search for new outlets for both capital and commodities. But there are few of these in sight. In addition, American capitalism must now meet the competition of the Soviet bloc, particularly in the still undeveloped areas of the world where industrial needs are the greatest.
The exceptional opportunities which once favored the rapid growth of the American capitalist economy are vanishing, never to return. Even the vast market created by production for war and for the armaments race has proved too narrow for the expanded productive forces that it called into being. Aside from its waste of material, of resources and of labor, the armaments economy led to dissipation of the people’s real income. A monstrous concentration of wealth in fewer and fewer hands fabulously enriched the capitalists while the country as a whole became poorer and more fantastically debt-ridden.
For the last twenty years the economy has been sustained very largely by armaments production. Tremendous government expenditures were poured into the country’s industrial arteries. Now, however, the indisputable fact remains: While the armaments market absorbed a vast industrial output, even this could not permanently sustain a prosperity level.
The question now arises: where are the new markets to be found which will provide the basis for a genuine upturn and further economic expansion? Without such expansion no economic upturn can reach very high levels. Much less can it have a lasting character. And to provide a basis for renewed economic expansion with an enlarged accumulation of capital, new markets would necessarily have to be of far greater dimensions than those hitherto found. Yet neither the savants of the capitalist school of economics, nor the spokesmen of government or Big Business have seriously posed that question.
 
Prosperity Went Thataway
In the absence of new and greater markets, is it not reasonable to assume that actual capitalist prosperity will become increasingly illusive? Lacking the stimulus of industrial growth the economy will inevitably sink lower. Production of capital goods now tends to be limited primarily to replacements. Accumulation of capital must, therefore, also proceed on a lower level, tending to restrict the production of surplus value and realization of profit. Opportunities for profitable capital investments are correspondingly diminished.
Serious cutbacks in capital investments have already taken place, and the indications are that this trend will continue for some time to come. Fortune magazine (April 1958) reports that between the third quarter of 1957 and the first quarter of 1958 capital spending fell by $6 billion, and by the end of this year it is expected to be $9 billion below the 1957 peak.
Figures from the authoritative McGraw-Hill annual survey differ slightly from the above forecast, but they emphasize the same basic trend. For the years 1958-61 the survey estimates that capital expenditures by private enterprise will be about 20% below the 1957 level. Manufacturing industry, the key factor in the economy, is expected to suffer the heaviest proportion of this drop.
Commenting on this survey, Business Week points to a major danger raised by the recession:
“If the decline in the economy becomes more serious than business is expecting, plans for capital spending might be revised downward even more drastically.”
With economic expansion curtailed, the contradictions inherent in the capitalist system of production become more malignant. The working masses go short of the means of subsistence because they have produced too much of them; bankruptcy follows upon bankruptcy; productive forces and production are enfeebled and squandered. On a lower economic level cyclical movements can continue, of course, though most likely with smaller upturns and steeper downslides. The incompatibility of social production with capitalist appropriation thus will become more pronounced.
This seems to be the outlook for the celebrated American free-enterprise system. Judging by the major economic indicators, it is headed for a period of chronic crisis with a number of permanent features and with temporary upturns becoming less significant. Most ominous, however, large-scale unemployment probably will be frozen into the system.
Yet this system counts among its ardent supporters most of the official spokesmen of labor. Their minds are as saturated with the free-enterprise philosophy as are those of the high moguls of Wall Street. It is only about a year ago that George Meany reaffirmed his faith in this philosophy before the Big Business-sponsoredIndustrial Development Conference at San Francisco.
Meany’s message declared:
“American labor believes that private enterprise has been and can be a great force for economic and social progress.”
 
“Little Has Been Done”
To what extent American labor holds to such a belief at this moment may not be easy to determine. In any case, the chances are that the social and political effects of further economic deterioration will, before long, compel new thinking.
To be sure, the labor leaders are even now seriously concerned about the growing unemployment. It cuts deeply into union membership rolls and causes them to react more critically than is usual for them. A recent meeting of the AFL-CIO executive board even complained that neither the Republican Administration nor the Democratic Congress is living up to its responsibilities to halt the recession.
“Little has been done,” says the executive board statement. “As a result the nation is threatened with a depression. Employment, production and purchasing power have dropped month after month since the recession started last summer.” The statement demanded measures to place more purchasing power in the hands of consumers, including an immediate tax cut and extended unemployment coverage.
The charge levelled against both Republicans and Democrats is entirely true, of course, and a good deal could be added to what the labor bureaucrats have said. The Magazine of Wall Street (January 4, 1958) wonders whether the Administration is actually aware of the recession or misjudging its real meaning; and the magazine goes on to remind its readers: The Eisenhower Administration is the one that “ignored, misjudged or long minimized the significance of Russian advances in weapons and science.”
The President has let it be known that he “refuses to be panicked” about the recession. Like the Great Engineer who occupied the White House at the time of the 1929 crash, he sees prosperity just around the corner – or very nearly so. Eisenhower’s advice has been no more profound than that of Herbert Hoover. But the views and the attitude of the President differ in no essential respect from those of the whole Republican Administration. For example, when secretary of commerce Sinclair Weeks appeared recently before the House Appropriations Committee, he was asked to comment on the current economic recession.
“I am glad to,” replied Weeks, “I don’t know why we have to be concerned. This is no depression or even a recession, but just a business lull caused by the Russian Sputniks and the recent severe winter weather.” One Democratic representative retorted: “Thank you, Mr. Secretary. You have given us a good illustration of the kind of thinking in this Administration on the problems of our people.”
But spring came; the birds started singing. Yet, despite the demise of the first two Sputniks and the arrival of warmer weather, the recession, or the depression, continued its slow, grinding, but unmistakably downward, movement.
It is by now quite evident that the Republican Administration will take no effective steps to relieve the unemployment situation. The pleas of the official labor leadership barely command a polite hearing. But what has the Democratic Congress done? Talk about anti-recession measures has been plentiful, but action has lagged woefully behind the promises made. Proposals for extended unemployment compensation for the millions of jobless workers have been so whittled down as to become practically meaningless. There has been no lack of debate about a reinvigorated system of education, with federal aid for a major school construction program; but to date not one solitary dime has been spent. Tax-cut proposals have been dropped for the time being.
Appropriations actually passed by Congress either represent accelerated spending for projects already authorized, or else they are of the type based on the “trickling down” theory. A good example of the latter is the $1.8 billion housing bill. Whether it will serve to promote home building is rated doubtful; its only certain provision is the guarantee of loans by mortgage brokers at a higher rate of interest. Indeed, this record leaves no room for hopeful expectation. The kind of thinking in the Democratic Congress on the problems of the people does not rise to higher levels than the kind of thinking in the Republican Administration.
This is not surprising. The monopoly capitalists, who own and control the means of production, dominate not only the economic life of the nation, but all the levers of government as well. In the words of the author of America’s 60 Families: They are the real government, “the government of money in a dollar democracy.”
These dominant monopoly owners have no objection to government intervention in economic affairs. The only question that is of moment to them is: For what purpose, and for whose benefit does the intervention occur? Massive government spending for armaments, for war and for other imperialist ventures, is perfectly acceptable to them. It is an integral part of their cold-war policy which they are determined to continue at all costs. But the directors of monopoly concerns are bitterly hostile to spending for public-works projects; they make sure to keep these on a beggarly scale. Measures to place more purchasing power in the hands of the consumers is not their idea of government function. Such measures would tend to favor wages and salaries and consequently endanger profits. Demands for full employment are similarly suspect. The capitalist entrepreneurs know only too well that this tends to strengthen labor’s bargaining position, which is the farthest from their intention. Their primary concern is the working principles of capitalist economy. And the existence of an industrial reserve army of unemployed workers is precisely what prompts them to view this recession as a “healthy readjustment.”
In this the Bourbons of big industry see their opportunity to re-establish the indispensable norms of capitalist production. Translated into terms of practical reality, their kind of readjustment means to impose upon the workers such a standard of wages and working conditions as will assure continuation of the fundamental source of power and profit for the free enterprise system.
 
Can You Afford a Depression?
These are danger signals to the American workers. For them the present recession, or depression, is far more serious than has so far been admitted. The unfolding attack from the employers, added to the ravages of unemployment and inflation, is the greatest threat to their standard of living and working conditions since the days of the great depression.
Recognition of this danger has been evident in some trade-union circles, but it has not led to effective action. While several major unions have succeeded over a period of time in maintaining the escalator clause for wage increases in their contracts, as a safeguard against the rising cost of living, the need for a shorter work week without reduction in take-home pay never got beyond the stage of resolutions and indorsements. It became popularized in the demand for a thirty-hour week at forty hours’ pay. But the union bureaucrats, who enjoy the privileges and the handsome emoluments of their official positions, have now deserted the idea of the shorter work week to which they once pledged support – this at a time when it is most bitterly needed to counter the blight of growing unemployment.
Objections to the shorter work week without reduced pay comes from the owners of industry, of course. Their professional apologists join the chorus: The demand is unrealistic, they say; business cannot afford it! In their opinion only the interests and profits of business, of the wealthy corporations, are to be taken into account, and not the interests of the people. Following out this logic, the corporations have proceeded arbitrarily to lay off millions of workers and reduce the average work week of those still employed, below the normal forty hours. But the effect of this arbitrary action is that the wage standard threatens to fall below the subsistence level.
Facing this situation, what are the workers to do? They cannot give up their right to work. It is the only serious right that is still left to them in a society based upon exploitation, and they constitute the only force which can safeguard this right. When the market is saturated by overproduction, the only rational measure to maintain the right to work and relieve unemployment is to spread out the work that is to be done among all who are in need of a job. And the only way to maintain the standard of living, established through years of struggle, is to insist that the take-home pay remains unimpaired even when fewer working hours are required.
Adopting this as a policy would have a salutary effect on the whole trade-union movement. One could hardly think of a better antidote to the dangerous division so easily fostered between employed and unemployed workers. Making the work to be done the common concern of all would promote solidarity and mutual responsibility.
Objections to the shorter work week without reduced pay can be met effectively by very simple answers; and the answers are irrefutable. The richest country in the world can well afford a job for all who are willing and able to work. It can afford a decent standard of living for all who are engaged in producing the necessities of life for the nation. No rational society can afford to do less.
Today the American home market is saturated because of the limitations imposed on consumption by the profit system. But the people in the major parts of the world cry out for goods and for technical means to build industry and thereby elevate their standard of living. They want trade and they need trade. Extended trade relations with the capitalist world are sought by the Sino-Soviet bloc. And who would doubt that acceptance by the United States could serve measurably to relieve unemployment here?



Road to Where?
When questioned by reporters April 23 about his prediction of an economic upturn in March, President Eisenhower replied:

“... I must say this: That I am not trying to be a Pollyanna and just say, ‘Everything is lovely, and that’s that.’ There is still a lot of agonizing reappraisal every day, if you’re going to stay on the job here. Now, people come in and blithely say, ‘Have a tax cut.’
“Well, no one starts – stops to think about this: Defense is expensive, and is growing more expensive, and we have got to be ready to pay those defense costs for the next forty, fifty years, possibly ...
“So, I say: You have got to look down the road.”




The growth of Soviet industry, instead of diminishing the USSR’s dependence on world economy, has increased it. Soviet industry depends on trade to a greater extent than ever before. And it has been made amply clear that the Soviet Union seeks extended trade especially with the United States. It desires to obtain machinery and manufactured products, and it is prepared to enter into mutually satisfactory long-term trade agreements.
An even greater quantity of products from American industry could find a market in the People’s Republic of China. It needs huge quantities of industrial and farm machinery to build up a modern economy. Emerging out of centuries of oppression, the revolutionary people of China have embarked on a program of industrialization to overcome the backwardness of the past and to lay the foundation for a society in which they can become masters of their own destiny. These people have asked for diplomatic recognition for their republic from the United States; they have asked for long-term credits to facilitate trade.
Credits are available in the United States. Then why are these not granted? What stands in the way of extended trade relations with the whole Soviet orbit? Only the cold-war aims of the Big Business government in Washington, and its opposition to the economic development of the non-capitalist world. With these policies the American workers can have nothing in common. On the contrary. Support of extended and active East-West trade would serve their own best interests. It would provide a positive and fruitful alternative to the reactionary demand of the trade-union bureaucracy for increased arms production, because such trade relations would tend to ease cold-war tensions.
As a means of alleviating the fearful consequences of unemployment here, the American workers would have much to gain by support of a program of free and unfettered East-West trade. It could provide many jobs producing the goods that the people in other lands want and need. Certainly, it would be preferable to dependence on an armaments program. Support by the workers of such a program would be in perfect accord with their need to defend their right to work. Without a doubt, it would find a hearty response from the workers in the non-capitalist world, and this would tend, in turn, to strengthen the bonds of international working-class solidarity.
The American workers cannot submit to conditions of everlasting insecurity, chronic unemployment and a life of bare subsistence. These are not conditions of their making. Such conditions grow inevitably out of the capitalist relations of production. It is the capitalist rulers who are unwilling to grant the workers the right to a job that affords them a decent living. They are callously indifferent to the needs of the people arising out of the calamities generated by their own system. Only the capitalist ownership and control of the means of production stands in the way of the economic well-being that the richest country in the world can and should provide.
When the workers realize the full import of this situation and make up their minds to fight for remedial measures, they will not hesitate to demand:
“If you, the owners of the great industries created by our labor, are incapable of maintaining production to satisfy the needs of the people, then let these industries be nationalized. Let them become national property, with the workers in control of production, and with production for use instead of for private profit.”



Mounting layoffs and slimmer pay checks mark a transition in the economy. Is it a “breather” or the ominous prelude to a far worse decline?
THE SPOKESMEN for US capitalism call it a “recession” or “deflation,” a “rolling adjustment,” a “shakeout” or a “levelling off.” President Eisenhower soothingly describes it as “a breather.” But all such comforting appellations cannot lend brighter tints to the bleak picture or conjure away the facts. The downward movement is operating with increasing force and the elements of serious crisis are gathering within the weakened national economy.
By the end of 1957 it was widely conceded that the business slowdown was swifter, sharper and cutting deeper than had been anticipated. The production index fell to 136 from its peak of 147 in December 1956. Stock-market prices came tumbling down, recording the biggest decline since 1931. The number of unemployed climbed steeply upward.
Since then the impact of these depressing movements has been spreading like a nuclear chain reaction, and with cumulative effect, throughout the economic structure.
The same capitalist sources that belittled the size of the coming slump last year assure us now that an upturn will begin later in 1958. After that, they predict, prosperity will again roll on serenely, in accord with the natural pattern of the capitalist scheme of things.
Beguiled by the long, artificially bolstered prosperity, the mouthpieces of Big Business appear to be still in a trance. Apparently they need hypnosis to sustain their faith in this sagging phase of production. And why not? If big Don Newcomb, the Dodgers’ pitcher, successfully submitted to hypnotic treatment to overcome his fear of flying, why cannot they use similar means to get rid of their anxieties over the economic decline?
 
The “Lost Horse” Technique
The boom has vanished; how can it be recovered? One economist, Sidney Alexander, has a simple prescription; it is called the “lost horse” technique. If you want to find a lost horse, go where he was last seen and then ask yourself: where would you go if you were a horse? Thus the economists are now rummaging through one component of the economy after another in their search for the “lost boom” and the signs of the beginning of a new one.
They are examining such factors as the extent of effective consumer demand growing out of the large baby crop of recent years and the increasing legion of old-age pensioners. It is considered helpful to know the disposition of consumer psychology; that might sell a few extra items. The views of purchasing agents are solicited for their estimate of perspectives. Inventories, at factory, wholesale and retail levels, are scrutinized for indications of business trends.
The “tightness” or “ease” of the money market, as well as the prospects for building contracts, are given close attention. Still more important is the question of how much capital investment in plant and equipment is in the offing, for this has direct bearing upon production and labor productivity. What is termed the “wage-price inflation spiral” is being carefully scanned. And finally, looming above all else, the vast government expenditures in the international arms race are being hopefully watched for clues to a reversal of the downward plunge.
It is indisputable that all of these elements have served as underpinning for the postwar boom and can contribute to any upturn ahead. But reviewing them one by one, or adding them together, will not suffice to give a reliable estimate of the direction of the main trends at work in the present phase of American economic life.
The mere compilation of empirical data relating to the major factors operating for growth and decline has little value without an understanding of the specific inter-connections between these factors and their mutual interactions; since these are tied up with the economic laws of motion in capitalist society.
This is what the highly optimistic forecast made in the President’s state-of-the-union message to Congress on January 9 fails to take into account.
“In a free economy,” the President said, “growth typically moves forward unevenly. But the basic forces of growth remain unimpaired. There are solid grounds for confidence that economic growth will be resumed without an extended interruption.”
Later the President boldly predicted that
“March . . . should mark the beginning of the end of the downturn in our economy, provided we apply ourselves with confidence to the job ahead.”
Should we remind the Chief Executive of the soothsayer’s warning to Julius Caesar: “Beware the Ides of March!”
Some Democratic members of Congress, eyeing the fall elections, do not want to seem so complacent. They have introduced bills to cut taxes, to increase state unemployment compensation and to set up a public-works program.
The principal premises that underlie all these predictions of an early upturn and renewed prosperity after the present “breather,” can be summarized as follows. A growing population will assure enough effective consumer demand. Excessive inventories will soon be worked off and renewed orders will again stimulate production. Government expenditures will go up rather than down – provided “peace” doesn’t break out and upset the arms manufacturers. The combination of these factors is expected to give a fillip to renewed capital investments which will propel basic industry forward at high speed.
 
Why It Won’t Work
At first sight this promised prospect may seem quite reasonable. However, what threatens to turn all the painstaking calculations along this line to naught are the gaping disproportions that have been developing during the boom period among the major segments of US economy.
The stability of any economy depends upon the maintenance of a certain proportionality in its vital sectors. Its survival and growth require a sustained balance among them. This holds true, for example, of the relation of production to consumption, of industry to agriculture, to transportation, communication, etc.
Three major components in the American economy go to make up the total demand for what is called the Gross National Product. These are: consumer purchases, private domestic capital investments and government expenditures. These separate elements are linked together in definite relations which are both quantitative and qualitative in character. These relations not only interact with one another but with the national economy as a whole and they extend, with similar effect, into the wider environment of the world market to which American capitalism belongs.
Let us examine the present interrelationship of these three decisive factors. We can gauge how great and ominous the current disparities are when we compare the boom after World War II with the previous extended prosperity during the 1920’s. In 1929, shortly before the crash, consumer purchases accounted for 76.5% of the Gross National Product; private domestic capital investments comprised 15.3%; while government expenditures were only 8.2%.
By 1955, however, the “sovereign” consumer’s share, upon which purchasing power ultimately depends, had declined from 76.5% to 65.1% of the total. Private capital investments remained constant at 15.3%. But government expenditures had mounted to 19.6% of the total.
Thus the consumer’s share of the national product has diminished while the share swallowed up by government expenditures, primarily for military purposes, has more than doubled. What is the significance of such a pronounced shift in the relations between these three basic components of the economy? The rise in the government’s share, which has occurred at the expense of the income of the people, supplies positive proof of the incapacity of monopoly capitalism to expand the standards of consumption on a par with the forces of production it sets in motion. The doubled portion of the national product expended by the government for unproductive purposes augments the polarization of wealth and poverty which is inherent in the system of production for profit. This lack of balance not only prevents the capitalists from maintaining the conditions for prosperity but dries them up at the very source.
How has this worked out in the present instance? The two main supports in capitalist society forming the more permanent basis for sustaining the economy are the purchases by consumers of goods to fill their everyday needs and the investment by business of capital for plants, equipment and materials. What has happened to the second item which is so fundamental to the functioning of capitalism, representing as it does the conversion of profits into capital and the accumulation of capital to enlarge the means of production in order to obtain more surplus value from the increased exploitation of labor?
Although the proportion of capital investments for 1955 was about the same in the total economy as in 1929, a sharp change became evident in the relation of this all-important sector to the others. Excess capacity of production had already begun to show up. The available means of production and the enormous productivity generated by American labor could turn out much more goods than could be absorbed under capitalist conditions by the purchasing power of the American people and the huge government expenditures combined! This is positive proof also that capitalism is incapable of continuous and planned utilization of the means of production that it creates.
The New York Times Annual Economic Survey points to the difficulty of estimating the ratio of output to productive capacity in exact terms, since the degree of technological obsolescence of certain industrial facilities is not easily ascertainable. Nevertheless, this survey and other reports generally agree on the following pattern.
When the two earlier recessions of 1948-49 and 1953-54 started out, industrial production was close to 100% of available capacity. When these slumps hit bottom, production had dropped to no more than 80-82% of capacity.
This time, however, the economic downturn began in the fourth quarter of 1957 with industry operating at only 82% of available capacity. From that point it has since plunged sharply downward. That is, the current recession started at the point where the previous downturns halted. This in itself must be sufficient cause for worry.
To make matters worse, steel production, the thermometer of industrial health, had dipped below 60% by the end of 1957. And now the bourgeois spokesmen, despite their hopeful posture, are becoming apprehensive lest the tremendous excess capacity of production act as a check upon further capital investment. A large-scale cutback in this field would curtail the free flow of the very lifeblood of capitalism at the point of its greatest debility.
 
The Points of Weakness
The contradictions of capitalism tend to accumulate and multiply and come to a head at the points of greatest weakness. This renders the economic structure especially vulnerable, as the following brief survey of various departments of the economy bears out. Let us first look at agriculture.
Excess capacity of production, which developed in agriculture quite a while ago, has led to a chronic farm crisis. Huge farm surpluses pile up in the warehouses with little prospect of disposal. This particular disproportion presents the government with the seemingly insoluble problem of handing out ever-growing and never-ending subsidies to bolster sagging farm prices and meet the cost of running the farms.
Yet, while crop output matched previous peaks on the smallest acreage in years, one million persons left the farms between April 1, 1956 and April 1, 1957. They presumably fled the farm crisis to seek work in the cities. This flow of population tends to aggravate the swelling unemployment problem. The outlook for agriculture presages a recurrence of the harrowing experiences of the thirties when Iowa farmers were burning corn in their stoves because it was cheaper than coal while unemployed workers in Chicago were picking through garbage dumps to find food for their hungry families.
To the farm crisis and the blight of unemployment can be added the grim statistics of business bankruptcies. For 1957, according to Dun & Bradstreet, 13,700 small concerns went under. This was almost four times the failures of a decade ago. These concerns were forced to the wall mostly by the combined effects of growing monopoly concentration and the business downturn.
The “lack of financial liquidity,” which has grown out of manipulation of the credit system, is still another source of weakness. For consumers this means that their installment debts are higher than ever in relation to their income. Whereas in 1946 annual payments on such debts amounted to $6.8 billion, they have now increased more than sixfold to $42 billion! How, in the face of unemployment and short work weeks, are these small debtors to pay off their accumulated obligations, let alone take on new ones?
Even for business and financial institutions, the capital-liability relationships are weaker than they were during the two previous postwar recessions. This is entirely apart from the mountainous federal debt which is again climbing skyward now that Congress has lifted the national debt ceiling another five billion dollars.
Thus the cumulative effects of the artificial prosperity and its inevitable attendant inflation have penetrated and corroded every pore of the credit structure from the consumer level to the Federal Treasury.



An Ancient Custom
The Cynic philosopher, Diogenes of Sinope, saw at Megara sheep protected by leather jackets while children went naked. “It is better to be a Megarian’s ram than his son,” he said. That certain features in our highly modern America have not changed much since ancient Greece is shown by the following observation of E. Ginzberg and D.W. Bray in The Uneducated:

“It is not comforting to realize that the Federal Government spends many times as much on assistance to migratory birds as on assistance to the children of migratory families.”




When we turn our eyes from the national scene to the world market and the status of American foreign trade, prospects are equally discouraging. The whopping rise in exports produced by the Suez crisis last year has turned out to be transient. Now the economic downslide at home is complicated by a rash of foreign exchange crises afflicting many lands. On top of these is the fact that Western Europe’s productive expansion has hit the ceiling while the undeveloped countries display less and less ability to buy on capitalist terms. Even the once-sure customers in the Western Hemisphere are complaining of the difficulties of reciprocal trade with the United States.
This summary review of the national and international economic trends indicates how closely interlinked are the crucial components of the capitalist system and how in their downward movements they react unfavorably upon one another. Already affected are all the segments of the structure: industrial and agricultural production, consumption, capital investments, income and indebtedness, government expenditures, etc. As they continue to pile up in the coming months, the adverse effects of these developments are bound to be felt more and more throughout the capitalist world.
Capitalism again is exposing itself as, not simply an exploitative system, but an essentially unstable one. The very forces which produced a dynamic equilibrium of its elements during the postwar boom have generated the counterforces which are disrupting that equilibrium. Despite government regulation and monopoly domination, anarchy continues to reign in capitalist production, which is subject to no other regulators, in the last analysis, than those of the market, of competition, of the mechanism of supply and demand and the subtle interplay of prices and credits.
 
Transition to What?
What impact has the already drastic economic decline had upon the thinking of the bourgeois economists. Some have ventured to describe 1957 as “a year of transition.” It marks the end, they say, of one phase of the postwar era – the period of catching up with demand and of very rapid growth that always follows on the heels of war. The shortages that developed during World War II and the Korean “police action” are now overcome.
It is hardly deniable that the American economy has reached a point of transition. Transition to what? That is the ticklish question.
Although most economists are extremely hesitant to say what the next period holds, they exhibit considerable uneasiness. A typical example of such apprehension was expressed in an interview given to US News & World Report on January 3, 1958 by Murray Shields. He was introduced as economic advisor to one hundred big corporations; it is to be assumed that he voiced the views of this clientele in saying:
“The mood today is one of perplexity about our economic outlook. The international news has not been good. It certainly is not reassuring. Psychologically we are making a transition from a condition marked by great confidence in the short and long range outlook to one involving a mixture of fear about the domestic economic situation. And in that environment, retrenchment can become the order of the day.”
This anticipated resort to “retrenchment” betrays the lack of confidence in top capitalist brackets in any quick return to prosperity. They are reading the storm warnings and saying among themselves: “Let’s batten down the hatches and ride it out.”
Naturally the capitalists and their government are going to do what they can to stave off the ugly features of the new depression looming before them. It is to be expected that all sorts of devices will be proposed, and some will be tried, to stem and slow down the decline. But, in the best of cases, these can only serve as feeble props to shore up a sagging economic structure.
Topping the list of the pump-priming measures projected by the government is an increased military budget. But military expenditures would have to rise in geometric proportions to slow down the slump and bring back another burst of prosperity.
The main measures so far contemplated center on the race for missiles supremacy. The budget for the coming year provides a whopping $5.3 billion for this purpose. However, expenditures for manned aircraft are in for a decrease. B.F. Coggan, vice president of Convair division of General Dynamics Corporation, has rather grimly suggested how far this can go in reducing unemployment.
Production of Convair’s F-102 airplane required ten production workers for every engineer employed. But production of its Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile requires only one worker per engineer. In other words, far fewer workers are needed to make a billion dollars worth of missiles than for the same amount of manned airplanes.
Some Congressmen are talking about a tax cut. How far would that go to improve the situation? Whatever it might add to consumer purchasing power would be more than offset by the further unbalancing of the federal budget. The revenue lost by the government would then have to be made up by more deficit spending which would bring about a new whirl of inflation and higher prices. This in turn would offset the lowered taxes.
The predominant feature of the current turning point in the American economy is plain. It is a transition to lower levels of functioning under increasingly precarious conditions. The chances for a serious economic crisis are greater than at any time in the past two decades.
Even if the present powerful trends toward depression are checked, partly and temporarily, the economic crisis will be delayed and slowed down only to strike later with all the fiercer fury.
 
Tell It to the Auto Workers
Today, as in the twenties, what has happened to the auto industry provides an excellent testing ground for the relative merits of the bourgeois economists and the Marxist analysis of capitalist operations. At the height of the boom during the twenties the choir boys of Big Business chanted that the theories of Karl Marx had been finally refuted by the practices of Henry Ford. His Detroit factories inaugurated the marvels of assembly-line production and created the mass market for low-priced cars. This myth that capitalist free enterprise and business genius guaranteed full employment and permanent prosperity was exploded by the stock-market crash of 1929.
The same legend has been revived with even more exuberance in recent years. This time the economy and the government, administered by General Motors through the Cadillac cabinet, had surely solved the problems of continuous production and economic security.
Tell that today to the auto workers! In Michigan, hundreds of thousands of workers have been laid off alongside a relative overproduction of capital in the form of idle machines and shut-down plants. Detroit, that citadel of modern technology, with 12.4% of its labor force unemployed, provides a dramatic verification of Marx’s analysis of the laws of capitalism.



Watch that Language
At his press conference last week President Eisenhower referred, no doubt inadvertently, to the present economic doldrums as a “depression.” So far, at least, the description doesn’t fit. Things are pretty bad – terrible, in fact, for the four to five million unemployed – but a real-scale depression has yet to show up.
– NY Times, March 2.



The present plight of American economy is still further complicated by the effects of world capitalist decline and decay. Through the growing interdependence of national states in world affairs, the economies of the capitalist powers have been linked more closely, increasing the repercussions of major events. A serious and prolonged depression here would cause economic convulsions both among the Allied powers and the neutralist countries. This would in turn help undermine the whole world capitalist foundation.
No wonder that the growing Soviet economic penetration into one part of the planet after another is viewed with undisguised alarm in Wall Street and Washington. In his state-of-the-union message the President spelled out the all-embracing scope of this penetration to Congress: “Trade, economic development, military power, arts, science, education, the whole world of ideas.”
Still more frightening is the prospect of economic depression here while the Soviet Union, thanks to its nationalized property relations and planned economy, forges ahead to new industrial, technological and scientific achievements. For all the prayers of the pious John Foster Dulles, the Soviet Union might even succeed in raising the living standards of the Soviet people while millions of workers in this most favored of capitalist countries go without jobs.
Eisenhower urged everybody to put their shoulders to the wheel and apply themselves “with confidence to the job ahead.” However, more and more workers are finding that their only job is behind them. The Commerce and Labor Departments conceded a sharp rise in unemployment during January to a total of 4.5 million. And a still further rise is predicted by the same sources. The newspapers daily publish accounts of fresh layoffs in one branch of industry after another.
The official reports also disclosed that the average work week had declined to 38.7 hours with a corresponding drop in average weekly earnings. It should be noted that the government’s unemployment figures are never very complete; no records are kept of the millions working only part time.
The privations which inescapably come in the wake of unemployment take on varied forms, ranging from repossession of homes, cars or appliances, in default of payments, to subjection to the costly clutches of loan sharks. Relief agencies have heavier loads than their staffs and appropriations can handle. But these are only some of the more obvious ways in which the effects of a declining capitalist system are translated into terms of human misfortune.
 
The Decline in Income
Alongside of the deepening economic insecurity the working-class standard of living is actually declining. This is clearly expressed in what is designated as “real per-capita disposable income.” This term means total after-tax income, adjusted for price changes and divided by population. The New York Times Annual Economic Survey noted that there had been a perceptible drop in this real income about the middle of 1956. Even though the income figures, in current dollars, continued to creep upward, prices had gone up faster. As a result, real income began to decline.
Statistics for the more recent period are not yet available, but the mounting unemployment, the reduced average work week and the more extended part-time work tells its own story. Moreover, real per capita income is calculated on the basis of the whole population, embracing rich and poor alike. A drop in real income affects the living standards of coupon clippers very little. But even a small cut in real income is a very serious matter for the mass of the people.
This is how the capitalist relations of production work out, and the trend indicated above is bound to be accelerated. Wages, prices, interest and profits, together with taxes and inflation, become crucial elements of the sagging economic structure and the stepped-up arms race. They form the center of increasing conflicts. But such elements are capable of final explanation only in terms of the class relations which underlie them; in terms of the position each social class occupies in the productive process. And any decision concerning these questions is subordinated entirely to class interests.
Anti-depression measures which are being discussed in Washington are not motivated by any concern for the welfare of the working millions but rather by the requirements of the plutocrats. This is clearly evident in the bi-partisan demands for a massive increase in military spending. This type of depression dispeller serves three purposes. It assures continuance of lush profits for the arms manufacturers; promotes further concentration of wealth and power in the hands of the dominant monopolists; and implements their foreign policy of making the world safe for imperialist ambitions.
 
Sacrifice – by Whom?
At the same time there is a persistent outcry from the same capitalist circles against too high wages and too great union power. Murray Shields, whom we quoted earlier, is likewise out in front on this issue. Speaking for his list of one hundred big-corporations, he insists:
“We haven’t had monetary inflation, we haven’t had budgetary inflation – what we have had is wage-cost inflation.”
Taking off from this absurd premise, Shields feels sure that “sometime business has to come to a point where it will refuse to negotiate long term contracts providing for automatic increases which cannot possibly be offset by increased productivity.” Significantly Shields adds:
“Something else I think we ought to do is to fight the four day week.”
This hired adviser of the big corporations does not stand alone. President Eisenhower recently repeated the demand that wage increases must not go beyond overall productivity gains. This trick of linking wages to productivity is merely a cunning device under which to hide an attack on prevailing wage standards. Wages have been moving upward only in labor’s belated and unsuccessful efforts to catch up with the rising cost of living. The fact that wages have not kept pace with the galloping prices is shown by the previously cited evidence of declining real per capita disposable income.
The capitalist leaders, caught in a declining economy amidst the world crisis of imperialist supremacy, are bent on unloading the consequences of their depression on the backs of the workers while making them pay for the arms race. That is the meaning of the President’s message to Congress demanding sacrifice from the American people. “Sacrifice,” he said, “must be made for the right purpose and in the right place – even if that place happens to come close to home.”
With minor variations, the spokesmen of the ruling class emphasize the same theme, and their aims are identical. Step by step these have taken on concrete form and more clearly marked direction. They are part and parcel of the offensive Big Business seeks to unleash against labor.
Any success in these efforts holds a serious threat to the working-class standard of living. Are the workers prepared to meet the threat?
We can remain confident that the American workers will fight; they will fight most fiercely to maintain conditions and rights gained as a result of long and severe struggles during past decades. It is precisely the attempts to lower their standard of living and their right to economic security which will provide the greatest spur to resistance.
Potentially one of the most decisive social forces in the world, this massive working class will learn, in time, to draw the necessary political conclusions from the struggles it will be compelled to engage in. In time it will recognize also that the capitalist system has failed to justify its further existence. When that happens the American working class will be face to face with the only alternative, a socialist America.



Do events inside the two centers of world power have any connection with each other? A Marxist considers the forces that make today’s headlines
THE RECENT shake-ups in the Kremlin hierarchy have again called attention to the crisis haunting this bureaucratic regime. Its first sharp manifestations, sufficiently clear for all to observe, began with the upheavals in Eastern Europe which culminated in the Hungarian revolution. The ill-fated Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of the Suez Canal pointed up, no less bluntly, the growing crisis in the capitalist imperialist world.
What happened at the Suez Canal and in Hungary were different manifestations of a turbulent epoch. Today upheavals and military interventions may appear in one part of the globe, tomorrow in another: but whatever their form, they are all part of the complex pattern of a world in change. Since the early part of this century, the social stability of the past has turned into its opposite. Crises, wars and revolutions have set into motion an interacting process of profoundly deep-going consequences for all future history.
Clearly indicated is a major alteration in the whole course of human history. It marks the beginning of a transition from one historical stage to another. The long-established order of social relations is in dissolution and new social relations are in the process of formation. New economic forms of society, represented by the Soviet orbit, have arisen alongside of the old forms of the capitalist world. Opposite forces, and opposite tendencies, constantly interpenetrate in the complex world fabric today. The progressive and the revolutionary exist alongside of the reactionary and retrogressive. Both the advancing and the retarding, while opposites, remain internally related as two aspects of one historical process.
It is not at all strange that social relations in the Soviet Union develop through crises and conflicts. Considering the immensity of the transformation from its backward heritage to the present advance, a smooth and easy course was not to be expected. The task confronting the Soviet republic was nothing less than the creation of entirely new economic forms. Here is how Lenin put it:
“The difference between socialist revolution and bourgeois revolution lies precisely in the fact that the latter finds ready forms of capitalist relationships; while the Soviet power – the proletarian power – does not inherit such ready-made relationships ... The organization of accounting, of the control of large enterprises, the transformation of the whole of the state economic mechanism into a single huge machine, into an economic organism that will work in such a way as to enable hundreds of millions of people to be guided by a single plan – such was the enormous organizational problem that rested on our shoulders.” (Selected Works in Two Volumes, Moscow 1950, Vol.II, Part 1, p.240.)
But the rise of the Stalinist bureaucracy, superimposed upon and distorting the foundation laid down by the Bolshevik revolution, has introduced additional crises and conflicts that are constantly increasing in scope and in intensity. Crises are thus running parallel in both dominant world sectors. But these crises are different in nature for the simple reason that they arise out of different social systems. Each social system develops in opposite direction and each is subject to different social laws. The basic distinction between them derives from the diametrically opposite relations of production or – what is but a legal expression for the same thing – the property relations: the capitalist property forms and the socialist type of property forms. These are the relations that determine the place in history of any society as they determine, indeed, its growth and development.
 
How Crises Differ
The crisis in the Soviet Union unfolds alongside of the unprecedented expansion of its productive forces. The greater the expansion the more glaringly the gaping disproportions in the social and economic structure stand out. Fundamentally the Soviet crisis is a reflection of the monstrous social inequalities, the great disparity between the low living standard of the masses of the people – who have suffered the most brutal repression under Stalin’s long-standing police regime – and the privileges and powers usurped by the ruling bureaucratic caste. It is the very success of Soviet industrialization that points up most acutely the anachronism of bureaucratic mismanagement and waste of capital resources, both physical and human, while the workers are deprived of any creative initiative, any democratic rights and any sense of ownership or control of the nationalized means of production. As an inevitable consequence, the dynamism of the rapidly advancing industrialization, made possible by the nationalized property relations, comes into ever sharper conflict with the restrictions imposed by the totalitarian superstructure. The promotion and protection of the privileges of bureaucratic rule collide with the needs and the interests of the Soviet masses. Essentially the crisis in the Soviet Union is a crisis of the regime.
The extension of Soviet economic forms to Eastern Europe also extended the bureaucratic powers and privileges and with them the crisis. Upon these countries totalitarian regimes were imposed. Looting and pillaging by the Kremlin bureaucracy became a corollary to strangulation of their national independence. The people there suffer the double oppression of native satraps ruling under a foreign bureaucracy. Their discontent with these conditions and their resistance to the oppressive rule, as we have witnessed, reached the stage of open rebellion from Eastern Germany, through Poland to the Hungarian revolution.
The crisis of capitalism grows out of an entirely different economic foundation and it will therefore have different social consequences. Concretely it is an expression of decline and decay of the system. Capitalist decay derives from the fact that world productive forces have long outgrown private property relations and the artificial barriers set up by national boundaries.
Prior to World War I the constant extension of the world market, the tapping of new resources and the creation of new fields of capital investment for exploitation of cheap labor in colonial spheres, acted as a self-sustaining process for expanded reproduction. This assured a certain social and political stability in a constantly rising curve of economic developments. To be sure it was interrupted by recurring cyclical crises, but the curve maintained its upward course nevertheless. This stability has turned into its opposite in a shrinking world market. Instead of stimulating an upward curve, this market now imposes restrictions’ on the productive forces.
Capitalist world equilibrium has been completely upset by the abolition of capitalist rule in one-third of the globe; that is, by the extension of Soviet economic forms into China and into Eastern Europe; and by the colonial revolution. The rich resources, the abundant market and the labor forces of this one-third have been withdrawn from the orbit of capitalist exploitation. It is true that the United States has expanded. Not only has the economic and political center of gravity definitely shifted to the United States, but all of the West European countries, together with Japan, are now dependent on American capitalism for economic, financial and military hand-outs. The disintegration of the former colonial empires acts to reinforce this dependence. However, the rise of the United States to world preponderance amid the eclipse of the old colonial powers only serves to emphasize the decay of the system as a whole in which American imperialism has gained far less than world capitalism has lost.
 
Struggle of World Systems
On the world arena capitalism must now meet the competition of the rival social order. This applies above all to the United States. It faces that competition especially in regard to the needs and demands of the countries rising from colonial status. To these countries the gigantic leap recorded by the Soviet Union from a backward to a modern industrial power represents an attractive goal.
While the new Soviet economic forms and the old capitalist forms are mutually antagonistic, their relationship is simultaneously dialectically interconnected. The decline and decay of the old and the rise of the new interpenetrate. Mutually their development reacts upon one another and tends to amplify their divergences. Any weakening or setback of one side is translated into reinforcement of the other. Similarly the internal relations of both tend to reflect the interactions between them. The shattering of the world capitalist equilibrium made a breach in the imperialist encirclement of the Soviet Union. In turn, this removed one of the obstacles to the struggle there against the bureaucratic regime. On the other hand, the blow thus suffered by the capitalist world created new strains in the imperialist coalition. In a declining capitalist world, national economies, especially of the lesser powers, face increasing difficulties followed by mounting social and political tensions. And in the next stage, this will again be reflected in sharpened class struggles.
Conflicts between the two world systems arise throughout the planet. They show up in the relations of the contending forces to the underdeveloped countries and, above all in their relations to the continued ferment in the colonial world. The struggle between the outlived capitalist order and the nascent world socialist order is the dominant feature of the world today.
Economic, political and military developments are interlaced everywhere in this struggle; to these can be added developments in the arts and sciences. In their interconnections they all react upon one another. The radio voice of “Sputnik” circling the globe as a demonstration of the giant strides made in Soviet science, engineering and technique, echoed in Wall Street and Washington in the form of tumbling stock prices and demands for greater, and speedier military preparations. Competing arms shipments to the Middle East from the United States and from the Soviet bloc intensify the struggle for political influence in that area while simultaneously adding to the Arab revolutionary mass ferment. Divided rule of nations like Germany, Korea and Indo-China arose out of the conflict between the two world systems, and acts as a source of constantly greater friction. Jim Crow violence in the United States no less than Kremlin suppression of upheavals in the buffer countries reverberates throughout the world. Yet, in all of these developments, there is a reciprocal interaction with a fundamental economic necessity which in the last analysis asserts itself. And the manifest superiority of the Soviet economic forms are viewed with increasing apprehension by all the chancelleries of the West.
 
End of Capitalist Boom
However, while the Soviet economy proceeds on its upward curve, the course of capitalist economy, as we have pointed out, is in decline. The crisis in the Soviet Union is a crisis of the regime. The crisis in the capitalist world is a crisis of the whole system.
In view of the present capitalist prosperity the above statement may seem one-sided and arbitrary. But this is not the case. True, the United States has experienced an industrial boom and expansion of its productive forces since the beginning of World War II. In recent years the boom has extended to Western Europe and Japan. But the truth is that the boom is stained by the blood of untold victims of war and marred by the ghastly destruction of World War II and the Korean conflict. While the boom does include actual capitalist expansion, such as arises out of regeneration of normal civilian demands and the need to restore war-devastated areas, together with the industrialization of the Deep South – essentially the boom has been artificially stimulated by war and armaments production for the militarization of the United States and its allies. It has left unsolved the central imperialist problem of finding new avenues in a constricted world market for export of capital, manufactured goods and agricultural surpluses. Only the vast government expenditures for armaments have so far postponed the inevitable economic crisis. However, the vast expenditures, deficit financing and expansion of the credit structure show up in a boom corroded by universal inflation.
This boom does not differ in nature from any previous capitalist booms. The artificial stimulant of armaments spending promotes greater speculative capital investments in industrial plants, increasing productivity and production to a point where the stimulant becomes less and less effective. Facilities for producing goods are outrunning the market. Output lags as capacity grows. There is ample evidence that the boom has attained its peak and is leveling off for the decline to set in.
According to reports by the Conference on Economic Progress, the rate of growth of the American economy has declined for the last three years. From an average of 4½% during 1947-53, the rate of growth has dropped to 2½% for 1954-55, and to 2% for 1956. Other recent figures show that it has now reached the vanishing point. Thus all the conditions for the cycle terminating in depression were prepared in the course of the boom. The conclusion is inescapable: the present economic prosperity is relative, transitory and conditional, whereas the decline and decay, operating as an organic part of the capitalist system, is absolute. It is a process that cannot be reversed.
Capitalist decline and decay, like its rise and growth, is subject to the law of uneven development. From its manifestation throughout history by the disproportions emerging from different rates of economic development, this unevenness now shows up in a more drastic form. This is demonstrated most clearly in the interrelations between the United States and Europe.
Not only is the overwhelming economic, political and military preponderance of the North American colossus an established fact, but its rise to this dominant position has occurred at the expense of the European capitalist structure. The older imperialist powers have lost their major colonial possessions. Their overseas investments, formerly a source of substantial national income, have been drastically reduced; and East-West trade has suffered a severe shrinkage. Remaining European colonial possessions are in a state of national revolutionary ferment extending even into Africa. Moreover, the dollar gap between what European nations spend and what they receive is still closed only by means of US aid, the continuation of which now faces ever greater difficulties.
The survival of capitalism in Western Europe, during the revolutionary upsurge following World War II, was made possible by the treacherous leadership and policies of Stalinism and Social Democracy. The fate of Europe was in their hands. In Britain, France and Italy the Stalinists and Social Democrats shared the allegiance of the majority of the population. Instead of leading this majority toward the establishment of a Socialist Europe, they took office in their own respective bourgeois state structures. Thus the Stalinists and Social Democrats disoriented the workers, kept them subject to the European bourgeoisie and imposed upon their struggle for socialism a serious defeat. The mass organizations of the workers were not broken; they were immobilized. A class stalemate resulted.
Taking advantage of the social peace thus enforced, American capitalism deployed its economic, financial and military strength to stabilize Europe. US resources proved sufficient for reconstruction and economic revival; above all else, they were sufficient to prop up the shaky bourgeois social order. But the boom experienced by Western Europe since 1950 has not lessened the dependence of its capitalist regimes politically and economically upon the United States. They remain under the challenge of the socialist-minded proletariat at home. And the dialectics of this inter-relationship reduces them to distinctly subordinate positions in the imperialist alliances. They must remain content with the constantly diminishing share in world economy that is allotted to them by American imperialism.
The most unkind cut occurred last year. While the Anglo-French imperialists were still reeling under the blow of Egypt’s nationalization of the Suez Canal and the disastrous collapse of their ill-fated invasion, American imperialism rushed in to fill the power vacuum, at a minimum cost and for maximum profits. Through the Eisenhower Doctrine, Washington proclaimed its suzerainty over the oil-rich Middle Eastern estates before the Anglo-French claimants were legally dispossessed.
Without attempting here to examine the complexities of the Middle Eastern crisis, a few outstanding points should be noted. At present this strategically important area focuses most sharply the competition and conflict between the two world systems. Washington policy makers aimed above all at protecting and expanding the lucrative American monopolist oil properties; but they aimed no less at counteracting the much feared “Communist infiltration.”
Their aims were greatly facilitated by the Kremlin preoccupation with its own internal crisis, chiefly its military intervention in the Hungarian revolution. This the Washington policy makers used to full advantage. But American imperialism is unable to substitute new forms of domination for the colonialism, avowed or covert, against which the masses are up in arms.
Like their predecessors, the American imperialists can find support only among the feudal rulers, the sheiks, the landlords and the militarists. Winning their support is a Pyrrhic victory indeed. After all, the situation in the Middle East is but one field in the crises, wars and revolutions affecting the world. Even the almighty dollar cannot assure social stability. So far the power and sweep of the colonial revolution has had greater impact on the Arab world than all the imperialist machinations combined. In the end, it will also prove stronger than the Eisenhower Doctrine.
 
Struggle of Social Forces
For British and French imperialism there can be but little hope of recovery from the blows struck by the colonial revolution and the disaster at the Suez Canal. Neither the dollar injections, nor the postwar economic upturn have altered their fundamental instability. In each country the economy operates under severe strains, threatened by the twin scourges of runaway inflation and unemployment. Both are glaring examples of the paradoxical fact that while the American economy has so far been sustained at boom levels only through colossal government arms expenditures, the economies of the West European capitalist powers can no longer carry the heavy outlays demanded by imperialist armaments. As a result the NATO setup remains in permanent crisis.
Britain is more dependent on the world market than ever before, and yet its share of world exports of manufactured products has fallen for five successive years. Economically, politically and militarily British capitalism is in deep crisis. Its desperate position drives it with increasing compulsion toward a showdown with the working class. For the Tories, however, this will likely prove an unequal struggle. They confront a highly organized and powerful working class, “the first-born sons of modern industry.” The proverb that events cast their shadows before would seem to apply to the present flight of capital out of Britain, not so much – according to London financial sources – in fear of devaluation of the pound, as in fear of a Labor government coming back into power.
The effect of this trend upon the Labor party leaders, who are still deeply immersed in Fabian conservatism, is visible in a negative way. Not a little afraid of the prospect of taking office they are much more concerned about mitigating capitalism’s crisis. During the Suez adventure they expressed their abhorrence of industrial struggle to back political demands. They have likewise resisted taking political advantage of major industrial conflicts. Now they are all but abandoning nationalization of industry as an issue in the struggle to return to office. The policy declaration adopted at the recent Labor party conference, with the support of Bevan, pays this tribute to capitalism: “Large firms as a whole are serving the nation well.” So instead of nationalization, the policy declaration advocates that a Labor government should purchase shares of industrial concerns on the stock market.
It is not at all unlikely that Britain’s crisis will lead to replacement of the Tories by a Labor government before long. Could a Labor government at this political juncture continue where the Attlee government left off a decade ago? Could it continue the piddling process of nationalizing one or another ailing industry including the purchase of industrial shares? This is hardly conceivable. Moreover, the choice would not be up to the labor leaders alone. They would face the relentless combined pressure of economic crisis and working-class demands. Of necessity a Labor government would have to take steps in the direction of comprehensive nationalization of industry and steps toward planned production. The crisis of British capitalism is fast approaching a point where such steps become imperative. For neither the needs of the people, nor the needs of a stable economy can find a solution within the capitalist relations of production. And for the British working class, it can truly be said that it is on the way to measuring up to the present situation.
To be sure, this implies replacement also of the present Labor party leadership. The working class, increasingly conscious of its strength, will hardly hesitate to do this. As Trotsky observed along ago: “It will take much less time to transform the Labor party into a revolutionary party than was required for its creation.”
In fact recent developments in Britain show revolutionary cadres beginning to work out Marxist program and policies, and extending their influence.
Developments of a similar nature in capitalist continental Europe, even though it is equally torn by crisis, may seem destined to appear at a later stage. In France, particularly, the treacherous opportunist course pursued by Stalinist and Social Democratic leaders alike, has constantly increased the danger of working-class political demoralization. (Without support in parliament from the Stalinist leaders for a year and a half, the Mollet “socialist” government could not have directed the “dirty war” in Algeria.) Yet advances made by the British workers cannot fail to have great impact across the Channel. These would tend to overshadow the feeble imperialist scheme of a common European market, and give new impetus to the idea of a Socialist United States of Europe. Even for the Soviet workers, or to be more exact, precisely for the Soviet workers, struggling against the Kremlin’s bureaucratic rule, the significance would not be lost.
Fear of these perspectives shows up in the chancelleries and stock exchanges of Western Europe like the chart of a rising fever. Fear of the rapidly growing Soviet power follows a parallel course and the European capitalists cling all the more desperately to Wall Street.
But this dependence is not a one-way street. The greater foreign dependence becomes, the greater the dependence of the USA on the world capitalist structure: for investment of surplus capital, for exports and imports and for essential and strategic raw materials, not to mention political and military alliances.
During past decades the uneven development of capitalism favored the advance of the United States. Enormous resources, tapped from a virgin continent, enabled the most rapid expansion within a stable capitalist world and its constantly widening market. Today the dialectics of world relations is turning this into its opposite. American imperialism is now faced with the expansion of its productive forces in a disintegrating capitalist world and in a constricted market. Simultaneously, as the condition of its own existence, it must assume the task, practically single-handed, of defending the decaying system as a whole against further revolutionary advances. Hence, the keystone of US foreign policy is to “organize the world” under its hegemony, to reconquer the lost one-third of the globe. Constant preparation for war flows implicitly and explicitly from this policy.
But the benefits the United States derives from its dominant position are temporary and tend to become transformed into liabilities. The greater its dominance the more do the contradictions and threatening upheavals in other countries become incorporated in the foundations of American imperialism.
“... it is precisely the international strength of the United States,” said Trotsky, “and her irresistible expansion arising from it, that compels her to include the powder magazines of the whole world into the foundations of her structure, i.e., all the antagonisms between the East and the West, the class struggle in Old Europe, the uprisings of the colonial masses, and all wars and revolutions.” (The Third International After Lenin, p.8.)
At home the present social equilibrium owes its existence primarily to the prolonged artificial boom. More than anything else, the boom enabled American capitalism to grant sufficient concessions to keep the workers subordinated to the reactionary but powerful trade-union bureaucracy. Today this bureaucracy sits astride 17 million workers and keeps the class as a whole harnessed to the capitalists politically. But this internal equilibrium is neither stable nor lasting. With the boom tapering off, the dominant monopolies are less willing to grant concessions to labor. Once they find it necessary to attack living and working standards, advance preparations for which are now in the making, the class struggle will again break into the open. And, judging by past performances, the American workers will not shy away from drastic action.
The American working class closed the lag in its trade-union consciousness in a single leap to the most highly advanced industrial unionism under the CIO in the thirties. Politically it still lags far behind the needs of the socialist transformation of society as the only real solution to the capitalist crisis. This lag in political consciousness and the gap between its class power and its class needs prepare the conditions for another forward leap in the political field. And this, we can be sure, will take much less time than was required for the rise in trade-union consciousness. Once the American workers attain political independence as a class, acting through their own political party, a new historical stage will begin in the United States.
 
The Socialist Solution
The logic of world relations points inexorably everywhere to socialist reorganization of society. It arises as an imperative necessity out of the crisis of both dominant world sectors – the Soviet Union as well as the capitalist world. True, the solution to these crises will be decided by the struggle of living social forces, both on the national and the world arena. And here the power of the mighty phalanxes of the American and Soviet workers will be decisive.
For the capitalist world it is a question of the socialist transformation of society as a whole. For the Soviet world, genuine progress to socialism is possible only through a political revolution. Socialism and bureaucracy are incompatible. Democracy and freedom are essential ingredients for its social as well as its economic development. Socialism can become a reality in the Soviet territories only by the complete elimination of the bureaucratic regime and the restoration of Soviet democracy.
The road to the socialist solution is clearly indicated by history. It was followed through to a victory over capitalism in Russia in 1917, and was again indicated in last year’s events in Hungary. “The most indubitable feature of a revolution,” said Trotsky, “is the direct interference of the masses in historic events.” And so the masses did interfere in Russia through the creation of their own mass organs – the Soviets, or workers councils. Arising directly out of the workshops when the mass movement entered the openly revolutionary stage, these councils became the pivot around which the toilers united in their struggle for the socialist transformation.
Workers councils reappeared in the Hungarian revolution; this time, however, they arose as working-class instruments of the political revolution to overthrow the Stalinist bureaucratic regime. There the course of the coming political revolution in the USSR was clearly indicated, for in Hungary the workers councils appeared as an affirmation of working-class determination to maintain and develop the socialist forms of property relations. Moreover, their existence was a demonstration in life of workers democracy.
The workers councils proceeded to reorganize the management of industry and to draw up plans for production and for economic advance in the interests of the toilers. These included a rational wage system, investments and utilization of capital to promote a harmonious development of the productive forces. Under the impulsion of the mass movement the trade unions functioned in behalf of the workers. Revolutionary committees removed worthless bureaucrats from state institutions, even from high ministerial posts and took over their duties. Throughout the country was heard the battle cry for democracy – workers democracy – for the right to strike and for socialist equality, for genuinely free elections with the right of participation by all parties standing on the basis of nationalized property.
In this manner the Hungarian workers demonstrated the meaning of the political revolution; their actions foreshadowed events to come in the USSR. As in Hungary so in the Soviet Union, the realization is mounting that an overgrown bureaucracy, jealous of its powers and privileges, has become the greatest obstacle to socialist development. Instances have been reported already of workers striking against the bureaucratic arbitrariness and misrule. Rapidly moving events have resurrected questions, forgotten since Lenin’s time, concerning the meaning of social control of production and of social relations in a workers state. Demands for workers control of the factories have penetrated the USSR from Poland and Yugoslavia, where some limited forms of control are exercised by workers councils.
A whole historical period is coming to a close and a new one is beginning. A new stage in the Russian revolution was inaugurated by the denunciation of the Stalin cult and the promise to return to Leninism. It is a part of a new historical process set into motion by the terribly pressing need to change the political superstructure to correspond to the transformed economic foundation. This process is not likely to proceed in a straightforward line to its inevitable conclusion, but rather in spurts and spasms. It might include, as has already been the case, both reforms from above and revolutionary actions from below. But the forces for change that have already been unleashed make it increasingly difficult to turn back.
Demands for democracy, for greater freedom and for legal reforms indicate the tremendous ferment especially in intellectual and student circles. Socialist aspirations of the working class are rising. Originally the power of the bureaucracy was rooted in the weakness of the working class. That has now changed. The bureaucracy is obliged to reckon with the growing strength and consciousness of the working class. We can rest assured also that the Soviet workers, as in Hungary, will take into their own strong hands the torch lit by the intellectuals and students.
On this broad arena of masses in motion, workers councils can be reconstituted in the Soviet Union. They can become the testing ground of political programs and leadership. Out of the struggle of political tendencies a revolutionary party can be forged – the party that is the indispensable weapon for the success of the political revolution in the Soviet Union as well as for the socialist revolution in the capitalist world.



William Green has come forward with a statement that the A.F. of L. Executive Council will call upon the workers, organized and unorganized, to “resist wage cuts to the fullest extent”. If that was meant to be taken seriously one would assume that steps for through-going preparation of all unions to adopt, methods and measures for effective resistance should follow to correspond with such statements. But this is not the case.
What the Executive Council has in mind becomes clear from the editorials by Green in the June issue of the American Federationist. His appeal is not at all directed to the working class, not even to the unions, but in the usual boot licking lackey fashion addressed to the employers. He says in part, with regard to the present crisis: “We look to gatherings of captains of finance and leaders of industry to find a way forward”. And then calling upon the unions he says:
“Get ready the facts to show your community how many customers are wage earners and what their wages mean to the retail trade of the town, to those who rent houses to insurance agents, to automobile salesmen, etc. ... Interest community groups in this wage preservation movement and get your statements into the local papers. Remember you must convince employers and the public. This is a time to utilize the facts and put your full strength behind them.”
The actual extent of wage-cutting can perhaps best be gathered by referring to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ figures for the month of January 1931. A total of 335 companies reported reductions affecting 43,507 workers. The same bureau also lists the wage cuts in percentage for a number of industries under the heading of per capita weekly earnings of March 1931 compared with March 1930. We quote in part.
2,937,525 workers in the manufacturing industry have had their weekly wage lowered by 9.4 percent; 110,669 anthracite miners by 9.2 percent. 213,028 Bituminous miners by 16.2 percent and so on for many other industries. These outright wage cuts listed by the bureau do not, however, at all include the many clever schemes which are being applied by way of indirect wage cutting of which many thousand workers have become the victims.
Undoubtedly these figures by themselves express a slashing capitalist offensive of a terrific magnitude against the working class standard. We might add that without a doubt the A.F. of L. leadership has become quite alarmed over the present situation. Not so much over the reduction of the working class standard as because of its ravaging effects upon the union membership. First, by the fact that large proportions of this membership find themselves unable to meet their dues payments. Secondly, and this is a well known fact that the unofficial wage cuts are far heavier than those registered by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Notably is this so in the building trades unions, which form the very backbone of the A.F. of L. These unions are today unable to maintain the wage scale which the official agreements call for. Because of the failure of the organizations really to take any steps to repel the capitalist offensive the members find themselves face to face with the choice of prolonged unemployment or whatever wage the boss sees fit to pay. It is very natural that under such conditions the unions should experience heavy membership losses.
It should now be perfectly clear that what we have clearly and distinctly emphasized some time ago as an inevitable perspective, is actually coming to pass. Capitalism is beginning its desperate efforts to overcome its economic difficulties by saddling the burden more securely upon the workers’ backs. They are aiming for a new sort of stabilization level, many degrees further down, based upon a drastically reduced working class standard. The all-important question now is: Will the workers resist and attempt to prevent it?
In answer to such a query we notice some very encouraging signs. Strikes are today on the increase. Workers are beginning to resist the capitalist onslaughts. The Department of Labor reports that there were only 903 strikes during the year 1930 which records the lowest number since 1918. During the most recent weeks, however many strikes, mostly against wage cuts, have broken out. There have been several strikes involving thousands of workers in the anthracite section of the Pennsylvania coal producing territory. Just now, about ten thousand workers are on strike in the Cannonsburg bituminous section in Pennsylvania under the leadership of the National Miners Union. About 2,000 steel workers struck in Mansfield, Ohio, against a 15 percent wage cut. The latter have so far experienced a total cut of 37½ percent in eighteen months. Several thousand miners have been on strike for some time against wage cuts in Kentucky. Several thousand workers struck against the wage cuts in the Mishawaka rubber and woolen factory in Indiana. Hosiery workers in Pennsylvania are still on strike. Building trades workers in Indianapolis struck and prevented a 20 percent wage cut. Two thousand pocket book workers in New York are on strike against a 25 percent wage cut. Similarly leather goods workers in Massachusetts are out fighting wage cuts. The New England machinists have decided to resist any wage reductions. The street car workers of St. Louis, Mo., have decided to strike against a 10 percent wage cut if negotiations fail them. These are only some of the present examples.
The American workers are still fighting on the defense. A change toward offensive battles is of course not determined only by the numbers involved the frequency of occurrence, the industries involved or even the specific nature of demands. It is rather determined by the general character and objectives of the struggles, not only toward the immediate issues but also toward the whole system of class society. Nevertheless there are without a question of a doubt great possibilities for development in such direction. And it is particularly important to remember that upon the revolutionary movement rests the task of bringing forward the slogans and tactical guidance which will furnish the bridge from the defensive to the offensive.
It would be erroneous to draw the conclusion from the decrease of membership of the A.F. of L. unions that it is definitely facing an unbroken period of decline. Undoubtedly it is in a serious crisis. But it is to be expected that the very pressure of the capitalist onslaught will bring many in the workers’ ranks to seek organizations and will still throw many of them into the folds of the A.F. of L. unions despite the treacherous career of its leadership. It is particularly pertinent, however, at the present moment to call the attention of the workers to the fact that the fundamental reason for the present plight of the A.F. of L. unions is to be sought precisely in the character of the leadership and its policies. It is only a short time ago, at the beginning of this present crisis, that William Green promised the Hoover Conference that there would be no strikes for “wage adjustments” during this period. And that at a time when any worker with an ounce of brains would know that precisely this period would be utilized for a general reduction of the working class standard.
It is to be expected that the present period of such slashing attacks upon the unions will bring forward new elements with pretentious “progressive” declaration. Such are merely the weathercocks of the general trend of the working class movement and serve as a mask cloaking the treason being prepared by the reactionary leadership whose color does not change. In that respect, such elements become particularly dangerous, as their fundamental outlook has not changed either, but only their appearance. They furnish the feeding channels of social reformism, into which they endeavor to direct the trade union movement to prevent its development truly and genuinely in a Left direction.
The American working class has during the past “prosperity” period been lulled into a false sense of security which to a large extent accounts for the slow developments of resistance to the attacks upon it. These workers have not suffered serious defeats. All the more can it be expected that with the increase of these attacks the developments toward large scale struggles and even offensive struggles will become quite rapid. There are great prospects and great encouragments in such a perspective. But there are also immense responsibilities resting upon the Communist movement. The coming period will most likely hold rich possibilities for the organization of the unorganized industries for the building of new unions. But it also holds similar possibilities for development of militancy for building of a Left wing movement within the old unions. Only a correct combination of these two tasks can assure success.
 



The miners’ strike against inhuman starvation conditions, from its inception which began two weeks ago in Western Pennsylvania has been spreading rapidly and is now extending to Ohio. At the moment of writing there are nearly 20,000 miners out. They are fighting with a militancy equal to the most glorious examples of American labor history. This holds bright prospects for further extention as the miners elsewhere begin to learn that this is their battle as well.
In another article in this issue we give some figures of slashing of the miners’ wages. These are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics compilation. We notice that during the period March 1930 to March 1931 213,000 Bituminous coal miners have suffered a 16.2 percent reduction. Recently the U.S. Department of Labor conciliator, Emmaline Pitt, expressed herself as “horrified” at the starvation and wretched living conditions of the miners and the “terrible brutality” of the coal and iron police as well as the state Cossacks. Miners have been existing on the starvation level. The most ruthless methods have been used to smash their organization.
In western Pennsylvania the National Miners Union has assumed the leading role. With a genuine mass basis being accepted and a genuine union democracy applied there are prospects for success for the N.M.U. But for this it will be necessary to avoid the mistakes of policy and the bureaucratic administration which have stifled the N.M.U. up till now.
The miners are on the march. A movement of real vitality has commenced, expressing itself in different forms in different parts of the country. In Harlan, Kentucky, 18,000 miners already struck early in May against starvation conditions. In Illinois there is a revolt against the treason of the Lewis-Fishwick-Walker reactionaries. This movement found reverberations in the southern part of West Virginia and Ohio where sections of a new union are being organized in opposition to the old Lewis union. It found reverberations also in Indiana and in the southwestern states where also new union formation is taking place.
The U.M.W. is definitely discredited in the eyes of the rank and file miners who have learned the lesson from the treasonable career of its officialdom. The capitalist forces, particularly in Pennsylvania, are now crying out for re-establishment of the Lewis union. The bosses prefer no union at all, but they will always be ready to accept the union of the A.F. of L. brand of leadership and policies when they are threatened with the alternative of the rank and file taking matters into their own hands and forming a militant union.
In western Pennsylvania the jails are being filled with militant miners. In Harlan Kentucky, 50 of them are in prison, 20 charged with murder in the first degree. All of these class war victims need defense and deserve all possible working class effort on their behalf. Relief is needed for the striking miners who already for a long time have existed on the starvation level. Workers should send such support to the Miners Relief Committee at 611 Penn Ave., Pittsburgh, Pa.
In this situation of growing strike, growing militancy of the miners and increasing revolt against the old U.M.W. machine there are real possibilities for a movement which may assume titanic proportions. There are real possibilities for a union built on a class basis, functioning under the banner of militancy and able to embrace all the coal miners. The slightest concession to the outfit of John L. Lewis will be wrong. To the miners it should remain clear that now is the time to bend all effort to direct the various movements of revolt against the old bureaucracy, of struggle against the inhuman conditions and of efforts to organize in various sections into one mighty stream for the building of an all-embracing class union. It is necessary to particularly emphasize once again the need of amalgamation of the various sectional unions being organized together with the National Miners Union into one such organization. It is incumbent upon all Communist miners to unite for the achievement of this goal as a part of the fight to a finish against capitalism.
 



Our readers have become acquainted with the criticism made by comrade Mihelic of the slogan, the six hour day without reduction of pay, which was adopted by our National Committee. Recently the “theoretical” leader of the official party, Earl Browder, also came forward with a “criticism” of this position. Thus there are two views on this question which, however, differ essentially in character. The first demands an exhaustive reply because it contains serious arguments defending a view. The second is of much less consequence because by its very stupidity it brands the arguments of this mediocre “theoretician” as having nothing whatever in common with revolutionary theory.
Comrade Mihelic presented his views for discussion. Browder evidently presented his arguments as the last word on the party line – that is, until the next “turn” – which is bound to follow. In this reply we present the views of our National Committee.
The April Communist contains an article by Earl Browder entitled How We Must Fight against the Demagogy of Fascists and Social-fascists. In this article Browder condemns the Hoover “stagger plan”; but he also makes the “discovery” that the slogan for the six hour day without reduction in pay, as advanced by us means the same thing. Were that so, one might ask: “What about the slogan for the seven hour day”?
Browder exposes the “social fascist” usage of the six hour day slogan. In that he is closer to being right. We quote from the article in question:
“The Socialist party joined in the game with the slogan slightly modified to six-hour day and five-day week. This was immediately taken up by the Trotskyite renegades, as their own ‘original discovery’, and the Communist party was denounced by them as an enemy of the working class because it refused to join the chorus that extended from Hoover to Cannon.”
A correction is necessary here. In the first place we did not denounce the Communist party as an enemy of the working class. We have the opposite estimate of the Communist party. But we do condemn its leadership for its failure to keep the Party on the correct revolutionary path. In the second place, we advance the slogan in the question as the six hour day without reduction in pay.
 
Does the Party Oppose this Slogan?
Revolutionary workers may think that there is somehow nn unfortunate misunderstanding here. The party leadership cannot actually oppose the six hour day slogan. No there is no misunderstanding. It is the “theoretician” speaking officially. The extent to which such a false position may lead became very vivid in the recent arguments of I. Amter, one of the lesser “theoreticians”. Of course we know that he will excell anybody in stupidity and put it into fifty pages of manuscript. He will rush in where angels fear to tread. And so, in an article in the Daily Worker about a month ago he actually denounced the demand for the shorter work-day as assistance to the Hoover “stagger plan”.
Why does the party leadership oppose the six hour day slogan? How will it maintain that in contradistinction to it, the seven hour day slogan leads in the direction of the “revolutionary working class solution” of the unemployed problem. This it fails to explain, and there is no good explanation, because its position is false. Its position can lead only to preventing the revolutionary working class solution to the extent that it prevents the correct slogan of the six hour day without reduction of pay from becoming instrumental in rallying a class movement of the American workers. The reasons for the superiority, in the sense, of the latter slogan we refer to consider in the reply to comrade Mihelic.
* * *
What Are Mihelic’s Errors?
Comrade Mihelic presented a seriously reasoned argument in support of his views on the slogan “the six hour day without reduction of pay”. The manner in which he poses the question has its distinct value, and a discussion on that basis can become helpful toward further clarification. In his comments on the crisis and unemployment situation, as well as in his criticism of shortcomings in our position, and, what we might call our unemployment program, there is much which can be welcomed. We lay no claim to having as yet adequately covered the subject or to having presented an analysis and program complete in every respect. We are far from that and can well afford to discuss even further than this present scope.
However, there are some of comrade Mihelic’s contentions which can by no means be accepted because they spring from an essentially false position. For example, his two major contentions: First, that: “From the general angle of the unemployed struggle, the emphasis must be placed on the fight for social insurance” – as against the demand for the six hour day without reduction of pay. Secondly, he contends that the slogan itself should be “the shorter working week with no reduction in pay.” Both contentions are incorrect.
In regards to the first contention we do not approach this problem from the point of view of counterposing the one slogan to the other or even counterposing its emphasis. The one slogan supplements the other and, when combined, help to make up a program of immediate demands.
Comrade Mihelic proceeds to amplify his contention by saying that social insurance places the chief stumbling block in the path of the capitalist’s designs to use the army of unemployed against the employed. He adds: “Social Insurance and the fight for it offers the chief instrument by which the unemployed and the employed workers can be united. If they cannot be united on this basis they cannot be united at all.”
This is certainly an altogether too sweeping statement to make. We believe we are much more to the point in saying: The slogan for social insurance is correct. It is the one with the most immediate appeal to the unemployed workers. It is not to be conceived merely for purposes of ameliorating the present unemployed misery but primarily as a means of drawing into the orbit of the class struggle all those workers who suffer under this pressure. In this sense, it also becomes a means of advancing the struggle more directly and more specifically against the existing system of capitalism.
Granting of social insurance certainly becomes an important stumbling block in the path of capitalist designs, as do most actual working class gains. By way of comparison, it is well to remember that in the United States at present there are indications that some form of unemployment relief may be granted. Senators, governors, and others have to an extent put themselves publicly on record. Of course, all efforts would then be towards loading the whole burden of such relief upon the worker having a job. This does not in the least invalidate the slogan for unemployment insurance. Actual relief will be granted only provided the workers fight sufficiently for it.
While the capitalist class displays its hostility toward unemployed insurance we may take for granted that it will be much more hostile to granting the six-hour day without reduction in pay.
In this respect we may also refer to England and Germany with their experience in unemployment relief as an established system; miserable though this relief is. In the first country mentioned, the employers have already, as in the recent coal miners’ strikes, offered the most bitter resistance to the shorter work day, and enjoyed the connivance of the McDonald government in this attempt. We may conceive of what the picture would be in either one of these countries with a serious working class struggle for the shorter work day and the opposition the capitalist rulers would offer in comparison to the irritation they suffer from the prevailing unemployment insurance.
There are already indications that they will rather retain the longer work day with more production of what becomes absolute surplus value, even at the cost of maintaining an unemployment insurance system. Marx has particularly emphasized how much dearer the absolute surplus value produced by the longer work day became to the heart of the employers than the relative value produced during the course of the shorter work day. Their motto is – keep the workers at the grindstone long hours, speed them up and they will pay for these out of work. Now to the second contention of comrade Mihelic. He says: “Granted that the six hour day could be obtained at once (which it cannot) even at this time it cannot be proved that this would provide jobs for all the jobless and even if it would, it would be only a question of a very short period before the situation would be the same as at present, due to rationalization, new machinery, and the law of surplus value. Thus social insurance offers the most permanent form of relief (even though it is not complete in itself) and places the biggest stumbling block in the path of the capitalist class.”
From this point, comrade Mihelic proceeds to show the necessity of beginning at the very bottom and arrives at the conclusion that the slogan should be “the shorter working week without reduction in pay”. This he also amplifies by first stating that, when we raise the slogan of the six hour day in a general manner we will succeed in nothing but appearing visionary. Secondly he states: “A reduction of the working hours can be won only by direct struggle with each separate set of bosses and not by pressure on the government and in that sense it surely is much different than the fight for social insurance.”
We have no agreement at all with such views of the six-hour day slogan. We will much rather subscribe to Lenin’s conception of the eight hour day slogan as stated in his preface to the pamphlet May Day in Kharkov:
“The demand for an eight-hour day, however, is the demand of the whole proletariat, presented not to individual employers, but to the government as the representative of the whole of the present day social and political system, to the capitalist class as a whole, the owners of all the means of production.” (Collected Works, The Iskra Period, Book I, page 47)
This does not in the least put us in the position, against which comrade Mihelic correctly warned, of drawing a mechanical analogy with the period of the eighties and the movement for the eight-hour work day. But is it more visionary now to promulgate the slogan of the six-hour day than was the slogan of the eight hour day? Is the gap from the present work day to the six-hour day bigger than from the then prevailing work day to the eight hours? We think not. History gives no such proof.
What is, however, more decisive today is the fact that we are in the epoch of capitalist imperialism with its immense rationalization of production and permanent elimination of millions of workers from the productive process. During the decade ending 1929 it is estimated that productivity per worker increased 48.5 percent without any appreciable reduction of the work day. We have reached the stage of the development of capitalist production where the six-hour work day has become an even more potent need than the eight-hour work day when it was first advanced in the eighties.
The present epoch is also the one of proletarian revolution. This imposes so much more the duty upon us to advance the slogan of the six-hour work day precisely in the sense in which Lenin speaks of the eight-hour day slogan. In this manner, utilizing the slogan to assist in setting workers definitely into motion in the direction, not merely of obtaining relief, but of fulfilling its historic role.
The present conjuncture of the working class movement is not the same as during the struggles in the eighties. Today, it is rather a defensive curve occurring under a period of crisis, unemployment, and drastic lowering of the working class standard of living. But precisely in this are created the conditions and the possibilities for the coming rising movement. In this situation, the character of the six-hour day slogan is that of a bridge from the defensive towards the offensive. Hence, it becomes an effective means for preparing for the next stage of the struggle.
In regards to the practical organization for this stage, one is naturally tempted to ask: “Would the realization of the six-hour work day appear within the realms of possibility to the American workers?” We think so and do not conceive of it as visionary. This is attested to by the fact that the United Mine Workers in convention back in 1922 went on record for a fight for its attainment. Within the various railroad workers’ unions there is today a growing demand for the six-hour work day. The attainment of the six-hour day would mean a real gain for the workers, and a strengthening of their position. The relief which it could afford from the unemployment situation could certainly become visible now to the workers.
We do not take the view that if the workers cannot be united on the basis of the slogan for social insurance they cannot be united at all. We think rather that the six-hour day slogan particularly possesses the quality of uniting employed and unemployed alike in the struggle. Nevertheless, we fully realized that the more complete program of our immediate demands, together with the proper pursuit of the fight on a revolutionary basis, is necessary to accomplish working class unity and to guarantee its correct direction.
Because of these various reasons, it would be entirely incorrect to substitute the slogan “the shorter working week without reduction of pay”. Due to its indefiniteness it would not sufficiently furnish a clear pivotal point for the working class in this struggle. Moreover, the slogan of the six-hour work day without reduction of pay. and thus the better possibility of crystallising a definite movement, would make it that much more possible to shorten the existing work day.
It is our duty to raise this slogan in an effort to have the idea penetrate the masses. We must, with the small forces at our command, do our best to assist in organizing the fight for its realization and by all means to win the Communist movement as a whole to become active participants. The various slogans supplement one another and thus make up a program of immediate demands. One important part of these activities is to carry on class education. Only that can assure that the workers, when set into motion, take a definite direction along which each demand becomes a stepping stone to the revolution.
 



By the thesis of the Eleventh Comintern Plenum we are informed that the growing contrasts between the systems of Soviet economy and capitalist economy is the “kernel of contemporary international relations”. Without for one moment overlooking this growing contrast, it is necessary to observe the “slight” error of estimate made by the authors. The kernel of contemporary international relations is not yet this growing contrast. No, this kernel is still to be found in the increasingly furious contest between the main imperialist powers for hegemony of the world market. – More precisely the rivalry between the United States and England.
Both of these powers are in the throes of the deep-going capitalist world crisis. The unbridled expansion of American imperialism is already forcing England to the wall. In actual practise it is now being demonstrated that the former, in order to overcome its economic difficulties will proceed yet more ruthlessly further to establish and maintain its world hegemony against Europe, and particularly, against its main competitor – England. It is in this sphere that the most gigantic conflict yet is being prepared. New wars and revolutions which will shake the world to its foundation. The storm clouds are gathering and moving with ever increasing velocity. This, which has been assigned only secondary place in the Eleventh Comintern Plenum thesis, is the “kernel of contemporary international relations.”
Manuvering for position through economic and diplomatic means has so far characterized the contest between these two powers; that is, with a few engineered revolutions thrown in for good measure. All a prelude to the continuation which will take the form of open warfare. The five power naval conference seemingly hung the shield of a diplomatic victory on the chest of the grotesque British premier; but in reality American imperialism carried off the laurels of victory. It will soon stand out much more clearly to what extent the results of this conference means a settlement of naval supremacy in favor of the power with the strongest industrial resources.
 
American Imperialism for Disarmament – in Europe
From the more recent Chequers conversations similar prospects have opened up for American imperialism in regards to land armaments. The German Chancellor suggested a downward revision ol reparations payments. Of course, such a proposal would need the sanction of Wall Street by which the reparations payments are finally pocketed. However, President Hoover was not slow in grasping the opportunity. His moratorium proclamation aims at two simultaneously “great” accomplishments – to knife the developing German revolution and to lend force to the counter-demand of reduction of land armaments of the European nations.
Such land armaments, of course, do not merely involve the question of soldiers, of standing army, but of the whole war machinery, of implements, of air fleets etc. Thus we see in the field of land armaments similarly the economic pressure by American imperialism for a settlement in favor of the power with the greatest industrial resources.
The Armaments Year Book of the League of Nations reports the sums laid out for military and naval expenditures in 1928–1929 by the principal powers to be:



United States


    


$772,964,000




Great Britain


$550,080,000




France


$337,556,000



We may rest assured that American imperialism will fully utilize this opportunity and swing its economic whip to reduce the armaments particularly of its nearest rival and secure its own supremacy unchallenged. Such are its preparations for the more open and more brutal inevitable conflict. It will also be another step toward more definitely putting the European nations on rations. While these undoubtedly are the perspectives of American imperialism there remains still the American working class to be heard from.
 
The Essential Question of Destiny of England
What is the position of England in this conflict? It is showing the scars of a declining empire. It has fallen to third place as a world exporting power. Inch by inch it is being forced further to the wall by its most overwhelming competitor the United States. Her dominion empire is shaken by the growing differentiation of interests of each separate part. In the colonies, serious revolutionary movements are developing. Thus, now that the sun is actually beginning to set over her imperial domain it coincides with her advance toward a revolutionary situation. The question of the greatest importance, however, is the one of the readiness of the working class for such a situation; and above all the question put by Comrade Trotsky in his book Whither England:
“Will it be possible to organize a Communist party in England, which shall be strong enough and which shall have sufficiently large masses behind it, to enable it, at the psychological moment, to carry out the necessary political conclusion of this ever sharpening crisis? This question involves the entire destiny of England.”
 
Where is the Proletarian Vanguard?
In the Dec. 1923 parliamentary elections, coming right upon the heels of the defeat of the German revolution and the American intervention for restabilizing German capitalism, the British Communist Party polled 53,000 votes to the Labor party’s 4,350,000. By the 1928 elections the relationship of votes were 50,000 to 8,000,000 respectively. Thus if parliamentary elections register any thing, this intervening period registered a victory of reformism over Communism, and that during a period of heavily growing unemployment. During the general strike year the C.P. membership reached its highest membership, about 12,000. It was a force within the trade unions and to an extent within the labor party, despite expulsion barriers. The Minority Movement was supposed to have a following of close to a million; but alas, the fatal weakness: it was mainly based upon the “prestige” of the “Left” gentlemen of the type of Purcell, Hicks and Cook. The party weekly organ reached a circulation of about 70,000 and the Minority Movement weekly organ about 110,000. Today the party finds itself frightfully reduced to a position of serious isolation, its daily organ not reaching much above a 3,000 circulation. The Minority Movement has become a skeleton organization of the party without any serious influence. The Communist vanguard has so far remained unable to draw upon the great and growing resources of working class disillusionment with the MacDonald labor government.
While we shall reserve an attempt to make an analysis of this specific situation until a later article, it is necessary to bear in mind, when looking at this contrast of the past with the present the disastrous policy of the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee. From this the British Communist Party has not learned one single lesson. As a matter of tact by its bureaucratic leadership of Stalinist faction agents, the membership has ben prevented from making any such attempt. Thus the heritage of this false policy, while remaining uncondemned and uncorrected, today still weighs like an alp upon the party. And surely a fundamental change of orientation, of policy and of tactics is necessary before the Communist party will be able to play a serious leading role in the coming struggles now being inexorably prepared by the developments of England’s crisis – not to speak of the coming revolutionary situation.
 
MacDonald Preparing the Road
Meanwhile the road of England heading directly toward new serious class battles is clearly discernible. The situation is being described by her leading industrialists as one of “unrelieved gloom”. But statements by them are, of course, not in the least concerned with the terrible pauperization and squalor of the working class. There is a growing demand from the financial interests for a complete overhauling of the industrial machinery. But right there the demand strikes a snag which with this gentry, finds its formula: “England is living on a higher standard than her continental neighbors”.
Naturally this is not to be interpreted as having any reference to the standard of the capitalist masters and hence all efforts are aimed at reducing the working class standard of living. Throughout England there is a systematic heavy wage slashing now carried into almost every industry. The workers to be sure laving registered a growing dissatisfaction and increased attempts at resistance but they have not yet taken the form of a consciously prepared defensive. In the wage slashing campaign a definite role has been assigned to the MacDonald government. Prior to its taking over the reins for his majesty, these Labor party politicians were rather unsparing in their demands for capital investments for expansion of British industry. Usually, this followed with a veiled “threat” that if capitalism could not run industry, the workers would. Not that this was intended for the ears of the workers and for them to carry out the practical conclusions therefrom. Far from that. It was intended as a pressure upon capitalism. And today history is drawing the conclusion for MacDonald and his colleagues. It flows inevitably from their position as his majesty’s ministers, as lieutenants of capitalism of the most miserable but also most cunningly treacherous social reformist stripe. Theirs is now the particular task, no longer of mouthing phrases about workers running industry, but of applying the instruments of capitalist state coercion to reduce the workers’ standard of living; to assure the basis for rationalization and further exploitation. That it is precisely also the labor government which is assigned the task of making preparations for the coming imperialist conflict – disguised under peace palavers – coincides with its position.
But the plans of the capitalist masters of England, including the specific tasks assigned to the Labor government, have not yet fully materialized. Thus, despite the menacing clouds which now so frequently threaten the much cherished jobs of these royal ministers they will, barring unforeseen developments, still be able to hang on for some time. But that will make possible the further completion of the process of disillusionment and make the break more decisive. It will make the coming class battles more decisive also. Yet the all important question remains the clarity and definiteness of working class direction. Will the Communist forces be able to lead?

Note: This is the first of a series of articles on the present situation in England and the tasks of the Communists. A second installment will appear in the next issue. – Ed.)
 



Only a full understanding of the rather stormy developments of the class struggle in England during recent years can explain the rise to power and a two year reign of the MacDonald Labor party leadership. Rut it must also lead to the conclusion that it has passed its zenith and is facing its period of decline, not merely by the Conservatives gaining at its expense but primarily by the coming turn towards the Left of the British working class. This grows inevitably out of the conflict of the shabby Fabian-imperialist position of this leadership with the actual needs of the working class.
The stormy strikes of 1917 to 1920 terminated in the defeat of Black Friday. In consequence of this defeat the British workers turned their attention to the political parliamentary field, to support of the labor party which became expressed in immense gains at the following elections of 1922. The Labor party polled 4,236,733 votes, almost doubling its vote at the preceding elections in 1918. Again in 1926, the general strike came to an inglorious defeat and once more the British workers put their faith in the labor party as expressed in the following elections of May 1929. It again immensely increased its vote, polling a total of about 8,000,000. For the second time it took over the government.
 
Struggles Looming
Without a question of a doubt serious economic struggles are once more looming in England. The all important question is: Will the British workers now know how to draw the correct political conclusion? Will it mark a period of growth for the Communist party?
The 1929 elections, if they recorded anything, recorded a victory of reformism over Communism. From the time of the general strike, the decline of influence of the Communist party seemingly correspond quite closely, in its relative proportion, to the growth of influence of the labor party. In future perspectives this must be seriously taken into account: and it becomes an imperative duty for the British C.P. first of all to furnish a sober analysis. One may begin by asking how did the party follow the advice given by Lenin to British Communists in his polemics against “Leftism” in Communism? This pamphlet, written in 1920 it will be recalled, proposed to the Communists to form a bloc with the labor party against the reactionaries in power – “to support (it) the same way as the rope supports the man who has hanged himself”.
It would, of course, be foolish to attempt to interpret such advice in the sense of applying literally or in essence at all times. But how far the British C.P. under the direction of Stalinism, has departed from this fundamental approach in two important situations first in a Right opportunist direction, later in a Leftist direction, has been clearly recorded by history.
The first instance we have in mind was the sorry role cut out for the Communists in the Anglo-Russian “Unity” Committee during and after the general strike. In the name of this spurious united front the Communist party apparently gained in influence and following, particularly for the Minority Movement. But it became only an influence gained for, and a following built around, the “Left” deceivers, those who – also in the name of the united front – betrayed the strike. With the collapse of the strike and the final collapse of the Anglo-Russian “Unity” Committee, the influence and following remained by and large with the deceivers who had merely functioned temporarily as the “Left” shield for the utterly reactionary trade union leadership. From this blow, the British Communist Party has not yet recuperated. It could not then and could not since unmask these “Lefts” because the error of this spurious united front has remained uncondemned.
 
The “Third Period” in England
The second instance came after the Stalin directed Comintern had officially proclaimed the “third period”. At the 1929 parliamentary elections, the C.P. entered its candidates under the slogans “class against class” and “fight all three capitalist parties” with the characterization of “social Fascism”. As an analysis the former is of course, correct. Moreover, in the class struggle it is always a matter of class against class. But as a concrete slogan and with the combination of the latter it could not at all serve to win the workers. It repelled them and threw them back into the arms of the bourgeois pacifists of the labor party leadership. The brief experience of the nine months’ government of these politicians in 1924 had by no means been sufficient for the British workers to recognize the banalities of their professed gradualness of socialism. On the other hand, had the C.P. understood correctly the revolutionary art of unmasking their deceptive reformist position it would at least have enabled it to secure the worker contacts which could become particularly valuable now with the additional experience of “labor” in office. However with the serious errors of the Anglo-Russian “Unity” Committee remaining uncondemned and unclarified; with the Stalinist revisionism saturating the core of its leadership, this could not be expected.
In the language of bourgeois diplomats the MacDonald government is credited with a “brilliant” record in colonial and foreign affairs. It upheld the British tradition of – continuity in foreign affairs, in other words it proved itself an effective agent in carrying on the policy of its imperialist predecessors. It has been characterized by that bourgeois diplomats call a “policy of firmness in Egypt and India”, which means that the labor government has known how to interchange successfully “at the right moment” diplomatic trickery or open brutal suppression: to substitute machine guns and deadly poison gasses for the mere police lathi and cane to subjugate their rebellious colonial people. If the recognition of and trade relations with the Soviet Union re-established by the second MacDonald government has not yet brought a favorable trade balance to British capitalism, they undoubtedly still have hopes of reaching this point. At the Hague, the “little giant”, Philip Snowden, in the words of the New York Current History, “pressed British claims with a pertinacity which the most imperialistic conservative who ever lived could not have surpassed.” Even Arthur Henderson has proven his “brilliancy” in defending British imperialist interests in foreign affairs.
 
MacDonald’s Imperialist Policy
But it is now in most recent European developments that these hybrid pietists. who abhor all force and violence, – except when in the interest of British imperialism – are again grasping for an opportunity “brilliantly” to serve these interests. While the American imperialists proceed in their ruthless expansion endeavoring to put the European powers on rations and at this moment, through the Hoover moratorium, particularly directs a blow at France, demanding armament reductions. MacDonald also sees his opportunity. That the European bourgeois powers will fight more desperately between themselves for their diminishing rations is now being historically proven. The French bourgeoisie insists on stiff conditions for financial assistance to Germany. The MacDonald government squirming under the pressure its capitalist masters already suffer for the American colonies, fight the harder for its diminishing ration. It joins the demands for armament reductions – in France. On July 11, it organized a “peace” parade through London, winding up in Albert Hall. All three party leaders, MacDonald, Baldwin and Lloyd George, spoke – for peace. They professed armament reduction in England and strongly alluded to certain other powers (primarily France) who had immensely increased their armaments. While British imperialism is losing its world hegemony it fights desperately for a European hegemony. However, the French bourgeoisie have had the audacity even to surpass England in armament expenditures. According to the report of the World Peace Foundation, the figures for the last fiscal year were (at least the public figures) France $440,080,000 – England $405,255,000. That hegemony within the capitalist world is determined by nothing but armed forces is perfectly well known to the pious gentlemen of the MacDonald government who look with horror toward force applied by proletarian revolutions. So while they talk peace and reduction of armaments they follow the tradition of “continuity of policy” of the imperialists of the previous cabinets. For purposes of public consumption MacDonald wound up his “peace” sermon at Albert Hall with the following drivel: “The problem that we have got to face is the man and the woman that can come up to the assault be beaten back, come back again, full of heart and spirit, knowing that wrong will not triumph; but by the faith, the persistence, the energy and the determined human heart, that which we regard as precious, that which we regard as essential to the divine purposes poses of creation, is bound by patience, by energy and by faith to be carried to triumphant issues in the course of world affairs.”
But what his speech actually implied was a call upon all patriotic Britons to arm more effectively to maintain by force the diminishing imperialist ration against the competing powers, this time particularly aiming at the former ally – France.
 



The decline of the British empire has almost become proverbial. The last part of the nineteenth century already witnessed the rise of the threat to its domination. Germany, then the most active competitor, began crowding England in the world market. But it is since the world war, and the establishment of the United States as a world dominant creditor nation, that the decline has become more accelerated. This is perhaps not so much demonstrated in actual figures of lost ground as in the import of their comparison with general world market conditions, and above all in the political import of this factor.
England did not experience since the war, an intervening “prosperity” period as did the United States from 1924 to 1929, as did France, not even such a temporary upward swing as took place in Germany. Since the world war she has been saddled with an enormous indebtedness to the United States. It would be difficult to calculate the total amount, but payments of the purely governmental debts to U.S. for the proposed moratorium year alone would amount to $159,520,000 according to the New York Times estimate. After a desperate struggle, England did succeed in re-establishing her gold standard but is now quite alarmed at the protracted heavy flow of gold to the U.S. and France.
The decline has become reflected within the country, that is, aside from the differentiation of interests within the dominion empire, in a steadily mounting unemployment; in a marked uncertainty within the upper class; in decline of the decadent Liberal party and new divisions within the political parties in general both capitalist and labor; in a diminution of the formerly powerful aristocracy of labor as well as in sharpened class antagonisms.
“Gradualness” some time ago became the sacred gospel of Baldwin and MacDonald alike. As far as its object is concerned there have been no fundamental differences discernible, all possible pious protestations by MacDonald to the contrary notwithstanding. And surely England is now experiencing a gradualness of decline, with – as in all past history, so also in the future – prospects of some violent interruptions, both of war and of revolutionary upheavals.
Today the export of British goods is declining more rapidly than is international trade. Figures are very tiresome but to cite a few in demonstration will nevertheless prove illuminating. The net favorable balance, or credit to British trade and services of all kind for the year 1930 amounted to $189,000,000. Before the war, with its lower price level, the net balance was nevertheless much higher. For example, in 1913 a total of $878,000,000 and in 1907 a total of $670,000,000. How seriously England has been hit by the present world crisis is illustrated by the Board of Trade index number of industrial production. With 1924 as its base line it shows a drop from 114 in the fourth quarter of 1929 to 110.7 in the first quarter of 1930; to 103.1 in the second quarter; to 99.5 in the third quarter. The yet more recent figures of the Board of Trade for the first quarter of 1931 shows a fall of imports of $368,467,665 and of exports of $339,692,555 below the corresponding period of 1930.
 
Growing Conflict in World Market
The competition and preparation for the conflict with the United States proceeds everywhere. In China it cannot be said that England has been most successful. It alternatingly backed the various reactionary militarist oppositions to the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-Shek which, of course, was equally as reactionary but so far more successful. The “open door” policy of the American imperialists – because of their having less important concessions – won favor with the bourgeoisie of the Chinese Nationalist government. The success to date of its present degree of stabilization is in no small measure due to the defeat of the revolution of the Chinese workers and peasants because of the Menshevik policy by which it was conducted by the Stalin Comintern regime. However, the perspectives for political superiority of American imperialism in China are by no means secured. The Chinese revolution is still smouldering.
In South America, British imperialism is striving desperately to maintain its foothold against the American aggressor. But the immense preponderance of credits available In Wall Street presses continually for new fields of investments. Recently the air has been astir with newspaper rumors of some sort of extension of the Hoover moratorium action for “relief” of South America. However, as is admitted, it is in this sphere not a question of governmental debts and hence the purpose could possibly better be accomplished without official governmental action. And no doubt, Wall Street itself will know how to make the broadest possible application of the Monroe Doctrine with its government ready to back it up in due time. British investments in South America are still far greater than those of the American imperialism. According to Revista de Economia Argentine the figures in 1928 were $4,103,000,000 for England and $2,167,000,000 for the United States.
It is in the control of electricity and mineral properties that the greatest duel is being waged in the South American republics. When the New York Stock Exchange boom was on, many securities went from London to New York. After the slump set in some have traveled the way back. In the little revolution in Brazil, Wall Street prematurely “backed a loser” and since then the successful “revolutionists” have called to their assistance an expert of the Bank of England and not of the Federal Reserve. But such an instance can hardly yet be considered typical.
Recently the Royal Salesman made a tour of the South American republics – It will be remembered that Hoover also made a similar “good will” tour just before his inauguration. The Royal Salesman returned and had a nice little speech written up for him which he delivered to a gathering of fellow capitalists at Manchester. It laid great stress on the problem of England’s recapture of these parts of the world markets lost to the United States.
 
Growing Conflict at Home
British capitalism, however, is now violently torn between the two problems of struggle to maintain its world market position or turning the major attention more inwardly upon the dominion and colonial empire. Although this turn is pretty much forced by necessity, in either field its difficulties are mounting not diminishing. With this is connected also the growing conflict of protective tariff walls as against free trade. Many have been the voices recently favoring empire economic unity. Especially noteworthy the empire crusade conducted by Lord Rothermere and Beaverbrook and the break within the Conservative party on this issue. Even the General Council of the British trade unions joined with the Federation of British Industries in issuing a statement for empire economic unity at the time of the last T.U. Congress at Nottingham.
At the last imperial conference the dominion premiers came and apparently fell right into line with the economic unity idea. As a matter of fact it was hailed like their own proposals, to be connected with the most favored nations clause; but as the discussions developed further it was soon found that the dominions, having developed capitalist economic interests of their own came into even sharper collision with those of the mother country and thus the idea does not stand so well.
Multiplications of capitalist contradictions record some classic examples in England. Its age-long dominance in the world market, with a steady flow of import of raw materials and export of manufactured goods and a foundation of a colonial empire, free trade became elevated to a sacred principle. Way back, during the hard times of the Elizabethan days steps were earnestly taken for colonial expansion. The manufacture of those days was prohibited in the colonies, great tariff walls were erected with a free interchange within the empire of staple products to England and finished goods to the colonies. Came the industrial revolution in England; the world market lay at its feet and the tariff walls could be eliminated.
History is now repeating itself – and we might add – while it was the first time as a tragedy, it is the second time as a farce. A section of the capitalist class, and indeed the most powerful section, is reverting to the clamor for protection for England’s decadent industry. For the development of a young capitalist industry facing an open world market, protective tariff walls can easily become an important incentive. But matters stand entirely different in England today. For a declining empire facing a definitely divided world market, for a bankrupt system, neither the reactionaries of protectionism nor the reactionaries of free trade can furnish the solution. That can be furnished only by the program of the social revolution.
 



On July 6, the miners of the Kanawha, West Virginia, coal fields went on strike against the existing starvation conditions and on the very first day equalled in the splendid manner the solidarity already displayed by the miners in other sections now on strike. A total of 23,000 went out in this field. This strike is called in the name of and under leadership of the independent West Virginia Mine Workers union. The conditions of poverty there are almost indescribable, wages are down to rock bottom, as low as 28c for getting out a ton of coal. It thus follows right upon the heels of the strike in the Western Pennsylvania, Eastern Ohio and Northern West Virginia territory under leadership of the National Miners Union and once more independent movements developing from various directions and through various methods and forms of the struggle. But all are genuine in mass character, all are striving in one general direction – toward the building of a miners’ union free from the corrupting and treacherous influence of the old John L. Lewis machine. This is what we have already emphasized as the only way out. Its correctness is being demonstrated in its first steps by the realities of life. It gives the lie to the Right wing Lovestoneites to their proposal to return to the decadent U.M.W., and flings it back into their face. How pitiful was their aim, how clearly it is now being demonstrated that it could mean only going backward, to give up struggle, to submit to the bosses’ agents and to prohibit the miners from finding a militant solution to their problems! Well, the miners gave no heed to such reformist proposals and even if they do not fully succeed at this present stage a tremendous step forward has been taken.
However, these struggles of various bona fide movements developing in one general direction, despite existing defects, present yet one bigger problem pressing for a solution. That is the one of unifying all these fighting miners ranks within one militant union embracing all the coal diggers and resting solidly on a class basis. The proposal made by Foster in the Daily Worker to invite these various sections, or perhaps only some of them, to come to the planned convention of the National Miners Union, while it shows a change from the former reactionary policy of boycott of these movements by the Centrists, brought about by the pressure of events and by the pressure of our correct proposals, is nevertheless false. It does not present the correct method of actually solving this problem. We have emphasized before that the correct method is a genuinely established united front, an amalgamation of all these rebellious miners’ sections with the N.W.U. leading toward complete unification within one such all embracing union. We repeat: these various movements are independent and genuine in their mass content as well as in their revolt against the old corrupt bureaucracy. They must all be treated as such and there must be an honest approach toward them in recognition of this basis. In the process of unifications, the Communists have nothing to fear and everything to gain. Only the office-seeking opportunists and outright traitor need fear the unity of the fighting miners. And it is precisely in such a process that they will stand exposed, while the superiority of the revolutionary policies and leadership will be demonstrated.
 
The Need for the United Front
The National Miners Union, and more particularly the party leadership, has a great opportunity in this situation to carry out a Leninist policy of the united front. It is absolutely essential, in the interest of the rank and file coal miners, that it heeds this opportunity. Translated into action, into practical steps required by the present situation it means that the party leadership must adopt a policy for the National Miners Union of it becoming instrumental in calling a conference and take all the other necessary steps to bring genuine representatives of these independent sectional movements together to discuss their problems as equals and to find the way and provide the means for united action. When these steps are taken there should be good prospects for unification into one militant miners union.
 



Has the MacDonald government any “solution” for England’s crisis? Oh yes! But in reality its proposed “solution” is identical in content with that of the British financial interests, although quite different in form and in the phraseology of its presentation.
Its proposals are the overhauling of the industrial machinery – rationalization – which means closing of “unprofitable” mines, mills and factories; more labor saving machinery; more speed-up; greater output, and thus more goods at lower costs of production for the already overstocked world markets. These proposals are already being carried out and from them flow the inevitable conclusion – increased unemployment and wage cuts. The royal cabinet similarly proposes further mergers of establishments within industry and finance. This also has its sinister significance in greater monopoly, and larger and more powerful combines to dictate more effectively working conditions.
It will be recalled that more than a year ago, when, British financial interests, following in the footsteps of its two most powerful competitors, their kin of the United States and Germany, went in for rationalization, the Bank of England employed at a royal salary a rationalization dictator. His specific duty was to lay down terms for rationalization, when applications for loans were made by industrial enterprises. The “labor” government became an effective handmaiden in these schemes. The results are, as already stated, mounting unemployment and drastic wage cutting.
 
A Campaign of Wage Slashing
To lend emphasis to the extent of present wage cutting just a few examples will prove illuminating: During the month of April, about a million and a half British workers in some of the biggest and most vital industries accepted a reduced standard, cajoled into acceptance by their reactionary leaders who held the whip over their heads of threats to break any resistance. The railway unions, embracing some 450,000 men, received a cut, decreed by the National Wages Board, of two and a half percent for those earning less than $8.00 weekly and five percent for those earning more than $8.00 weekly. Of the clerical grades, those earning more than $500.00 yearly received a seven and a half percent wage cut. This is how the semi-governmental agencies – of the “labor” government – function to help overcome the crisis.
In the building trades the employers demanded wage cuts and changed gradings involving further reductions for 800,000 workers. Because of a threatening strike situation, the union leaders induced them to accept a six months truce, hoping meanwhile to more effectively prepare the actual cuts. In South Wales an “independent” arbitrator finally rendered an award calling for a reduction of $1.75 a week for 162,000 coal miners. Here also, when a strike became threatening, the union leaders again succeeded in cajoling them into acceptance on the promise of asking the government for the passage of a new minimum wage law – -whatever that will mean.
In the pottery trade, on the main steamship lines, and in the ship building yards, wage cuts are demanded by the employers. About 1,000,000 men in the engineering trades (machinists and metal workers) have accepted a new agreement involving reductions of standards and working conditions. These examples are sufficient to present a picture as to how the British workers fare under the rationalization of industry by the “labor” government.
It should now be clear also why these pious Christian gentlemen of the MacDonald government, in service to their capitalist masters, demand and promulgate mergers of industrial establishments. Their Coal Miners Act of last year established a state supervising organization based upon a regional division of the industry; and, since the proof of the pudding is in the eating, in this instance it was presented in the arbitration wage cut decree to the Wales miners. Now the union leaders of the Iron and Steel Trades Confederation propose to ask the government to bring the industry within the control of a public utility corporation. Their efforts will likely not prove unavailing, the same as can possibly be said for the efforts and loud clamors of Jimmie Thomas in the negotiations for the wage cuts to the railroad workers for mergers of the existing roads.
With an overhauling of industrial machinery, accomplished primarily at the cost of a lower working class level British capitalism nourishes its hopes of still maintaining a leading position in the world market. Although compelled to proceed from a greatly contracted basis it will undoubtedly fight desperately for its diminishing ration. One section is focusing its attention upon the growing market in the U.S.S.R. While these upper circles are torn with the conflict between further extension of trade relations with the Soviet Republic or prosecution of its hypocritical fight against “dumping” what they really want is to change the present adverse balance, which has obtained ever since the re-establishment of trade relations. According to the figures of the British Customs House, during the first quarter of 1931, the Soviet Union sold goods to England to the value of $31,266,635; while goods sold by England to the Soviet Union amounted to only $6,921,189.
The conflict was quite clearly expressed by Sir Geoffrey Clark a director of shipping and other companies, when he proposed the two alternatives. “One,” he said, “is united action to restrict the import of Russian goods, which is not easy to effect, especially as certain great countries are now reaping a harvest from Russian orders. The other method is to adopt a system of barter whereby Russian goods would be paid for in the goods of importing countries on the principle of balanced exchange.” Yes, not only balanced exchange but if possible to get in on that harvest. In this respect, the British capitalists are not the least sentimental.
Extension of trade relations with the Soviet Union in successful competition with the other capitalist powers, however, involves the granting of large-scale, long-term credits of which the workers’ republic is in need. And just a couple of days ago, Thomas Johnson, with the exalted title of Lord Privy Seal, announced the intention of granting long-term credits for an expected order of up toward $50,000,000 for heavy machinery material. The gigantic strides of the youthful Soviet industry will yet for some time to come require a growing trade with the capitalist world, a growing import of machinery to build the industry toward a socialist level. With long-term credits from the capitalist nations this task could undoubtedly be immensely facilitated. Unemployment is steadily mounting in England and there would seem to be a special opportunity to set the British workers into motion ground the slogan of “granting large scale credits to the Soviet Union.” To demand from the capitalist rulers to furnish such credits and to increase production in England of machinery to the Soviet Union. This special opportunity belongs to the British Communist Party. It would afford the means of creating a powerful movement around a specific demand upon capitalism at home. It would afford the means of making the British workers real participators in the building of Soviet industry.
Alas, this slogan, proposed by the International Left Opposition, has been declared counter-revolutionary by the Stalin Comintern regime. Thus by another paradox growing in the wake of Centrism, MacDonald can today appear almost unchallenged as the defender of recognition to Soviet Republic; as the defender of trade relations with it and as the sponsor of extension of these relations. The Stalin regime prefers to go the road of back-door dealings to obtain credits rather than boldly to proclaim the slogan. This method lends its assistance to bolster up the shaky government of liberal labor politicians. It strengthens the social reformism of the despicable Fabian brand of MacDonald in the face of the inevitable British working class revolt. The alternative would undoubtedly strike an immense sympathetic chord among the British working masses who have before proved their readiness to support the Soviet Union. It would help to make them real defenders of the Soviet Union and become a source of strength to the British Communist Party But the leaders of the party true prototypes of Stalinism, self-contented bureaucrats who have gradually decimated the party, are using their powers to prevent this possibility.
 



Without any let-up, the economic crisis has been hitting deeper and the ranks of the unemployed workers have increased from day to day, with the beginning of 1931 so far showing the very lowest ebb. Consequently, the economic experts and the financiers, in their New Year “messages”, maintained an extremely cautious tone, in everything except their demands for wage-cuts. From the International Labor Bureau at Geneva comes the announcement that the world’s unemployed workers today count 20,000,000, the European share being 11,000,000 – on a whole, a rather moderate estimate.
That there has been a constant decrease of jobs in the United States with an almost exactly corresponding growth of breadlines is evident even to the casual observer. The New York Industrial Commissioner, Frances Perkins, reports factory employment in the state hitting the lowest level on record for December since the establishment of the bureau in June 1914. The December Index for factory employment showed 77.5, a drop of 4.1 from November, which is again the largest decline of any single month since 1920. Steel output during December reached its lowest in six years, production for the month being 38.57% of capacity. Foreign trade during the year 1930 fell off a total of $2,737,780,000. There has been an epidemic of bank failures and while, to an extent, this reflects the struggle between chain and unit banking, on a whole it is only additionally symptomatic of the ravages of the economic crises growling inevitably out of the capitalist system of production.
 
Hoover’s Promises
Even to the most gullible, the “optimistic” promises, made at the famous Hoover conferences more than a year ago, to bolster up the waning confidence in this system for initiating large scale industrial “emergency” undertakings, alleged to be mounting into billions of dollars to alleviate unemployment, should now have proven themselves incontrovertibly as nought. The railroad magnates stepped up with the largest single item of alleged expansion but at the end of September 1930 showed a drop of employment on all Class A roads of 261,000 jobs: from 1,747,816 to 1,485,906 or 15 per cent. Mr. Wollman of Hoover’s Unemployment Commission reports a decrease of number of workers engaged in public works in June 1930 from the same month of the preceding year. All in all sufficient proof of the fact that capitalism. in order to maintain its existence needs an industrial reserve army.
Undoubtedly there have been “valiant” efforts on the part of the capitalist owners of industry to dispose of the large stocks of “surplus” products on hand together with a curtailment of production in preparation for a revival. Above all, this is expressed in what is politely called “efforts to reduce cost of production”, in other words, to increase the rapacious speed-up system and further reduce wages. The automobile output, for example, has come down to an estimated total of 3,350,000 for the year compared to the 5,350,000 for 1929. Mr. Wiggin, the president of the Chase National Bank, in his New Year’s “message”, added his voice to the many other exploiters demanding a further wage reduction.
Most certainly there have been similar “valiant” efforts by U.S. capitalism in the ferocious struggle for further re-divisions of the world market. One need only cast a glance at the latest South American “revolutions” made to order by Wall St., and at the proposed silver loan for the stabilization of China; in other words, attempts at saddling part of the burden of American capitalist restitution upon the shoulders of the workers abroad.
 
Economic Cycles of Capitalist Production
Despite the efforts of the masters of industry we have now for more than one year been in the midst of this crisis, an inevitable outcome of the cyclic nature of capitalist production constantly proceeding through its course: depression – “prosperity” to depression again. That this crisis is more convulsive and more deep-going than preceding ones is a natural outgrowth of the developing process of contradiction between increasingly socialized production and individual capitalist appropriation. It is caused mainly by the general decline of imperialist capitalism especially in Europe and the growing interdependence of world capitalist economy, making the crisis appear almost simultaneously in every capitalist country, and becoming more acute in all its manifestions. It is caused by the immensely increased expansion of productive capacity due to technical application of science to the machinery of production, growing rationalization and speed-up. It is caused [by] the growing standing army of unemployed cast off from industry even during its “favorable” period when employment decreased despite the increase in production. It is further caused by the growing intensity of the struggle to reduce the working class standard of living as a whole through what is euphemistically called “reduction of the cost of doing business”. These are some of the main factors in the present situation.
The contradictions of the savage system of capitalist production and rule have increased enormously, becoming of serious portent for the future. First we must register the fact that henceforth we will have in the rich United States a large standing unemployed army creating a central problem for correct Communist policy.
Present Status of Working Class Movement At the present moment, the outstanding feature of the situation is still the capitalist offensive, the working class attitude being expressed in a distinctly defensive manner. A ferocious slashing of wages, both directly and indirectly, to a point where many standard trade unions are unable to maintain their officially set scale; a murderous increase of the speed-up system, pitting the employed workers against the unemployed; efforts to saddle the scant charity pittances to the “most needy cases” entirely upon the backs of the workers; brutal dispersal of unemployment and other working class demonstrations, and mass arrests of the Communist vanguard.
Is there as yet an actual working class resistance to this offensive? Unquestionably, there is a growing widespread mass discontent which has not yet assumed concrete forms: the illusions of the capitalist charity crumbs as a solution still prevail; the working class political ideology has not yet reached beyond the boundaries of the capitalist parties but still swings within the sphere of transfering allegiance from the Republicans to the Democrats – here and there growing support to reformism; 1930 shows fewer strikes on record than any year during the past decade despite the drastic wage cuts; there is not yet a mass response to the fight for the unemployed led by the Communist vanguard. In fact, we must record a decided drop in such response once manifested, largely, however, due to the blundering tactics of the Communist Party leadership. In sum and substance the situation presents itself to us at this moment as a downward curve of the working class movement.
 
From Wrong Estimates Flow Wrong Conclusions
At the very inception of this crisis the bottom fell out entirely from the party leadership’s estimate of the general trend and from the tactical policies it pursued, resulting in a constant narrowing down of the movement and preventing the rich potentialities from materializing. Its cry of widespread workers’ radicalization, workers’ offensive struggle already culminating in a revolutionary upsurge came to nought, shattered upon the rock of realities and further negated by its own inclination toward opportunist distortions of the slogans for immediate demands.
We witnessed in the early part of the struggle the attempts to set up a national organization of unemployed councils, ready made by mere administrative orders from above and within the artificial limitations of the T.U.U.L. It remained confined to the party and circles immediately sympathetic to it unable to develop roots in the life of the masses. There can, of course, be no other result from this sort of short cut manoeuver, which attempts to skip over a whole stage of diligent preparation essential for an actual mass foundation upon which to set the workers into motion and from which alone can spring genuine organization. Correct tactics during the period of the low ebb become the preparations . for the flood tide – the rise of the movement. But just as surely, the hitting of a too high key from a note of an entirely fictitious revolutionary upsurge produces a relapse, a setback. In serious matters of revolutionary politics from this relapse flows the inevitable consequence – downward sliding. This became expressed in the opportunist tendency of the party leadership to concentrate almost exclusively on the slogan of relief, embodied in a spurious “unemployment relief bill”. Further, in a collection of signatures for the bill, also to be presented to congress, turning the workers’ attention in that direction and to that extent away from the powerful dynamics of mass struggle.
 
Playing into the Hands of Reformism
Is it surprising that the party leadership found itself in a position unable to make any other distinction from social, liberal and ordinary bourgeois reformers, also framing “relief hills”, except the vulgar opportunism of the amount of dollars and cents demanded for each worker per week? Next the leadership even reduced its original demand for $25.00 weekly benefit per worker to $15.00, putting it exactly on a par with a similar “bill” for $15.00 per week now proposed by a newly organized New York committee representing civic, social welfare groups and conservative trade union leaders. Such a policy will in no way serve as preparation for the next stage, for the coming upturn in the movement for active resistance to the capitalist offensive. It cannot mobilize the workers under the Communist banner but on the contrary helps to put new life into an otherwise rather feeble social reformism.
In the revolutionary movement there is no escape from the inevitable logic of erroneous policies. A general strategy which runs counter to the basic curve of the specific period leads to a continuous decimating of the forces available. In this respect matters stand not any better with the hunger marches of unemployed now initiated by the party leadership. The very slogan itself, hunger march, is wrong, as it leads, even under the best of circumstances, to a separation of the unemployed, from the employed. With the objective of marching to reinforce the demand for the fifteen bucks weekly relief, however, just as glibly promised by the civic reformers and pursuing methods which deliberately make the small Communist vanguard an easy target for police dispersion, we must not be surprised at the working masses remaining passive bystanders. Thus there are very good reasons that, despite the splendid prerequisites for the beginning of a real proletarian movement this negative result is all that the balance sheet can show to date.
The next immediate future will undoubtedly bring a further rise of prerequisites of a class movement of the American workers. The low ebb will be followed by an upward curve of workers reassembling their forces, entering into active resistance and gradually assuming the offensive. With this, in view the problem of the Communist movement of correct revolutionary policy becomes a seriously pressing matter.
 
What Must Be Done?
Facing a coming crucial period of an upward turn, our mass activities must be of such a nature as to effectively prepare for its success, give the correct direction for the working class struggle and establish Communist leadership. This means first of all a correct evaluation of the present defensive character of the movement, secondly it means a correct program for today and in anticipation of the next steps, when fighting for immediate demands, a sharpening of the general line of demarcation from reformism. Concretely the following points must be emphasized:

It is absolutely necessary to make clear the general object and limitations of immediate partial demands and not to arithmetically add new demands for every ill of the present situation appearing as solutions in themselves, such ends only in reformism pure and simple. Partial demands for partial objectives are advanced by the Communists essentially for the purpose of setting the workers into motion against their class enemy and in such a way that the struggle will lead ever more toward the revolutionary goal. In this unemployment situation, with its slashing capitalist offensive, particularly the demands which unite the unemployed with the employed and prepare for a working class offensive. We must make clear that partial demands are never advanced by Communists in the reformist sense of being in themselves a solution, we must say definitely: “There is no solution to the unemployment problem under capitalism.”
 
Based upon the above considerations the demand for the six-hour day without any reduction in pay must become the central immediate demand. It should be clear that this demand has the widest base of appeal and tends the most directly to set into motion and embrace unitedly both the unemployed and employed workers. As a direct slogan of action it can become a very effective means of preparation for the working class offensive in the next stage.
 
Other demands to be linked up with this most outstanding one should be formulated not from the view of having as many as possible, seemingly covering every need, but from the view of becoming definite rallying points. For example:



Immediate unemployment relief from the bosses and their government;
extension of large scale credits to the Soviet Union. The last mentioned demand has a particularly direct bearing on the world aspect of unemployment and furnishes, a means of cementing the natural interests between the Soviet Union and the world proletariat.



The forms, methods and tactics applied in the agitation struggle for the unemployed are of as equally vital importance and can become correct only when thoroughly inspired by serious efforts toward a broad united front basis. The hunger marches must be made demonstrations in which all workers can participate and further fight jointly their for common interests under the proper broad slogans. It is necessary to effect a reorganization of the unemployed councils genuinely on a united front foundation. Especially should serious efforts be made to include the existing trades unions and working class organizations even to the extent of such whose leadership, in an effort to offset possible rank and file revolts, pretends to be championing the needs of the unemployed. Efforts toward a correct Leninist united front policy includes in particular the direct approach to the rank and file through the workshops, the breadlines, the union meetings but also the formal approach to the organizations officially.
 
Above all it is necessary for Communists to draw the complete revolutionary implications of the unemployment struggle. To tie up the agitation for the immediate needs in an indissoluble bond with the struggle for the socialist revolution and in such a manner that each step for the realization of the former becomes progressively a step towad this final goal, is an inescapable duty of the Communist movement.

 



A serious study of recent events in the European labor and revolutionary movement would afford many valuable lessons. To bring some of these events out in their momentous importance should be well worth while. Add to them a few home experiences and we may approach the moot question of problems of strike strategy.
What is a correct strike strategy? Ask the theoreticians of the Stalin school and you will receive the most complex and detailed descriptions of the mechanics of conducting strikes. While this is necessary it does not really begin to touch the problem of strategy. Yet reams upon reams have been written in this manner in the official Communist International press, the sum total of which, considering its object, is hardly worth a brass farthing.
We are unquestionably moving toward a period of rising working class and revolutionary activities in the United States. With it yet greater problems will call for solution. It will be a test of the correctness of our theory and only that will stand up which is based upon the experience of life. Hence it is well to proceed to a close examination of these events mentioned in an endeavor to learn from them.
 
Recent Strikes in England
The declining British capitalist imperialism is now conducting an offensive against the working class all along the line. At the moment of this writing 250,000 weavers in the Burnley, Lancashire and Yorkshire districts are on the streets through an employers’ lockout. An equal number of spinners are affected and practically idle. The weavers refused to accept the “famous” American stretchout system of handling eight looms per operative instead of four as formerly prevailed. The lockout began January 19th.
In the railroad industry the employers demand a 10 percent wage cut. In the building industry as well as in the boot and shoe industry similarly wage cuts are demanded by the bosses. On July first, the legal maximum workday of seven hour in the mining fields is supposed to go into effect. But with the experience of recent events in these fields the coal miners may look forward with little probability of its becoming a reality. That is, unless they can pull themselves together better than before.
 
Coal Miners in Struggle
Some 140,000 South Wales miners have just returned to work after a strike to enforce the seven and a half hour workday act. The operators were willing to concede recognition of this act only on the basis of a demanded 6 percent wage cut. The miners terminated their strike on the promise of arbitration which has since resulted in the signing of a new three year agreement. It provides for a conciliation board to settle all disputes. The agreement failed, however, to decide the important question of a subsistence wage which is referred to an independent conciliator for adjustment.
Shortly prior to the South Wales walkout the Scottish miners struck also to enforce the seven and a half hour workday act. They returned to work on a somewhat similar basis as the former. While the Scottish miners struck those of South Wales were kept on the job and only after the defeat had been administered to the former were the latter called out. Thus do the union bureaucrats, among them Arthur Cook and others who were once hailed as the “great leaders of the Left wing”, divide and defeat the rank and file workers.
At the present moment the officially registered unemployed workers in Great Britain number over two and a half million. The bosses now have no need of what was called Mondism, i. e., the British form of class collaboration. They are directly on the offensive. Obviously in such a situation the lock-out, not yet well known in this country, becomes an extremely dangerous weapon against the workers. It cannot be defeated by the tactics pursued by the reactionary trade union heads.
 
MacDonald Again “For Labor”
After a considerable period of comparative “tranquility”, so much worshiped by the bureaucratic officials, the British workers are beginning to resist the attacks. The labor party, having reached its pinnacle in being his majesty’s government, has had another opportunity to demonstrate its faithful service to capitalism. MacDonald advised the coal miners to forget the seven and a half hour workday law enacted by his government and to accept the stretchout over eight hours. One of the “great pledges” of this government was to repeal the Tory trade union limitation bill. What will happen to this “pledge” is with usual cynicism of bourgeois scribblers indicated by Charles Selden in his New York Times dispatch of January 28th, partly as follows:
“Premier MacDonald was forced by the organized labor elements of his party to put the bill on his Parliamentary program for this session against his better judgment. He has fought hard for it, so thereby seriously risking the life of his government and his own political fortunes. If it comes out of the committee in such an altered form that the trade unions are unable to recognize it Mr. MacDonald will be able to drop it without taking another chance, for defeat on the third reading. (sic!)”
 
What Has Become of Minority Movement?
One may ask, what has become of the Minority Movement once counting the support of over a million workers? Is it entirely wiped out, or does the present objective situation offer no opportunity for activity and growth? The latter could hardly be the case. It would perhaps be more correct to say that it is still suffering the consequences of the miserable Stalinist policies pursued by the British Communist party leadership during the last few years.
The general trade union officialdom is today making little or no pretense at shielding its reactionary views. The former “progressive” front is entirely absent. At the Nottingham Trade Union Congress last summer a majority in reality favored the Empire Economic Unity of Lord Beaverbrook. And from the Inprecorr we are informed that only two militant delegates spoke in opposition to these views.
No doubt the Communist leadership in the Minority Movement committed the cardinal mistake of building around the fake progressives of the Robert Williams, George Hicks, A.A. Purcell and Arthur Cook stripe. When they had the opportunity to reveal themselves in their true light and take their stand with the other reactionaries, the movement collapsed. Since the advent of the Stalin leadership in the Communist International this has been the record elsewhere also. The plunges into Left adventurism of the British revolutionists entering into a head-on collision with the capitalist labor party; with the “social fascist” trade unions and into the building of new “revolutionary unions” could, of course, not prevent the collapse.
However, of more fatal consequence yet became the rank opportunist policy of the united front with the liberal labor politicians in the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee. The British revolutionary movement still suffers from its effects. This effort to leap over the stages of the slowly developing Communist party, which may have seemed revolutionary, could have no other results. It was false even prior to the general strike.
It was designed by the Stalin regime to become the means of rallying the British workers to prevent intervention in the Soviet Union. The Left Opposition replied already then: “The more acute the international situation becomes, the more the Anglo-Russian Committee will be transformed into a weapon of English and international imperialism.”
We have seen since that the committee itself in reality became a means of shielding the reactionary designs of the Trade Union Council by making the “progressive” front appear more real. The impact of the millions on strike threw these “progressive” fully back into the camp of the bourgeoisie. They became the most effective betrayers of the strike. But any criticism the Communists at the time attempted to direct against them was in advance negated by the prestige they enjoyed in being partners in the “unity” committee with the representatives of the revolutionary Russian workers. Ever since, the British Communist party, together with the Minority Movement has experienced a constant decline both in numbers and influence upon the course of the working masses. It could not be otherwise. Simultaneously, and to almost precisely that degree, the influence of the Trade Union Council and of the capitalist lieutenants in the leadership of the labor party has grown. And grown to a point where they are yet able to divide and defeat the British workers.
The isolated position of the British Communist Party and the Minority movement reflects its internal life. There is not yet an organized Left Opposition. However, with great struggles looming on the horizon and thereby, the growth of the real problems of the revolutionary movement, the experiences of the failures are bound to become expressed in the development of such an Opposition.
But to return to the question of the experiences in the workers’ struggles and the problems of strike strategy, we intend, in the next issue, to bring some further examples from France, Germany and the United States and to draw some conclusions.
 



The result of the miners’ convention held at St. Louis on April 15 has already been characterized toy us as another setback to the most recent rank and file revolt. It failed to materialize in the formation of a new union. But it does not for one moment invalidate the correctness of such a course.
For the miners there is still no other way out. The once proud United Mine Workers of America, in all of the soft coal producing territories, is shattered – its sorry remnants dragged into the gutter by the official leeches who still try to hang on to the graft from coal operators in reward for preventing union organization.
In the first instance, the failure to lay the foundation for a new union, now that this opportunity was available, must be charged to the Muste-Howat type of “progressives.” But there were other important contributing causes. Some of them were hemming in the sweep of the movement itself prior to the convention. We must not forget that the coal miners are still suffering from the pressure of serious defeats of not so long ago and reverses in numerous local struggles to maintain a semblance of union conditions. In addition the fields are ravaged by unemployment. Through all of this, the miners have continually had the sinister and powerful force of the combined coal operators, corrupt union fakers, and state police arrayed against them.
While these factors in a sense should count heavily for a new union movement, their effects naturally require great determination, driving power, and organization to overcome. This driving power was by no means furnished and could not be furnished by the Musteite “progressives” who became the leading factor. Their lack of decisiveness and inability really to furnish a progressive program came particularly to a head at the convention when it faced the central issue.
 
Serious Weaknesses Still Prevail
That the miners from the Illinois district would show considerable caution and move slowly despite their being thoroughly, aroused by the treacherous Lewis-Fishwick sell-out agreement was to be expected. One need only remember the shattered expectations from their healthy revolt of one year ago which ended in the filthy harness of the so-called reorganized U.M.W. The Left wing of the National Miners’ Union, directed by the Communist party bureaucrats, failed the miners then. This official Left wing failed the rank and file now. It even went to the extreme stupidity of asking the miners to boycott the St. Louis convention.
What is the status of the miners now after this convention? Their position, while a precarious one, is still rich in possibilities. Paradoxical as this may seem it is nevertheless true. And only boldness and decisiveness will make the latter factor weigh heaviest in the scale.
The St. Louis convention officially separated all of the miners locals represented there from the U.M.W. of Lewis, Walker, and Fishwick; but it failed to provide a national organization in its place. It thus failed really to provide the machinery of defensive and offensive for these miners. Surely this is a weak position to be in. It is one laying them just that much more open to attacks from the operators, the fakers, and the police. It is one also which in no way facilitates the organization of the unorganized fields. It can remain so only temporarily. But precisely in that lies its possibilities. We can therefore repeat: not only is there no other way out than the organization of a new national union, but this way out must be adopted as speedily as possible.
At the St. Louis convention the Musteite “progressives” seemed afraid of their own shadow. With a good delegation at hand, with a few scores of thousands of miners represented, they failed to provide them with an organization or even to lay the basis for such. Nevertheless a force is set into motion, and even for these “progressives” the die is cast. By the further conflict they have arrived at with the A.F. of L. officialdom, they are compelled to go a bit forward, even though with possible splits, or else, to step out. They will undoubtedly seek to establish themselves further as a definite factor in the mine fields. This is further evidenced by their plans for another convention this summer.
 
Which Position Proved Correct?
A comparison of the position taken by each of the three Communist currents toward this revolt movement is illuminating, to say the least. Here where workers again groping for a way out; attempting to break from the terrible scourge of official corruption and treason with which the old union was infested. They had made a first serious attempt with the formation of the National Miners Union. This union became an isolated sect and remained impotent mainly due to the serious blunders of the party leadership. The Illinois miners made another attempt in the revolt of a year ago leading only to the disillusionment of the present Lewis-Fishwick agreement. Meanwhile the U.M.W. is practically wiped out except in the anthracite. And even there the scourge of official corruption and treason has been no less prevalent. Recently the striking miners at the Glen Alden mines and the Shamokin section of the lower anthracite, when appealing to Lewis for assistance, were denounced by him with the most brutal cynicism. The lesser officials could on that basis proceed to defend the mine owners’ interests. In the unorganized fields of Pennsylvania, Ohio and West Virginia soft coal regions, whatever is left of this union is notoriously known to be only the unorganized gangs of gunmen who seek to prevent union organization from coming into being.
 
The Right Wing and the Center Make Their Position Clear
In this situation the Right wing current, the Lovestone group, proposes their solution as follows:
“Therefore, what is to be done? Only one thing! To organize now a new national union of coal miners would only increase the division and confusion in the rank of the workers.
“The fight therefore must be taken up in spite of all difficulties in the U.M.W.A. to organize a Left wing – to organize a rank and file opposition. That is the only solution.” (Revolutionary Age, 4-25-1931.)
True to their position, the Right wing advocates going back to the Lewis union. This is condemnable not merely in view of the fact that, this union is decaying and its remnants becoming utilized by corrupt officials as a means of preventing any struggles to better the conditions of the miners. That by itself is not the major consideration. No, by far of greater consequence is the fact that in face of the existing revolt such advocacy, when brought forward in the name of working class policies, brands the Lovestoneites for exactly what they are in this case: Definitely to the right of even the Musteite “progressives”, the handle at which the capitalist forces and the old union bureaucrats pull to endeavor to prevent the revolt, to prevent the building of a militant union. Is there any difference in this from the role of the social reformists?
How did the Centrists square their position toward this revolt? We have reported their policy of boycott during the pre-convention period as expressed in leaflets issued by the N.M.U. This amounted in sum and substance to boycott of the movement itself. There followed the feeble attempt, at least formally, though not in reality, and too late to have any effect upon the convention, to make a 180 degree turn toward a correct position. It was contained in Foster’s belated article in the Daily Worker, proposing that the miners attend the convention and form a united front with the N.M.U.
 
The Position of the Left Opposition
From the very inception, only the Left had a correct revolutionary position. We stated immediately that the first step of the revolt must be complete separation from the reactionary capitalist lieutenants. We proposed to follow up directly with the organization of a new militant union as the only way out. We proposed further, as a means toward building one union of all coal miners, to work for an amalgamation of all the revolting sections with the N.M.U. We appealed to the party to accept a united front of the Communist vanguard to work for this correct policy.
In politics the logic of a correct position when applied brings its own definite conclusion: particularly so in revolutionary politics. And so also here. When confronted with the position taken by the Left, the party was compelled to make a change. And willy-nilly, despite all the Stalinist denunciations of us, in actual practise they could not reject our united front proposal. Delegate Dan Winnigan of Indiana, the only supporter of the official party views, and we assume, with the most honest intentions, became the first direct supporter for comrade Allard’s motion at the St. Louis convention to “proceed and build a new union now.” It would be well for party members and Communist workers to reflect deeply over this comparison of positions. Not only that, but also to draw the necessary conclusions.
For us it was an achievement of no small importance that delegates supporting the Left Opposition views became the outstanding banner-bearers in the fight for a new militant union; that there were certain weakness in this fight we have already pointed out. Nevertheless these delegates succeeded in making clear their critical attitude to the Musteite “progressives”. They made correct Criticism of the party-directed N.M.U. while simultaneously maintaining a correct attitude for unity of action of the Communist vanguard.
 
What of the Future?
The failure of the present revolt movement to crystallize as yet into a new national union will undoubtedly be taken advantage of by the coal operators jointly with the U.M.W. officials and backed up by the state police. They will endeavor if possible to crush this movement before it assumes “too” definite proportions. That the miners, however, will know how to fight back is already indicated in Indiana, in Kentucky, as well as in the anthracite Glen Alden and Shamokin Valley strikes.
As far as the reformists of the Muste school are concerned the following is well to bear in mind: At certain periods reformists are compelled to take a progressive direction. Inevitably they will again revert to reformism. One year ago the Musteites went into a combination with the Fishwick-Walker reactionaries. But the miners’ revolt movement, when the forces become really unleashed, will develop much faster than the “progressiveism” of the Musteites and go beyond these narrow confines. Since the ultimate solution of the working class can be found only through revolutionary action, the reformists, when reverting to their natural position, become a distinct barrier. Thus the role of these “progressives” within and in relation to the movement: Yesterday in the camp of reaction, today “progressive”, while tomorrow standing pat and then again reactionary. Hence this conclusion: this leadership must be replaced by the Left wing.
Victory for the coal miners can best be assured when they rely solely upon their own class forces. The next convention of the revolting elements planned for this summer can unquestionably become an important step on this road. But it would be quite clear that such an achievement is directly connected with and dependent upon the ability to strengthen the forces which really fight for a new militant union. The Miners’ Educational Leagues now-organized at several points in Illinois can become valuable instruments in this process.
It should be clear that these leagues should specifically be made the instruments of the Left wing. Ours is the task of imbuing them with the necessary spirit and clarity of purpose and to fully establish the Left wing leadership within them. In their activities these Leagues should by all means use every possible pressure toward the definite building of a new national union upon the local and district Policy Committees which are established by the St. Louis convention decision. The further policy of fighting for amalgamation with other revolting sections and with the National Miners Union remains as correct as before. We of the Left Opposition again propose a united front with the party for unity of the Communist vanguard in the struggle toward this goal.
There will be no genuine Left wing without the building of the Communist forces. In this sense we urge the Communist coal miners to build the Left Communist Opposition directly in the fields.
 



The New York Tammany Mayor is in California “pleading” for Tom Mooney Sent off with the proper emotional touch, including a telegram from the aged mother of Mooney, he was hailed as “liberator” by “capitalist philanthropists”, by smug labor “leaders” and by the Socialist Party officials. What a strange situation? Mayor Walker, the bosom friend of Tom Mooney’s very jailors, or – maybe it is not so strange. Thus Tammany hopes to wash off the bloodstains of the innocent workers whom it and its vicious police have done to death or maimed.
Is the stage now all set for him to be released as a “magnanimous” act of his jailors and tormentors? We do not know. Perhaps they have finally noticed the power of Tom Mooney’s cause to eventually kindle the smouldering flame of working class revolt. Perhaps they calculate that the best way to quench this smouldering flame would be to assume the role of “liberators”. With a presidential election coming next year such a “noble” role could well serve the democratic party headed by the reactionary, corrupt Tammany Hall. But do they intend to extend this magnanimity to other class war prisoners? Not for one instant. Their only object is to try to grasp a popular issue and make it their own.
To complete the mockery all the friends of Tammany are scurrying to get on the band wagon. Wm. Green, evidently joined by the whole of the A.F of L. executive council reaffirms the “belief in Tom Mooney’s innocence”. Wm. Green asserts that the California Federation executive council is the only labor body authorized to intervene and to receive funds for Mooney’s release. But during these fifteen years which have passed, this galaxy of capitalist agents in labors’ ranks have used every means possible to choke any effort on behalf of Tom Mooney. Hence his scorching condemnation of them.
 
To Whom Did Mooney Appeal?
Despite all this stage setting; despite all the capitalist mockery, if Tom Mooney is soon to step out of jail a free man, the working class throughout the world will have cause to rejoice. They will welcome Tom Mooney to their ranks. His fight was and still is their fight, and his cause belongs to them only. They in the first instance compelled his capitalist jailors to abandon the execution which had been planned. But there remains nevertheless a blot upon the American working class for its submission to all the deception and betrayals which have helped to keep Tom Mooney in jail for so long. There remains especially a serious blot upon the leadership of the official Communist Party for its utter failure to rally to the recent clarion call of Tom Mooney, which pointed the way not only to his release by working class action, but also to that of a mighty movement toward the release of all class war prisoners. That failure has caused an indelible stain upon the Communist movement which can be eradicated only by being laid bare, by being honestly admitted and by being decisively condemned.
Tom Mooney’s appeal was addressed to the working class and in particular to its most militant section, the Communists. Tom Mooney knew, as history has proven, that only that section can give the life needed to build a powerful movement on a class basis. But Tom Mooney also definitely asked for “a genuine united front”. He named the organizations and groups which should be invited to participate in the movement. Among others he named the militant units of the A.F. of L., the Socialist Party and farmer labor parties, the Communist Party and the separate Communist groups, including the Communist League of America (Opposition).
 
The Heavy Price of Stalinist Failure
This genuine united front, the Stalinist bureaucrats of the official party feared. Their attitude was exactly that of the social reformists. From that decrepit gentry it could be expected; it should be otherwise with the Communist Party. The issue of a pardon for Tom Mooney was made a factional football. While the social reformists called their own conference, and, as for example in New York, excluded the Communists, the Stalinist strategists emulated that dastardly action in full. At a conference called by the New York I.L.D., to take up, among other issues, that of the liberation of Tom Mooney, delegates of the Left Opposition were expelled.
Such is the miscarriage of a golden opportunity. “Tom Mooney is an historical symbol of the American workers – of their weakness and failures of yesterday and today and their potential, dynamic power which alone will bring victory tomorrow”. It was the opportunity to weld this potential, dynamic power and to set it into motion. But in this great duty the official party leadership has failed miserably. Thug they carry their heavy share of responsibility for having brought degradation to this issue so dear to the working class and for having played directly into the hands of its enemies.
These enemies, while now appearing in the role of liberators, may hope to choke the glowing spirit of Tom Mooney. We do not think they [1] can. But their endeavor is to take his cause away from the working class in order to obliterate and crush it. The policy of the official party leadership has helped to make this endeavor an easy one. Thus once more is recorded a heavy price paid by the Communist movement for Stalinism. We will continue to bend all our efforts for its eradication in the future.

Footnote by ETOL
1. This word reads “we” in the printed version.
 



“On the day when the English proletariat frees itself from the mental baseness of Fabianism, humanity, particularly in Europe, will increase in stature by at least a head.” (Trotsky – Whither England, page 91)
Unquestionably the most outstanding among the generally extraordinary results recorded by the British elections of Oct. 27 is the crushing blow dealt to fabian reformism. In the immediate sense and by way of parliamentary representation, reaction gained overwhelmingly. But in its more fundamental aspect, these elections have compressed into one expression the fact that the British workers are becoming disillusioned with this insidious corrupting influence of reformism, but have not yet learned the revolutionary way out. In this respect the elections record one serious obstacle diminished.
The conservatives increased their vote from the 1929 elections by more than three millions; it gained more than 200 mandates now having 472 seats in the House of Commons out of a total of 615. In the same comparison, that is, with 1929, the Labor party lost over one and one half million votes. In the apportionment of seats in parliament they are now minus 214, having been reduced to a mere fraction of 50 members in the house. The Communist party polled a total of 74,824 votes, compared to its 50,000 votes in 25 electoral districts in 1929 and 53,000 votes in the 1924 elections.
 
The Labor Party Prepared for Present Situation
Undoubtedly the two years reign of the labor government succeeded admirably in laying the foundation for what is happening now. It would be entirely inadequate to speak only of its treasonable role. In fact it performed the historical function of reformism which inevitably followed the road from a progressive position to that of reaction.
With the accelerating decline of British imperialism, altered also the position of the Labor party reformism. Thus, when the capitalist masters, in an effort to save the sinking pound, made their categoric demands for further drastic reductions in the working class standard, these people were faced with either complete submission or the revolutionary alternative. The latter, of course, his majesty’s ministers would never accept, so MacDonald, Snowden and Jimmie Thomas went with the national government to “victory”. The others attempted to stick to their fabian reformism and were pretty well wiped out of parliament. This vote of Oct. 27, happening in a country with a decisive proletarian majority, represents first of all the despair caused by the miserable role of the Labor party. Only in that light can also be explained the small vote of the Communist Party. It failed to indicate the revolutionary way out.
 
Does MacDonald See His Finish?
In his statement, thanking the voters for their “confidence”, MacDonald says: “The very emphasis of the response is embarrassing, but I appeal for forbearance as well as confidence ...” Perhaps he sees in this response already the forebodings of his being thrown away as a useless tool now that he can no more affectively serve to keep the workers under illusions. At any rate the conservatives will not be slow in taking full charge of affairs without being much hampered in parliament. Even the Lloyd George section of the liberals should hot cause much more worry to its leader as it has been reduced to an extent of being pretty safe from any further splits.
One of the first issues which the conservatives can be expected to ride through rough shod will undoubtedly be their much cherished protective tariff. As a solution to a decadent industrial system operating in a country which has now become the classic example of imperialist decline, protective tariffs can, at best, have a very questionable value. But it will be certain to add its part in the sharpening of imperialist antagonisms in the world market and especially so with the United States, Great Britain’s main competitor. However, the conservatives majority can be expected to more than repeat its infamous record of the former tenure in office, of which the trades union act became the outstanding example.
 
New Relations and Labors’ New Road
British capitalism finds itself today already reduced to a smaller ration in world economy. That it will fight more desperately for its diminshing ration is already indicated, but the most immediate front it will seek at home. The slashes in the working class standard which nave so far taken place, can be considered only the preliminary skirmishes and a prelude to what is coming. For that the way has been well prepared by the two years reign of the “labor” government. The workers at this moment, perhaps more disorganized than ever, are undoubtedly looked upon as easy victims by the conservatives who will now continue the task of their predecessors and consider the election victory a license to go to the extreme limit.
While these elections merely reflect the; deep going changes now taking place in the general structure of British imperialism, in its relations to other powers on the world market, and particularly in its internal class relations, they will also undoubtedly in more than one respect mark a serious turning point. The furious conflicts for the world economic rations and for division of the world can be expected to develop at an accelerated pace. But above all, the sharpened class relations within will compel a new constellation of forces. On a whole it can easily be assumed that what now looks like a body-blow to British labor may rather prove its rebirth on a higher plane. The role of the official parliamentary labor opposition can become only a very limited one. In reality it will register a body blow to the miserable fabian reformism, which although
not dead, in this new situation of sharper class relations will be compelled to give place to a new and a revolutionary outlook. In this respect the elections can become a milestone on the road forward for British labor. To the degree to which it has become freed from the mental baseness of fabianism, to that degree it will be able to commence its solution on the revolutionary path.
For the Communist party the future possibilities are that much more enhanced. If it can solve the very serious problems of correct policy, it has the opportunity of reviving the splendid traditions of the Chartist movement and a revival on a higher plane – on the plane of the world proletarian revolution.
 



In the recent avalanche of diplomatic visits are concealed many ominous signs of our epoch being at the threshold of new gigantic developments. Grim indeed are the forebodings when these pillaging marauders from the world’s highways come together to discuss new schemes of division and redivision of spoils. It is easily noticeable that the American imperialist highjacker holds the very center of the stage. Most of the traveling diplomats are steering their course toward the United States.
These visits are themselves, of course, results of important developments already in the making. They are results of the increasing pressure of the world crisis upon the various capitalist powers And their attempt to find a way out by establishing a new relationship of forces. Each power is on the alert to endeavor to maintain and strengthen its place in the sun. Naturally this was also the primary intent of Premier Laval’s visit to the United States. Unquestionably his visit is a part of a definitely emerging new constellation of forces which may have the most far reaching consequences, not only for the two powers involved, but for the whole of the imperialist world.
 
What Are the Specific Relations?
The question immediately arises what is it all about? One can, of course easily conclude that there are now many pressing problems before the main imperialist powers which they find require discussion. But discussion among robbers can become nothing else but a maneuvering for position. And so it is in this case.
Nevertheless even among bands of robbers a certain community of interests can be found. In this respect we may mention first of all the problem of inflation. These worthy diplomats still remember the dreaded spectre of the German inflation of 1923. They remember with a shudder the narrowly averted proletarian revolution. German capitalism is still financially very hard pressed. Lead by Great Britain, many lesser powers have gone off the gold standard. Even the American dollar showed a few sickly symptoms. The United States and France, the two largest creditor nations, who hold between them about two thirds of the world’s gold supply, have undoubtedly much at stake in such a situation.
Secondly, there is the problem of war reparations and inter-allied war debts.
To the aristocracy of finance and to their diplomatic marionettes, it is not at all a problem of the point of view of the staggering burden lodged upon the working class or upon the broad strata of the population of the debtor countries. Not at all. But they cannot ignore the plight of German capitalism. They cannot even ignore the difficulties of the British bankers. And so, while these two of the most powerful creditor countries are compelled to lend some assistance to their fellow exploiters in Germany and England to avert a complete breakdown which would inevitably drag them all in its wake, they are also, by virtue of exactly the same self-interest, continually applying the pressure which leads in that direction.
Let the workers have no illusions. Any apparent solidarity or mutual assistance of the capitalist powers is not for one minute intended in the interest of peace. Nor is there any possibility of peaceful solutions. An eventual modification of reparations or war debt payments, any assistance to prevent a too disastrous inflation will bring a further intensification of conflicts, not merely between creditor and debtor nations but also among the creditor nations themselves. It will become only an instrument in the hands of the strongest imperialist powers to further strengthen their position for the inevitable war for redivision of the world.
 
The Preparation for These Conflicts
This brings us to the essence of the apparently friendly diplomatic visits of the capitalist nations. American imperialism is more definitely assuming world hegemony. The devastating crisis is pressing it on toward a more aggressive position. New developments are taking place with lightning speed. Events of former decades are now being compressed into a short span of time. Only a few months ago American imperialism held the revolver at the head of the French bourgeoisie. Now there are clearly the preparations for a powerful block of the kings of capital of the United States and France. The latter brings along its little entente and thereby hopes to succeed in obtaining for itself from the hated uncle Shylock a greater ration in world economy and greater degree of hegemony in Europe. Representatives of other powers are still to come here. The Fascist foreign minister, after a hearty welcome in Berlin, is now on his way also to put in claims for a ration in world economy. How many may still find a place within this powerful block cannot yet be foretold. After all, agreements among robbers stretch only so far, and last only until the victim is fleeced; then new victims have to be found. But one thing is entirely certain. The aggressively growing hegemony of American imperialism in world affairs is devoting itself diligently for this block, to first of all settle the deadly combat with its main competitor, England.
Yet above all, the American bourgeoisie is asserting its world hegemony and taking charge to strengthen the whole imperialist front against the working class, and with that against the Soviet Union. It is fully apprehensive of the tottering and decaying symptoms recently so strongly manifested within certain European capitalist countries. It is fully conscious of the effects of the crisis upon the workers and apprehensive of their rapidly growing dissatisfaction. It sees the signs of coming proletarian revolutions. It is taking all measures to crush it if possible.
 
The French Bourgeoisie a Worthy Ally
France remained the strong European capitalist power in face of the crisis. Her internal market with its large peasant economy proved itself a strong absorbent. By virtue of low wages her production for the foreign market was cheap. Her bourgeoisie succeeded in strengthening the ties with, and continually bolstering the little entente. The present government is of the Bourgeois Right section, though headed by Laval, the former “socialist”. Its economic non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union is solely in the interest of more effective exploitation of the Russian market. The French bourgeoisie in entering into a marauders’ block with American imperialism for the redivision of the world is, of course, nursing its own hopes of thereby attaining a larger ration in world economy.
American imperialism can well use this ally for the furtherance of its own heinous designs. It was with this in view that the American capitalist press called Senator Borah tactless when, at the time of the Laval visit, he advocated changes of the European boundaries as laid out by the Versailles Treaty. He was otherwise willing to leave the question of disarmament to France itself as it sees fit – and why should he not leave that to the ally? While the latter proposition pleased the French bourgeoisie, the former, being advanced at this moment, was somewhat painful. But then, it may serve in good stead for Senator Borah’s real masters as a warning to the ally as to just how far it can go.
These definitely marked constellations of imperialist forces prove again that the kernel of contemporary international relations is still to be found in the furiously growing contest of the powers for redivision of the world market. More precisely the contest between the United States and England.
American imperialism has definitely assumed its role of the main fortress of world reaction. Under its direct tutelage there is a sweeping on march of reaction throughout capitalist Europe. In France the Right bourgeois block is more firmly in the saddle; in England the conservatives are in power stronger than before; in Germany a constant stiffening of emergency decrees. More serious yet, however, are the growing fascist hordes in Germany. While American imperialism may not yet be ready to assume the risk of giving support to an open rule of these hordes, they are being nourished as powerful reserves against the proletarian revolution.
From these prospects the important question inevitably arises: What is the Communist International doing to prepare the working masses to meet the onslaught of reaction. Unquestionably the immense pressure of the crisis, the ceaseless capitalist offensive and the reactionary governmental decrees, will bring the struggles of the workers more into the political field. It will favor a Leftward development of the masses. There are already such evidences in Germany, in its, embryo in England and elsewhere. But at the same time it is impossible to close one’s eyes to the weakening of the parties due to costly blunders of leadership in practically every capitalist country. In England this weakening became particularly outstanding in the recent political crisis and the elections. In France the strikes of last Autumn brought victory to reformism largely due to the party failure of applying the united front policy. In Germany there can be no other results than weakening from the dastardly adventure of a reckless Communist leadership of a united front with the fascists in the Prussian referendum.
The “Third Period” estimates spread its dangerous illusions of revolutionary upsurges not yet at hand. It deliberately aided illusions of the movement, its possibilities appearing stronger than reality. Its results became the policy of adventures. But worst of all, it prepared a new “turn” to the Right which has already found its classical expression in the united front policy with the German fascists.
The Stalin leadership carries the heavy burden of responsibility for decimating and politically weakening the Comintern forces, for reducing them to a mere appendage of interest of state of the Soviet Union. By the policies of this leadership, the progress of the world proletarian revolution has already been put in a position of being contradiction to the economic progress of the Soviet Union. This has become mainly expressed in the fear of upsetting the present status quo of the powers, that is, the capitalist equilibrium prior to the completion of the Five Year Plan. But the capitalist equilibrium does not remain constant. From the serious weakening caused by the economic crisis, we now have the new constellation of forces; the powerful block under American imperialist hegemony to further strengthen the capitalist equilibrium against the working class. It is developing with breath-taking speed and does not at all wait for the completion of the Five Year Plan. It will aim to take ruthless advantage of the weakened position of the Communist parties.
Thus the chief contradiction is that of the task of the epoch and the maturity of the Communist Party.
These imperialist preparations can bring immediate revolutionary situations. To prepare – not to miss these situations – is the pressing need. This has become mandatory upon the Comintern leadership.
 



Step by step the capitalist forces are mobilizing their heavy artillery to make certain of a wage cut on the railroads. This important industry is one of the remaining strongholds of the pre-crisis working class standard which now, in the view of the aristocracy of finance, must be battered down at all cost. Yet in face of this, there is no visible action whatever of the unions preparing to meet the onslaught.
Individually the railroad workers have long ago been gradually put on reduced rations by the “economies” effected by the roads. Increasing use of heavier material, heavier rolling stock and longer trains have brought about constantly reduced forces and a greater output per man. This is vividly substantiated by the reports of the unions. According to statements made by the president of the Brotherhood of Enginemen and Firemen before the LaFollette Senate subcommittee, labor saving machinery during the last few years has displaced about 250,000 workers, and since the beginning of the crisis, the owners of the railroads have dropped an additional 500,000 employees. Many important regulations gained during years of struggle have long ago been lost in practically all of the railroad crafts, and some of them have lost the eight hour day once in operation throughout the railroads.
 
How the Capitalist Pressure Works
The first direct step in the assault upon the present wages was taken by the railroad owners in their appeal to the Interstate Commerce Commission for a 15% rate increase. Their appeal was predicated upon a denial, which promptly followed, to lay the basis for a wage cut. No sooner had the denial been rendered, then several roads began some by directly announcing wage cuts; others by making a pretense of negotiations with the unions, with the stage all set of course and proper pressure provided. The Canadian National Pacific lines demanded a wage cut. The New York Central lines, the largest single system in this country demanded a 10% wage cut, to be voluntary and to remain in effect for one year; evidently to prepare for further cuts after that.
The New York Central Lines alone have reduced their working force from a total of 170,061 on January first, 1930 to 128,448 on February 15, 1931.
Finally there is now additional pressure for wage cuts on the railroads. The Investment Bankers Association at its recent convention demanded that all the roads immediately institute a 10% all-around wage cut. This association includes all the biggest banks of the country headed by the firm of J.P. Morgan.
What answer have the union leaders given to these onslaughts? It is reported that the “Chiefs” of the four transportation brotherhoods recently attended a dinner jointly with the representatives of the biggest railroad magnates, ostensibly to discuss in a friendly mariner. But, while this may satisfy their culinary tastes, it cannot give the slightest security to the position of the railroad work ers. On the contrary, that is the particular method to prepare a sell-out. And today there is no organized Left wing force to effectively challenge such deals.
 
Will There Be a Repetition of the Past?
In 1921 and 1922 the policy of the railroad union leadership relied entirely upon the railroad labor board for adjustment of grievances. To the workers it proved a deep disappointment. The labor board became the very instrument to take away the conditions from the unions one by one. In 1921 the train service unions threatened to strike, but declared they would look out only for their own interests, leaving the shop crafts to their own fate. The latter were left to strike alone in 1922. They fought not the railroad systems as a whole, but merely single roads, and only those where their grievances were the most outstanding. The result became a settlement only with minor roads, a general defeat and decimation of the union forces from which they have not since recovered.
The railroad companies are now making their demands for wage cuts one by one. Their aim is to repeat the experiences of the past, and all indications are that the unions will fall into the trap. As far as the union leaderships are concerned, there need be no doubt that it fits in well with their views. They have no other interests than to serve the companies by helping keep the workers divided and easy victims for defeat. That the dangers in the present situation have long ago been sensed by the workers is quite clearly evident from the rank and file pressure, particularly for a six hour day. That pressure came to a head last summer and culminated in a conference of large representation by the five main transportation unions held in Chicago. But in anticipation, the leaders – these company lackeys – succeeded in sidetracking the general ferment into proposals to ask for legislation for the six hour day. This was but another repetition of relying upon the capitalist governmental machinery of “justice”. It is doomed to disappointment and defeat.
 
What About the Left Wing Movement?
The situation growing out of the 1922 strike movements became also the beginning of a powerful Left wing movement, at that time inspiring great hopes among large section of railroad workers. At the railroad amalgamation conference held in Chicago in December 1922, over 400 delegates attended. Several of the railroad unions indorsed the proposals for amalgamation, despite the resistance of the high salaried officials. The Left wing movement experienced a growth until the dizzy “Third Period” tactics were inaugurated by the official party leadership. The results were the fatal mistake by the railroad workers Left wing movement – the adoption of the policy of building new “revolutionary unions” on the roads. Of course no new unions were built, but the Left wing movement received a death blow and has remained practically non-existent ever since.
So much for the Left wing movement officially under the leadership of the T.U.U.L. We have not noticed any admission on its part of this fatal policy. What the workers thought of it, however, they have clearly shown by losing confidence and remaining absent.
But there has been another ray of hope shown since; a beginning toward a correct rebuilding of the Left wing movement. The railroad workers of Minneapolis set this example by the methods and activities of their local railroad council. It became one of the effective instruments in promulgating the demand for the six hour day on the roads. Its activities enjoyed the support of most of the railroad locals in that center. It showed a way for the rank and file towards closer consolidation of the various crafts. This is precisely the first step needed in this present situation. The railroad workers constitute a powerful army. A consolidation of their forces, now divided in the sixteen standard unions; a united taking up of the fight to at least maintain the present standard, not by single unions or against single companies, but by recognizing all of the companies as the common enemy – only in that lies the hope for success.
 



For almost half a century the slogan of the eight-hour working day was one of the most powerful slogans of the working class throughout the world. Everywhere it became inscribed upon the proletarian banners, inspiring solidarity, and unifying the struggles. It was violently contested throughout by the capitalist enemy.
To the capitalist class the longer workday represents so much more absolute surplus value produced without any additional investments in the instruments of production owned by them. More surplus value spells more profits. This is the basic reason for their bitter opposition to any shortening of the workday. They have no intention of granting it without the most severe struggle. In fact they would rather, pressed to the wall, grant many other concessions which do not cut so directly into their profits. They know that the shorter workday is a real gain for the working class.
 
A “Visionary” Slogan
The eight-hour work day is not as yet established for the working class as a whole in any country. Nevertheless, would it be more “visionary” today to advance the slogan of the six-hour work day without reduction in pay than it was when the eight-hour work day slogan was first promulgated preceding the struggles of the ’80s? Not at all!
Could victory in a struggle for realizing the six-hour work day appear within the realm of practical possibility to the American workers today? The answer must be: “Yes.” One need only remember that already in 1922 the United Mine Workers convention, by rank and file pressure, adopted a program of fight for the six-hour work day. At this moment within the various conservative railroad unions there is developing a demand for the six-hour work day without reduction in pay. One may also recall the proposal of the last A.F. of L. Metal Trades Department convention for a five-hour work day without taking it seriously in the sense of expecting a struggle for its attainment.
It is, however, primarily as an offensive slogan for the coming rising labor movement that the demand for the six-hour work day without reduction in pay assumes its real importance. Secondly, it can become a powerful means of unifying the working masses, employed and unemployed alike, and set them into motion against their class enemy. Thirdly, it corresponds with the working class needs today. Particularly in the industrially highly developed United States has machine production reached such a stage that the very right to live for millions of workers becomes bound up with a drastic reduction of the present working day.
 
The Workers’ Resistance
Working class resistance to the capitalist offensive is appearing now in its first early manifestations. The short strike of the Lawrence textile workers has been followed by others in the New England textile region. At the Kensington, Pa. mills, several thousand workers have fought militantly against the increased speed-up. So far it is only embracing light industry, but in southern Illinois also groups of coal miners and metal workers have resisted the bosses in the face of a most terrific onslaught. Likewise in the unemployment movement there is a growth of militancy. All in all, these early signs are the harbingers of great struggles to come.
Even a possible revival of the capitalist production cycle would not seriously alter this perspective. Such a possible revival would have as its foundation more speed-up and more wage reductions. It would only make so much more inevitable the resistance of the working class.
A general reduction of the American working class standard is the avowed policy of the capitalist masters. Particularly is the unemployment crisis being taken advantage of for a drastic wage-cutting campaign. Demands for “reduced cost of production” are continually reiterated in publicity material from the big banks of the country. The extent to which actual wage cuts are being enforced may be noted from late reports of the Labor Bureau, Inc. During February wage cuts were twice as numerous as increases.
 
The Miners and Railroad Workers
The coal miners and the railroad workers look forward to the establishment of the six-hour day as a means of diminishing the ravages of unemployment. We remember the impudent demand of John L. Lewis, made back in 1928, to eliminate from the industry 250,000 coal miners. In reality, more than that number have already been either definitely eliminated from the industry or remain there – in the standing army of unemployed. In the railroad industry on the Class 1 Roads, between December 1929 and December 1930 a total of 248,527 workers lost their jobs according to the Bureau of Statistics of the Interstate Commerce Commission. In other industries, similarly, the machine developments are rapidly displacing labor power, adding to the ranks of the unemployed even during the favorable periods of the capitalist production cycles.
It may thus appear as if the demand for the six-hour work day without reduction in pay, in the present unemployment situation, becomes purely an objective of amelioration. While naturally this is one of its purposes, it is by no means the whole. Such a demand presented at this time and adopted by the organized section of the working class, would effectively help to prepare for the general workers’ offensive which will become so essential.
Immediate demands by their very nature are limited in scope and cannot present any solution to the working class problems. They do not by themselves reach beyond the bounds of reformism and always carry the danger of strengthening of reformist illusions. But an actual demand for the shorter work day when obtained can become a source of further strength to the working class in its advance toward the revolutionary goal. The struggle for its attainment can become a powerful lever to set mass forces into motion. Moreover, by virtue of the fact that it embraces the interest of the employed and unemployed workers alike it will similarly become a powerful instrument for unity of the masses.
The six hour work day slogan, which does not exclude other necessary slogans but supplements them, particularly possesses this quality. It further becomes the general focal point for all efforts towards the shorter work day. This is already now a life’s necessity for the American working class. The six hour day without reduction in pay should become the central slogan of the toiling masses.
 



Once again a scoundrel’s agreement has been made in the Illinois mine fields. The John L. Lewis and Fishwick-Walker cliques, with all their big and petty officials, have settled their little “differences” and agreed upon the place for each to take around the flesh pots.
Significantly enough this agreement was reached, signed and sealed in a capitalist court. The Fishwick-Walker combine is divorced from the so-called reorganized U.M.W. It has become the recognized Illinois district administration. Lewis withdraws his provisional officers from the district and is recognized as the head of the U.M.W. of A. – that is, whatever is left of it. And then, in an effort to prevent the expected wrath of the rank and file membership to become crystallized in an actual rebellion, the attorney in charge of this agreement, J. Londrigan, denounces any contemplated convention as “an act of secession and an open attempt to form a dual organization.”
The rank and file membership will now be expected to pay the enormous bills of a court litigation between these two cliques which began Oct. 1929. They will be expected to pay continued royalties to these mercenary officials who have been leaving behind them a trail of wreckage of a once splendid organization and of miners’ homes forced down to the lowest point of degradation. The bills are expected to be paid through the check-off from miners’ wages collected by the operators. The latter are to get their share of the reward of the spoils to accrue from the agreement through increased profits derived by further lowering of the miserable conditions of the miners.
Will matters pan out as these thieves contemplate? Hardly – Discontent is now seething, a rank and file revolt movement is on foot. Staunton has become the stronghold of the rebellious forces. Shortly after the consummation of the agreement, 300 coal miners from several points in Illinois met in Staunton, denounced the agreement, and decided upon the calling of a special convention. This to be held in St. Louis on April 15. Clearly enough there can be no alternative for this movement to consider seriously except a complete break with the corrupt officials and their whole line of policy of treason.
One year ago, on March 10, a widespread, healthy miners’ rebellion was frustrated and harnessed into delusive channels. The revolt was a healthy one in the sense that it strove already then for a complete break with John L. Lewis and the whole tradition of his corrupt administration. It was, however, capitalized by the Fishwick-Walker-Farrington combine, who, with their whole string of rapacious petty officials, succeeded in turning this movement into one for personal spoils. To make such complete diversion of a healthy rebellious movement possible this combine cleverly utilized the “progressive” front of Howat, Brophy, Hapgood and others. Howat, despite his long experience with the corrupt officialdom of the U.M.W. of A., allied himself with these old hands at the game of treason. Previously he had been an ally of the Communists and genuine Left wing forces but the weakened condition reached by the latter through a continuous blunder policy made possible the backsliding of Howat. He no longer needed any such alliances. The result of this period since the beginning of the rebellion a year ago, in which Howat played such a miserable role, are now epitomized in the sell-out agreement. It becomes a powerful object lesson of what the road of reformism actually leads to.
Alexander Howat, who was eased out of his office by the Lewis-Fishwick-Walker agreement, has now with the other Muste type of “leaders”, become one of the active sponsors of the present rebellion. A warning must be issued against this type of “leaders” who during the whole existence of the so-called reorganized U.M.W. of A. failed to fight the contemplated treason of the Fishwick-Walker administration. Thus they played the game of stalking: horses for the reactionaries, being in the Fishwick camp one day only to return to the camp of other reactionaries a while later. The miners will win out if they rely on their own class strength.
Where are the Communist party and National Miners Union forces now when this new rebellious movement is taking shape? Unfortunately their complete departure from the correct policy of building the Left wing within the existing mass movements, even though these may be under control of reactionaries, has brought them to a position of complete isolation – if not to use the stronger term – complete discreditment. The N.M.U. is non-existent as an organization in Illinois, and there could be no better proof of fatal results from a departure from correct policies. Today there is a splendid opportunity for a united Left wing to give actual leadership.
The misery of the conditions of the miners in the Illinois fields can hardly be described. Unemployment and stark misery stalks the coal producing territory. The Orient Mine No. 1, the biggest in the country, worked exactly 70 days during 1930. Several small strikes are now in progress in southern Illinois, fought tooth and nail by the union officialdom, by the coal operators, and by the state police. The mercenary combination the rank and file miners will henceforward find yet more solidly opposing them. Their road is not an easy one.
The National Committee of the Communist League (Opposition), in view of the situation now existing in the Illinois coal fields calls upon the coal miners to oppose with might and main the putting into effect of the Lewis-Fishwick-Walker agreement. We propose to the Communist party and the National Miners’ Union forces the establishment of a united front, of all Left wing elements in support and possible leadership of the present rank and file opposition movement. It should by all means be strengthened to bring a powerful delegation to the St. Louis convention on April 15. If at this convention there is a substantial delegation actually representative of the membership, the only correct road for the convention to take must be a complete break with the new unified clique of the officialdom, their policies, and their views. This should result in the formation of a new miners’ union on a class basis. Our N.E.C. has as its further policy the establishment of one union of all the coal miners of the country through the amalgamation of this new union to be formed with other sectional organizations opposing the Lewis-Fishwick-Walker machine, such as the new union organized in West Virginia and the National Miners’ Union. Such a union, in order to fulfill its role, must come about through this amalgamation on a definite class basis so that it will really be able to struggle against the operators under a militant leadership and give the necessary guarantees for rank and file control through complete union democracy and all the measures necessary to carry this into effect.
We urge the coal miners to make the experiences of the past, fundamental object lessons for the future. These experiences should be utilized as a warning against corrupt officials and opportunist careerists penetrating their ranks for the sole aim of acquiring office in order to become better agents for the operators. It is necessary that the coal miners also learn a serious lesson from the activities of Howat and the part he played by becoming a “progressive” shield for the underhanded treason of the Fishwick-Walker combination. The severest criticism and strictest vigilance will help in safeguarding against repetition. It is necessary that the Left wing demand from Howat as a condition of joint action of all forces of the opposition movement now developing in Illinois that he agree to this policy here outlined and that he be willing to cooperate with the Left wing, including the N.M.U. forces, for the realization of this policy.
 



In a serious discussion of problems of strike strategy the most determining factors should receive first consideration. Unfortunately that has not been the case within the recent experience of the revolutionary movement. In an effort to overcome that failing, but with no pretense of having ready-made solutions, we enumerate the following points:




The problem of correct analysis of existing conditions.
 
The question of attitude toward union organization.
 
A well defined Leninist united front policy.
 
The strike issues, demands and slogans.
 
Independent leadership of the revolutionary vanguard.




It should be quite superfluous to emphasize here that the general attitude toward strike policy of the present reactionary A.F. of L. officials can only be the sharpest condemnation. As agents of capitalism, progenitors of the theory of partnership between labor and capital, their views are definitely against all strikes. When compelled by rank and file pressure to get into motion they seek to limit the strikes within narrow craft bounds and look toward the first avenue of escape through betrayal. This must always be borne in mind and as much as possible guarded against in a strike situation. Moreover, this very question assumes vital proportions even in case of strikes led by independent unions of the T.U.U.L. At least in all such instances in the recent past the A.F. of L. officialdom, or sections of it have played their part.
 
What Strike Strategy Is Not
But we have recent experiences also in the attitude and conduct of the Left wing in serious workers’ struggles of what strike strategy is not. For example, the irresponsible manner in which the slogan for strike has been promulgated. One need recall only August first two years ago when the party leadership called for strike against the war danger. The American workers would have been quite justified then in posing the question, why strike against war danger on just that date? To such a strike call not even the independent unions (which then had somewhat of a membership) under the party control, could respond. And, of course, there was no strike.
We may also recall the time of the dastardly murder of Ella May Wiggin by the Black Hundreds of southern reaction. The party leadership immediately made a grand gesture, calling upon the American workers to strike in protest. Such a strike, if it came, would naturally be of a highly political character and require at least some ideological preparation. Such was not the case and the call left the workers entirely untouched. Neither in this case could be independent unions even think of getting their members to respond, and they did not try. Strikes are quite serious actions, and should not be played with in such light-minded fashion.
In the simple matter of the method of calling strikes we have some very good lessons of how not to do it. When, for example, the Marine Workers Industrial Union under party leadership, called the strike of the Philadelphia water front workers last year, the small matter of first consulting the workers was entirely overlooked. So at least reported Wm. Lawrence in his “self-criticism” in the Daily Worker at the time. Is it any wonder that the strike extended only to the party functionaries of the union? These light-minded, bureaucratic triflers came in grave danger of being run off the water front. But what is far more serious is the fact that the union lost all prestige on the water front because the grievances of these workers were sufficiently deep-seated for serious strike action. Similarly in the Illinois miners strike, during December 1929, the Centrist bureaucrats in leadership did not consider it necessary to take a rank and file strike vote or to make any serious preparations for strike. Hence, despite the favorable situation of miners being aroused by the heavy assaults upon their working conditions and being in revolt against their old union officials, the strike failed to rally any appreciable support. It was easily crushed by the united efforts of the mine owners, the old union reactionary officials and the state armed forces. As a consequence the National Miners Union was wiped out in Illinois, leaving no trace behind.
When the results of the present strike of the New York Needle Trades Workers Industrial Union can be fully accounted it is quite certain that another sad chapter may be added to this blundering policy.
Revolutionary strategy must particularly take into account the basic tendencies of the given period. In a strike situation it assumes the form of very definite factors to be correctly analyzed, viz.: What is the basic curve of the working class movement, is it an upward or a downward one – an offensive or a defensive one? How fully have the issues matured and preparations been completed? What is the relationship of forces and how fully can the workers be mobilized?
Needless to emphasize that in the examples already cited on this very first essential, the one of correct analysis, the party leadership also made its first mistakes. From wrong estimates naturally flow wrong conclusions. However, when correct estimates are made, other factors being equal, a revolutionary strike leadership, while it can never guarantee victory in advance, can at least secure a basis for growing influence upon the masses.
The question of union organization – the relation of the independent unions to the A.F. of L. – is by no means settled by the empty formula of “revolutionary unions” versus “company unions”. Neither of these terms are correct in the present situation and when made the foundation for a revolutionary attitude towards the problem become entirely false. Unions in order to function as unions must naturally embrace a sufficiently decisive section of the workers in an industry. As such they will reflect the general level of the working class and cannot at this time become a simple reflex of the revolutionary party. Nor should they be made a battle ground for its possible political differences. This the party leadership has attempted with its independent unions and it is one of the reasons that they have been reduced in several instances to paper organizations.
The object must not be to transform the independent unions into auxiliaries of the party for momentary aims. It must be rather to gain influence over the masses through the unions.
The A.F. of L. unions are, of course, not company unions but merely organizations of workers under the influence and domination of the reactionary officials and their policies.
To assume the attitude of A.F. of L. company unions will inevitably create a wall of hostility between these two sections of the workers where, instead, efforts toward rank and the unity in struggle should be applied. Problems of strikes are intimately bound up with union organization. With a coming rise of the labor movement, which is bound to occur, the prospects for organization of new independent, unions are very good. But we may conclude that for some time to come, at least, the A.F. of L. unions will be a factor to reckon with even in industries where new unions can be organized – and likely a major factor. Success for the new union movement can best be assured with corresponding efforts also to influence the workers through the A.F. of L. In other words it involves also the problem of building a Left wing in the old unions to become an instrument for co-operation in the task of organizing the American working class into militant unions.
 
The United Front Policy in Strike Strategy
This brings us to the question of applying the united front policy as Lenin taught it. Particularly is this imperative in the union field and in strikes despite the resistance that reactionaries will offer. Their charges against the independent unions of being rival or dual unions should not frighten anybody. But we must recognize that the independent unions so far are rather insignificant, hampered in their natural growth by all sorts of foolish blunders and wrong conceptions, though even with this being eliminated they will perhaps for some time remain a minority. However, being organized on the basis of the class struggle they must become the initiators of the united front policy, particularly in strikes. With the Left wing co-operating from within the old unions the prospects for success become more favorable. With such a policy pursued preparatory to and in the present strike of the New York Needle Trades Workers Industrial Union the outlook would have been a different one.
It is perhaps best to illustrate by a concrete example how the united front policy could be correctly applied. During the struggles in the Southern textile industry we recall that with short intervals the strikers of Gastonia and of Marion suffered the murderous attacks of the Black Hundred gangs organized by the textile barons. The former were members of the N.T.W. affiliated with the T.U.U.L., the latter were members of the U.T.W., affiliated with the AF. of L. The National Textile Workers Union, directed by the party leadership, made an effort to unite the workers of both mill towns for the struggle under its own auspices. The results were practically nil and most likely due to the fact that this effort was tantamount to asking the Marion workers to give up their organization, which could not be expected. Undoubtedly, the possibilities were excellent for the setting up of a genuine united front body comprising the local membership of
both organizations. The fact that the reactionary leaders of the U.T.W. would resist should have been no deterrent. The workers would be sure to be in favor, which would swing them all the more under the influence of the correct policies proposed by the Left wing.
 
Clarity of Strike Issues Essential
Too many strikes of recent date, under party leadership, have suffered from lack of clarity as to the issues involved. In some cases the demands have been altogether out of proportion to the objective possibilities, while others have experienced so many detailed demands that the vital issues have been obscured. Consequently the slogans became too far removed from the life of the workers. Demands and slogans must first of all be based on the correct objective analysis of the workers needs, of the basic tendencies available and of the possibilities at hand. They must particularly have the quality of setting the workers into motion and unifying them in struggle. Naturally this does not preclude the necessity, at times, when settlements are to be arrived at, of certain compromises being made.
Thorough preparation in an ideological sense, so that the workers may clearly perceive what the fight is about, should be a foregone conclusion. But just as essential is thorough preparation of the strike itself, its machinery, etc.
To attain independent leadership by the revolutionary vanguard in strike struggles is, of course, our aim. But that is by no means reached by the method of splitting off small working class sections to lead. The real object should be to win the working masses away from their present reactionary leaders and bring them under our influence. Workers are quite unsophisticated and do not accept as their leaders those whom we may think should lead, merely because of our thinking so. They accept as leaders only those who by virtue of their accomplishments have shown their ability and the superiority of their program. Labor skates may lead for a time but ultimately correct programs, courageously applied, will win.
 



Last summer, some very militantly fought strikes took place in the northern industrial section of France. About 150,000, mainly metal and textile workers, struck against the provisions of a check-off from their wages instituted by a new Social Insurance Act. Their demands were for a wage increase commensurate with this check-off.
Of the greatest importance for the strategy of the revolutionary vanguard in such a situation becomes the question: What is the basic tendency of the working class movement? To stop a moment here, one notices immediately the upward curve of working class struggle. Beginning with the latter part of 1929 strikes again increased in France, in numbers, in participants, in militancy, as distinct from the preceding years. First they embraced merely the lighter industries but by July last entered also the heavier metal industry. Even the unemployment crisis had not yet invaded France. Conditions were excellent for an offensive struggle.
Was the Communist party strategy based upon such an upward curve? No, on the contrary. The French party had already early in 1928, following Molotov’s “brilliant” example at the Tenth Comintern Plenum, placed France in the front trenches of a decisive revolutionary situation. This, of course, did not correspond with objective reality. The reaction produced drove the party, way back to the rear and it found itself at the tail of events when the workers of the North pressed forward in struggle. History is merciless with those who are at the tail of events. The party failed utterly to prepare for this struggle and even to recognize its actual significance.
 
Workers Divided in the Strike
The workers of the industrial north are divided in the two existing unions. The major section belongs to the C.G.T., which is under reactionary leadership. The militant union, the C.G.T.U., counts only a minority within its ranks. The latter, as a matter of fact, has witnessed a period of decline throughout the country during the last few years. From its high point of over 500,000 members it has dropped to about 250,000. The party’s keeping this union in mechanical leading strings has by no means been a healthy factor. While in the final analysis the question of mechanical control resolves itself into whether or not correct slogans and correct programs are advanced, this is precisely where the party failure lies. Unquestionably this also had something to do with the direct decline of membership and influence. Meanwhile, the union under reactionary leadership has suffered less decline and has even gained a foothold within the militant union in form of a syndicalist opposition going to the Right.
Upon enforcement of the social insurance check-off last July the workers of the north took the initiative in strike over the head of the bureaucrats of both unions. The latter, as a matter of fact, found themselves compelled to move only after about 50,000 workers were already out. The party, caught unprepared, at first advanced a slogan against the social insurance law. Later it corrected itself to the quite ordinary position of demanding a 10 sous hourly wage increase to meet the insurance tax. The reactionaries of the C.G.T. demanded a 5 sous increase, the amount of the actual tax. With no greater distinction prevailing, the majority support went to the reactionaries’ demand as one seemingly easier obtainable. The latter were not slow in taking advantage of this development to complete their role of betrayal in finally entirely dropping this demand.
 
A Caricature of Strike Strategy
Only a few months prior to this outbreak a conference, initiated by the Profin[tern], took place in Strassburg, Germany. [1] The C.G.T.U. had its representatives there. The French party leaders were represented. Its “momentous” results were pretty well reflected in the inglorious record of the party and C.G.T.U. leadership in the strikes in the north. The truth is that the conference failed to discuss even problems approximately strike strategy but merely produced long resolutions on the technique of smaller tactical problems And yet even such small tactical problems, when actually faced in the strike, suffered from bureaucratic abuses by this leadership. Through the Inprecorr (Vol. 10, No. 35), we are informed, that the party members carried on endless discussions on the forms of strike committees while the workers forged ahead conducting their own struggle. And in a later issue we are told that when strike committees finally came into being they were not even democratically elected.
Both unions established their strike committees, each trying to lead independently. This simply meant that the strikers remained practically leaderless. The cardinal necessity in such a situation – a correct united front policy, was completely negated. The party and C.G.T.U. leadership rejected it. The capitalist agents of the C.G.T. had, of course, no interest whatever in a united front struggle. Theirs was solely the role of betrayal and it was made more easy by the failure of the revolutionary section to apply this correct policy. Through the final defeat ensuing, the syndicalist bloc, those who are turning backward to the Right, have now been strengthened in their advocacy of unity of organization. Such advocacy has, of course, nothing in common with the united front policy. While the former can at the present moment mean only the solidification of the control and influence of the reactionaries, the latter policy, correctly applied, would go a long way toward weakening their hold upon the masses.
Little by little the capitalist agents of the C.G.T. and the Socialist party, reinforced by the police and military suppression, were finally able to divide and defeat this splendid struggle of the workers, driving them back section by section with nothing gained. The many failures of correct policy – yes, of correct strike strategy – helped to turn a potential victory into defeat.
 
Recent German Experiences
In Germany the most recent lessons become of practically decisive importance because of the extremely acute stage of the class struggle. Only a couple of instances need be cited: the Berlin metal workers strike last September and the Ruhr miners strike in January this year. Both of them in different ways became major events. In both instances, the treacherous crawling of the socialist trade union leaders before their masters broke the workers’ ranks. But we must add that the serious mistakes committed by the revolutionary vanguard slashed with the sharpness of a razor edge further into the already deep wounds of the German workers.
Basically we note in Germany a sweeping capitalist offensive to lower further the already miserable standard of the workers. With the long duration of the crisis, capitalism could no longer effectively use the coalition social democratic government to stem the tide of working class unrest. The Bruening government came and carried on openly and boldly the wage cutting formerly more cunningly concealed under the social democrats. We note a rise in revolutionary potentialities and simultaneously a menacing growth of fascism. These basic tendencies were particularly reflected in the latest Reichstag elections on September 14, 1930.
In this situation the metal corporations advanced their demand for a 15 per cent wage cut to take effect September 30. The ingenious invention of the social democrats, the compulsory arbitration machinery, set into motion and ordered an 8 per cent wage cut with 6 per cent for all young workers. 140,000 metal workers struck, however, only to become disintegrated and return about two weeks later on a promise of a new arbitration award. Yet, to capitalist Germany, it became a breath-taking demonstration of working class power. But how did the revolutionary vanguard square with its responsibility?
 
A Sample of Party Strategy
Unfortunately the party leadership, – the German Stalinist edition – had already gauged the decisive revolutionary situation In Germany long before this. Its noisy proclamations for conquest of the streets only left a gap between itself and the working class. Its shrill exhortations against the “social fascist unions” had practically crippled all revolutionary activities among the organized workers. The consequent firmer control over the unions by the treacherous social democratic officials in a strike situation, as we shall see, also became extended to the organized section.
Among the Berlin metal workers strike about half were unorganized. Nevertheless they followed the lead given by the organized section. The party and Red Trade Union Opposition proceeded, not to endeavor to gain influence over these masses through the unions, but through the establishment of their own strike committees and a small rival union to separate further the Left wing from the masses. It proclaimed the abstract slogan of a political general strike instead of starting direct from the economic issue of wage cut to turn the struggle directly against the system and its political state which were the executors of the wage reduction. It could thus not become the factor unfying the workers in a revolutionary direction. This tactic of openly splitting the workers in struggle before their support had been won for a revolutionary ideology could only repel these workers. The revolutionary object is not to split away from the masses but to split the masses away from the reactionary leaders. Thus when the new arbitration award came, providing for the original wage cut to be applied in installments, the workers found themselves compelled to accept the award.
The strike itself, a powerful incentive to the advancing struggles of the German workers, did not attain that objective. The immediate results were a victory for reaction. In this, the serious mistakes of the revolutionary vanguard played their part.
This general line of policy of the Communist party also led to practical disaster in the Ruhr region when continued there. The mine owners served notice of a wage cut of 12 per cent affecting 300,000 miners, to take effect Jan. 15. The reactionary union officials intimated their willingness to accept a 4 per cent cut, thus greatly incensing the rank and file workers. Naturally here was a great opportunity to win mass sentiment, to lead directly all the miners, both organized and unorganized into struggle against the will of the officials; to win mass influence through correct union and strike tactics. The essential point should have been to agitate and organize broadly for a united resistance at the actual commencement of the wage cut. Instead, the party rushed ahead calling a strike entirely over the head of the unions to commence Jan. 1. About 40,000 miners responded, mostly unorganized, but with real militant spirit. The overwhelming majority, however, including the organized section, assumed a waiting attitude, wanting to see what would happen when the wage cut was to take effect on Jan. 15. This again demonstrated that while the organized section can easily become the rallying point for the unorganized in a struggle, the opposite can rarely be the case even under the best of conditions. The picketing instituted by the strikers against the workers, otherwise willing to resist the bosses’ onslaught but to do it in such a manner as to make the union carry the fight, created a wall of antagonism between these two sections. Simultaneously an immense police terror set in.
The party again here advanced as the main slogan “the political general strike” and made the strike object the building of a new revolutionary union. Rote Fahne commented: “The Red Trade Union Opposition is pregnant with new unions” (quite similar to what one has heard from the T.U.U.L.).
On Jan. 4, this strike collapsed completely. It failed to draw in the majority of the workers. It lasted only four days. The defeat immediately instituted more police repression to crush any further possible resistance – primarily, however, in anticipation of the final arbitration award to be made. When this comes the workers will already have suffered their major defeat, its advanced section crushed for the time being and the militants further isolated from the masses.
Needless to say that in the serious situation now prevailing in Germany, particularly with the threat of fascism to crush all working class organization, it becomes obligatory upon the revolutionary vanguard to alter fundamentally its strategical line, and to pursue the tactics which will enable it to play is historic rôle.

Note by ETOL
1. At the time this article was written Strasbourg, the capital of Alsace, was in France.
 



Definite signs of active workers’ resistance to the capitalist offensive are here. In Lawrence, Mass, a total of 10,000 textile workers have struck the American Woolen Co.’s mills against an increased speed up system and a wage cut. These strikers immediately began militant mass picketing. It has thus become one of the early small beginnings of a rising labor movement.
On Feb. 16th, 1931, the strike began with only 33 workers coming out of the Washington Mills combing dept. against the instituted new schedules. It became spontaneous. By Feb. 21st it increased to 8,000. Despite the fact that only fragmentary union organization exists the strike continued to grow to embrace 10,000 workers.
The new schedules provided for increased speed-up. It instituted wage cuts in the form of abolition of all overtime pay and abolition of extra pay for night shifts. It provided for placing of efficiency experts throughout the mills to increase the labor intensity.
The strike involved mainly the three mills of the American Wool Co. The Washington, Wood and Ayer Mills. The workers demanded time and a half for overtime, double time for holidays, withdrawal of efficiency experts, no discrimination and recognition of the Mill committees to settle special grievances.
The employers fear of these signs of actual resistance became immediately expressed in the brutal efforts of the police to break up picketing. The Company offered to restore the old schedules if the workers would return. Furthermore, as usually happens in such cases the “better citizens” rallied to the company offering their services through an established citizens committee.
The small section of the National Textile Workers Union existing in Lawrence, took a militant lead in this strike. This the employers feared and they refused to deal with these workers’ representatives.
They called the officials of the N.T.W. “outsiders”. However, that is always so in a strike; workers representatives are castigated as “outsiders”.
On Feb. 26th, the employers succeeded in getting the strikers to take a vote on returning to work granting the concession that there would be no efficiency experts, that the old schedule in force prior to Feb. 16 will be put back into operation and that a committee of mill workers will be met to consider any disputes in the future. They refused to grant time and a half for overtime. Following immediately upon the voting the police-force raided the N.T.W. union headquarters, arresting 11 workers. Of those arrested the following 5 – Edith Berkman, Pat Devine, William Murdock, John C. Czarencki and Alex Danilevich are held under bail aggregating $100,000. Of the 10,000 strikers only about 2,000 participated in the voting, the result of which is announced as 1,651 in favor of returning to work and 453 against. On the face of it this does not look like an expression of the workers’ sentiments.
While this strike is entirely of a spontaneous and isolated local character its significance lies in it being a beginning of a new basic tendency. A tendency towards working class resistance. It did not have any previous preparation enabling it to spread on a large scale.
In this fact the present C.P. leadership has a serious responsibility. For a long time it has not only criminally neglected to build a union in the textile industry but has by its narrow factional attitude towards the working class movement removed one after another of officials elected by the union, finally substituting for elections the method of appointing. It permitted a splendid movement in the textile industry of the South to completely collapse. The net result is a union, in an industry holding great promises, reduced to almost nothing.
In view of these beginning signs of working class resistance our slogan against rationalization and speed up assumes real importance. But above all in general agitation the slogan of the six-hour day without reductions in pay should be put forward, as a propaganda slogan. It can become the unifying slogan of working class struggle. It is the main slogan of the rising labor movement.
 



In an adjoining column, we print Tom Mooney’s clarion call to all revolutionary and militant labor organizations and groups.
We agree with. Tom Mooney that the “time for action has come”, and unreservedly indorse the call. To the Communist movement, to all revolutionary and militant workers it becomes a golden opportunity and an imperative duty to close the ranks and act unswervingly and unitedly in a struggle which will reverberate from coast to coast, for the unconditional pardon of Tom Mooney and the release of all class war prisoners. The Communist League of America (Opposition) adds its voice to that of Tom Mooney’s from his prison cell, where he has been buried for fifteen long years. We say: Yes, this issue can serve as a common rallying ground for all revolutionary and militant groups!
 
The Need for Action
With the capitalist offensive forging its way ruthlessly, with its dungeons filled with miners from Harlan, Kentucky, and from the Pennsylvania fields, with Negro workers from Chicago and Scottsborough, with the Centralia prisoners still languishing in jail and the continued increase of class war victims, this issue of freedom for Tom Mooney and release of all class war prisoners has become an ever more potent one, action upon which brooks no delay. With the deepening of the crisis and more acute working class misery, it is to be expected that the rulers of Wall Street, in order to extricate themselves from their economic difficulties, will attempt to feed the greedy maws of class oppression with many more victims – sterling champions of the proletariat. But it is not yet too late for the working class to rally and to build a gigantic movement which will prevent it.
From his prison cell Tom Mooney says: “I ask for a genuine united front.” This is entirely correct and will meet with the approval of every red-blooded worker. Only a genuine united front can produce a movement sufficiently strong in numbers, sufficiently strong in purpose and in conviction to batter open the prison doors and to advance the American working class toward the social revolution. Only an international solidarity, steeled by a revolutionary purpose, can liberate the working class from capitalist oppression and forever destroy the capitalist dungeons.
Tom Mooney names specific organizations upon which he calls to build genuine united front, to create Pardon Mooney Committees throughout the country. He does not call upon the imperialist agents within labor’s ranks, the reactionary trade union bureaucrats, nor upon these who have deceived with slick promises. Their role as deceivers and betrayers he has already unmasked by his burning denunciations. A genuine united front must mean an effort to include all of these organizations and others willing to participate. In this there need be no fear of the deceivers and betrayers within some of these organizations. The Hillquits, the Hillmans and the other little Mustes hate more than anything else to work in common with us in any genuine struggle, or even for the release of all class war prisoners. They prefer the ranks of reaction to the camp of revolution and they prove it daily at every serious test. But it is our task to make them stand up in front of the workers on every concrete question and affirm this by their refusal to participate in a real struggle. Such leader types will oppose the united front with the Communists because they aim to maintain capitalism. But without the Communists, there can be no united front and the workers will thus, by one more experience, learn that to heed the clarion call of Tom Mooney they will have to fight all such leaders standing in the way.
 
The Communist Duty
Upon the Communists devolves, therefore, the duty to bring this genuine united front into life. Their guiding line can only be the one of the dearest interests of the working class and of following the glowing spirit of Tom Money and the other class war prisoners. To weld together various workers organizations, with varying programs, into one solid fighting front around this one common purpose will bring about a mighty echo of approval from every militant worker.
It is therefore pertinent to ask, in view of the statement of the Central Committee of the Communist Party published in the Daily Worker of August 28 alongside of Mooney’s call: Do the party leaders intend to emulate the Hillquits, the Hillmans and their helpers in a refusal .to organize a genuine united front? Is this statement to be a justification for evasion of duty? While it indorses Mooney’s call in general, it fails entirely to indicate one single measure, one single step toward the organization of a united front. While it does call upon the workers, upon the unemployed councils, etc., for support to the call, it fails in the most crucial demand – the demand for the organization of a united front movement. The statement attempts to cover this failure by the usual base slanders against the Left Opposition as a means of diverting the issue away from the party leaderships’ responsibility.
Why do the party centrist bureaucrats fear a genuine united front? Not a “so-called ‘united front’ ‘arranged’ from the top with ‘leaders’ ... an alliance of a few so-called ‘leaders’.” This is not what Tom Mooney asks for. In a genuine united front the Communists can have nothing to fear from such “leaders”. Why, then, do they shirk this responsibility? This is what every party member should ask of the leadership!
Through the International Labor Defense there must be initiated the organization of a genuine united front, the setting up of Committees to fight for the freedom of Tom Mooney and release of all class war prisoners. The party leadership must give up its miserable evasion and cease begging the issue. It should grasp this as an excellent opportunity for Communists to mobilize a powerful movement. That much every militant worker will demand from it. Our modest forces will stand unreservedly at the disposal of such a movement.
“Tom Mooney is an historical symbol of the American workers – of their weakness and failures of yesterday and today and their potential, dynamic power which alone will bring victory tomorrow.” To bring this potential dynamic power into motion is now the task. Throughout the period of the present crisis, the insoluble contradictions of capitalism are intensifying. Throughout the country, the signs of sharpened struggles are multiplying. We are facing the beginnings of an upward working class curve. It harbors enormous possibilities. In this situation, the ringing call for Tom Mooney’s liberation and the release of all class war prisoners must echo and reecho throughout the length and breadth of the country. It must resound in a movement of powerful proportions. The Communists must become its spearhead.


A Call from Prison
California State Prison,
San Quentin, California
August 20, 1931
To All Militant and Revolutionary Labor Organizations and Groups
Dear Comrades and Fellow Unionists:
The time for action has come. Too long have we been deceived with slick promises – away with them! From the cell where I have been buried alive for fifteen long years I appeal to every working class organization with a spark of militancy or revolutionary purpose – I appeal for united action.
The most flagrant “frame-up” this country has ever seen is dragging into its sixteenth year, and not even a glimpse of freedom is in sight. In fact, I am more securely imprisoned today than when first arrested. The dictatorship of capital knows the economic conditions are so ominous that to issue a pardon at this time would be as though a lighted match were thrown into a powder keg. We must prove that neither will my continued imprisonment serve their purposes. Let this appeal be the spark which will start an unparalleled conflagration – agitation that will arouse the masses to demand my unconditional pardon and the release of all class war prisoners.
I ask for a genuine united front. Every working class organization should elect delegates and be represented on Pardon Mooney Committee that will direct the activities of the workers in this fight. The task of such committees will be to call mass meetings, distribute literature, carry on monster public demonstrations, and engage in an energetic campaign that will make the ground tremble under the feet of the arrogant rulers of California.
One of the immediate tasks of these committees will be to force through the pressure of an awakened public opinion, the publication of the Wickersham Commission of the suppressed report on the Mooney case, prepared by its experts. This Report, I am given to understand, is a factual record and, when published, will definitely prove that the California authorities combined to organize the frame-up.
Too many working class groups divide and weaken their forces. The effect they quite naturally should have in combined numbers is lost when they quarrel among themselves. This case ought to serve as a common rallying ground for all revolutionary and militant groups which should unite for effective work in the face of a common enemy.
I call upon the following groups, listed alphabetically, and other similar groups I may overlook or forget in my haste to unite and organize Pardon Mooney Committees in every city and state in this nation for immediate action:

All the militant units and individuals within the A.F. of L.
The Amalgamated Clothing Workers.
The Communist Party, and all of its subdivisions including the Trade Union Unity League, the International Labor Defense, and other similar organizations.
All of the groups who have split away from the Communist Party, such as the Majority Group, the Communist League Opposition, the Communist League of Struggle.
The Conference for Progressive Labor Action.
The Farmer Labor Party.
The Industrial Workers of the World.
The Proletarian Party.
The Socialist Party.
The Socialist Labor Party, etc.

I know it will not be easy for some of these groups to cooperate, one with the other. But this is a basic issue, and every sincere man and woman willing to join in a united effort should and shall, be welcome.
I have spent fifteen of the best years of my life in a California dungeon for the ideals and purposes all these groups represent and my fate is in their hands. When they fight for my freedom, they fight for their cause – the cause of labor. My continued imprisonment is the very best evidence of the futility and weakness of their divided efforts. Only by their combined strength can they defeat the common foe.
I hail each and every one of my fellow workers and comrades in this struggle. Let us all work in common for the Social Revolution that will bring to an end this barbarous dog-eat-dog, profit-mad, capitalistic system.



 


To each and every one of you I send fraternal revolutionary greetings.




 


TOM MOONEY
31,921



 



Our thesis breathes not one particle of spirit of a coming “Victorian age” for American imperialism in the Lovestonian sense. Nor does it project the possibility of a “Victorian age” for American imperialism parallel to the development of British imperialism in the nineteenth century. But we do give the reasons which “are still effective enough to warrant its ability to extricate itself out of its present crisis by shifting the burden of it not only upon the working class at home but upon the nations of Europe,” without even excluding the possibility of another boom.
This we believe, is the most likely variant for the immediate future which can be quite well substantiated by the present economic and political trends.
But at the outset let us remember that this question is closely bound up with the perspectives of the world’s revolutionary movement. It will be of decisive importance whether it progresses toward new victories or whether it suffers new serious defeats.
Hence, our thesis does not at all draw any conclusions based upon the ability of American capitalism to solve its problems or to overcome its contradictions. It proceeds from the inevitable intensification of these contradictions to hold out “prospects of struggle which will increase in breadth and depth and militancy”. And precisely under the likely variant of an upward conjuncture of American capitalist economy.
 
Fundamentals of Present Crisis
The capitalist system of society as a whole has reached its period of decline. The crisis which followed the short speculative post-war “boom” marked a beginning of a period of crises for capitalism, within which the business cycles still operate but are changed to the degree that the general period has changed. This period also marks the beginnings of the development of a new system of economy represented by the Soviet Union which, of course, will play its serious part in any future perspective. Each new cycle becomes a historical step in capitalism, bringing it nearer to its end. The increasingly planetary character of the conjunctures of capitalist economy has become particularly expressed in the more uniform and more universal phase of the industrial cycle in each crisis dip, though not uniform in the rising “booms” This testifies to the growing intensity and scope of crises as a part of capitalist economy. At the beginning of this crisis, France was still to some extent an exception – to the extent, mainly, to which her economy is still made up of small scale and peasant economy. Also this crisis particularly records as a universal phenomenon within capitalism the growing standing army of unemployed on the one hand, and on the other, a growing abundance of credits seeking new markets for Investment. However, the latter in its overwhelming preponderance is in the hands of one imperialist power – the United States.
To substantiate the possible variants upon which our general strategy is based it must be proved whether, despite this general crisis period, room for expansion at least for single capitalist powers can still be found. One of Marx’s dictum reads: “There is no such thing as a permanent crisis.” Lenin never tired of emphasizing that: “There is no situation for which there is absolutely no way out for the bourgeoisie.” Both are still true today. And it depends decisively upon the maturity and actions of the proletariat to what extent capitalism can recover from the crisis or whether it will proceed more rapidly in its decline. In this respect, the proletarian vanguard unfortunately shows great weaknesses throughout the capitalist world.
 
The Basis of Possible Revival
The law of uneven development of capitalism holds no possibility, after the acute phase of this crisis is overcome, of a business revival comprising all countries. But this very uneven development, which is more pronounced under the imperialist epoch, holds precisely the possibility of the stronger power emerging from the crisis, passing through depression to revival, at the cost of the weaker.
Crises are the periods of capitalist forcible adjustments of the relative over production. They are manifested in the purely economic aspects by a restriction of output, diminution of stocks on hand by a falling price level, thus releasing money for renewal of fixed capital, which means production of means of production, factories, machinery etc., re-employment of labor and increases of variable capital. Apparently, however, there is as yet in this country no diminution of stocks on hand. According to Survey of Current Business for Feb. 1931, the following comparison of stocks on hand is shown:



December


1928


 


1929


 


1930




Total Raw Materials


 


156


186


195




Total Ind. Finish. Products


122


119


121



Prior to the war, the American production cycles were based almost exclusively on the home market, by continuous expansion of national market, by extending the frontiers to tap new natural resources and by turning a constant stream of immigrants, in addition to the growing population, into producers and consumers. They became particularly expressed in the extension of railroads. The postwar boom of 1921–1929 was still based mainly on the home market. It became expressed mainly in the renewal of fixed capital for railroad material, machinery and building which had been practically at a standstill during the war, as well as by the spurt in the automobile industry. Meanwhile, however, American capitalism had entered the world market and world affairs on a large scale. It would therefore be incorrect to speak of prospects of American capitalism overcoming its crisis merely on the basis of the process of business cycles operating in the home market. This would entirely ignore the fact that its sources of power are spread all over the world. And it is precisely in the world arena that it will seek its further field of expansion.
 
Further World Market Expansion
The majority of the world’s population still consist of peasants (still mainly engaged in natural economy). To turn the peasants into elements of capitalist production, i.e., producers and consumers of capitalist society, is one of the important processes of capitalism and has proven one additional means of capitalist expansion throughout its history. From its very inception, It began by battering down barriers for this expansion set up by feudalism, first by “liberating” the peasants from serfdom, thus creating a new equilibrium. Immense areas and population can still be developed capitalistically once there are the apparently sufficient guarantees for return on capital investments.
The crisis releases enormous amounts of liquid capital seeking new fields of investments. Such are to be found primarily in these economically backward countries, colonies and semi-colonies. American imperialism is again gathering its breath from the first shocks of the stock market crash and the crisis. It is preparing to conquer new territories. Its most important weapon will be a combination of capital exportation with export of goods, granting of long term credits and outright loans for the purchase of industrial goods. American imperialism has long had its eye on China with its 420 million population, overwhelmingly peasant in its make-up, engaged mainly in natural economy. Of course, it would not pour in heavy investments merely to develop sources of production in competition with its own cotton fields, its own copper mines or its own steel mills. No: it would enter primarily to turn the vast field of peasants into elements of capitalist production, into producers and consumers; to first of all invest into fixed capital, which means building roads, railroads, factories, machinery, etc., thus making the investments for promotion of sale of its industrial goods and simultaneously for the extraction of surplus value – new super-profits. So far, the Chinese worker is already on a much lower level, making the super-profits possible. This prospect can well enough serve as a complement to a revival and a new upward conjuncture of American capitalism.
To develop such backward countries capitalistically, although offering a means of expansion for a time, does not at all solve the contradictions of world capitalism, nor of any of its component parts. On the contrary, it vastly increases these contradictions. But to draw from that a conclusion based upon the absolute inability of American capitalism to extricate itself from this present crisis is simply ridiculous.
 
America’s Role in the World Market
American imperialism won the war. It established its world hegemony. It intervened in Europe in 1923 to defeat the German proletariat and “stabilize” German capitalism. It intervened again in 1931 to postpone the German revolution and to put the screws on France. It is intervening now in England. In this process of interventions, it has poured millions upon millions into Europe because its hegemony demands a certain measure of “stability” of the capitalist equilibrium. While such capital investments are made also for the promotion of exportation of goods, they are above all designed to strengthen the Wall Street hegemony and thereby serve constantly to put each of the European powers on a more limited ration in world economy.
Evidently, Wall Street does not in the least fear the consequences to its own market within these competing powers by limiting their rations or even crushing them as competitors. That will not reduce the size of world market still available. But it will relatively strengthen further its imperialist hegemony and its struggle for re-division of the world.
So far, however, these forecasts have taken into account only the possibilities of American capitalism extricating itself out of the present crisis in connection with its possible further expansion on the world market. Yet each step in this direction inevitably produces the most furious conflicts of capitalist state relations as well as of class relations, and, as far as the latter are concerned – not the least at home. But this part of the problem – so important for our perspectives of coming sharpened struggles – it will be necessary to leave for another article.
 



With ever sharper turns and jerks American capitalism is endeavoring to find its way out of the present crisis. The convulsions already recorded by its efforts give eloquent testimony to the explosive character of the present epoch.
To what extent it can gain a respite from the general crisis period and to what extent it can take advantage of the possibilities still open for further expansion on the world market should not be judged a priori. Moreover, it cannot be judged at, all on the mere basis of such possibilities without regard to the problem of class relations. But for purposes of determining the general direction and to work out a correct strategy it is necessary to examine the economic and political processes.
While even the “best” of the bourgeois experts have not as yet succeeded in establishing any concrete evidence of a change in the cycle, there is evidence a-plenty of preparations for the shifting of its burden. None of these so far point to acceptance of a condition of “stabilization” on a lower plane for American capitalism. This is not yet the general direction of the economic and political processes.
To be sure, the general declining character of capitalism cannot be overcome. And any respite even for American capitalism will necessarily implies the lowering of the present level of the American workers as well as the reduction of the ration of other capitalist powers in world economy. This process is already in operation in both directions.
The American bourgeoisie is definitely aiming at replacing the bourgeoisie of Europe and particularly that of England, primarily, in order to take possession of their markets. But what this implies comrade Trotsky has so aptly pointed out:
“It is precisely the international strength of the United States and its unbridled expansion resulting from it, that compels it to include powder magazines throughout the world among the foundation of its structure – the antagonisms between the East and the West, the class struggles in Old Europe, uprisings of the colonial masses, wars and revolution.”
We have witnessed, as ominous signs for the European bourgeoisie, a series of convulsive economic and political crises coupled with direct intervention of American capitalism within the most recent period. Notably so in England and Germany, with France not escaping pressure from both the American colossus which in every instance emerged the victor, further strengthening its hegemony. Behind the apparent international action to assist the financially hard pressed powers, there develops the sharpened antagonisms across the various state borders and keener competition for armaments. There have been rapid, frenzied swings from the rule of social democracy as an instrument of capitalism to that of open reaction, as these powers, each struggling more desperately for their diminishing rations in world economy, attempt to put ever heavier burdens upon their own proletariat and reduce its standard. Unquestionably there has been an immense sharpening in existing class relations. The objective situation is becoming increasingly revolutionary. These results, which express the contradictions of capitalism in general, are made so much more turbulent by America’s ruthless advance in Europe.
What are the prospects of development within the United States in this struggle for a respite? While the further ebbs and flows of the economic cycles may take place in strong leaps, some of the important aspects of the course for the immediate period are already indicated. And most likely, within these leaps the attitude and the actions of the working class will become a factor of far greater decisiveness than during the past decades. The sharper and deeper the changes in the future cycles as well as in the general economic and political conditions, the sharper the actions of the masses will be. Its outcome, however, depends decisively upon the extent and ability of Communist leadership.
The process toward the reduction of the working class level is definitely in motion. That is also one of the signs of efforts toward an economic revival of American capitalism which, of course, holds possibilities of success in so far as another upward conjuncture is concerned. But depending, as it does, in a large measure upon the degree of the reduction of this level, the attacks upon the workers can be expected to reach yet a much more acute stage. It is therefore logical to assume a tenacious growth of resistance in this upward conjuncture, when the workers find more solid ground under their feet, when the threatening clouds of large scale dismissals from factories and shops seems to disperse and when the demand for Labor power begins to increase. This is so much logical to assume in view of the fact that the working class has experienced a rude shaking from its false sense of security, induced by the capitalist “prosperity” alone and, not having exhausted its forces in serious defeats, finds itself compelled to meet attacks formerly not dreamed of. Unquestionably the prospects of such broad economic struggles also holds prospects of new life to the labor movement in general as well as possibilities for a rise in the level of class consciousness.
Growing resistance of the workers at the beginning of this crisis or during its first rapid progress downward could not be expected. That was the period of mass dismissals from the factories with the prosperity illusions still strongly imbedded. How false was the party leadership’s analysis when, already prior to the crisis. It proclaimed the ‘’mass radicalization” of the workers and in its seventh convention thesis, in attempting to analyze the crisis, stated: “Its effects are broadening and deepening the counter-offensive of the exploited working masses.” And further to make sure of no misunderstanding, it proceeded to list the evidences (?) of “the revolutionary upsurge of the working masses of the United States”. How equally false were its strategical conclusions for the “conquests of the streets”.
Yet, in this coming period of growing resistance and sharpened economic struggles, the workers, despite the false analysis and conclusions of the leadership, will move at an accelerated tempo toward the Communist party. And while the impact of the struggle may for a time, as far as the masses are concerned, relegate the questions of strategy to the backward there will nevertheless be a growth of the problems of correct leadership. Moreover, at each decisive turn, of changes of objective conditions, the questions of strategy will again be posed in full force – more so at each particular mistake and failure recorded. And from the Centrist bureaucracy now in control of the party there are no signs whatever other than those belonging to its career of false concepts and stupid blunders.
Unfortunately, however, the field for mass leadership is not left open exclusively for the Communists. There are yet the social reformists of various types and appearances to be taken into account. While in certain advanced European capitalist countries we witness many strong manifestations of disintegration of the social democracy, that process has not yet reached such a point here. To what extent the workers here will past a period of reformist illusions depends largely upon the objective developments and the ability of the Communists. It is therefore no accident that in recent strike struggles, as in the mine fields and in Paterson, where the party leadership failed in its greatest opportunities, the penalty became a strengthening of social reformist influence. It was to be expected that such would first be reflected in the trade union field and in economic struggles of resistance. But it is also a portent of serious consequences for the future. Particularly in the first stages of masses moving Leftward, the reformists also move Leftward, hoping to lead them. They bring forward their most effective “Left” coverings, but when the masses make more definite demands, when the tendencies to go beyond the bounds of reform appear and assume revolutionary implications, they change their tune. It is precisely in this situation, in these very first beginnings of such manifestations, that the party leadership has shown itself utterly incapable of utilizing the united front policy which would strengthen the Communist influence as against that of the reformists.
It can therefore not be too often asserted that with each step of development of present objective conditions, the position of the party and its policy becomes of ever greater importance. Commensurate with this grows the importance of the role and function of the Left Communist Opposition. Has the party spent itself in its “Third Period” assaults upon a “revolutionary upsurge”, existing only in the sphere of false evaluations of its leadership? This, of course, is what all the capitalist agents within labor’s ranks as well as the social reformists and with them, although in a different manner, the Right wing leaders of the Lovestone camp would like to have us believe. For us, however, it is pertinent to recognize the weakness of the party’s position despite the growing favorable objective situation. A false strategy running counter to the actual developments of the working class movement mulcts a heavy punishment. And all the protestations of the Centrist leadership of great disproportion between the party’s numerical weakness and its large ideological influence to the contrary notwithstanding, the workers have in many respects, since the early part of the crisis, cast an adverse vote In regards to the party. They have voted by their absence from its mass organizations, by their decreasing response to calls for demonstrations; their vote became decisively adverse in the mine fields and in Paterson after the party leadership’s failure to become the proponents of a united front struggle.
Forced by the pressure of objective developments and by pressure of our correct criticism and intervention, the Centrist party leadership has found itself compelled to relinquish its “Third Period” analysis and conclusions. Has It come to a position more in accord with the actual needs of the mass movement? Has it come to a correct understanding of the Lenin policy of united front, which In this developing period will become so particularly essential? There is no such evidence. But there is evidence of the continuation of the zig-zags of the past now turning toward the Right. The serious effects of Its adventurist position compel it to turn in the opposite direction. This is also expressed first in the trade union field. Above all, the Centrist leadership stifles the party’s ideological and political life; its continued tip-tilted position, in the opposite of the objective curves, keeps it from rapidly advancing the working class ideological level in a revolutionary direction. Because of this, it will be equally as unprepared when the masses move Leftward.
However, there will be new decisive jerks and turns also in the working class movement in the immediate future, perhaps of a convulsive character. This is clearly indicated in present perspectives, and at such decisive instances the questions of strategy will be posed in a forceful manner.
This imposes heavy obligations upon the Left Opposition. Our strength must first of all become the one of correct Marxian evaluations and conclusions. There will be plenty of decisive issues and situations and in all instances our direction must be the one of all efforts toward the restoration of the party to its revolutionary path. It is our party, and this is our task. A concentration on the decisive issues must first of all be our object, coupled with the most direct intervention. For that we still require an immeasurable development and strengthening of our forces.
 



On the shoulders of European revolutions England for decades consolidated her progressive development into an ever more powerful imperialist power. But her position as world’s banker is now witnessing its eclipse. Her capitalist economy is afflicted with the illness of decay. Her statesmen, those who are capitalist in name and those who are labor in name, are at this present moment endeavoring to pool their resources to overcome the much feared economic disaster and to save the proud mother of the capitalist empires from the humiliation of a Hoover moratorium for England. England’s present development is toward a revolutionary situation at an accelerated tempo.
However, so long that the British Communist Party remains what is tantamount to an impotent, isolated sect the situation is not so hopeless for the British bourgeoisie. However, it follows that to get the Communist Party out of its present stagnation is an imperative task. But to this task, its Centrist leadership does not at all measure up.
The disillusionment of two years of the “labor” government, the innumerable betrayals of the reactionary labor leaders the growing discontent with unemployment and a constantly reduced standard of living, are preparing the working masses for motion. A point has already been reached where in situations of labor conflicts these leaders speak to empty halls or meet loud protests. Even the imperialist agents in the Trade Union Council, sensing the danger, have on two occasions come out in criticism of the “labor” government. It protested the government attitude to the report of the Royal Commission on Unemployment; it protested the liberal-labor agreement to the bill of repeal of the anti-trade union act. But these are merely the efforts to construct if possible a safety valve for reaction. Yet the Communist party has not at all been able to supply leadership in this situation of rich possibilities.
 
Pollitt Recites the Failures
At the Eleventh Comintern Plenum, Harry Pollitt, the most perfect prototype of a Stalinist third rate functionary, presented a tragic picture. His lamentations were:
“The trouble is that our comrades do not differentiate between the workers in the I.L.P. and their leaders and because of this we build up a great barrier between ourselves and the workers in the other parties ... the attitude of nine members out of ten in our party to a new worker, and particularly to an I.L.P. worker is that if they are not prepared to swallow the whole 21 points of the Comintern program they are social fascists ... Today we have a big strike move in England which has not been headed by the party and the Minority Movement ... we are not able to develop the independent forms of struggle, the independent forms of leadership, so that we are not in a position to be able to give the call – Strike on – we are not able to get the lead of the strike movement. The reformists are able, on the whole, to call the workers out and call the strikes off.”
A dismal picture of failure indeed, particularly when one considers the objectively favorable situation. But do these leaders attempt seriously and thoroughly to account for the reasons? Not at all. One may go further and ask: What does the present Comintern leadership propose to remedy the faults? From the shameful combinations of the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee, which served to give the reactionary Trade Union Council a Left covering and subjected the Minority Movement and the Communist party to these “Left” representatives of the Trade Union Council, the Comintern commanded the party to execute a sharp turn to “class against class”. It instructed the party to assume “independent leadership” à la the “Third Period” style; not because of specific factors of the objective conditions which were then particularly favorable to the reformists, but because of the proclamation of the “Third Period”. It became naturally translated, not into struggle to prove the superiority of the Communist program, but by arbitrary division of separate strike committees, of separating and isolating the militant minority from the trade unions for creation of new independent unions. Thus the blundering stupidity of the British party leadership must, of course, first of all be traced to its roots of the Stalin policies in the Comintern, and a correction must first of all begin with a decisive condemnation of these false policies.
 
The Party Leadership Views
The opportunist nationally-limited position inevitably flowing from the reactionary theory of “socialism in one country” invented and applied by the Stalinized Comintern leadership has found its particularly crass expression in the whole concept of the British party leadership. In the cardinal question of the Indian revolutionary perspectives, the party leadership confines itself in the main to demanding independence for India, that is it calls upon the British workers to demand for the Hindus the same national liberty which they have. This allows for no distinction whatever from the position of the “Left” I.L.P. But what is yet worse it fails entirely to establish the intimate connection which is so essential between the British workers and the Indian proletariat and poor peasantry. The continued subjugation of India remains one of the main pillars of the British empire, and just as much so is the development of the revolution in India – not merely its national liberation – one of the main pillars of the proletarian revolution in England. A correct orientation on this question thus becomes a cardinal task of the British Communist Party.
However, the opportunist nationally-limited position of the party leadership applies also in a full measure to its views of the situation of the British working class. The axis of its present propaganda and activities is the fight for shifting the burden of the growing crisis from the working class to the bourgeoisie. To this end it advances, as is for example contained in the program of the “Charter movement”, the slogans of the partial demands for an increased dole at the cost of the owners of industry, the seven hour day, housing for workers, reduction of rents, a guaranteed minimum wage, repudiation of arbitration, release of class war prisoners, repeal of Trades Disputes Act, against tariff attacks upon workers’ standard, added to which are the slogans, for fight against imperialism and for the defense of the Soviet Union, etc.
 
“Simplifying” the Problems of Revolution
These leaders have arrived at an altogether too simple rationalization of the power and resources of imperialism and the problems of the working class. Their conclusions are that since capitalism in its present declining stage cannot grant the necessary reforms to the workers, hence every struggle for reforms becomes a revolutionary struggle. But the problem is not quite so simple. While struggles for reforms have a different significance today than during the period of organic development of capitalism; while reformism could then play a progressive role but today will definitely have to choose between the paths of proletarian revolution or organic support of capitalist reaction, and invariably chooses the latter, nevertheless, for the Communist party, there still remains the problem of giving the struggle for reform needs and democratic demands a revolutionary content. Above all, there remains the problem for the party of building the forces which under its leadership in the struggles must consciously select the road toward the revolution. The party must establish itself as the vehicle of the revolution.
The British party writes voluminously about the growing capitalist crisis and the debacle of the MacDonald gradualness. It quite correctly endeavors to unmask the “Left” of the I.L.P. and usually draws the conclusion formulated in blanket statements to the effect: These experiences will prove to the British workers that the Communist party is the only party fighting for their interests. This, however, does not at all follow. That is, it does not and cannot follow unless the party also succeeds in proving its worth as a revolutionary leader.
What did Pollitt have to offer, at the Eleventh Comintern Plenum, as a solution for the present party difficulties? Of course, one must not expect a serious examination of possible fallacies of past and prevailing policies and directives from self-contented bureaucrats. And so, Pollitt, also remained true to the established style of empty platitudes. He recommended “... to intensify work ... to lead workers’ economic struggles ... to build broad union front activities from below ... activities against growing tendencies of fascism against growing war danger, etc.” The particular possibilities for this, Pollitt saw in the Charter Movement.
Alas, in the Charter Movement the deceptive practise of, in view of all the failures, to appear stronger prevailed, from its inception. In conformity with the “Third Period” style the party leadership set out to drum up a large delegation at the initial charter conference. It became a substitute for the reality of mass influence which the party still has to win. 788 delegates were secured, but only 68 representing trade union branches, 51 the unemployment movement branches (a movement hardly existing in reality), 31 representing the party and Y.C.L., the balance were supposed to represent various miscellaneous mass meetings, sports clubs, Minority Movements groups etc. This undoubtedly becomes its first fatal weakness. The revolution cannot be organized by deceiving the workers. Secondly, one cannot yet notice any visible effort to correctly connect the economic needs and demands of this movement with the political issues. Thirdly, being borne out of the conception of finding a substitute for the ill-fated Minority Movement and a short cut to mass influence, the party’s problems have not been brought nearer its solution. Essentially these problems remain as before.
 
The Future Holds Great Possibilities
The future orientation of the party still remains intimately bound up with the lessons of the past from which it has not yet drawn the necessary conclusions. Particularly so with the lessons of the 1926 general strike and the Anglo Russian Unity Committee. Pressed by the growing workers discontent, today, similarly as prior to the general strike. “Lefts” are again coming forward from the reformist ranks to serve as a shield for the reactionaries to endeavor to defeat the struggles growing out of the discontent and to return to their original camp when this “danger” again blows over. The Communist party is yet entirely isolated. There is therefore a great danger that the struggle of the discontented masses, which marks the developing revolutionary forces, may be swallowed in this “Left” reformist swamp. The party cannot prevent it by its so-called “united front from below” coupled with the perfidious practises of what is called independent leadership. This will only mean to substitute deception and cunning for the actual unification of the workers. Moreover it always leaves the door wide open for the other desperate alternative, – that is, to attempt to overcome the isolation which will ensue by alliances behind the backs of the workers with these Left coverings. In other words to repeat the shameful alliance with the “Lefts”, the Hicks, Purcells and Cooks in the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee.
These “Lefts” in England have considerable experiences precisely in deception and cunning. The party has nothing to gain by attempts to emulate them. It has therefore become so much more an imperative duty for the British Communist Party to conduct an extended discussion to enable it to draw the proper lessons of 1926 so that it may arrive at a position of correctly estimating the future perspectives, correctly work out its orientation for genuine unification of the British workers which will in reality mark the end of “Left” reformist deception and lay the basis for Communist leadership.
 



American capitalism is now embarking more definitely upon its long cherished aim of reducing the working class standard. It is seeking thereby to shift the burden of its economic difficulties further onto the backs of the workers. At the very inception of the present crisis the signal was given in the demand of the most powerful bunking institutions for a lower cost of production – a demand growing in volume until now wage cuts follow all along the line.
No matter how great or how slender their prospects for revival, to the capitalist rulers there is hardly any doubt that the commencement must of necessity imply a measure of stabilization on a lower level than hitherto. A greatly contracted market and an enormous capacity of production makes that course compulsory. The lower level sought is first of all to be applied to the working class. While sought as a way out of the present crisis, it will not at all serve to diminish the contradictions of capitalism. On the contrary, it increases the antagonisms of present class relations.
The increasing class antagonisms can be expected to be expressed in sharpened struggles on a scale which has not yet been witnessed in the United States. As a first sign, there has already been a considerable increase in the number of strikes and conflicts during the first half of 1931 as compared to the six months previous.
Any actual beginnings of revival could not seriously alter these perspectives as it would first of all involve an increase of the burden upon the workers’ backs.
The concrete illustrations are already at hand in the present wage-cut drive. The most serious aspect of this drive is in the fact that it is gravitating towards the basic and important industries. No one will believe that the workers employed by the U.S. Steel Corporation have escaped wage cuts. The board of directors’ meeting held recently evidently realized that it would not be so good to administer a wage-cut dramatically just at the moment, when much ado was made about the Hoover administration “opposing” wage-cuts. It would perhaps too seriously compromise the administration. But the actual cut is merely postponed for the moment and will soon be put over more quietly. The coal miners throughout the country have already suffered a drastic deterioration 0f their conditions both by direct wage-cuts, decrease of tonnage rate, mechanization, speed-up and the ravages of unemployment. Added to that comes the announcement of the Rockefeller interests of 20 percent wage cut to be applied at its Colorado mines.
On the railroads, continued improvements of heavier equipments and machinery have already eliminated several hundred thousand jobs while increasing the hauling capacity. During the period of 1920-1929, 370,000 men thus lost their jobs. This year an additional 300,000 are unemployed. With such economies the owners, representing an alleged $5,000,000,000 investment claiming insufficient “earnings” and have appealed to the Interstate Commerce Commission for the right to levy a 15 per cent increase on all freight rates. It is significant however, that during the latest years these rates have tended to decrease in face of the increased competition of truck hauling. If the right to apply this increase is granted, it evidently cannot be applied because of this growing competition. It becomes clear, then, that it is in reality a preparation for a wage cut. Whether the application is denied or proved, inapplicable, in either case it will be used as a basis for the demand for a wage-cut.
According to reports submitted by employers to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 210 establishments cut wages in June involving 25,645 workers with an average cut of 10.8 percent. Five plants reported wage increases affecting 182 workers. Inadequate as these reports are, they nevertheless help to bring out the general trend. Add to this the estimate made by the A.F. of L., fully as inadequate and extremely conservative, and it will help to make the picture clear. The A.F. of L. estimates that “if workers’ incomes continue for the full year of 1931 at about the same level as the first half, they will lose $10,500000,000 from the 1929 level.”
The employers attitude toward the unions in two instances of the present wage cut drive deserve particular attention. On July 12, the New York B.M.T. announced a new “agreement” with its 10,000 employees on the basis of a cut of 50 percent in the 2-cent-an-hour bonus paid for satisfactory work.
It adds, “the motormen, being members of a union, are not affected by this agreement”. This shows both the advantage of union organization as well as the fact that the B.M.T. is not yet ready to force the issue with a union. On the other hand there is the instance from the coal miners present situation. In Pennsylvania, during the present strike, efforts were made by the Pittsburgh Terminal Coal company in particular to revive and put new life into the dead body of the U.M.W. to offset the growth of the National Miners Union. The strike now appears to be on the decline and evidently the operators are somewhat getting over their fear of the militant union for at the proposed Hoover conference on coal, the operators refused to sit jointly with the Lewis forces
But it should not be forgotten for one moment that, for example, the coal operators’ ignoring of all the unions in the field and continuing their brutal assaults upon the workers’ standard, is due in a measure to the failure of the Centrist party leadership to utilize the real opportunity which were and still are available for a fighting united front. Let the National Miners Union take the steps for a genuine united front of the various sectional organizations which ave split away from the decrepit U.M.W. and it will certainly mark the first serious hurdle in the way of the capitalist offensive. That is also the way to deal with the reformists and pseudo-progressives who in reality are only for the kind of “hurdles” which do not, imply struggle And the example of the coal miners is only one out of many.
Wage-cuts hit the workers in the most direct sense and become an important lever to help set them into motion against their class enemy. Regardless of all the servile and treasonable efforts of the capitalist labor agents to prevent their resistance the workers will move nevertheless, compelled by these circumstances. It will increase the abyss between the needs of the masses and the high paid gentry now in leadership of the existing major unions. New progressive currents will spring up within them and the opportunities for working class organization will advance also in the unorganized industries.
Even an upward conjuncture of American capitalist economy will fully embody such prospects. It will mean a real opportunity for Communist leadership. But the one essential step in the present situation, toward establishing it is a correct policy of welding the fighting ranks into a united front.
 



With the accelerated speed of England’s growing decline from its world dominant imperialist position, the lines are becoming more clearly drawn for the contest o£ influence over the British working class. From the point of view of total population, the great majority composes the industrial proletariat. By history it has long ago been invested with the decisive role. But while the MacDonald type of workers’ “leadership” is approaching the end of its career, it would be folly to assume that the influence of reformism is about at an end. In this respect, the sharpest contest is still to take place between the forces of social reform and those of social revolution.
It is still to be fought, with the British Communist Party becoming a much more serious contender than its present small numbers and uninfluential position would indicate. Coming objective developments will inevitably count heavily in its favor even though it will face a much more cunning and much more “Left-appearing” form of reformism, quite distinguished from the now outright and open imperialist agents of the MacDonald, Henderson and Snowden type.
Reformism, having become pretty well discredited in England by the continuation of outright imperialist, policies by the MacDonald government, is bringing forward new champions and new defenders. The “Left” wing within the labor party is feeling the new breeze of working class discontent and is endeavoring to set its sails accordingly. Many efforts are being made by these “Lefts”, like Maxton, Lee, and Brockway to turn the labor government failures into capital for themselves. They sense the danger of growing working class dissatisfaction. They want “real and true reformism”. To make the most possible capital out of the present situation their slogans and demands are becoming ever more “Left” in appearance. They are finding important allies amongst the trade union bureaucracy who, in their deadly fear of any developing working class struggle, have always endeavored to turn all hopes toward the labor party and the labor government. The record of this process of failures and defeats of the workers is now, because of the same fear, turning trade union leaders toward criticism of the “labor” government. While a definite split is unquestionably developing within the labor party, a radical and a reactionary differentiation, a closer examination will soon prove that the radical section is merely a “Leftist” variation of the same old miserable Fabian type of reformism.
 
A General Political Fermentation
Because of the outstanding parliamentary character of British politics at home made possible by her ruthless non-parliamentary politics within the colonial empire, the manifestations of political ferment are first of all expressed in the parliamentary sphere. Growing oppositions, halfway splits and regular splits, are taking place within all three major parliamentary parties. Those, of course, all reflect the growing economic and political decline, the change of issues, and indicate that new problems are developing, problems which in the final analysis all bear directly on the question of class rule and the ability to hold the working class in subjection.
The already greatly declining Liberal party has practically lost a parliamentary section under Sir John Simon, to the Conservatives, while the balance of the group still hangs on to a horse-trading support of the “labor” government. Within the Conservative ranks there is developing the new united Empire party of Lord Rothermere and Beaverbrook. To an extent, this has hampered the Conservative party from taking immediate advantage of the Labor party weaknesses. But it is within the Labor party that the most important fermentation, opposition and splits are taking place. Because of its contradictory position of a party supposedly representing labor and yet being in control of a capitalist government, its fermentation has become the deepest and the most clearly expressive of the recent evolution of the British empire; both in respect to the colonial field and in respect to events at home.
The present economic decline became expressed first in the split-off by the Mosley section going to the extreme Right. Both in the character of this group, as well as in its proposals for solution of England’s plight, are undoubtedly contained serious Fascist elements. The endless petty pilferings of the “labor” government in its efforts to continue capitalist policies under a different label seems to have helped to lend a glamor of reality to the Mosleyites’ demand for a system of economic planning and a semi-dictatorship. And it is not surprising that the former “Left” leader A.J. Cook and the former Communist sympathizer, J.F. Horabin could become signatories to their manifesto. Perhaps the member which this group gained from the parliamentary fraction of the Conservative ranks, W.E.D. Allen, most clearly expressed the methods by which Fascism aims to get a foothold. In a statement: eulogizing the Mosley platform he said: “Let us save the admittedly capitalist ship and when that ship is saved we can discuss without prejudice the distribution of the cargo.”
At the April Scarborough I.L.P. conference Jimmie Maxton and the other “Lefts” taunted the “labor” government, but in a well-measured moderate tone, leaving sufficient loopholes open for a retreat. Maxton asserted: “The labor government has signally failed to achieve the end to which its policy was directed – and that failure was not due to lack of efforts or lack of honesty, but because it was a capitalist objective, carried out in the main through the medium of capitalist machinery.” Very well, it it was a capitalist objective, how can one then speak of failure to achieve the end to which its policy was directed? And granted to the hilt that this objective was carried out through the medium of a capitalist machinery – which is entirely true – do Maxton or the other “Lefts’” draw the proper conclusion, namely to destroy this machinery and replace it with a proletarian machinery of government? Of course not. This is not their objective.
A motion for disaffiliation from the labor party at this conference suffered a defeat of 173 to 37. In many respects this I.L.P. conference repeats the tragic-comedy of the one of 1925. That was held after the experience of the first “labor” government and at the time of a rising wave of working class resistance. It approved, after much criticism, the MacDonald policies 398 to 139. At the Liverpool labor party conference that same year the “Left” section loomed strong but completely capitulated when under fire. Not only was there no split as some of the more gullible had expected but the conference, after settling the “Left” criticism, proceeded to exclude the Communists from the labor party.
Today also the prospects of splits are being whimpered. The “Lefts” are becoming more radical in their utterances. David Kirkwood as a delegate to the recent Second International congress declared that “the labor government preferred to coalesce with liberals and conservatives to maintain capitalism instead of overthrowing it.” The same Kirkwood has now been cited before the labor party disciplinary committee for having stated that, “the conditions of the worker are no better under a labor government.” The New Leader, official organ of the I.L.P. entered in his defense a denial of his having made such statement. It would then be pertinent to ask “why not?” A genuine Left wing leader [would] not only state so but also draw the proper conclusion therefrom. Seven M.P.s of the I.L.P. “Left.” section are also cited before the labor party disciplinary committee because of their voting to table the Anomalies Bill (the bill to correct the “abuse” of the dole).
 
The I.L.P. in the Past
Under pressure of the events of the. world war the “Left” I.L.P. disaffiliated from the Second International. It almost proposed joining the Comintern, but found satisfaction in the Two-and-a-Half International, to return a little while later to the Second. This excursion to the Left followed the working class pressure of the stormy struggles of 1917–1920. The ebb of this period found them returning to the original camp where they, of course, belong. Again with the working class rise and the struggles growing towards the general strike of 1926 these “Lefts” became critical, they became more radical, they again addressed letters to the Comintern, some of them sat in conferences with the Russians in the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee. That was upon invitation of the Stalin-Bucharin bloc. A deal with the “Lefts” – not the workers genuinely moving towards the Left – but the Left coverings of the Fabian imperialist agents. They quickly returned from this second excursion with the defeat, of the general strike, in which they had played their treacherous part.
Workers’ discontent is again beginning to grow and this time with more genuine, more real possibilities. It is occurring in a period of growing working class disillusionment with the servile Crown lackeys in whom they had long placed their faith. We are in a period when comrade Trotsky’s predictions, made in bis Whither England?, have increasing likeliness of coming true: “On the day when the English proletariat frees itself from the mental baseness of Fabianism, humanity, particularly in Europe, will increase in stature by at least a head.”
But the gentlemen of the “Left” are also again beginning a new zig-zag, endeavoring to arrest this growth. Dialectically, it may be contended that it occurs this time on a higher plane, at least on a higher plane of maturity of the English proletariat. While these Left coverings and their apparent radicalization express the workers’ discontent and in this sense records progress, they, of course, act as a brake upon the movement – a reformist brake. The Left phraseology cannot he separated from the important question of basic program. Fenner Brockway, for example, now proposes a “bold socialist program”, which would contain the essentials:
“Assume control of finances by nationalizing the banks ... Reconstruct basic industries under national ownership and direction ... Meet increased productive power of rationalization by concentrating upon increasing the consuming power of the masses of the people ... on a socialist basis to be fulfilled by national control of imports.”
It is, however, well to remember the shudder of these mental offspring of the original Fabian school when in 1926 the Comintern tersely stated the problem of the English proletariat as the one of armed revolutionary force. This is not at all the program of the “Left” I.L.P. They intend merely to repeat the early MacDonald career of reformism in vain hopes that their projected embellishments will make it more palatable.
 



Two years ago when the British Labor Party won the parliamentary elections, aided by its glittering promises of gradual development into “socialism” and of a definite cure for the unemployment situation, it naturally stood out in bold contrast to the reactionary Baldwin Tory government. However, when in power, the labor agents of imperialism, even to attain their promised reforms, would be compelled to go beyond the bounds of reformism and engage in a struggle with the actual rulers of the system from which they would again have to draw certain revolutionary conclusions. Such are the relations between yesterday and today. And in politics, it is one thing to promise and another thing to attain. Of course, the MacDonald coterie of leadership never had any serious intentions with their promised reforms.
But the working masses who expected something from their support of MacDonald have received nothing but disillusionment. What, among the grotesque figures in knee-breeches at the British court, may be considered quite brilliant victories won in the diplomatic field, are not worth a brass farthing to the masses. On the contrary, it has only helped further to reduce their position and hence their dissatisfaction with the “labor” government is now growing apace. Thus the future does hold promises for the British workers, and far more real than MacDonald’s election promises. The future holds promises of defeat of the disgraceful illusions of laborism.
In the two major problems facing the British working class directly at home to which splendid promises had been given, those of the unemployment situation and the repeal of the anti-trade union act, the “labor” government failed signally – or what would be more correct to say – it acted precisely as a government, capitalist also in name, would have acted.
 
The Serious Unemployment Situation
At the time of the liberal labor politicians taking over the golden reins of his majesty’s government, in June 1920 there were a total of 1,100,125 unemployed officially registered. On July 6, 1931, their numbers had more than doubled and were 2,634,288. The dole system initiated in 1920 and intended then as a temporary measure, has since become permanent in character. And while the weight of the dole is becoming rather irksome to British capitalist society the “labor” cabinet is considering means of lightening this “burden” by shifting the load to the backs of the workers.
It attempted to substitute migration of the unemployed to the Dominions. But this had to be discarded even by the hidebound reactionary Jimmie Thomas lord privy seal and first minister of unemployment. The Dominions, having such problems of their own, did not want the unemployed. He found a perplexing problem and succeeded in getting relief only for himself in form of a change to the Dominions. His successor to tackle the unemployment problem, Vernon Hartshorn, died in office. So while the unemployment problem remained and became more acute, all parties, – exclusive, of course, of the Communist party –, were called upon for help. The Royal Commission was created and it returned a report for a cut in the dole and an increase of payments to the fund. According to the report unemployment relief would be reduced, for example for a family with three children, from $8.00 weekly to $7.25. Workers with jobs would be required to pay to the unemployment fund 4 cents more weekly, employers 2 cents and the state 3 cents more. However, this was too raw even for the “labor” government to support. It would have become dynamite to the growing dissension within its own party ranks, so it confined itself to sponsoring a bill for the elimination of “abuses” of the dole evidently hoping that in the process, in committee, more teeth could be put into the bill. For the sake of facilitation Snowden had already announced, prior to presenting his budget, that, only “drastic and disagreeable means” would prevent the country from slipping into bankruptcy.
 
The Communist Party and Unemployment
It seems quite paradoxical that the British Communist Party has proven itself almost entirely unable to take advantage of this long protracted serious unemployment problem. It has, of course, religiously observed all the Stalinist calendar dates of unemployment demonstrations, but they have become mainly formal exercises. Their significance as well as the number of participants have dwindled. The party in the unemployment situation has not been able to set the workers into motion around a revolutionary perspective, nor to instill the life and spirit necessary to advance.
The crux of the party’s demands has been to shift the burden of unemployment from the workers to the bourgeoisie. Thus its outlook became limited to one of a purely national reformist character. It could make little or no distinction from the views of the “Left” within the labor party and the trade union officials who contend that if the state – that is the capitalist state – cannot assure work for its citizens it must provide them with a free living. For the workers there could hardly be anything else to do than attempt as best as they could to adjust themselves to the “inevitable” dole. Until the British Communist Party is able to extricate itself from such views it will remain pretty well paralyzed.
 
The Anti-Trade Union Act
The vicious Trades Dispute and Trade Union Act, legislated by the preceding Baldwin government after it had become so frightened during the general strike, increased the miners’ workday from seven to eight hours; it prohibited any coercive strike over wages or similar disputes which may tend to have a direction against the established order; it prohibited civil service employees from joining unions; finally it also prohibited any levy upon trade unions for political purposes. To the liberal labor party lackeys this latter clause became the only real obnoxious part and accounts for their zeal in election promises to repeal the act. But then, after assuming power a way was easily found to overcome that.
So when the so-called bill of repeal was promulgated it could easily be allowed to be ditched and die in committee. Meanwhile when the Scottish and Welsh miners fought against the spread-over (the eight hour day) and to uphold the more recent Coal Miners Act which provided first for a seven and a half-hour day and by July a seven-hour day, MacDonald advised the miners to accept the spread-over in return for a promised minimum wage law for miners.
To expect from this champion of gradualness to sponsor a movement for the shorter workday to relieve unemployment would, of course, be ridiculous. His “gradualness” leads in the opposite direction knowing, as he does that the shorter workday would cut directly into the absolute surplus value still pocketed by the lords of finance and industry. Yet it is absolutely certain that the productive capacity of British industry and the output per man has grown to an extent making a demand for a six-hour day without reduction of pay as potent as was the demand for the eight-hour day when first advanced. There are at least good reasons to assume that it could become, in the present unemployment situation, a powerful rallying cry for the working class and a means of unifying the employed with the unemployed. It could become a means to help bridge the gulf of the present retreat and defensive toward the working class offensive. From the point of view of building a class movement if utilized by the Communist Party, this slogan could undoubtedly become an effective supplement to the feeble demands of the charter movement. Oh yes, the party has already adopted the seven-hour day slogan; but apparently it overlooks (?) the fact that the seven-hour day today supposed to be law for the coal miners and as a slogan for a movement it could hardly mean much to them.
 
What Does the Balance Sheet Show?
The salient fact is that the considerable and militant unemployment movement once existing has practically disappeared. The British Communist Party failed to consolidate this movement and to help assure its revolutionary course. It failed in the necessary class education and thus could not raise the general class level of this movement. It is now failing to take advantage of the costly experiences of the British workers who put their fate into an excursion in the degenerate field of laborism. Yet the unemployment problem is still the center of gravity in England pressing ever more acutely for a solution. A beginning can be made only when the masses are actually set into motion upon a definitely revolutionary course.
With its two years in power the Fabian gradualness of reformism has quite clearly revealed its miserable role. From once having played a historically progressive role, it is reaching its inevitable conclusion. At its very apex its true character is being exposed. The labor party leadership as a reactionary obstacle is losing its hold upon the masses. There is today a mighty abyss created by the contradiction between the vital needs of the masses and the reactionary imperialist course of the “labor” government. In this lies the great future prospects for the British Communist Party. Despite all its wasting of the capital of the world revolutionary movement it still has the opportunity to utilize these possibilities.
 



Delegates to the fifty-first annual A.F. of L. convention had to travel all the way to Vancouver, B.C., to re-affirm its “time honored” reactionary policy of completely indorsing all the views of the aristocracy of finance as at present expressed by the Hoover administration.
The only serious proposal, which could really be considered in the interest of labor, to come before this body, namely, the proposal for unemployment insurance, was rejected. No wonder the New York Times could take great comfort in this decision and say editorially:
“The action at Vancouver might well serve as an example of steadfastness and intelligent self-interest to nervous business men who have been behaving and talking as if the end of this familiar American world of opportunity, courage, energy and enterprise were here. They ought to be willing to wait a little while longer before throwing up their hands and calling for revolutions and miracles”
The A.F. of L. convention called neither for miracles nor for revolution. It was obsessed by only one idea – to strengthen the foundation pillars of hard pressed bourgeois society. It had to be done this time in a language interspersed with remarks somewhat foreign to this coterie of high salaried officials. But that was only an effort to deceive the workers into helping ram these pillars more securely with their own heads.
With all the old slogans of bourgeois prosperity, of the full dinner pail, vanished into oblivion, a new language had to be adopted. This fact gives a different connotation to the apparently radical passages in Mr. Green’s opening address, such as:
“Because of this dislocation of our economic structure, because there is suffering in a land where plenty exists in abundance, men and women who are the victims possess inquiring minds ... They are asking questions that are difficult to answer. They are wondering whether the system itself set up by society in every nation has failed ... We may well ask the question, has capitalism failed?”
We could well answer: “Surely Mr. Green, it has failed miserably!” But he did not stop for an answer and did not seek one. He proceeded to show that he also had learned the art of calling the wolf to gain his own ends. He continued:
“But I warn these people who, through force and domination and dictatorship and brutality, exploit the masses of the people, forcing them down and down to the lowest depths of despair, that they can only drive them so far, and then they will turn eventually and rend those who do it.”
This was not at all spoken to the working class. Nor did it intend the working class to carry out the conclusion therefrom. It was the gang boss’ plea to the master not to exact too much for fear that those he was to hold in subjection may turn upon him. The convention actions furnish conclusive proof of this contention.
Held in a period of the most serious crisis of capitalism, with millions walking the streets in vain search for work, and the masters without the slightest regard or scruples utilizing this opportunity to hammer down the standard of living, cutting wages right and left, the convention exuded eloquence but took not one single measure toward working class resistance. This convention kept the record of the A.F. of L. officialdom being more reactionary than so-called capitalist liberals. Although a rather strong section favored unemployment insurance the convention declared it “unsuited to our political and economic requirements”. Instead it asked for more and better charity from capitalism and solemnly resolved to ask each employer to take on additional workers. Could the most hard boiled exploiter ask for anything better? The convention supported the Wall Street imperialists in their demand that before they be asked to forego any “just claims”, meaning war debts, Europe be compelled to reduce armaments – not the United States. It went on record for extension of the ban on immigration. The convention rejected a proposal to defy anti-labor injunctions. And to cap the climax of this burlesque labor gathering the demand for 2.75 per cent beer went over with a whoop.
The executive council did not fail this time either to submit the traditional absurd review of favorable legislation gained by labor. 15 labor laws passed by Congress was the record claimed among which we notice such two as – modernization of three battleships at a cost of $30,000,000 to be performed in the government navy yards, and requiring work on 11 new destroyers at a cost of $51,700,000 to be performed in the same yards. From this splendid record the convention concluded to reaffirm its old policy of “rewarding our friends and punishing our enemies”. As it has been applied, and there is no intention whatever of deviating from that – it has always meant the friends of capitalism.
In this whole setting any proposal or declaration which may on the face of it appear entirely valid, loses all significance. Thus, for example, to return again to the question of the A.F. of L. official view of working class redress in the present crisis, the principles of the five day week, of the shorter workday and of maintenance of the wage standard were eloquently propounded in resolutions and otherwise. That becomes entirely meaningless without preparations for enforcement. The A.F. of L. can still, despite all serious deterioration, count almost three million workers in its ranks. Truly a formidable force if actually brought into action, particularly with present growing prospects of countless others getting ready to follow, once a serious lead is given. But this is precisely what is not wanted.
To conclude from this, however, that revolutionists can brush the A.F. of L. aside as hopeless, as company unions, as “social Fascist” unions, etc., is worse than repeating the farce of this recent annual gathering of its high priests. The mere fact that they were compelled to make some revision of language employed, reflects the advance signs of the pressure coming upon them from below. This pressure is bound to grow with the continuation of the crisis and more so with the slashing into the standard of wages and working conditions. How far the officials will respond to this growing pressure is of no serious interest. No expectation whatever is to be placed upon that. Essentially they remain imperialist agents under all conditions. But a rank and file membership chafing under rising exploitation and finally getting into motion to resist, that is a different matter. And this is an actual prospect.
That this A.F. of L. convention perhaps was less vituperative against Communists and radicals only reflects the extent to which the present official party policies and practises have succeeded in actually separating the Left wing from the trade union bodies. It has succeeded, at least for the time being, in wiping out a once promising Left wing movement within these unions. Some very recent feeble efforts made by the party though as yet only on an isolated scale, to draw local A.F. of L. unions into some united front activities, should be welcomed as one step in the right direction. But it should also serve as a most serious reminder that now more than ever must the work of aiding and stimulating the pressure from the A.F. of L. union membership and gradually directing it into the channels of a Left wing movement, be taken up in earnest.
 



The second national conference of the Communist League of America (Opposition) has completed its tasks through a four days session of fruitful discussion held in New York City, September 24 to 27 inclusive. In the unanimous opinion of all delegates it recorded a substantial forward step for the Left Opposition in taking account of the past, both of achievements and. of shortcomings, as well as in its adoption of a guiding policy for future work.
A completely free and untrammeled discussion during a preceding sixty days period, conducted without any trace of the factional or bureaucratic encumbrances which have now become the rule in the official parties, culminated at this conference in such a way that the delegates could return to their branches with a conviction of having attained further strength to the future cadres of the American Communist movement. This does not mean that no difference of viewpoints were presented, for example, on such issues as an evaluation of present trend of economic and political processes as well as in regards to interpretation of the role of the Left Opposition in its practical tasks. There were such differences. However, in every fundamental aspect the discussion resulted in practically unanimous conclusions.
With comrade Coover from Minneapolis in the chair for the first day's session, the credential committee reported the following branches represented: Toronto, Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City and Minneapolis. Smaller branches, such as Montreal, New Haven and Richmond, could not see their way to send delegates and in general bearing upon reducing the size of the delegation, for example, from such distant points as Chicago and Minneapolis. The delegates were practically exclusively workers direct from the shops, many unemployed and compelled to beat their way to the conference or to travel on local expenses; hence, the inevitable reduction of size. Not only that but some regularly elected delegates, because of these economic reasons, had to be replaced by alternatives. In this respect a certain weakness became manifest by the absence of those experienced comrades who could otherwise have contributed much.
In spite of these handicaps, the second conference succeeded as expected in marking a new stage when compared to the first held a little better than two years ago. At the first conference the pivotal point became the one of elaboration of a platform based upon the general international views of the Left Opposition with an endeavor to apply it in the sense of building a functioning group in the United States and Canada. Compared to this, the second conference could record a developing degree of maturity. Several experiences were already, at hand not only of results of our propaganda activities but also of our becoming a factor of actual intervention in the Communist movement. Thus it had a firmer foundation to build upon and could further elaborate these views in conformity with the additional requirements of a situation of intensifying developments in the class struggle. Fully cognizant of this more advanced stage, the second conference adopted in full the views contained in the various theses presented by the National Committee, indorsed its stewardship during the past period and decided to continue the leadership with an addition of two members to the National Committee. Thus the committee is now constituted with the following membership: Martin Abern, James P. Cannon, Vincent Dunne, Albert Glotzer, Hugo Oehler, Max Shachtman, Carl Skoglund, Maurice Spector and Arne Swabeck.
It cannot be denied that since the first conference, that is, during the early period following it, a certain organizational slump set in, which naturally also had its political repercussions. The center became greatly weakened, the necessary means for carrying on the work were seriously curtailed and naturally the obstacles in the way contained elements of friction. One of the blows was expressed in the inability to continue the weekly publication of the Militant which had begun in November 1929, about one year after the first expulsions of Left Oppositionists. Yet the great vitality of the organization, the power of the Left Opposition platform made it possible to weather this period with only minor disorganization in a few branches. So much so that capitulations or actual loss of membership during these trying difficulties were exceedingly rare within our ranks.
This experience the conference faced squarely, analysed its reasons and became so much more convinced of our great vitality and powerful political position, by the splendid upward curve which could be recorded following immediately upon the slump. The branches of Boston, Philadelphia and St. Louis, which had witnessed particular difficulties, were re-established. New members were gained everywhere and to a yet greater degree, new contacts of sympathetic elements within and around the party. We rapidly increased our literature supply by printing new pamphlets and books by comrade Trotsky and extended its distribution. The Program of Expansion became a means of setting definite political objects for the material support given by all our contributors. Thus we organized the Pioneers Publishers, opening up new avenues for propaganda activities. We re-established the Mlitant as a weekly, strengthened the staff and made a small beginning toward field organizing work. Progress in rapid strides had political manifestations in important issues of the class struggle, to such an extent that the intervention could be felt, both by growing sympathy as well as by its pressure upon policies of the party bureaucrats, but also in the fact that the American League began to become more of an active participant in the international Left Opposition movement. The second conference could, of course, only accept this as a small beginning, but nevertheless a beginning in the right direction.
 
The Political Report
While it may be difficult to determine which item on the conference agenda, or which report made, called forth the greatest attention or more thorough discussion by the delegates, it stands to reason that in the discussion on the general political thesis most of the vital issues were concentrated. It was also in this document that a certain tactical departure from past position was presented in regards to our views toward the labor party question. Comrade Shachtman delivered the report for the National Committee and most every delegate made valuable contributions. All were unanimous in indorsing the general line represented by the thesis with possibly one exception, which advanced a view that the present crisis marked the beginning of the definite downward curve for United States capitalism, whether or not it could emerge from it at the cost of other imperialist powers and of its own working class. Then also, on the very vital question of our position as a faction of the Communist movement, discussion centered around a specific interpretation of what this implies. However, there was unanimous agreement that our platform is correct, i.e., that our orientation is directly upon the Communist movement, of which the Comintern, and in the United States, the official party is the center, as the only historically progressive force, to which our appeal, despite the blunders and mistakes of its bureaucratic leadership, is addressed for the purpose of re-establishing its Marxian foundation. But to make this effective the delegates again reaffirmed the necessity of organizing the Communists inside and outside the Communist Party of the United States on the platform of the Left Opposition.
As already mentioned, the second conference made a tactical departure from the views presented in our platform, adopted in 1929, in regards to the labor party question. While we then still carried remnants of officially adopted party views we considered it feasible under certain conditions for Communists to raise the slogan of organization of a labor party. In this respect, our thesis presented a change away from such views and found unanimous indorsement from the delegates, not, however, overlooking the fact that should a labor party come into existence upon a working class and trade union basis it would become necessary for us to consider our relation as Communists towards it, depending upon the general conditions existing.
The trade union discussion, report of which was made for the National Committee by comrade Swabeck, was the second point on the agenda but with no less attention. It is particularly in this field that we have witnessed the sharpest clashes of policy with the Stalinist party apparatus and naturally more so with the Right wing views of the Lovestone group. That is because the issues present themselves here in the most concrete form, already in the initial stage of each specific struggle. We have had the very recent experiences of the strikes in the mine field and in Paterson. We have had the general experience of the T.U.U.L. unions under control of the party bureaucrats as well as the emergence of other new unions under leadership of social reformists. All this rich material at hand in the view of the delegates had served to vindicate more decisively the views and the platform of the Left Opposition and complete unanimity prevailed in indorsing the National Committee thesis.
While space makes it necessary to treat the other reports more briefly, they received fully as much attention and created just as live and fundamental a discussion as the other reports mentioned. The next in order was the report on the international situation and the development and growth of the Left Opposition within the various countries. While it contained many important lessons of the birth pangs of a movement— expressed in this case particularly in groups and elements professing adherence at first to the Russian Left Opposition and later to the International Secretariat but without accepting its views thus having made several operations and splits necessary—all in all the main lesson accepted by the delegates became the one of striving much more seriously and consciously for a real international orientation. That is to function more actively and more directly as a part of the international movement and participate in all of its problems and achievements. As to the latter the conference could take joy in the great progress, to mention only two instances, the rapid growth organizationally and in revolutionary influence of our Left Opposition in Spain and the unification of four distinct Left Opposition groups in China into one organization.
A small token of this spirit the conference expressed in its cable greetings to the new weekly Left Opposition paper in Spain the El Soviet and to comrade Trotsky. Similarly it also expressed its feeling of solidarity with the thousands of Bolshevik-Leninist prisoners now in the Stalin prison camps in Siberia.
 
On the Soviet Union
In discussing the report on the situation within the Soviet Union the conference was fortunate in having the draft thesis presented by comrade Trotsky. It met with unanimous approval. The youth question received more serious attention than at our first conference. This is natural as we have since that time gained quite a good number of young members. A couple of valuable amendments were made to the youth thesis before its final acceptance and prospects are very good that the youth committee to be selected by our National Committee will find a splendid field for its work. We would be remiss if we failed to mention that several amendments and proposals were on hand from the branches pertaining to the various issues and problems before the conference. But since all were in conformity with the general views presented in the various documents and reports, only altering formulations or adding minor points, it became quite easy to select only those which could really mean an improvement. In the organization report, the second conference received a graphic picture of the developments which had taken place and had proposals presented for means of further strengthening in an organizational sense. A further elaborated constitution presented also served that purpose. The discussion in particular centered around concrete experiences in the tasks of building a Communist organization supplemented by experiences on a local scale as told by the delegates. Its general tenor became the one of deeper penetration into the party, every member active in the existing party auxiliaries and mass organizations, more definite expression of the requirements for membership in the League, definite requirements for entering into its leading bodies, etc. In sum and substance, it can be said that with the acceptance of the report and the proposals made by the National Committee one more important forward step will be recorded. One step toward more clearly defining our purposes, our duties and obligations and to prepare for a more solidly knit body of revolutionists conscious of their tasks and able to carry them out.
The pitiful attempt made by Weisbord to represent himself and his few supporters as a group adhering to the International Left Opposition, and his proposal to send representatives to our conference to discuss what he considered as following from his pretended adherence, namely to "unite" the alleged "two" groups, met with a very stern rebuke from the conference. The resolution adopted unanimously upon this question is printed elsewhere in this issue, suffice only to say that the conference had no time for this imposter pretending to adhere to our movement while at the same time using every opportunity to show that he has nothing in common with our views. Yet the conference did decide to call upon those who may follow Weisbord, those who really have sincere intentions of supporting the Left Opposition to do so by joining our League.
Having settled in a thorough and exhaustive manner all of the main issues presented by the National Committee reports the conference found itself compelled to deal very briefly with other problems arising. For example the Negro question and what is at present its main immediate aspect viz. the correctness of the slogan of “Right of Self-determination" as well as all the implications which would necessarily flow from such a slogan. While a general consensus of opinion exists within our ranks of deep scepticism in regards to the correctness of this slogan the conference accepted the National Committee on this question. It decided to instruct the National Committee to create a commission which is to make an exhaustive study of this problem in such a way that when a policy is finally arrived at it can be fully motivated and definitely based on Marxian conclusions. Similarly in regards to the specific issues and tasks of the present acute unemployment situation the conference decided to instruct the National Committee to finally elaborate the draft resolution presented.
It can truthfully be said that the first manifestation of the second conference actually marking a real forward step were apparent in the splendid banquet arranged by the New York branch in honor of the conference on Saturday, Sept. 26. A total of 150 plates were set and every place filled with comrades who came to give their enthusiastic indorsement. At several instances the hall virtually rocked with the applause given to the remarks of the speakers when picturing the advance of the Left Opposition and forecasting the future prospects and tasks. Beyond the fondest expectations, and in spite of existing unemployment and economic difficulties, that sentiment was translated into action in a collection of $207.13 for the future work of the League. Two comrades representing the militant miners of Pennsylvania and Ohio appeared to make an appeal for their follow workers. They were invited to sit at the banquet and a collection was taken up on their behalf amounting to $24.85, the contributions being started off with a donation from the National Committee.
Such examples are a telling answer to the Stalinist bureaucrats who have been exuberant in their predictions of collapse to the Left Opposition. But with each such prediction we have appeared stronger. We are stronger in numbers and stronger in influence with constantly growing sympathetic contacts. We have succeeded at this conference in preparing to meet our organizational requirements. All proposals were worked out on the basis of the experiences accumulated. We have made provisions for a stronger and more definitely defined constitution, a beginning toward a functioning staff, more effective use of propaganda and educational material, organizational tours, utilization of voluntary organizers, recruiting of new members, etc. We have made provisions for much more effective utilization of the many young members who have joined our ranks. A shortcoming of the past, but with prospects of really taking up youth work in the future as it should be taken up.
 
Conference Achievements
While these may be considered small achievements let us point to the yet more important facts as emerging from the second conference.

Our experiences during the longer existence and difficult struggle of the International Left Opposition, the facts of which were assembled and analysed collectively at this conference, has confirmed in all of its major aspects the correctness of our position.
 
Our strength is reinforced in a developing maturity toward a Marxian evaluation of political and economic processes as well as of the needs and tasks of the revolutionary movement.
 
We are establishing ourselves more firmly and more clearly as a faction of the Communist movement orienting ourselves mainly upon this movement for an uncompromising struggle to restore our party to again become the party of Lenin capable of fulfilling its great historical mission.
 
We are increasingly strengthening ourselves for more active and more direct intervention in the class struggle as a force presenting and fighting for our definite views of strategy and policy to be pursued, be it in the trade union field or elsewhere, be it in regards to a correct conception and practice of the working class united front or other major issues.
 
Our decisions at the second conference, despite any differences of opinion and freely expressed, were arrived at unanimously on all major questions of policy. This itself gives the nearest possible guarantee which can be given for a collectively functioning leadership.
 
We have succeeded in marking one further step toward a broader and more precise understanding and practise of internationalism in a revolutionary sense. The inevitable conclusion flowing from this must be our more active collaboration in the solution of problems of the International Left Opposition movement.

With this we feel certain that we can confidently face the future which belongs to the developing world proletarian revolution.
 



It has already been amply demonstrated that the 10 percent wage cut decided upon by the board of directors of the United States Steel corporation, affecting about 220,000 workers on Oct. 1, became the signal to a whole series of wage cuts for a number of the biggest industrial concerns, such as the General Motors, the United States Rubber Co., the Colorado Fuel and Iron Co., the B.F. Goodrich Co., the Northern Pacific Railroad, the biggest Arizona copper companies, several New England textile concerns and the other major steel corporations. Similarly the reaction of the steel workers to this slashing of their standard will in many respects be determining for the working class as a whole.
 
Wages and Living Costs
By Ethelbart Stewart, the United States Commissioner of Labor Statistics, we are informed that since December 1925, using that period as the basic figure of 100 both for cost of living of the American workman and for total payroll in manufacturing industry, when compared to June 1931, there has been a total drop of only 15 per cent in the cost of living but of 40 per cent in the total payroll. These are telling figures. The total payroll, of course, includes in this case the present heavy unemployment. But that is precisely the biggest curse of capitalist society today. When one adds to this the drab prospect of much more deep-going wage slashes, as aliready haughtily proclaimed by the barons of finance and industry, the outlook for the working class indeed becomes one fraught with sinister import.
To what extent and how effectively can the steel workers take up a serious resistance to these attacks? For the moment this is quite a crucial question. What the attitude is of the American Federation of Labor leadership and what can be expected from them we have so often pointed out in these columns. Throughout the whole present period of wage cutting, the bombastic statements by Green and other A.F. of L. officials about “standing like the rock of Gibraltar against wage cuts”, are just so much empty chatter. It is not associated with an appeal to the workers and preparations for their resistance; and such could not he expected from imperialist agents. Their empty proclamations to organize the automobile industry and the Southern textile field were not even worth the paper they were written on. Now they address themselves to the employers saying that wage cuts will not help the recovery of industry. But, it is, of course, a well known fact that the employers’ aim is to unload the whole burden of the crisis upon the backs of the workers as a means of facilitating an industrial recovery. Hence the wage cuts.
The steel workers cannot look for any leadership or assistance from the A.F. of L. The difficulties in their way are indeed great. Herded into their miserable hovels, working and living under the most brutal industrial and political oppression, with armies of privately owned police and a complete spy system watching their every move within the plants and within the company owned cities in which they live, only the greatest power of solidarity and consciously planned militant organization can batter down such walls. It is a well-known fact that the steel barons have already before this wage cut announcement taken all possible precaution to forestall effective resistance. Undoubtedly they even have their spy system busily engaged not only in attempting to prevent any sign of organization but also to provoke abortive actions which can easily be defeated.
 
Past Experiences
The steel industry is rich in experiences of spontaneous strikes on a local scale arising out of grievances, of special conditions, within single plants. Though entirely unorganized, many such strikes have been successfully won by the workers. But the industry is also rich in experiences of strikes of a national character around issues of national importance “won” by the employers. The powers of the steel trust are as mighty today as before. The forces of state suppression and the private armies of police and gunmen are as much at their disposal as ever. But today we also have all the potentialities of a coming new wave of rising resistance of the working class in face of which the power of the mightiest trusts might be reduced to rather small proportions. In this lies real hope for the present.
It will be recalled that during the time of the mighty wave of organization of the steel workers in 1919, the labor movement as a whole was experiencing an upward curve. A growth of organization and a growth of militancy. So much so, that the reactionary A.F. of L. leaders found themselves compelled to engage in this campaign of organization and strike. That they did it reluctantly is true. That they used every opportunity for betrayal is equally true. Nevertheless there was an almost irresistible sweep of organization and struggle. And yet the steel trust, aided by these factors mentioned, “won” the battle and since crushed practically all remnants of union organization.
Today, the possibilities for dissension division and betrayal of these imperialist agents are lessened. The possibilities for Communists and militants as a real factor in leadership of organization and resistance are much greater. These become two additional positive points of real value in favor of the steel workers. We are again facing an issue of national proportions and importance – a wage slashing throughout the industry. But the steel workers as yet remain practically without any trace of organization or actual preparation for struggle.
In face of this situation serious-minded revolutionists can look upon with deep apprehension upon the attitude of the official party leaders proclaiming, and apparently pushing forward for local strikes against the present wage cut, expecting them, as stated by Foster, to “spread like wildfire”. This is not the method or tactic to pursue. Local strikes in face of this national issue carry all the dangers of becoming abortive of facilitating isolation of the most militant sections to become easily crushed as a means of administering decisive defeats before the main forces can be collected; before any adequate preparations and organization can be accomplished.
Unquestionably the wage cut in the steel industry can become a real incentive toward organization. That itself is the main task. Amongst revolutionists there should be no dispute about that. Organization in preparations for a nationwide strike should be the issue at present.
 



If the corpulent gentlemen, who met in Vancouver, B.C., recently, have their way, there will be a more intense jurisdictional war within the building trades unions than ever before. At least that much was decided by the A.F. of L. Building Trades Department convention. Speaking virulently and with much gusto, that is, in between chewing on fat cigars, one after another of there “labor” representatives denounced the “triple alliance” of the carpenters, bricklayers and electricians unions. Times are hard, most union members are out of jobs and some sort of militancy had to be shown.
The “defensive” alliance of the three unions was described as having been formed “to take work away from other people.” The carpenters particularly came in for the unanimous wrath. They were called “pirates” and “ruthless”, having the intention of fostering an organization to “create turmoil and industrial discontent”. One expressed the opinion that until all locals affiliated with the “triple alliance” were ousted from existing building trades councils “we are simply wasting our time talking”. And this became the unanimous sentiment expressed in a resolution, that “this building trades department of the A.F. of L. direct the national presidents of the affiliated unions to support to the fullest extent of their resources any affiliated union when an attack is being made upon them by unions not affiliated with the building trades department of the A.F. of L.” The three unions mentioned are not affiliated because of jurisdictional disputes.
For the rank and file membership, however, this is an ominous sign rather disquieting for the future prospects. It has become a well established practise among this type of “leaders” to intensify the jurisdictional conflicts as a prelude to attacks coming from the bosses.
The general wage cut campaign is already in full swing. That it has not yet to any great degree officially hit the building trades is perhaps only due to the fact that by the conditions of large scale unemployment and the extreme weakness of the craft union position the bosses find themselves able, in the main, to enlist the labor needed at a price way below the officially established wage scale. That itself, of course, carries with it only further weakness and seriously undermines the organizational basis. For the large contractors in the building industry this undermining serves well as a prelude to an open attack which is sure not to be long delayed.
The well-fed officials of the nineteen building trades unions, those within as well as those outside of the building trades department, surely know what is coming. They have not a scrap of a program for organized resistance and have no such intentions. The intensification of jurisdictional squabbles in their hands serves as a means of preparing the way for the bosses and makes their task an easier one. In this manner do they prove themselves as efficient servants of capitalism.
The slogan and demand for amalgamation of all building trades unions correctly advanced by the militant workers a few years ago should now again be put on the top of the agenda. An effective campaign for amalgamation and its ultimate accomplishment, plus the replacement of class struggle for class collaboration, would make short shrift of all these present designs of dissension and division promulgated by the officials. It would become the most practical and effective way of making an end to jurisdictional squabbles and really help to unify the ranks of the building trades workers for resistance to the coming attacks.
 



In at least the same ratio by which growth of unemployment and wage cuts go hand In hand increases also the importance of effecting unity of action of the workers who are employed with the unemployed. Moreover, when facing the inescapable future prospect of a standing army of unemployed, this issue becomes one of major importance.
That unemployment is still increasing is substantiated by the United States Department of Labor. According to its monthly report for September of statistics obtained from the various manufacturing establishments throughout the country, it is made clear that for every 100 persons employed 3.58 were taken on as compared with 5.62 laid off. The extent to which wage cuts inevitably follow in the train of the increasing unemployment by capitalism utilizing the situation to shift the whole of its burden upon the workers, is also revealed by Department of Labor report. Thus during the first eight months of 1931 there were a total of 1,895 wage cuts, the average reduction applied being about 10 percent.
All present indications bear out the contention that with the continued reduction of the standard of living and the increasing pressure upon the workers they will inevitably be set into motion to resist. Nevertheless the distance still to be traveled to make this resistance a broad and effective one becomes clear by an analysis the number of wage disputes during the present crisis as compared to the one of 1920–21. These figures are illuminating. The wage disputes listed by the Department of Labor were:



First seven months of 1920


 


2,246




First seven months of 1921


1,790




First seven months of 1931


   498



In the first instance it must be remembered that 1920–21 occurred in a period when workers actually were in motion to maintain their most recent gains and further elevate their position. It was an aftermath of the great strikes of 1919 and the methods of militancy still prevailing. In the intervening period the illusions of bourgeois prosperity became deeply rooted. Deterioration of the trade union movement proceeded apace, feeding upon the false sense of security. But what cannot be overlooked by revolutionists is the salient fact that, growing out of this situation, the working class enemy has made considerable progress in its obvious designs to separate the unemployed from the employed workers, to isolate the former in order to facilitate the defeat of their struggle for actual relief, and to utilize their position to keep the employed in submission.
 
Opponents Divert Unemployed Issue Into False Channels
This prospect is fraught with serious dangers to the American proletariat as a whole. Worse, however is the fact that the tactics and organization methods pursued by the official party leadership have unwittingly played into the hands of the class enemy, strengthening them in their designs. While the party is undisputably at the head of whatever organized unemployed activities exist today, it has failed in the main object of uniting the employed with the unemployed. If another sharp “turn” is contemplated by the party leadership, which, of course, is to be expected, we ask emphatically that this be the first turn to be considered without delay.
From its early stage of mass response to party calls for unemployment demonstrations, the movement in every respect, including its actual organized expression, has become reduced to a position of vegetation. The center of the stage has been taken by the reserves mobilized by monopoly capitalism. The so-called progressives from within the class enemy’s camp have taken up the unemployment issue and to a large extent have already succeeded in diverting the objective away from struggle and into the illusory channels of hope from capitalist charity crumbs. They have made themselves the spokesmen for relief, in a manner seemingly occupying an unusual radical position. Senator Borah proclaims the necessity to tax the rich for the benefit of the unemployed but carefully avoids any concrete steps in that direction. Governor Roosevelt made proposals for extended charity measures of relief. Governor Murray (“Alfalfa Bill”) violently denounces the bankers for their guilt in this situation. Senators and congressmen and sections of the capitalist press speak vigorously for relief – alas, as opposed to actual unemployment insurance. Unquestionably there is much fishing for issues and preparations for the 1932 elections. But it just as assuredly reinforces the conclusion that these spokesmen for the petty-bourgeois interests, caught in the squeezers of advancing monopoly capitalism, have actually become alarmed by the much more dreaded spectre of potential proletarian revolt. True to their position and driven by these fears, they hurry to become the reserves of monopoly capitalism and forestall the greater danger.
 
Unemployed and Employed Must Be United in Struggle
On a whole these attempts at diverting the issues into the channels of illusions serve first of all to blunt the edge of the proletarian struggle. Secondly it serves to strengthen the endeavors to dislodge the Communist leadership of the unemployed masses Thirdly, it serves to facilitate the general efforts to separate the unemployed from their class brothers and to isolate their struggle for easier defeat.
The enormous increase of productive capacity under monopoly capitalism creates all the conditions for the standing army of the unemployed. Its constant overproduction can seek an outlet in the recurring crises which accentuate the unemployment problem. The fact of the increase of output per man, reliably calculated at from 48 to 50 per cent during the last decade, just that much more emphasizes the permanency of unemployment even during the future upward economic conjuncture. The violent slashing of the workers’ standard of living, now so much intensified, accentuates the indications of the capitalist preparations to gain a respite for them from the crisis. But with the prospects of the standing unemployed army remaining under such a possible upward economic conjuncture, there are reasons aplenty for an ever sharper emphasis upon the need of unity of employed and unemployed workers. There can be no successful struggle for relief, for actual unemployment insurance, without it. To the employed workers facing the inevitability of resistance to the attacks, it be comes a question of serious magnitude Today the crowding of unemployed workers at the factory gates seeking work is the club effectively wielded over their heads to make them hesitate and submit. For tomorrow’s struggles it is necessary that this threat be removed by making clear the common objectives of both categories of the class and uniting their efforts for its realization.
 
Party Recognizes Narrowness of Unemployment Movement
It appears that the party leadership has learned at least one lesson from past experiences. Piatnitsky, commenting upon the Weaknesses in Our Unemployed Work, says that the unemployed workers movement in “America was attached to the weak red trade unions, which are few enough in number. The association with the ‘red trade unions’ and ‘revolutionary trade union opposition’ drove away the unemployed who belonged to other political parties and to the reformist, catholic and other trade union organizations.” (Daily Worker, 10-13-31)
Small and criminally belated as this recognition is, it is nevertheless to be welcomed. However, we clearly and much more emphatically warned against precisely that at the’ time of the very formation of the national unemployment councils on July 4, 1930 in Chicago. We said in these columns:
 
For a United Front
“Certainly the successful carrying on of the struggle for the unemployed means to spare no effort to really unite T.U.U.L.”
Further, commenting upon the working class, which cannot be done within the narrow framework of the the detailed measures of organization we declared:
“These added mechanical limits isolate the movement and confine it within that section of the workers ready to join the ‘revolutionary unions’ There could be no better way of actually preventing a mass basis of struggle for the unemployed. The social reformists will thus have a free field to rally all those workers who in vain search for a job are turning away from their capitalist ideology, but are not yet ready to join the ‘revolutionary unions’. In that broad field the social reformists can continue to sow their seeds of illusion and deceit. But it is precisely also in that field that a united front struggle around the burning issues of unemployment as well as the very question of Communist activities has such rich potentialities.” (The Militant, July 26, 1930)
However, despite this present recognition by the party leadership, it proceeds yet essentially on the same basis. It is now intensifying the activities of hunger marches and connecting it with punblicly arranged hearings on the misery of unemployment. This serves to emphasize the needs of the unemployed but still ignores the essential aspect of the needs of the class. When standing alone it lends itself to facilitate all the efforts of capitalism to separate the unemployed from the employed and to isolate the struggles of the former.
It is necessary for the Communist movement to fight relentlessly for mitigation of the misery of unemployment. It must, however, to be successful, be done in such a way as to provide for the maximum of working class unity. It is necessary to repeat again that in this field especially there is an opportunity of a broad united front policy.
It is the one where the most elementary class objectives, aspirations and activities of the workers can be united. The recent A.F. of L. convention again demonstrated its servile capitalist character and refused to consider even the need of unemployment insurance. So much more should that now be considered an opportunity to press forward for Communist leadership on this issue. An actual, united front foundation for the uemployed movement embracing also the A.F. of L. unions would be a good beginning.
 



Since the Fall of MacDonald “Labor” government the class struggle in England has entered a new and more decisive stage. A revolutionary perspective, although yet only in its embryonic form, is at hand. But the all important question of ability of the Communist party to meet this situation still remains unanswered.
The real significance of the October 27 elections is not so much determined by the immediate question as to who wins the majority of seats in parliament. The almost certain prospect of the national government bloc, – in reality the Conservative party, – winning a majority will make but little difference. The all important fact for the future lies in the beginnings of the new and more definite line-up of forces. To the extreme Right, those represented by the national government; in the Center, those most nearly representative of social reformism in England, the official labor party opposition, with perhaps a section of the liberals; to the Left, the revolutionary forces, of the Communist Party and the Letfward moving sections from the labor party.
 
Serious Currents Within Labor Opposition
The future role of the official labor opposition will more than ever be that of social reformism, i.e. to continue under a new cloak the capitalist policies of the past. Its resources are still powerful. Its leadership may still develop a far greater skill and cunning in keeping the working class under illusions and ward off its natural progressive course toward the Left. But whether MacDonald and Henderson again find common ground, which is most likely, and in spite of the great hold which the official labor opposition still has upon the British working masses, the disintegrating process which has now hit European social democracy will perhaps have an accelerated course in England. In general there should be excellent prospects for Communism.
The break-up of the labor party is already an actual process though as yet only in its initial stage. The old and tried imperialist agents, the Hendersons and the trade union leadership, have time only for efforts to find new ways of balancing the capitalist budget, meanwhile winking a friendly eye to a coalition with the Lloyd George liberals. With the lines so sharply drawn by the general crisis and the economic ultimatum of the National government, their only alternative course would be a revolutionary one which they have no intention whatever of pursuing. The Left section of the I.L.P. is by the force of events being driven further Leftward. The “challenge” of such leaders as Maxton, Brockway and others of a “socialist program”, of “socialism in our time”, of “socialism with speed” is being taken seriously by their rank and file followers. In scores upon scores of letters to their official organ, the New Leader, they ask pointed questions, demanding recognition of the necessity of revolutionary action, of the necessity of forcible overthrow of the system, for affiliation to the Communist International and for unity with the Communist party. These leaders, seeing the masses moving Leftward are hurriedly covering themselves with the red mantle and moving in that direction also, endeavoring to keep step so as to maintain their leadership and head it off. When the masses, compelled by the force of necessity, continue further in this course and attempt to translate their program of “socialism with speed” into action, a program which was conceived purely on the basis of reformist measurtes, but which can be accomplished only by revolution, they will soon change their tune. Then the actual separation of the masses from these charlatans begin.
 
C.P. Leadership Impotent
With these splendid possibilities the Communist party leadership has unfortunately not measured up at all. During the first phase of the present situation it displayed its utter impotence in failing to give any direction whatever. But a “turn” came, a turn with an adventurist vengeance, however, maintaining all its former opportunist essentials, it emerged with a basic program formulated in the following slogan:

Not one penny off the “Dole”, not one worker off benefit!
Not a penny off wages of the workers!
Not a penny off teachers’ salaries!
Not a penny more tax on the people’s food!
Down with the National Government!

To this even the Henderson official labor opposition, since it has extricated itself from the MacDonald government can well subscribe without difficulty as it does not in the least take cognizance of the revolutionary potentialities of the present situation. It does not even approach the “challenge” of “socialism with speed” which is put forward by the “Left” mountebanks.
 
Adding New Confusion
Our London correspondent correctly criticizes the recent confusion of adventurist mixture added by the Communist Party leadership of calling for councils of action and general strike, all within one week and without any previous preparation. And further proposing to build alongside of the unemployment movement also the charter movement, which was already antedated at its inception and became only a sorry caricature of the proud old Chartist movement. It is naturally difficult for revolutionists to have any patience with such people, who, while remaining steeped in their opportunist outlook, suddenly discover at last that they are somewhat belated and hurriedly, in panic, call upon the working class for action without performing their duty of previous preparation. Their characteristics are that of contemptible bureaucrats.
Surely there should be opportunities for strike action against the National government economy program of drastic reduction of the working class standard and yet much more heavy cuts to come. Surely councils of action, which already have a good tradition in England, should be created to lead these economic struggles and become a weapon against treason of the reactionary trade union bureaucrats. However such strikes in the present situation will inevitably have dynamic political implications and naturally the danger of defeat by isolation or lack of preparation become so much greater. The actual steps of preparation, thorough preparation of organization, of tactics and of object are yet in order and no moment should be lost. As a matter of fact they should have been taken from the very first day of the National government. That much at least should be known to revolutionary leaders.
 
The United Front Policy
However, the main key to the present situation, which the C.P. leaders must learn to take hold of, is the united front policy. Not its perversion, neither of the alliances behind the workers’ backs with reformist leaders nor the fakery of “united front from below”, but a united front policy as taught by Lenin. The former method was well exemplified by the spurious Anglo-Russian Unity Committee. The latter has now become the “line” by which party bureaucrats can unload responsibility for their own failures upon the membership for not being in the shops and not understanding the unity with the workers. But it has nothing in common with the united front policy and does not lead toward a solution of the revolutionary problems.
It is necessary for the C.P. leaders to define their attitude particularly clearly toward the Leftward moving section of the I.L.P., to consider them potential revolutionists who, however, still follow the I.L.P. leaders. The C.P. must speak to them as class brothers in arms. It must say to them:
“You trust these leaders, we don’t, and in our opinion it is well founded upon past experiences. You believe their ‘socialist program’ is seriously conceived as an actual overthrow of capitalism and the building of a new system, we don’t because that becomes a revolutionary objective which they fear. The realization of an actual socialist program, how-ever, must of necessity proceed through the struggle for the immediate and pressing needs of the workers. On the basis of these needs we propose a united front with you so that we may in common endeavors work out the well defined immediate demands which the situation now requires and by united efforts fight more effectively for their attainment. We propose to reserve for ourselves the right to aim for an actual socialist program, for a revolutionary objective. For this objective we will fight also within this united front.
“However, that itself must first of all imply on your part a complete break with the official labor party parliamentary opposition and its whole apparatus, both ideologically and organically, because their objective goes definitely in the opposite direction.”
In such an attitude and approach lie the possibilities of the Communists taking over leadership of this Leftward moving section. It is true that in this process new problems will arise such as even the question of a slogan for a socialist government, which under present conditions in England has a different connotation from say, for example, in Germany. But once the approach to the problems is begun correctly the further solutions will not have the greatest difficulties. Finally it goes without saying that such approach can never in the least be confined within the narrow scopes of parliamentary activities. Revolutionary objectives by far transcend such bounds and it is precisely around these objectives that the strike movements can have real meaning and become an integral part.
 
Now is the Time to Apply Lessons of Past Experiences
The present situation in England pressingly demands a revolutionary orientation by the Communist party. That dare not be delayed, any longer if it is at all to take advantage of the exceptional possibilities. But to accomplish this means a definite fight to eliminate root and branch the heavy burden of the Stalinist bureaucratic leadership, the penalty of which the party is now suffering. Of course, this would be altogether inconceivable without a broad, open and free discussion within the party. To any such attempt the bureaucrats will certainly answer by, if possible, reinforcing their edict against any discussion under the plea that now is the time for action, and there is not a moment to lose. But for the party to act correctly in this situation first of all implies a proper evaluation of the experience and disastrous orientation of 1926. If this is further compared with the puerile banalities of the “third period”, a good beginning will have been made. Many lessons could be learned of incalculable value for the present situation. And to initiate this is precisely the duty of a revolutionary leadership.
Of course, judging the present serious situation in England from a considerable distance, there may be many developments unavoidably escaping our attention and thus of necessity make our suggestions incomplete. Nevertheless we believe our Left Opposition supporters should give these suggestions their most serious attention.
 



For years the head of the Teamsters union was well regarded in business circles. Then he was suddenly singled out for crushing exposure. What is back of this astonishing reversal in top policy?
TWENTY years ago the great sit-down strikes and the rise of the CIO added a new and significant chapter to American labor history. Like a mighty battering ram union consciousness and union organization smashed all obstacles and conquered the open-shop fortress in basic industry. Never before had labor organization reached out so widely or deeply. In one tremendous sweep the American trade-union movement was transformed. From its backward craft-union status it became an advanced industrial organization. This regeneration was stimulated by the most powerful dynamic any movement can have; a high degree of confidence in its growing strength. But that was yesteryear.
Today we witness a sordid spectacle. The unified AFL-CIO has become a center of attention and publicity, but not because of its progress or achievements. It is the victim of attempts to reduce it to a mere fulcrum for exposure of racketeering and corruption of a section of its leadership.
Dave Beck and some of his co-officials of the Teamsters union were the first target. Let there be no mistake, however; these exposures are merely a convenient cover for far broader objectives. As always, social reaction in all forms is constrained to mask its real aims. And these exposures can be understood correctly only as a first step in a softening up process, directed against the whole labor movement, in preparation for more open attacks.
The Wall Street Journal opened its account of the Beck hearing with the observation: “Disclosures of union corruption are unloosing legislative demands to curb labor’s powers.” Arthur Krock, the Washington correspondent of The New York Times, spelled it out more clearly. One prominent reaction in the capital to the Beck revelations, according to Krock, was the “view that ‘right to work’ state laws should be adopted generally, or that the Taft-Hartley Act, which now permits the ‘union shop’ should be amended to prohibit it everywhere.” And Senator McClellan did not even bother to conceal his indecent haste when he introduced a “right to work” amendment to the pending civil-rights bill, long before the hearings of his committee were well under way.
But one hardly need doubt that when the attacks are mounted, the labor movement will know how to reassert the militantly progressive tendency which has become an inextricable part of its history.
Like all other social forces the trade-union movement is subject to the changing conditions of the class struggle. It rises to progressive heights of militancy when the pressure of deteriorating material conditions provide the combination of conscious awareness and readiness to fight for the needs of the movement, together with a leadership that is adequate for the occasion. It sinks to the level of quiescence, and even apathy, and retreats when material conditions permit greater concessions to labor and the pressure of class antagonisms ease. During recent years this is the kind of ebb tide that has prevailed. It has provided abundant possibilities for the labor leaders to extend their bureaucratic powers and privileges. And corruption, even graft and racketeering, is not an exceptional part of the usurpation of special privileges.
 
A Degenerate Bureaucrat
Among this parvenu caste, Beck proved to be an easy target for the sanctimonious senatorial exposure. His mercenary career is studded with corruption and shady deals. For outright racketeering and thievery, it must be conceded that his type of leadership furnishes a most degenerate example. Using the union treasury and union power as a base of operation, Beck engaged in the most fantastic and foul conniving over juke boxes, liquor, real estate, and union welfare and pension funds for the personal profit of himself, his family, his cousins and nephews. Some of his top associates were implicated in the same shady kind of business.
The McClellan hearings were carefully designed to create the impression that the trade unions are natural breeding grounds for corruption. This is entirely contrary to the facts of life. Corruption does not originate in the labor movement. It oozes out of every pore of the capitalist system. From this native habitat corruption seeps into the circles of the labor bureaucracy, primarily through collusion with the employers. In this field Dave Beck excelled. He became a most accomplished practitioner in the art. Teamster services were withheld to eliminate small business competitors, while the big ones were granted more generous contracts at the expense of the workers. Collusion served also to discipline recalcitrant union members. The marauding type of business unionism practiced by Beck and his associates epitomizes the worst evils of labor bureaucratism.
Dave Beck conceived union organization as a piratical business. Without compunction he proceeded to raid other unions in the spirit and practice of the buccaneering robber barons whose despoiling of the nation is a familiar part of American history. Most notorious was the attempt, in 1948, to break the Seattle strike of the Boeing aircraft workers union in hope of swallowing its membership. The attempt failed; but continual raiding tactics have brought the Teamsters into jurisdictional disputes with many other unions.
Early in his career Beck let it be known: “I have no use for class warfare.” But he and his machine never hesitated to use goon-squad terrorism to rule the Teamsters union with an iron hand. Local unions that stepped ‘‘out of line” were put under trusteeship. Almost 12 percent of the Teamsters locals – 105 out of 897 – were under such trusteeship at the end of 1955.
When Beck was at the head of the West Coast Conference of Teamsters he told Joe Miller, a journalist who interviewed him, “I am paid $25,000 a year to run this outfit. [Later he received $50,000.] Unions are big business. Why should truck drivers and bottle washers be allowed to make big decisions affecting union policy. Would any corporation allow it?”
 
The Real Union Builders
Beck rose to top leadership in the aftermath of the great drive, initiated from Minneapolis, to build the Teamsters union into a mass organization. That initiative has been recalled recently by several commentators. Paul Jacobs made the following observation in The Reporter of January 24, 1957:
“But between 1933 and 1935 a remarkable change took place in a Teamsters local in Minneapolis, a change that fundamentally affected the nature of the entire union. Local 574 in that city had come under the control of a group of Trotskyists, who in the short span of a few years established a wholly new pattern for the organization of Teamster unionism, one that has guided it to its present size and success.
“The leaders of 574 during that period were the Dunne brothers – Vincent, Miles and Grant – and Farrell Dobbs, all Trotskyists.”
In an article recently syndicated by the North American Newspaper Alliance, Sid Lens placed further emphasis on the Minneapolis initiative:
“Back in 1933 the Teamsters Union had only 70,000 members. The following year, however, a Trotskyist named Farrell Dobbs conceived the strategy which made the Teamsters what they are today. He organized the over-the-road drivers nationally, fanning out from Minneapolis, and used this economic power to rebuild the union.
“Any company which was recalcitrant faced the prospect of having its long distance hauling stalled. The union organizer was a militant and a radical, but there is no question that his unions were free of corruption. Had he remained in the Teamsters he probably would be in Beck’s place today and Beck would be only a minor figure.”
Lens described the government prosecution of Dobbs and 17 of his associates, under the Smith Act in 1940, and the rise of Beck’s star in the Teamsters firmament. He ends his observation with the comment: “What Dobbs sowed, Beck reaped.”
The corruption disclosures have reverberated through the AFL-CIO hierarchy. How did the high moguls meet the twofold challenge? No exception was taken to Beck’s collusion with the employers. Nor did his peers object to his autocratic rule of the Teamsters union, for both of these practices form an inseparable part of the lamentable record of the whole labor bureaucracy. Bourgeois respectability proved once again to be their foremost concern. They felt outraged because Beck invoked his constitutional right of resort to the Fifth Amendment – an indispensable safeguard against all witch-hunts whether these are used to destroy civil liberties or to weaken and destroy the trade union movement. Stung by the inference of guilt by association, Meany pontificated in sonorous tones about “setting labor’s house in order,” and Reuther prescribed “high standards of ethical and moral conduct.”
Alas, morality more than any other form of ideology has a class character. And the morality of the self-proclaimed paragons of virtue, sitting on top of the heap in labor’s house, follows the imperialist credo everywhere, from fortification of Chiang Kai-shek’s regime on Formosa to protection of the imperialist oil properties in the Middle East. In the name of this morality, the stalwart gentry affirm their allegiance to the prevailing order of capitalist rule and succumb to its implications. By the same precept every critical voice in the unions is stifled and refractory workers expelled. It is the morality that has class collaboration for its foundation.
The AFL-CIO hierarchy did not hesitate to offer Beck as a scapegoat in the hope of appeasing the capitalist rulers. But the failure to meet the real challenge only stands out the more obviously. There is no sign of any serious preparation to resist the threat of an anti-labor drive that is so clearly implicit in this whole affair, let alone a recognition of its existence. Without this, the actions taken against Beck by the Executive Council become a mere token of surrender on the real issue, serving notice that class collaboration will continue in effect.
This is the contradiction that grips a trade-union movement whose only reason for existence is the class struggle. And whether or not the class struggle is recognized as a fact of life of capitalist society, the union officials can discharge their obligations to the members only by policies and actions that correspond to the needs imposed by this struggle. Class collaboration pursues the exact opposite course. Starting out from the illusory objective of class peace it leads inevitably to retreats and surrender, if not outright betrayal of the needs and the interests of the workers. As a result capitalist forces are strengthened and the power of the unions is undermined. But every surrender only resurrects and intensifies the contradiction at the next successive stage.
Any doubt about this will be quickly dissipated by a look at the record of the bureaucratic confederacy in relation to the Taft-Hartley Act. At the time of its introduction into Congress all the union leaders were under great pressure for some form of resistance from an aroused rank and file. In response they uttered some threats of general strike, or a march on Washington. To be sure, there was neither firmness nor conviction in their response. And they quickly retreated. Their whole attitude has been about as serious and as effective as the quack medical commercial telling us how to break the laxative habit: first take two Little Liver Pills, next take only one, and then nothing. Similarly these peerless bureaucrats: first they demanded repeal of the Taft-Hartley Act, next they reduced their demand to revision of the Act, and then nothing.
But the retreats did not produce appeasement. On the contrary, they served only to heighten the attacks on the labor movement and thus to intensify its contradictions. “Right to work” laws banning the union shop followed in quick succession in one state after another. Qualitatively the labor movement has suffered greatly from these retreats.
In the trade-union movement there is a generally close interrelationship between quantity and quality. Mutually they react upon one another. During the stormy growth of the thirties a new quality made its immediate appearance. The whole movement rose to new heights of consciousness and militancy. The powerful internal dynamic – the confidence of growing strength – that was generated by these developments was still in evidence during the great strike wave of 1945-46. Numerically the trade-union membership reached its high point.
 
Stagnation Instead of Growth
Since then, what has been the record of organizational performance by the official stewardship? Has it been less sordid than its record on restrictive labor legislation? To be sure the fraternity of bureaucrats has gained vast extension of its privileges and correspondingly handsome emoluments. Never before have the members of this fraternity enjoyed such princely salaries and huge expense accounts. Union control has become much more firmly centralized in the hands of the top bureaucrats. In negotiation of union contracts, they appear in the role of mediators rather than champions of labor. They readily give concessions, for they seek, above all, stable relations in their collaboration with management. Authorization for strikes is likewise centralized. And when strikes cannot be prevented they may often occur just at the right time to help management unload burdensome inventories. On the whole the effects have been quite well in harmony with the highest corporate aim of maximizing profits by holding labor costs to a minimum. In turn the labor leaders use centralized control as an instrument to tame the workers rather than to advance their economic interests. Thus on the fundamental issue of class collaboration there is no real difference between the leadership of the Beck type and that of the general trade-union bureaucracy. All perform the function of labor lieutenants of capitalism in the ranks of the workers.
By and large these servile leaders have succeeded in their efforts to reduce the activities of the unions to the purely business routine that accepts all restrictions as a lesser evil. True, they have had to contend with a good deal of what they consider a greater evil: militant rank-and-file action expressed in numerous wildcat strikes, and there have been some minor revolts. Nevertheless, the leaders have succeeded in maintaining a certain equilibrium sustained by crumbs of concessions that fall from the banquet table of lush profits from arms production enjoyed by monopoly capitalism. But this equilibrium has been maintained at the cost of destroying the internal dynamic that once made the movement great and powerful. Since 1946 the working population has expanded but union membership has remained stationary.
The failure to expand organizationally is a common feature of all present-day union leaders. Tiny advances made here and there are offset by losses of “runaway” shops. Most outstanding, however, is the failure to organize the South where less than one-fifth of the workers belong to unions. With the extensive industrialization of the Southern states during the last 15 years and the mechanization of agriculture, large segments of former sharecroppers and plantation hands have become transformed into modern wage workers. Simultaneously the Southern Negroes, on their own initiative and out of their own resources, have struck powerful blows against the main obstacle to union organization: the hated Jim Crow segregation system. These developments cry out for organization. Besides, the Southern wage differential remains a threat to union conditions elsewhere. Yet, “Operation Dixie,” the campaign to organize the South, launched in a blazing fanfare of publicity, is now but a faint memory. It died a-borning.
Following the unification of the AFL-CIO, another organization campaign was announced. This time it was to be “Operation White Collar.” In this field there is a potential reservoir for organization of 13 to 14 million workers. Methods and objectives of the campaign are explained by John Livingston, the director of organization, in the AFL-CIO American Federationist. Referring to the effective organization achievements during the early years of this century and during the thirties, he invokes the spirits of Gompers, Green and Murray. It is no accident that the name of John L. Lewis is not mentioned. That could spell guilt by association with the spirit of militant struggle of the thirties. Therefore, as could be expected, “Operation White Collar” has not yet got off the ground. And to initiate an organization drive in the spirit of Gompers, Green and Murray, as the patron saints, is to condemn it to death in infancy.
 
Defensive Organs
Progress of the trade unions depends to a large extent on their ability to extend organization to all the workers in the various branches of our highly integrated system of production and distribution. The greater their success in this field, the more effective their function as mass organs in protecting the elementary rights and interests of the workers. In this sense unions are essentially defensive in character. Their main aims and activities are centered around maintaining the standard of living theoretically granted by the capitalist system. Generally this standard includes no more than an approximation of what is required to reproduce labor power.
But labor productivity tends to rise with every advance in the technique of production. As a result the profit from additional values created increases while the share received by the workers diminishes proportionately. At the same time the capitalist mode of production creates new needs and new wants, from automobiles to the tiniest kitchen gadget. All these wants enter into the requirements of modern living although they cannot be supplied to the workers within the share of value they get under the laws of capitalist production. And the unions become instruments of the workers in the fight for a greater share of the national income, arraying the workers against the bourgeoisie. In this sense the trade-union movement has revolutionary implications.
American labor history is replete with examples of these implications. They were clearly apparent in the great upheaval of the thirties. Challenging the bourgeoisie, the resurgent labor movement became a new powerful social force. It proclaimed and simultaneously established its independence as an organization. Still this great resurgence did not achieve political independence for labor. On the contrary. While the leadership of the time was adequate for the breakthrough of union organization, it established close ties with the capitalist state power. During the subsequent years these ties became more firmly knit, particularly through the Roosevelt and Truman administrations. In return for meager concessions to labor the leaders put themselves at the service of the capitalist state. Class collaboration was elevated from its earlier rudimentary stage of collusion with the employers to the higher level of collaboration with the capitalist political state.
However, while this collaboration serves the aims of the labor statesmen who are camp followers of the bourgeoisie, for the trade-union movement it creates serious contradictions, new disappointments and frustrations. These appear in the development of organization as well as in politics. One example will illustrate the point.
The chief medium of collaboration is the coalition of these labor statesmen with the Democratic party. But it remains in effect only through their subservience. Policies and actions of the unions are subordinated to this relationship, and this is precisely the reason why the much publicized campaign to organize the South was quietly shelved.
Racial segregation is still one of the pillars of the Southern social system. It forms the axis for the divide-and-rule policy of the Dixiecrats. How could there be any effective union organization without unity in action of both white and colored workers? But this would not only clash with the rule of the Southern Bourbons, it would also endanger the labor-Democratic party coalition. And so the interests of preserving the coalition took precedence over the needs of the workers.
 
The Petty Stockholders
But the collaboration with the capitalist state is by no means confined to the Democratic party. In return for concessions to labor, monopoly capitalism, in control of state power, demands that the labor leaders serve directly as petty but active stockholders of the imperialist enterprise at home and abroad. On every question of basic issue they are no less bipartisan than are the representatives of both capitalist parties. They have given as unstinting support to the Eisenhower Doctrine as they did to the Truman Doctrine. And, eager to show how indispensable they are to the capitalist state, they become the most aggressive proponents of the cold war, and the foremost champions of the imperialist arms build-up. Any voice raised for moderation of world tensions is denounced as appeasing the Kremlin.
On the home front the labor bureaucrats adapt themselves to the demand of the capitalist government to hold the unions in line. This is the reason for the extreme centralization of power in the hands of the higher officials. Manifestations of worker militancy are stifled, wildcat strikes are outlawed, and, above all, any effort toward independent labor political action is strangled in infancy.
To the bipartisan witch-hunt, unleashed by the government, the labor bureaucrats responded with parallel measures in the unions. Militant or radical workers accused of Communist taint were fired from jobs, in collusion with the employers, or eliminated from union office. Whole unions were expelled on the same grounds. But this collaboration with the capitalist state brought disastrous consequences. The labor bureaucrats could not circumvent the logic of the class struggle. The trade-union movement, whose only reason for existence is the class struggle, is now face to face with the contradiction of the class-collaborationist policy of its leadership.
With every move to stifle worker militancy the unions were laid increasingly open to attack. Step by step monopoly capitalism, in control of the government, followed up with legislation restricting the rights and independence of the unions. From the Taft-Hartley Act through the “right to work” state laws, the road is now being cleared for more sharply restrictive legislation. The witch-hunt technique is now turned directly against the trade-union movement. The form of the procedure has changed. There is no accusation of Communism or inquiry into political association; but the objective remains the same. Congressional hearings of this kind are held to smear organizations and isolate them for persecution. Beck and his fellow freebooters were singled out as the first exposure target because they were the most vulnerable. Revelations of their plunder and pillage could be used most effectively to inflame public opinion.
The design of this game is clear to all who view it objectively except – the labor bureaucrats, the very ones who are supposed to defend the unions against such attacks. It is true that the leaders are dependent upon the working class which is the source of their positions of power. But they place their reliance and their trust in the capitalist system from which, in the final analysis, they draw their privileges. Their loyalty to this system is primary. Their loyalty to the working class is only secondary and residual. So instead of preparing to defend the unions, the labor bureaucrats capitulated.
 
Union Democracy Essential
There can be no question about the advisability of booting Beck and similar scoundrels out of the trade-union movement. But that can be done effectively and thoroughly only by the rank and file. Theirs is the task of eliminating all bureaucracy from the unions and replacing the corrupt and treacherous officials with leaders who are loyal to the unions and who identify their interests with those of the workers. An inseparable part of this task is the restoration of union democracy. For only the conditions of free expression, without fear of reprisals, will provide the unity of action that is so essential for the unions to be of genuine service to the working class.
But the real target of the attack initiated by the McClellan committee exposure is not the officials but the unions themselves. And the efforts of the AFL-CIO hierarchy to settle everything within the upper circle by eliminating Beck and effecting a quiet reshuffling of offices, will not buy immunity. The failure to center attention on the problem of how to meet the attack will serve only to confuse the workers about its real meaning. The attempt to duck this main issue does not attenuate the problem but aggravates it. Regardless of intentions, it serves the very objective that is clearly implicit in the whole affair; namely, to cripple in advance any resistance to the assault on the unions themselves.
Changing economic conditions are at the foundation of this onslaught on the labor movement. The boom, long sustained by unprecedented arms expenditures, shows increasing signs of tapering off. Elements of crisis appear as a result of productive forces outstripping a market saturated with goods and deformed by inflation, high taxes and installment buying. Monopoly capitalism is apprehensive about diminishing profits. And, facing this dilemma, it resorts to its time-honored method of attempting to get out of the contradiction by unloading the consequences of economic decline on the backs of the workers. To do so, union opposition must be eliminated or at least reduced to a minimum. For this purpose the efforts of various governmental agencies have been coordinated so that the initial blow may set an impressive precedent for further attacks. From the McClellan committee comes the announcement that other unions besides the Teamsters will receive the exposure treatment. And, as part of the coordination, the Department of Labor timed a special report for this particular occasion. It implies that excessive wage increases have been the key cause of the rise of prices in the last decade. Following the specious type of reasoning that is so common in such reports, it insists that “real labor costs” have increased because average wages and salaries of working people as a whole have risen far faster in the last decade than has their productivity. This report has been submitted to the Congressional Joint Committee, which is making a study of the relationship of wages, prices and productivity. It can be expected that this study will concentrate on “excessive” wage increases, ignoring the fact that these have merely followed, and still lag behind, the excessive rise in the cost of living. To be sure, the combination of these developments marks the opening of a new stage of increasingly strained relations between the unions and the capitalist government.
 
Need New Political Policy
Within the trade unions these strained relations will be reproduced in growing antagonisms between the privileged bureaucracy and the rank and file. Whatever power and control over the unions the leaders possess is contingent essentially on their capacity to obtain concessions from capitalism and from its state machine. Conversely, as concessions diminish or disappear, the leaders are stripped of their power of arbitrary control. The dilemma that will increasingly confront these labor bureaucrats is a reflection of the developing crisis of capitalism itself. They will face the alternative: either to cease their reliance upon and their support of the capitalist state, or bring relations with their own rank and file into jeopardy.
As the onslaught on the trade-union movement unfolds, the political character of the class struggle will be the more clearly demonstrated. But it is precisely in the field of political action that the class-collaboration policy of the leadership has brought the most disastrous consequences. Retreats and capitulation in face of anti-labor legislation have been rewarded with new kicks in the teeth. Labor’s political demands have seldom got beyond the stage of a polite hearing. And, what is far more serious, through the alignment with the Democratic party and with bipartisan capitalist politics, labor’s political influence has fallen to a new low, despite its power as a great social force. More than anything else, this is due to the bankrupt political policy of its leadership.
What is sorely needed now is a decisive political turn – the adoption of a political policy that is in harmony with the objective needs of the workers and their political class power. A ringing declaration of labor’s independence from the capitalist parties would give serious pause to those who are engineering the assault. The formation of a labor party would provide the political weapon that has now become indispensable to the working class. Moreover, the real significance of such a step would be as far reaching as once explained by Trotsky:
“The class, taken by itself, is only material for exploitation. The proletariat assumes an independent role only at that moment when from a social class in itself it becomes a political class for itself. This cannot take place otherwise than through the medium of a party.”
When this objective is translated into action another significant chapter will be added to American labor history. Once again the trade-union movement will be transformed; but this time from political backwardness to political consciousness. It will have resurrected the militantly progressive tendency which already forms an inextricable part of this history.
June 1957



FIFTEEN years of relative prosperity in the United States, and the recent upturn in Europe, have given new impetus to the never-ending debate about the validity of the Marxist analysis of the objective laws of capitalist economic developments. Once again the bourgeois ideologists marshal their arguments to attempt to refute Marx. Some of them will concede, rather slyly, that the Marxist analysis seemed to have some justification during the time of the “dark satanic mills” in England of a century ago; but they insist that it has little or no relevance to the “new capitalism” of the twentieth century. None of the learned defenders of bourgeois interests possess the exuberant confidence that was displayed during the boom of the twenties; at that time the claim that Marx had been refuted by Henry Ford seemed to suffice. Yet what we witness now is the trotting out of the same old shibboleths, dressed in a more modern garb, but equally devoid of scientific or even rational content. “Marxism was the raw answer to raw primitive industrialism,” says Barbara Ward, former foreign editor of the London Economist and author of Faith and Freedom. But now, she insists, “a revolution has occurred in industry which has made modern capitalism in certain areas – chief among them the United States – almost unrecognizable in terms of nineteenth-century practice.” Now even the “profit motive ... is, in fact, fulfilling a social function or at least operating in conditions which help to make its function social in the proper sense ... the profit motive serves the mass market.”
The theme of a “capitalist revolution” appears on every hand. Even the “strong man” in the Eisenhower Cabinet, Treasury Secretary Humphrey, does not mind such terminology. In an interview with the editors of US News and World Report, January 14, 1955, Humphrey described “our wonderland economy”:
“Q. Doesn’t this prove that social revolution can come about peacefully in a democracy?
“A. Yes. Compared with the rest of the world, it is clear that this nation’s economy has grown right on past, and has left behind in the dust, both socialism and communism. We have progressed so that the basic interests of the wage earner and the small saver are today the same as the basic interests of the larger investor.”
This theme is elaborated in exalted prose by the well-known economist and corporation lawyer, A.A. Berle, Jr., in his recent book The Twentieth Century Capitalist Revolution. It is hailed in the publisher’s blurb as “A clear and conclusive refutation of Marxist philosophy.” Exultant about the power and “corporate conscience” of American capitalism, Berle declares that its “aggregate economic achievement is unsurpassed ... Its instabilities and crisis ... show indications of becoming manageable.” According to Berle this “capitalist revolution” is supposed to have resulted in fundamental changes in the spheres of both economy and class relations.
 
“People’s Capitalism”
All that now remains is how to define this phenomenon. Suggestions from bourgeois publicists have ranged from capitalism with “a balanced full employment economy” to “people’s capitalism.” And why not? According to some of the specious theories advanced, workers and capitalists both work, supposedly alike, only in different spheres. As a finishing touch to these ideas, the E.I. du Pont de Nemours and Co., which earned the name “Merchants of Death” as a result of the post-World War I probe conducted by the Nye Munitions Investigating Committee, is now being presented on Voice of America broadcasts as an example of “people’s capitalism.”
Philosophical justification is supplied by the type of panegyrics to the “new capitalism” of which Robert L. Heilbroner’s The Worldly Philosophers is representative. Compared to the crude sophistry of Barbara Ward, Heilbroner’s approach appears rather refined, but any resemblance to scientific method is purely coincidental. He pays his respects to the penetrating examination of the capitalist system made by Marx. Moreover, Heilbroner considers it frightening to observe the grim determination with which weakened European capitalist countries steadfastly hewed to the very course which Marx insisted would lead to their undoing:
“But capitalism here [in the United States] has evolved in a land untouched by the dead hand of aristocratic lineage and age-old class attitudes ... Here is a business community in which ‘public relations’ have come to be a paramount concern – in which, that is, business is engaged in explaining and justifying its place in society ... in the new world new attitudes have emerged: the idea of democracy, the idea of an impartial government seeking to reconcile divergent interests ... all this would have seemed only a wishful fantasy to Marx.”
Yet this optimism is by no means universally shared. Uncertainty and anxiety concerning the future appear repeatedly even within the very circles most fond of extolling the superior virtues of the “free enterprise” society of the dollar oligarchy.
 
The Debate Broadens
There are voices also from the left in this debate, claiming to speak in the name of socialism. Among these, the editors of the Monthly Review indicate that they are also slightly beguiled by the theme of a “capitalist revolution,” their own formal disavowals notwithstanding. In the issue of December 1954, the editors declare:
“... It should be obvious that our analysis provides no support for the view that there is likely to be a repetition of the Great Depression. It is to be anticipated that government will become a more, not less, important factor in the demand for goods and services as time goes on.”
Returning to the same subject in the April 1955 issue, the editors of Monthly Review recognize that the forces making for a crisis are in full operation.
“But they can be countered and, indeed, sooner or later they almost certainly will be countered,” say the editors, and they add: “All classes of the American people have learned at least one thing in the last decade and a half, that economic crises are not made in heaven and that the government can deal effectively with them if it is prepared to borrow and spend on a sufficiently grandiose scale.”
The editors of Monthly Review conclude that a large increase in government spending “points in the direction of the real problems and struggles ahead. Who is going to control this vast and growing, outpouring of public funds? What objectives will be served by it? What groups and classes will be the chief beneficiaries?”
The importance of the latter point is readily conceded. Likewise, there need be no doubt that the government will intervene more, not less, in economic developments. But whether or not the government can “deal effectively” with economic crises is another question which we will discuss later.
The Stalinist leaders of the Communist Party are no less equivocal in their appraisal of economic developments. In fact, it is difficult to judge what their actual appraisal is, but an indication is given in their confession of “left sectarian errors.” Some of these we extract from their present Draft Resolution for the 16th National Convention of the Communist Party scheduled for February 1957:
“Repeatedly since 1945, the Party has erred in assessing economic developments in the United States. In 1945, in 1949 and in 1954, it predicted that the current declines would develop into crises of major proportions.”
According to the draft resolution the party erred in appraising the effects of continued arms program, of investments in fixed capital, of the scope of unsatisfied consumer demand and the possibilities of credit expansion, etc.
“The Party’s judgment in each case was faulty because ... [of] applying the Marxist theory of economic crisis in a routine, formal and doctrinaire manner.”
This reason given for faulty judgment conceals more than it reveals. If a “routine, formal and doctrinaire” application of the Marxian theory was all that was involved a correction would seem possible. But the truth is that, due to the years of corruption in the Stalinist school, these leaders have long since forsaken Marxist theory. Proof of that becomes patently clear in their projected program to meet capitalist crises. But this question can be discussed more fruitfully following a careful examination of what is proclaimed to be “the greatest boom of all time.”
 
War and Armaments “Boom”
Admittedly, fifteen years of relative prosperity, interrupted by what turned out to be merely minor recessions, is unprecedented in capitalist history. Employment and total payroll is, at the midpoint of 1956, at an all-time high. The annual rate of production and services – gross national product – has now exceeded the $400 billion mark. For the year 1955 national income amounted to $322 billion, of which wages and salaries accounted for $208 billion (preliminary figures) [1]; corporation profits, garnered out of the products of labor, broke all records, reaching the total of $43.8 billion (before taxes). Yet these figures do not include additional concealed profits, such as huge reserves set aside for depreciation and for various unnamed contingencies. Even per capita disposable income for the whole population, measured in constant 1955 dollars, has increased from $1,066 in 1929 to $1,630 in 1955.
At any rate, so says the official record; but the same record also concedes that in 1953 there were 22,186,000 families, or 43.9% of all American families, who had an annual income of less than 84,000, which was considered a necessary minimum then for a decent standard of living. And, leaving aside for the moment the tremendous consumer indebtedness, it is true that today family home ownership is higher than ever; the same holds true for ownership of cars, television sets and home appliances. Viewed superficially, there seems to have been some justification for the claim made by the President’s message to Congress last January that “Our economy ... is at an unparalleled level of prosperity.”
However, this “greatest boom of all time” includes the tremendous cost in human lives and the immeasurable destruction of World War II and the Korean War. It includes the stupendous total in direct military expenditures by the US government, during these fifteen years, of $618.2 billion, or an annual average of $41.2 billion. No destruction ever touched an American industrial plant; instead, the huge military outlays served to prop up the otherwise sagging economic structure. A whole new activity ensued: building and tooling of government-financed plants, government purchase of raw materials and financing of the production of weapons of war.
Here then is revealed the primary underpinning for the relative prosperity. “The greatest boom of all time” rose and developed principally on the yeast cake of the war and subsequent arms economy.
What this signifies in terms of economics can be illustrated most effectively by comparing the present boom with the previous prosperity period of the nineteen-twenties. We take as our example the most important factors making up the total demand for production of goods and services: consumer purchases, private domestic investments and government purchases. Thus in 1929 consumer expenditures accounted for 76.5% of the total, private business investments accounted for 15.3%, while government purchases were only 8.2%. By 1955, however, this last item, government expenditures, occupied an entirely different position in the economy. The “sovereign” consumer’s share had now declined from 76.5% to 65.1% of the total, while private business investments remained constant at 15.3%; but government expenditures now accounted for 19.6%.
 
Government Expenditures
Viewing the above factors in their mutual interrelations we get a still clearer appreciation of what these government expenditures mean to the economy as a whole. As is well known, in capitalist society the purchase by consumers of goods to fill their everyday needs and the investment by business of capital for plants, equipment and materials, etc., form the more permanent basis for sustaining the economy. And so, in 1929 the gap left between these two items combined and the gross national product amounted to not more than $9.2 billion (1929 valuation); this gap was filled largely by government expenditures, primarily non-military in nature. In 1955, however, the gap between these two items combined and the gross national product reached the far greater sum of $79.2 billion (current valuation) ; again this gap was filled largely by government expenditures, to be exact, in the amount of $75.9 billion. The balance was made up by net foreign investments. But these government expenditures were primarily military in nature. In fact, during these fifteen years of relative prosperity, total government expenditures – of which more than two-thirds went for directly military purposes, with an unrevealed proportion of indirect military outlays – reached the enormous sum of $902.8 billion, or an annual average of f 60.2 billion. In other words, without these huge government arms expenditures, the American capitalist economy would experience a catastrophic plunge into depression and large-scale unemployment.
But private investments in production of capital goods have also kept abreast with the rising economic boom level. That this should be the case is not at all surprising for a period in which the insatiable demands of war accelerated all economic developments. Arms production and rationalization of industry, by dint of necessity, went hand in hand. Lush profits in production of weapons for war and for the arms race gave an immense impetus to greater investments in fixed capital for the building and expansion of plants and modernization of equipment. Application of electronics, complex automatic control devices and automation of whole industrial plants, formed an important part of these developments.
 
Industrialization of the South
And yet there is also a distinctly new aspect to the sustained private capital investment boom, an aspect of actual capitalist expansion: the industrialization of the South. According to US News and World Report, January 27, 1956, the Southern states at the turn of the century had only 9% of the country’s manufacturing facilities; now they have nearly one-quarter. Gains in manufacturing output, over the last fifteen years, range from 353% for Alabama to 533% for South Carolina; and industrial output for all of the Southern states climbed to close to $60 billion in 1955.
“War plants gave the South its first real shot in the arm,” says US News and World Report. The South was engulfed by a tide of so-called defense construction, running into billions of dollars, including a new H-bomb plant into which more than $1.5 billion have been poured for plant, payroll and community facilities.
Rolling, fallow fields are now checkered by new factories drawing their workmen from the farms. Agriculture has been industrialized; sharecropping has been reduced by, one-half. And where a sea of aching backs once moved through the rows of bursting cotton plants, heavy machinery has rumbled into the scene. The sharecroppers and plantation hands have been expropriated from the soil; they have become transformed into material elements of variable capital, furnishing labor power either for industry in the North or for the new plants in the South. From participants in old backward forms of production, they have become transformed into producers and consumers of goods pouring out of capitalist industry. As in the early period of dynamic capitalist expansion, when the frontier was constantly extended and industrialization of new regions followed, so now on a smaller scale, it became possible to repeat this process in the South. During these last fifteen years capital investments have taken over and transformed the old semi-feudal system of production in the South.
 
Foreign “Aid”
Finally to be considered, as a part of this “greatest boom of all time,” is the item called foreign aid. And this is not the least important part either, for it involves American efforts abroad to arrest the process of crisis and disintegration of the old and outlived social order as a whole. American capitalism, for its own survival, had to assume the responsibility of restoring the world capitalist equilibrium which was shattered by World War II; this included the task of restoring the war-dismembered world market and international division of labor. Above all, American capitalism had to take on the job of defending the decaying capitalist system as a whole against the extension of the October 1917 revolution.
In the light of such objectives there is no reason to assume that any part of this foreign aid, going chiefly to Europe, was dispensed for the benefit of workers abroad. On the contrary: the war-devastated industries and cities were rebuilt on the knuckles and bones of the workers. They were compelled to consume less and produce more; and incidentally, as in France, they were exhorted to do so by their Stalinist leaders when the latter held posts in the bourgeois government.
For the eleven-year period from July 1, 1945, to the end of the fiscal year June 30, 1956, total net US expenditures for foreign military and economic aid amounted to $55.5 billion. In this case also it is important to note that the overwhelming bulk of foreign aid went for military purposes in the form of weapons and auxiliary implements of war. Thus, for example, the highest of the annual appropriations made for this purpose, for fiscal 1952, was $8.5 billion of which $6.3 billion was specified for military weapons produced in the United States.
Over these years, each annual appropriation served as a government subsidy for American exports and, needless to say, private business and capital investments followed in the wake into the stabilized market. Moreover, the government subsidy served also as compensation to American monopoly concerns for their loss of exports to important sectors of the world market which were walled off by the fire of colonial revolution.
Viewing these developments, what stands out above all else is the importance of government expenditures for war and arms production as the major component in the present artificial prosperity. But to realize what this means and to foresee its consequences it is necessary to understand the nature of the epoch in which it occurs. The mechanism whereby the various aspects of the economy are at one period brought into balance and at other periods disrupted, reveals the objective laws of capitalism. But the operation of these laws, so thoroughly analyzed by Marx, yields, as he pointed out, different results in a developing and a declining economy.
 
Basic Cause of Crisis
For the capitalist economic system the general historical curve of development is no longer upward. That came to an end for the world system as a whole shortly after the turn of the century, and for the United States certainly with the collapse of the boom of the twenties. If there be any doubts about this, we need only recall the Great Depression from which American capitalism found a way out only by plunging into war expenditures on a vast scale. This, however, did not remove, or even mitigate, a single one of the basic causes of that crisis. Yet, within the general historical curve of capitalist economic development, there are short-range pulsations of expansion or contraction which may run counter to the general curve. What we have been experiencing during these last fifteen years is a series of such pulsations ; these have been quite extraordinary, to be sure, for they included large-scale production for World War II, for the Korean War and for the subsequent arms program; they included also a couple of recessions.
Not these pulsations, however, but the general historical curve of development foreshadows the future. And, it is important to remember, the basic causes of crisis, which exploded with unsurpassed fury in 1929, still form an integral part of the economic structure, although their operation is for the time being concealed.
On the surface, a harmonious, prosperous equilibrium exists between the three major factors of effective demand for goods and services. Government expenditures make up for the deficiency of private capital investments and consumer purchases in keeping the productive machinery running at its current rate. The government dispenses social capital coming out of tax revenues, which means, of course, that it comes out of the products of labor and is made possible only by the great productivity of labor. Even the taxes collected from the corporations have their origin in surplus value produced by labor and converted into profits by the corporations. The greater part of this social capital is returned as payments for arms production in the juicy contracts held by corporations. Further capital investments in plants, equipment and material is stimulated, and this is given additional incentive, moreover, by government grants of accelerated tax amortization for new plants certified as necessary to the arms program.
But these three major factors of effective demand for goods and services are directly interconnected; and in their development they produce mutual interactions of far-reaching consequence for the economy. In incipient form some of these consequences are already apparent. In the first instance, in the stimulation capital investments experience in the tremendous drive for greater profits through reduced costs of labor, productive capacity is driven beyond the absorbing ability of the market. On this particular point US News and World Report, March 11, 1955, made the following comment:
“Large unused capacities are indicated in almost all lines of industry and agriculture. Workers too are in surplus ... American industry in fact is able to turn out a much greater volume of goods than is now being produced.”
 
More Production, Less Jobs
The most important factor here is the virtual leap in productive capacity accomplished by the technological transformation that is now proceeding silently, but effectively, in major industries. What is taking place is not merely a quantitative extension, but the introduction of qualitatively new elements: automation of industrial processes. This is what Marx, about one hundred years ago, described prophetically in his analysis of machinery and modern industry :
“An organized system of machines to which motion is communicated by the transmitting mechanism from a central’ automaton, is the most developed form of production by machinery. Here we have, in the place of the isolated machine, a mechanical monster whose body fills whole factories, and whose demon power, at first veiled under the slow and measured motions of his giant limbs, -at length breaks out into the fast and furious whirl of his countless working organs.” (Capital, Kerr edition. Vol.I, pp.416-17.)
Early signs of the social impact caused by automation is illustrated by US News and World Report, April 20, 1956, in what it calls evidence of improved efficiency:
“Factory production hit a record high in 1955 ... American industry, apparently, was able to turn out 3 percent more goods than in 1953 with almost 6 percent fewer workers ... At present there are about 800,000 fewer workers employed in factories than at the same period in 1953. Yet output is higher.”
The report continues:
“These figures indicate that the effect of investments in new plant and in modernized equipment already are showing up. Business investment plans for this year point to an acceleration of this trend ...”
Here we have a telling illustration in facts and figures of what Marx explained as one of the laws of the capitalist mode of production : Progress in technology, in the form of more efficient machinery of production, affects directly the organic composition of capital – a qualitative change is introduced into the relation of its components. It increases the constant part (equipment and materials) at the expense of its variable part (wages, labor), and thereby reduces the demand for labor. The demand for labor “falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital, and at an accelerated rate, as this magnitude increases. With the growth of the total capital, its variable constituent or the labor incorporated in it, also does increase, but in a constantly diminishing proportion.” (Op. cit., p.690.) Marx explains further: “The laboring population therefore produces, along with the accumulation of capital produced by it, the means by which itself is made relatively superfluous, is turned into a relative surplus population ...” (Ibid., p.692.) This is what Marx calls the industrial reserve army. Moreover, modern capitalist production, due to its cyclical movements of expansion and contraction, requires for its free play an industrial reserve army independent of natural limits of population.
Thus, in their immediate effect, the vast government expenditures for arms production and the heavy capital investments that these stimulate, have served to keep the economy on an artificial prosperity level. Their essence, however, will unavoidably become manifest, and with intensified fury, in technological overproduction of capital and large-scale unemployment. The tremendous productivity of American labor will beat against the barriers that the capitalist system of productive relations itself sets up.
 
The Credit Spree
But the mutual interaction between the huge government arms expenditures, capital investments for expanded productive capacity and consumer purchases is reflected also in the complex phenomenon that while the consumers’ share of total demand for goods and services declined from 76.5% in 1929 to 65.1% in 1955, this decreased share was maintained only by an inundation of consumer credit. By the end of 1955 this had reached the fantastic sum, including home mortgages, of $124 billion. Naturally this became a powerful stimulus to the economy; but the amount represented 46.8%, or almost half, of the disposable income for the same year, and it has since gone higher. More ominous yet, during these fifteen years of relative prosperity, consumer credit, or more exactly consumer indebtedness has increased almost twice as fast as disposable personal income. For the same period net savings out of total personal income declined from 11.1% to 6.3%. Installment credits have, no doubt, squeezed quite a few extra billion dollars out of the consumers’ market; but they have not created a basis for expanding it; on the contrary, they have laid the basis for its saturation and contraction. And for the workers, whose future income is thus mortgaged, the loss of jobs will be catastrophic – as it surely will be likewise for the economy.
Incidentally, total outstanding debts, public and private, at the end of 1955 exceeded the $675 billion mark. This is more than two-thirds of the wealth of the United States, estimated by the National Consumers Finance Association to be $1,000 billion. Translated into everyday terms, it means that more than two-thirds of the nation is in hock to the bankers.
But there is another aspect of the credit expansion which even more directly affects economic developments – the inflationary aspect. Bourgeois publicists usually attempt to create the impression that inflationary rising prices are generated primarily by wage increases. The real situation is rather the other way around: wage increases generally lag behind rising prices. Even Treasury Secretary Humphrey, in the interview with the editors of US News and World Report cited above, acknowledges: “Inflation is the situation in which the supply of money and credit grows faster than the supply of goods and services which you can buy. This produces a rise in prices.” Facts of life show this to be the case. From the boom year of 1929 up to the end of 1955, while gross national products increased by 274%, total deposits and currencies (which include a large share of fictitious bank-made money) increased by 303%. The supply of money and credit rose faster than production. And the real source of the process of inflation experienced in the United States since the beginning of World War II is the inordinately heavy government deficit-financing of arms production. [2]
What this means to the workers’ pay checks is illustrated by US News and World Report, July 20, 1956. After every war wholesale prices have declined except for the present period. Thus, eleven years after the Civil War there was a decline of 45%, eleven years after World War I a decline of 30%; but now, eleven years after World War II, wholesale prices have increased by 70%.
This is how inflation works. It presents another aspect of the mutual interaction between the various components that enter into economic developments. Expressed in monetary terms, it has created a situation in which, during “the greatest boom of all time” in the richest nation in the world, the mighty dollar, the universally recognized denominator for all bourgeois monetary exchanges, has lost almost half its purchasing power.
There exists today in high government circles a belief that by credit controls, applying alternately a government policy of “tight money” or “easy money,” not only every pain and pimple in the economy can be cured, but economic cycles actually can be mastered. This is dead wrong: it is dealing with effects without touching the fundamental causes. Back in 1929 the discount rate went up to 6% and “call money” rose as high as 20%; these rates went on their merry chase until the whole economic structure came crashing down on the heads of the financial overlords.
 
Capitalist Anarchy
Aside from the special feature of inflation, the basic causes that precipitated the crash of 1929 are now again coming to the fore. This is not surprising, for the immanent laws of capitalist economic development are far stronger and far more real than the most exuberant claim of a “twentieth century” or any other kind of “capitalist revolution.” The very factors which operated to generate the boom, and drive it to higher levels, are the ones that set into motion the forces that will cause the boom to collapse. Lavish government expenditures for weapons of war have stimulated a vastly disproportionate expansion of the means of production. Annual capital investments have increased more than threefold from 1941 to the end of 1955; and these have resulted in a higher organic com. position of capital, as we can see from the reports of new or improved plants, modernized equipment and greater output with less-labor employed. This is a bitter example of the planlessness and anarchy of capitalist production. Moreover, the market’s capacity for expansion cannot keep pace with the tremendously expanding capacity of production, for the market is primarily governed by laws which operate much more slowly.
It is this self-expansion of capital, carried on by the drive for greater profits, the motive and aim of all capitalist production, which promotes reckless speculation, overproduction, crisis and surplus capital along with a surplus labor force. Surely the American economy is headed straight for a crisis of far-reaching dimensions and explosive consequences.
It should be distinctly understood, however, that it is not in terms of human needs that elements of a crisis of overproduction are becoming apparent; on the contrary, it is in terms of capitalist relations of production. The productive forces are beating against the barriers set up by capitalist ownership of the means of production.
It should be remembered also that in historical terms the world capitalist order has entered its downward curve; it is beset by crisis everywhere. And the reality of the interdependence of nations in the world market remains in full force for the strong as well as for the weak. For American capitalism, the constant extension of its internal and external market, during past stages, acted as a self-sustaining process for expanded reproduction. This process is now being turned into reverse in a contracting world market from which 35% of the world’s population have been withdrawn from the capitalist economic orbit. Moreover, the nascent socialist world order is now entering into economic competition with world capitalism. These are some of the important characteristics of the present epoch which will have their deadly impact also on American economic developments.
But what about the much advertized built-in stabilizers, such as unemployment insurance, etc.? Will these be effective means against an economic downturn? It is quite true that for workers who lose their jobs, unemployment insurance helps to soften the blow for a short while; but neither this, nor any other so-called built-in stabilizer, can serve in a serious way to sustain the market, let alone create a new market. In fact we are provided already with an instructive example of what such measures can accomplish. The farm subsidies have helped, no doubt, to ease the present situation for the farmers, especially those on the bigger commercial farms; but they have not affected seriously the course of the farm crisis, nor have they served to remove the growing impact of the farm crisis upon the whole economic structure.
Yet further increases in government expenditures, in an effort to stem a serious economic downturn, are to be expected. More state intervention, including more government subsidies, regulations, management and control to rescue private capitalist enterprises – this is already clearly indicated. But to visualize what such a rescue mission, to be effective, would involve, we need only to recall the tremendous war expenditures required to pull out of the Great Depression. For the year 1943 the direct military expenditures reached the immense sum of $80.4 billion, and in 1944 they went even higher, to a total of $88.6 billion; yet these expenditures produced no use-values whatever for the consumer market. What they did produce, however, was the virulent inflation which cut the purchasing power of the dollar almost in half. Further government deficit-financing on a large scale will inevitably take the dollar on another dizzy inflation whirl. And the working class will face the twin scourge of unemployment and spiraling prices.
 
“Anti-Depression” Measures
Is this what the editors of the Monthly Review mean by their statement that the government can “deal effectively” with economic crisis? After all the only example that we have to go by is precisely these last fifteen years of government-sponsored artificial prosperity. It was born out of wars, sustained by expenditure for wars, for an armaments race and cold war, with all the terrible consequences that these entailed, including the threat of new imperialist wars. Moreover, this government-sponsored “prosperity” regenerated the elements of crisis which are now operating with increasing force. How the government will attempt henceforth to “deal effectively” with crisis is foreshadowed already by this very example. As in the past, so also now, be the scale of expenditures ever so grandiose, the objectives of government action and the groups or classes the action will serve are determined fundamentally by the interests the government represents. And what else is the government, the present political state, whether administered by Republicans or by Democrats, but the instrument of the owners of capital – their politically presiding executive body? The logic of this position is inescapable. Any government intervention against crisis will have as its essential objective the insurance against serious impairment of the capitalist system of free enterprise, and it will attempt to effect this by war or by any other means at its disposal no matter how ruthless. Conversely, any proposal for large-scale government expenditures which would genuinely serve the people can be expected to be fought by the owners of capital with all the powers at their command, as “socialism.”
The National Guardian of August 29, 1955, correctly made this particular point in argument against the anti-depression program advanced by the Stalinist leaders of the Communist Party. In response, Celeste Strack replied for the Stalinists:
“Certainly the content of even the most advanced economic program being put forward today does not require a change in the economic system. Therefore it does not involve socialism any more than does the demand of the American people for peace ... To project this as a political necessity for enactment of even the most extensive anti-depression measures is wholly incorrect.” (Political Affairs, November 1955.)
This type of miseducation has its root source in the perfidious policy of the Stalinist CP leaders, who try to subordinate the issues of the class struggle to their desire for peaceful coexistence with capitalism. This currently takes the form of treacherous attempts to block the working class from moving toward political independence, in order to remain shackled more firmly to the party of Tammany Hall and the Dixiecrats.
 
The Marxist Position
Caught in this treacherous web, Celeste Strack even tries to bolster her disavowal of the socialist way out of capitalist crisis by an unpardonable distortion of Marx. She quotes at some length from the concluding part of the paper addressed by Marx to the General Council of the Workingmen’s International Association in 1865. But she selected the parts that seemed to suit her purpose, letting Marx urge working-class struggle against attacks upon wages and working conditions, but leaving out Marx’s final sentence in which he sums up the essence of his advice to the workers – not to confine themselves to mere struggles for temporary improvements. Said Marx in the sentence omitted by Strack:
“Instead of the conservative motto, ‘A fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work,’ they ought to inscribe on their banner the revolutionary watchword, ‘Abolition of the wages system’.” (Published under the title, Value, Price and Profit.)
This is the authentic voice of Marx. For us this is a guide to action. And for Marxists there cannot be the slightest doubt that the period of capitalist crisis is precisely the time, above all others, to present the socialist solution, to raise the issue of socialism, to speak and act in terms of socialism and to fight for the socialist transformation of the economic, social and political system.
There remains to be added, in this renewed debate on the validity of Marx’s analysis of the economic laws of development of capitalist society, one more essential point. Marx stressed that what is of primary concern in the process of production is relations between men; that is, their relations in the process of production. Under the capitalist method of production these relations assume the form of relations between “things,” such as commodities, markets, finances, etc. In essence these production relations are relations between social classes. In these relations the capitalist class has long since turned into its opposite the progressive function it once performed in developing the social forces of production. The very anarchy of production that prevails today – the crises, wars and revolutionary upheavals that beset the capitalist system – point with imperative necessity to the socialist transformation of society. But capitalism also called into existence the very force that now holds the future in its hands – the modern working class. It is today the only progressive force in society. And for the American working class, it can truly be said that its mighty force has grown in organization and cohesiveness in inverse proportion to the decline and decay of capitalism. When the artificial prosperity bubble bursts, it can be expected that the political consciousness of the workers will develop at a swift pace into mass organization as they prepare the ground for taking hold of the levers of production, rooting out the anarchy of production and establishing a society of plenty for all.
 
Footnotes
1. All figures, unless otherwise noted, are from official government sources as presented by The Statistical Abstract of the United States.
2. I refer those readers who may desire a more complete explanation of inflation to my article Inflation and the Arms Economy, in Fourth International, May-June 1952.



THE dynamism of the rapidly advancing Soviet industrial development is gradually dawning upon an incredulous capitalist world. In the military field and in the diplomatic sphere the challenge of Soviet power and effectiveness has long been recognized by leading circles in the capitals of the West. But a challenge on the economic front was, until recently, considered unthinkable.
Ever since the 1917 revolution it had been smugly assumed that whatever else might be true about the Russians, they would always lag behind economically. This idea was fortified, especially in the United States, by the official bourgeois doctrine that capitalist relations of society are incomparably the most productive and a “natural order,” as Adam Smith put it, in which “man’s self-interest is God’s providence.” The validity of this official doctrine seemed borne out during the last fifteen years by the fabulous productivity of American economy and, to a lesser extent, by the recent economic upturn in Western Europe. But these beliefs are now about to be swept into the dustbin of history.
The rise of the Soviet Union to the position of a modern industrial power, second only to the United States, has compelled the capitalists to take another look at all their past perspectives. Industrially the USSR has far outstripped the capitalist countries of Europe. Its tempos of growth are without parallel. And living social forces are now settling the debate about which is more productive – capitalism or the new economic forms established by the Bolshevik revolution. The socialist foundation laid down in the USSR in 1917 has demonstrated its right to victory, not in theory alone, but in terms of steel, coal, electric power and instruments of production.
The Soviet Union now occupies first place among nations in the rate of continuous capital investment in industry. About 25% of its 1955 national income was reinvested as industrial capital, according to a survey of the UN Economic Commission for Europe. For the United States the rate of capital investments, government and private, was about 18% of national income, and this was the highest percentage in the postwar period. According to the ECE, France and Britain ranked lowest in capital investments with a rate of 8% and 6% respectively.
Of course, the high rate of capital accumulation in the Soviet Union has its opposite side of low living standards for the working population. But this we shall discuss later.
A study of Soviet economy in the April, 1956, Lloyd’s Bank Review of London calculates that in 1950 the Soviet Union’s industrial output was 35% of the United States figure. In 1965 it came close to 50%. For the same period the authors estimate that the industrial output of the United States increased by 24%, while that of the Soviet Union made a leap of 75%. Other estimates, for the same period, came to roughly similar conclusions.
At the Twentieth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held in February 1956, Khrushchev claimed a twenty-fold increase of Soviet industrial output since 1929. Of course, in the early stages of industrialization, starting out from a low level, percentage increases will naturally be large. Yet, however exaggerated Khrushchev’s claim may be, the astounding growth is acknowledged from all sides. Moreover, the Soviet achievement stands out more sharply in view of the colossal destruction of industrial plants in World War II. In comparison, American industrial output for the same period (28 years) is variously estimated to be from two and one-half to three times; and not a single American industrial plant suffered damage from the war. So, the discrepancy in the figures, whatever it may be, is of far less importance than the general trend that is indicated.
Consider, for example, the wild gyrations of the American economy since 1929. It took the catastrophic plunge into the Great Depression and went up to the high peaks of war production during World War II and the intervention in the Korean civil war. Since then we have oscillated between relative prosperity,’ artificially stimulated by a gigantic armaments program, and recessions, farm crises and the mounting inflation that has cut the purchasing power of the dollar in half. Compared to this delirious performance the Soviet economy – in which recessions or depressions are not known – presents a picture of robust health and enviable stability.
 
Labor Productivity
The relative advance of labor productivity affords another means of comparing the two world economic systems. Its supreme importance lies in the fact that labor productivity is the measure of strength of an economic structure. “All economy,” said Marx, “comes down, in the last analysis to an economy of time.” And the function of technique is precisely to increase the productivity of human labor.
But the difficulty of making an exact estimate of labor productivity is commonly recognized. Considerable variations in given industries occur over specific periods, depending on many different factors. And when evaluations of relative productivity levels are extended to a comparison between nations, many more variables are involved. Galenson makes this amply clear in his study of Soviet and American productivity. [1] He traces the development of several specific industries, but direct calculations cover only the pre-war period, with some suggestions of comparative trends up to 1950. Thus the estimated productivity of Soviet labor in 1937–39, for the industries examined, would average out to about 42% of that of American labor. It is worth noting that a contemporary Soviet statement reached approximately the same conclusions.
Galenson calls attention to the decline of Soviet labor productivity due to the destruction of plants and equipment in the war. But the lost ground has been more than recovered, for a 1950 Soviet industrial productivity index indicates a substantial narrowing of the pre-war U.S.-Soviet productivity gap. While Galenson expresses some doubts about this, the editors of Lloyd’s Bank Review estimated that Soviet labor productivity had advanced in 1955 to about 50% of the American rate and might be about the same as the British. And here we enter the most significant aspect of the question – the rate of increase of labor productivity.
For the decade 1928–38 Galenson concludes that Soviet industrial labor productivity rose at a rate, compounded annually, of about 6% a year. Evaluating this against the American experience, he cites Solomon Fabricant’s authoritative conclusion that during the 40 years from 1899 to 1939 the average annual productivity increase in US manufacturing was about 2% per man and, 2.75% per man hour. Thereupon Galenson hazards the guess “that the Soviet productivity increase from 1928 to 1938 has been unmatched.” The rate declined in the 1940–1950 decade. Included in this period was the effect of destruction of plants and equipment during the war; nevertheless Soviet index figures imply an average rate of productivity growth of about 3% a year. Against this, Galenson cites the 1947 US Census of Manufactures, which indicates an annual rate of productivity increase in US manufacturing of about 1% between 1939 and 1947. The commonly accepted rate of 2.5% for U.S. manufacturing apparently failed to materialize. But Galenson adds that there might have been an approximate annual productivity increase in American industry of 2% since then, while The Nation’s Business, August 1956 estimates an annual average of 2.9% from 1947 to 1954.
These figures for the US do not seem very impressive when compared to the growth of Soviet labor productivity during the fifth Five Year Plan (1950–55). Although projected targets were admitted to have not been fully attained, with agriculture lagging far behind its goals, Bulganin reported to the Twentieth Congress that in industry productivity rose 44% or an average annual increase compounded of 7.6%. “Indeed,” exclaimed Khrushchev, “higher productivity accounted for more than two-thirds of the total increase of industrial output during the fifth Five Year Plan.”
According to Bulganin and Khrushchev the increase in labor productivity is due solely to the superiority of planned production. Basically this is true. But it does not tell the whole story. Intensified labor, spurred by the bureaucratic whip, became a part of the whole process of industrial growth. It became a part also of the intensified social antagonisms.
 
Facts or Lies?
But the question has often been asked: “Are Soviet data reliable?” No serious analysis has unearthed outright fabrications. But bureaucratic pressure develops a tendency to embellish the facts, and exaggerate accomplishments. Besides, under the same pressure, statistics for segments of the industry where growth rates are low can be conveniently dropped. Over and against this stands the necessity of maintaining a sufficiently accurate statistical control of measurements of production as well as productivity without which rational planning and allocation of resources, human and material, would prove impossible. And Galenson comments on his examination of Soviet data: “To construct a fabricated system of statistics attaining such a degree of internal consistency would require herculean labor.”
A Columbia University study, made by Dr. Seymour Melman, indicates that the productive efficiency of Soviet industry is going up twice as fast as that of the United States and two to three times as fast as that of Western Europe. The rise of Soviet productive efficiency is estimated at a rate of roughly 6% a year. Dr. Calvin Hoover reaches a similar conclusion in the January Foreign Affairs. It is true that these figures are more conservative than Soviet estimates. Nevertheless the general trend is now clearly established; the rate of growth of both production and of labor productivity is far greater under the socialist type of property forms and state planning than under the most highly developed capitalist economy.
Soviet post-war trade has leaped to almost three times the prewar level. The share of the Soviet bloc countries, including China and Eastern Europe, in total world trade reached about 10% in 1955.
It illustrates one aspect of the growing interdependence of nations in world economy. Even though roughly four-fifths of this trade is carried on within the Soviet bloc, this only serves to point up the severe losses incurred by the imperialist world. And now, while the capitalist embargo against trade with the Soviet bloc is being whittled down gradually, the Soviet Union has embarked on its avowed aim of competitive penetration of the world market. No major trade deals are involved so far; but the potentials are indicated by the stormy growth of Soviet industry. Hence, in Wall Street as well as in Washington, this emerging economic penetration is viewed with ill-disguised apprehension.
 
In Science, Too
But the imperialists, who once felt so sure of their world supremacy because of the superiority of capitalist industry, have shown even greater apprehension over Soviet progress in science. It is now recognized that since the 1917 revolution the advancement of science and engineering – despite some lamentable instances to the contrary – has been fostered by Soviet planning. “A prodigious effort has been expended on scientific and technical education,” says Allan Dulles, the Director of American Central Intelligence. (US News and World Report, May 11, 1956.) And as one example he cites the fact that in 1955 the Soviet Union graduated 130,000 students in the physical and biological sciences as against 77,000 in the US. For graduates in engineering the comparative figures were 62,000 as against 24,000.
The apprehension of Allan Dulles is shared by former Senator William Benton, who, upon his return from a visit to Russia, cried out in alarm: “The Soviet Union is challenging us fundamentally at what have traditionally been our two strongest points, technology and mass education.” In the New York Times of April 1, 1956, he described his experience at a Moscow bookstore overrun by 15- and 16-year olds, excitedly buying, not comic books or Westerns, but texts of physics, engineering and chemistry. In other words, the interest in science is higher among the Soviet people than among the American.
How does the United States compare? At its last annual meeting the American Association for the Advancement of Science considered an extensive committee report on social aspects of science. “The social environment in the United States,” said the report, “does not elicit a maximum interest in science ... on the part of the public or of those who attempt to judge the public mind for purposes of directing the media of information.” The report complained that agencies which use scientific knowledge (industrial, management, military and medical) encourage scientific research which “seems to promise information that might be useful for their own specific purposes.”
In the Soviet Union, on the other hand, the function of science is closely integrated with the planned social and economic development – including, of course, the military aspect – not, however, to extract maximum profits for private entrepreneurs, but to increase national income. Science advances on a qualitatively new foundation, assuming direct responsibility within the conscious overall social direction and development of the productive forces. This leads to a greater utilization of human intellectual resources, as demonstrated by the ability of planned economy to attract scientists and to generate science.
But the most eloquent testimony to the progress of science in the USSR comes from a group of American scientists who participated in a Moscow conference on high-energy particle physics in May 1956. They reported that the Soviet Union has achieved a lead in pure nuclear research that the United States probably cannot overcome within the next ten years.
Two American physicists, Marshak and Wilson, described in the Scientific American August 1956 the advanced nature of the experiments at the great new physical research center at Bolshaya Volga, near Moscow. “They knocked my eye out,” Wilson said, “... the detectors, counters and electronic circuitry are not the homemade affairs typical of a US laboratory but are beautifully engineered.”
Almost a couple of centuries of painstaking technological research and development in the capitalist world have been absorbed by the Soviet Union in a few decades. At the same time, new and incomparably more effective industrial methods corresponding to planned directives were made possible by concentrating the means of production in the hands of the state. The results achieved reveal the inner powers and resources of the Soviet Union as the material expression of a new and progressive historical tendency. But the grandeur of these achievements underlines all the more heavily the still existing inadequacies.
 
Cracks and Seams
Comparative indices for the volume of per capita production are far less favorable to the Soviet Union. While the amount of coal produced per inhabitant is only slightly higher in the United States, yet for such basic industrial items as steel and oil, the US per capita figure is almost 3 and 5 times as large respectively. The far greater proportion of the latter figure is due primarily to the shift to oil in the US for industry and transport. And while the most striking expansion has occurred in Soviet production of electric power – a 34-fold increase since 1929 – the US per capita output is still about four and one-half times as large. Per capita annual use of electricity in the US is 3,455 kilowatts compared to 758 in the USSR. However, Soviet production of machine tools, in 1955, exceeded that of the United States, according to Allan Dulles, which would indicate proximity in this vital industry. Moreover, by the end of 1965 – with the completion of the fifth Five Year Plan – Soviet industrial output and labor productivity were only about half that of the United States.
As an explanation in this instance, the time element is an important consideration. It could not be expected that the Soviet Union would attain the US level of technique, either quantitatively or qualitatively, in the brief span of a few decades. The relatively leisurely development in the United States permitted a technically more homogeneous and therefore a more efficient industrial and agricultural structure. It permitted a more harmonious integration of plants and equipment, a higher coordination among factors of production and more adequate means of transportation. Other advantages, not the least of which was access to the resources of the world market, favored the United States.
In contrast the Soviet economy still contains gaping disproportions. The backward and antiquated exist alongside of the most advanced; motive power by draft animals is combined with the latest in nuclear development; and the backwardness of certain branches greatly decreases the useful operation of others. Besides, bureaucratic arbitrariness and mismanagement aggravates all disproportions.
Concerning machinery and equipment Bulganin complains “... we still have many old turning lathes ... the foundry machines ... have only one-third or one-quarter of the productivity of modern automatic and semi-automatic machines ... the level of mechanization is insufficient, and the proportion of hand labor is very high.” And indicating bureaucratic mismanagement, Bulganin adds: “In certain branches of industry production capacity is by no means being used to the full.”
Means of transportation are altogether insufficient. The Soviet railway system has only about one-third the American total of 370,000 miles of tracks. And “... It must be admitted,” says Khrushchev, “that railway transport is lagging behind technically. In the main, steam locomotives are used, although it is a well known fact that the efficiency of steam traction is low ... only 2,267 kilometers of railway, or 58% of the five-year target, were electrified in the course of the last five years.”
Turning to the problem of freight haulage by roads, Khrushchev hints at some more bureaucratic mismanagement. He points an accusing finger at the “unbelieveable lack of centralization. A vast number of dwarf organizations have sprung up,” says Khrushchev, “to which many heads of plants and institutions cling. Suffice it to say that 85 per cent of these organizations have ten vehicles or less.”
But the disproportion between industry and agriculture presents a far more serious problem. Agriculture has consistently been the weakest element in Soviet economy, a fact now officially admitted. Its traditional backwardness, the past disasters of forced collectivization, and the recurrent peasant passive resistance, are all well known. Even today crop yields per hectare are far less than in advanced European and American farm areas. As a result food and industrial crops have remained in short supply.
It is true that soil conditions, rainfall, temperature and other climatic factors are generally less favorable in the USSR. In addition there is inadequate irrigation, commercial fertilizers, buildings and equipment for livestock, not to mention the lack of rural electrification, all of which require large capital investments. Even more detrimental has been the long-standing Kremlin policy of favoring the development of industry at the expense of agriculture. This has meant lack of machinery for the collectives and lack of manufactured goods for the countryside with the consequent fostering of individualistic tendencies among the peasants who favor their midget plots to make a livelihood. As a result, output per farm laborer has remained relatively low. In rough terms it requires one farm worker to supply four persons in the USSR, compared with one farm worker for every sixteen persons in the United States. These were the conditions that prompted Khrushchev to admit at the Twentieth Congress that the Central Committee “has brought to light serious shortcomings and mistakes in the guidance of agriculture ...” Guidance by whom if not by the bureaucracy ? Acknowledging the importance of grain farming as the foundation of agriculture, Khrushchev was compelled to admit further:
“The outcome of all this was that in 1953, when the requirements in grain had risen greatly in comparison with the pre-revolutionary years, the area under grain was almost the same as in 1913.”
Considerable improvements have been claimed for 1956. The harvest is reported to be the largest in the history of Russia. Unfortunately one year’s crop, even a bumper crop, is not yet decisive for future perspectives. Least of all can it decide the ultimate success or failure of the presently extended cultivation of the semi-arid, “virgin and fallow lands” of Central Asia and West Siberia.
 
The Sixth Plan
The sixth Five Year Plan aims to overcome some of the more glaring disproportions in the Soviet economic structure; it also aims at a more permanent solution of the farm problem. State capital investment in agriculture is to be nearly double the amount of the preceding plan – approximately 120 billion rubles. Collective farms are expected to invest an additional 100 billion out of their own resources. The goal is to increase agricultural production approximately 70%. This is to be achieved, according to Khrushchev, by going over from mechanization of separate jobs to the comprehensive mechanization of all agricultural production, animal husbandry included. Industry is to supply new farm machinery for the five-year period in quantities approaching the total of all previous deliveries. A big increase in the supply of mineral fertilizers is promised, along with extended irrigation and expanded rural electrification. Coupled with more advanced farm technique and crop specialization, these measures, we are told, will assure the projected increase of both farm production and farm productivity.
But the sixth Five Year Plan continues the previous emphasis on the construction of heavy industry. It calls for an overall increase of production of approximately 65%. Of this projected total gain, capital goods production is earmarked to increase in the five-year period by approximately 70%, and consumer goods production by approximately 60%. However, some revisions of these plan targets already point to a cut-back in capital investment in industry. These revisions arise out of the great pressure for more consumer goods and especially for more housing.
Total projected state capital investment for the entire economy is 990 billion rubles or more than the combined amount of the two preceding plans. In comparison, the first Five Year Plan that began in 1928 was financed by a modest 58 billion rubles.
A few examples will illustrate graphically the plans for the present five-year period. The goal for electric power is an increase of 88% and for electric power per industrial worker more than 60%. The directives call for the construction of several atomic power plants with an aggregate capacity of 2 to 2.5 million kilowatts; a greater total capacity than those contemplated, for the same period, in the United States and Britain combined. Even more notable is the attention given to the problem of improving industrial technique.
The sixth Five Year Plan calls for the introduction of automatic processes in the metallurgical, extractive, machine-building, electrotechnical, chemical and construction industries, as well as a member of consumer goods industries. In the machine-building industries alone, it is proposed to put into operation some 220 automatic and semi-automatic production lines and shops. On the whole, the production goal for all such equipment is a five-fold increase. Moreover, projected strides in technique such as these, permitting a more rhythmic operation of plants, are visualized as the basis for a projected labor productivity increase in industry of approximately 50%.
Thus the Soviet system not only allows for a speedier development of the productive forces, but tends to revolutionize the productive processes, to permit technological advances at tempos unattainable by capitalism. From this follows, as a primary feature of planned directives, the qualitative extension to more efficient processes and work methods.
The principal economic aim, as expressed in the sixth Five Year Plan, is “to overtake and outstrip the most advanced capitalist countries in per capita production.” An entirely correct and worthy objective, corresponding to the needs and aspirations of the Soviet workers. However, the task of catching up is still far from realization, all the bureaucratic boasting about the triumph of socialism and the transition to communism notwithstanding.
“Socialism,” said Trotsky, “could not be justified by the abolition of exploitation alone; it must guarantee to society a higher economy of time than is guaranteed by capitalism.” And Trotsky added the words that are as true today as when they were written:
“In that sense, decisive for all civilization, socialism has not yet triumphed. It has shown that it can and should triumph. But it has not yet triumphed. All assertions to the contrary are the fruit of ignorance and charlatanism.” (Revolution Betrayed, pp. 78–79)
 
What About the Workers?
To what extent have the workers of the Soviet Union benefited from the giant strides in economic growth? No analysis of the progress made can afford to minimize the decisive importance of this question, especially when it is considered in terms of progress toward socialism. After all, socialism concerns not only economic development, it is a question also of human relations.
National income in 1955 was more than 14 times that of 1928, according to the new statistical abstract, now published in Moscow. During the same period in the United States real national income roughly doubled. In this case also percentage increases in the USSR would naturally be much higher due to mass production of goods previously imported or manufactured in antiquated ways. But a comparison of living standards gives us an entirely different picture. In the first place a disproportionate share of national income was devoted to capital investment in industry and technique. The swarm of bureaucratic locusts devoured a huge part. Another large share went into monuments, public edifices, Soviet palaces and institutions of learning – of which the new Moscow University is rated the greatest, the most imposing and the best equipped educational structure in the world – and into ornate projects such as the Leningrad and Moscow subways and even luxurious sanatoriums – mostly temples of rest for the upper layers of Soviet society. A large share went into armaments for defense. Obviously, only a minor fraction of the steeply rising national income was devoted to the elevation of the living standard of the workers.
Reporting to the Twentieth Congress on the material and cultural needs of the people, Khrushchev admitted, “... we must say that we do not yet have an adequate quantity of consumer goods, that there is a shortage of housing, and that many important problems connected with raising the people’s living standard have not yet been solved ... the speed of house building seriously lags behind the development of our national economy and the growth of towns and industrial centers. Besides, many ‘ministries and other bodies regularly fail to carry out their housing programs.” Bulganin calls the housing shortage acute. And all objective observers, agree that despite the huge efforts in house building, particularly for the upper layers of Soviet society, these have not kept up with the immense growth in urban population. Workers’ living quarters remain wretched and terribly overcrowded.
 
The Greatest Disproportion
The general rise in culture in the Soviet Union cannot be disputed. Yet it is true, that since its inception state planning has conceded only second place to the people’s needs. Consumer goods are still in short supply and poor in quality. As a result the dismally low working-class standard of living stands out as the greatest disproportion in Soviet economy. Planning in the hands of the bureaucratic oligarchy has displayed elements of the cynically raw disregard for the most precious component of all capital – human labor power – that was characteristic of the capitalist Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
While the brutal police repressions of Stalin’s time have now markedly eased, immense material and cultural inequalities still remain. Distribution of life’s goods still takes place on the basis of the capitalistic measure of value. Their trade unions devitalized and workers councils liquidated, workers have been deprived of any sense of ownership in the nationalized means of production, of any voice in planning, in management, in allocation of resources and in division of national income.
The growth of privileged social layers has been spurred at the cost of the immense majority. In many cases the members of these privileged layers receive monetary rewards at rates twenty times as high as those of factory workers. Such are some of the effects of the bureaucratic regime which still remains the most serious barrier on the road to socialism. Progress toward socialism demands democracy for the producers and consumers as an absolute prerequisite for the free flowering of creative initiative and sense of social responsibility.
But it is not possible to accept either the social-democratic or directly bourgeois-inspired versions of the condition of the Soviet workers; these reflect primarily an anti-Soviet bias. One such example – ridiculous to be sure – offered in the US World Report, September 21, 1956, informs us that the new minimum monthly wage in the USSR will buy: one pair of men’s leather shoes and one pair of socks. The question this fails to answer is: how do the Russian workers manage to eat? Another example is the charge made in the New Leader supplement, December 24–31, 1956, that “Soviet labor’s real wages at the end of 1952 ... [were] still below the 1928 standard.”
No facts are supplied to support these misrepresentations, because none can be found. An entirely different conclusion appears in the analysis made in Foreign Affairs by Dr. Calvin Hoover. Comparing observations and studies made on visits to the Soviet Union in 1939 and 1956, his estimate is that “real wages of urban workers increased by somewhat less than 40% over the last 17 years.” He warns that this should not be regarded as a statistical conclusion; but he discounts the higher Soviet claims. Hoover adds that “average real hourly earnings of workers in manufacturing industries in the United States, during the same period, increased by nearly 50%.” The latter estimate may appear somewhat high to American workers. However this may be, the fact is that whatever was gained was due, not to the generosity of Big Business, but to the workers’ own massive organization of industrial unions.
Presumably the estimate of Soviet real wages takes into account the substantial number of social services available to the workers. There is free medical care, day nurseries for children of working mothers, payment during maternity periods, free vacations at rest homes, sick benefits, pensions, etc. Khrushchev reports that during the fifth Five Year Plan the state spent a total of 689 billion rubles for these social services, including education. But even so, it is a known fact that the standard of living of the workers in the Soviet Union still remains comparatively low.
The sixth Five Year Plan projects an increase in real wages for Soviet workers of approximately 30% over the five-year period. Income of collective farmers, in cash and kind, is to increase by approximately 40%. The workers are promised a shorter work week (seven-hour day, six-day week) at no reduction in pay, beginning in 1957. At the same time, all tuition fees in higher educational institutions are to be abolished.
A fundamental revision of the existing wage structure is to be an integral part of these efforts; it has in fact been under way for some time. But the revision is designed principally to bring wages and output more closely into line with technical efficiency already achieved. Bulganin stated this rather delicately in his demand of “bringing order into the wage rate system in industry and clearing the way for mass scale introduction of technically substantiated output quotas.”
In the struggle to raise labor productivity the Stalinist bureaucracy introduced the most crude and naked forms of inequalities. The piecework system and bonuses and premiums for greater output, on the one side and penalties on the other, were used as speed-up incentives. Stakhanovists and other shock workers, technicians and managers were the main beneficiaries, and they became a part of the more privileged social layers. The average workers on the other hand were underpaid. But the increasing inequalities collided with the growing socialist elements in the economy. The intensification of labor tended to keep the basic wage at a low level. Administrative speed-up of shock brigades became a disorganizing factor and elemental worker resistance against the sharp differentiations affected adversely the general level of labor productivity. At the same time, the constantly increasing proportion of the labor force drawing bonuses and premium pay, tended to increase the cost of labor. And owing to all these features, the wage system has become increasingly anachronistic.
To keep rising labor productivity in step with the technological advances, a greater equalization of wages has now become mandatory. But the workers, who have good reason for distrusting the bureaucracy, have already given one indication of their fear that wage revisions are to be carried out at their expense, by the sit-down strike last year at the Kaganovich ballbearing plant. On the other hand, a reduction of the bonuses and premiums given the more privileged layers would tend to bring into question the privileges of the bureaucracy itself. This is the dilemma. Khrushchev proclaimed its solution to be “the socialist principle of payment according to the work performed.” It would have been more appropriate to justify this method of payment by reference to necessity. To declare it to be a principle of socialism is, as Trotsky said, “to trample the idea of a new and higher culture in the familiar filth of capitalism.” (Revolution Betrayed, p. 82)
The truth is that the character of the wage system in the Soviet Union – based predominantly on piecework payment – is still much more capitalist than socialist. The prevailing level of productivity and the level of per-capita production is still below the highest capitalist standard. These are some of the most forceful indications of the actual state of development of Soviet society. It is still a society in transition from capitalism to socialism. And real progress toward socialism will be measured, above all, by the degree to which inequalities disappear.
The evolution of Soviet society remains internally determined by the conflict between the ruling bureaucratic caste and the needs and interests of the Soviet masses. This is also its major contradiction. Its great advances were achieved despite the obstacle of a bureaucratic regime. Conversely, the greater the advances, the more clearly is revealed the role of the bureaucracy as a brake on the harmonious growth of the productive forces.
 
The New Tendency
During the earlier Five Year Plans, millions of peasant recruits were brought into industry; they tackled machinery with barbarian clumsiness. Because of the unprecedented tempo of its formation, and the lack of skill and experience, the Soviet working class was then less homogeneous than any other in modern times. Against the background of defeats of the working class on the international arena, these conditions provided the most potent lever for the power and sway of the bureaucracy. But the effects of this lever are now in process of being turned into their opposite. The working class has grown numerically, and it has undergone a qualitative change. New additions to the industrial labor force come now mainly from the urban centers. The former peasant recruits have become proletarianized; and in this decisive sense the working class is more homogeneous. It has acquired skill and experience. By this changed status its former fragmentation has become converted into social coherence and unity.
Being determines consciousness. And being – in this case the unexampled advance of the material forces of production in the USSR – is decisive in imparting to the working class greater self-confidence and socialist consciousness. Out of the bitter experience of Stalinist repression, the Soviet workers are arming themselves with new and higher ideas and methods of struggle. Fear of imperialist encirclement has been largely dissipated by the growing strength of the Soviet Union and by the colonial revolutionary successes. All these factors taken together herald the birth of a new tendency emerging out of the womb of the prevailing order of things. This new tendency has manifested itself, on the one hand, in the actual and genuine concessions that the mass pressure has compelled the bureaucracy to grant. On the other hand, it has manifested itself in in the power and determination of the working-class movements in the Soviet zone of Eastern Europe, culminating in the Hungarian revolution. In both instances the workers proved to be the decisive social factor, demonstrating their devotion to the system of nationalized economy alongside of bitter hatred of the ruling bureaucratic caste.
The birth of this new tendency opens a higher stage in the dialectical development of the historical process in the Soviet Union. As the Soviet working class progresses and the economical backwardness is overcome, the very basis upon which the bureaucracy grew and arrogated its powers and privileges is undermined. The bureaucracy is compelled to retreat and grant concessions. Each concession strengthens the working class. At the same time the bureaucratic privileges collide ever more sharply with the interests and the needs of the masses. These opposites interpenetrate in their mutual conflict. Free Labor is incompatible with a bureaucratic regime; and a bureaucratic regime cannot tolerate free labor. This is the essence of the crisis of Stalinism. And it is in terms of these new conditions that the struggle against the hated bureaucracy will unfold.
The dynamic growth of the Soviet productive forces is conclusive testimony to the historically progressive character of the socialist type of property relations established by the 1917 revolution. But the Stalinist bureaucracy, which usurped political power, constitutes a parasitic growth upon the progressive foundation. It is the main force of degeneracy in the workers state; a consequence of the isolation of the Soviet Union and the inheritance of backwardness; a feature that is in sharp contradiction to the historical future that is clearly implied by Soviet economic developments today.
Improvements in material conditions already won by the toiling masses do not reconcile them to the bureaucratic regime, but on the contrary, prepare the conditions for open conflict. The social forces which have been set into motion by recent events in the Soviet Union, and which have extended into Eastern Europe, must inexorably tend, as already indicated, to resolve the contradictory tendencies through the overthrow of the Stalinist bureaucracy. In other words, through political revolution. Restoration of workers rule and a corresponding high order of Soviet democracy will bring the political superstructure into harmony with its historically progressive foundation.
The crisis of Stalinism unfolds parallel to the crisis of world capitalism. But the latter grows out of an entirely different material foundation; it is an expression of the process of decomposition that has become part of the system. Capitalist decay derives not from a lack of productive forces but from the fact that its productive forces have outgrown private property relations and the barriers of artificial national boundaries. Concurrently with the decline and decay of the capitalist system, the conditions mature for the socialist revolution. But the growing world interdependence of nations is reflected also in the living social forces. The rebirth of Soviet democracy will tumble the barriers between the Soviet masses and the Western workers and fuse the delayed proletarian revolution in the West with its beginning in the Soviet Union.
* * *
Footnote
1. Labor Productivity in Soviet and American Industry – A Research Study by the Rand Corporation, Columbia University Press, 1955.
 



To the American working masses all questions concerning the coming post-war period are summed up in the single and simple proposition of jobs. The problem of what kind of social system shall prevail does not so far appear to them as a problem of practical reality. And yet, these two questions – jobs for all, and the kind of social system – are insolubly linked together.
For continental Europe it is readily granted that such a posing of these questions is in order, because of the much more acute nature of its social conflicts. But the United States of America! Does it not represent the very heart and life-blood of the capitalist system; nourished by seemingly unlimited resources?
This is true. But it is precisely because capitalism is here so highly developed and its productive powers so colossal that the question of jobs for all will under post-war conditions cut like a razor edge to the very roots of the social system itself. Because of the social relationship of capitalist ownership and control, this enormous capacity of production and jobs for all become utterly and entirely incompatible.
During the last six months of 1943, according to the US Department of Commerce, this nation produced goods and services at the rate of $188,000,000,000 a year. This is more than twice the previous high production peak reached in 1929. And it was accomplished at a time when about ten million young men were in the armed forces. Insofar as actual war production is concerned most figures are kept secret. But such figures as are available emphasize one thing above all – the enormous capacity of production.
The steel industry, for example, reached a total output in 1943 of 94,000,000 tons. This is about one third higher than any pre-war peak year. It is also more than the rest of the world can produce in one year.
The Maritime Commission reports that the last eight months of 1943 saw the launching of 12,000 merchant ships averaging 10,000 tons each. This means an output of five such ships every twenty-four hours. For the year the total tonnage reached twenty million, or ten times more than was launched in the United States during 1918 when the U-boat warfare was at its height in World War I. And all this is in addition to the building of a five-ocean navy which for the year 1943 alone, according to published figures, amounted to 1,600,000 tons of combat ships.
For the airplane industry the claimed annual capacity is now 125,000 planes. Conversion to war output stepped up the machine tool producing industry from an average annual rate of $40,000,000 for the years after 1929 (and including 1937) to the imposing figures of $1,320,000,000.
Naturally, such an increase in machinery and tools of production, together with what is popularly called more efficient methods, has brought about an increase of labor productivity. Since the beginning of war production this increase has taken place on a constantly rising scale from year to year. The output per man hour was 3.9 percent greater in 1940 than in 1935; 3 per cent greater in 1941 than in 1940; and in 1942 4.4 percent above 1941. The increase in output per man hour in 1943 over 1942 is estimated to be still greater, although final figures are not yet available. The Union Trust Co. of Cleveland asserts that labor productivity has risen from 100 in January 1943, to 136 by the end of that year.
One instance, typical of many others, of this same process has been widely publicized by one of the big automobile corporations now making an aircraft engine crankcase. The original daily output was met with a minimum of tooling and required 230 hours of work with the spoilage averaging 47.6 per cent. Through the addition of new machines the crankcase operations were mechanized and instead of 230 hours of manufacturing time the work was cut to 125 hours, while scrappage was reduced to 7 per cent. Tooling expansion, rationalization and efficiency methods kept pace. Machine time dropped to 40 hours, and finally to 32 hours. Such is the record: from 230 man hours of labor to 32 hours per crankcase.
 
What Will Happen If and When the War Ends?
Available figures of production do not cover a wide field and cannot therefore be considered as conclusive for industry as a whole. Nevertheless they do furnish a partial illustration of what present productive capacity amounts to. At the same time they serve as a portent of different things to come in the post-war period.
Summing it up in their minds, sensing the rhythmical, monotonous hum of machines everywhere, and aware of the flow of war materials that leave the factories, mills and yards in a steady and endless stream, Americans of all classes get an impression of a veritable ability to produce on a global scale. But the workman, who is the most important cog in this huge machine, also faces the question almost as ominous and catastrophic, as the war itself: What will happen when this war comes to an end? Simultaneously an additional query arises: If we can produce so magnificently for war, why can we not also do that for peace?
These are momentous questions. But outside the ranks of the Marxists nobody has dared, or wanted, to give a fundamental, realistic answer. Such attempts as have been made with regard to post-war planning have not set forebodings or uneasiness at rest. Nor can the American workers draw much comfort from plans advanced by official labor leaders. Because of their utter inadequacy these plans have been accorded only scant attention.
In fact, the elder statesmen of the AFL appear to view the coming post-war period as a matter of business as usual. They make no pretense of hiding their support of Big Business demands for speedy and complete restoration of “free enterprise.” They warn against what they call the tendency to tax “free enterprise” out of existence. At the same time, however, their practical suggestions, for example, for a housing program and other job providing enterprises, propose joint labor, management and government planning together with extended government financing.
CIO leaders are not less contradictory in their plans; but they start out from the premise of a high level economy of large governmental expenditures, extended government control, and then they wind up by accepting the Baruch-Hancock report which proposes a speedy restoration of “free enterprise.” CIO leaders also want joint labor, business, agriculture and government planning. Such planning they say must be for “large output at low prices and profits kept at reasonable levels and monopoly profits utterly prevented. To this end anti-trust laws must be enforced, patent laws must be improved, and new controls developed.”
Philip Murray and his co-leaders proclaim that the nation “has the knowledge, the skills, the machines and the resources to produce a gold standard of living to every American.” How? Very simple. They say that
“the only way to win the peace, when scarcities end, is to go on full rations for every man, woman and child in. the United States. Then farmer’s, factories and stores will have good markets and prosperity can. be general. High wages help the nation as well as the wage earner. With full production prices can be low and wages can be high.”
This would be entirely true if Murray and his co-leaders visualized and proposed an organization of productive society which would make it possible. Such, however, is not the case at all. Perish the thought. It frightens them.
But the capitalist owners of the American productive system have already made it abundantly clear that they have no interest in low prices and high wages as such; nor will they countenance extended government control or extended government financing in order to create jobs. And serving people’s needs has no place in actuality in their calculations. They will keep the factories running to produce commodities only to the extent that a profitable market is available. Moreover, capitalist production is governed by certain definite laws, not made in legislative halls, but engendered by the system itself and in turn submitting the system to the action of these laws.
Profits are the motivating force of all capitalist production. No other incentive is given any serious recognition. Production for profit and the people’s needs therefore become opposite poles. So long as the profit motive prevails as the single dominant factor in production, to which all other factors are subordinated, the needs of the people will naturally be utterly disregarded. What proof could be more telling than the last great world depression? And proof equally as telling is contained right in this war.
Capitalist production is not only carried on for profit, it depends for its very survival upon profit – upon ever increasing profits. It depends upon the accumulation of capital and constantly increasing opportunities for profitable investments. Realization of profits in turn depends upon increasingly larger markets to absorb the rising output of consumers goods which is a necessary condition for the absorption of capital goods. Thus continued expansion is a prime necessity for capitalist survival.
It is a prime necessity not only for capitalism in general but for American capitalism as well. And today this is even more urgently so. During the past century U.S. capitalism encountered no great difficulty in solving this problem for it enjoyed exceptional opportunities, and its rise and growth took place on a new continent. It had before it a constantly and naturally expanding internal market, an enormous population growth, swelled by immigration. It had before it constantly new raw material sources which, with the application of new scientific discoveries, made possible constant industrialization of new regions and building of new industries. All of these favorable factors, together with some brazenly-executed con-
quests, accounted for the rapidity of its development and the tremendous wealth it accumulated. From the civil war to the first world war the rate of growth of American capitalism showed a constantly rising curve and it averaged over five percent annually. Since then the rate of growth has been declining. Not only that, but each new prosperity peak was lower than the preceeding one. For example, the percentage of growth for the period from 1902 to 1906 was 7.6; for the period from 1909 to 1913 it was 4.6 percent, and for the period of the great boom of 1922–29 it was only 3.8 percent. In other words the constantly upward movement came to an end in the period 1909–13. The same holds true for capitalism on a world scale. In the United States the favorable factors of capitalist expansion, mentioned above, which were of a long range nature are now no longer available. They have been exhausted.
 
War Production, a Hypodermic Injection
Naturally, the expanding capitalism of the past stimulated an upward economic movement. Industrialization of new regions and the growth of new industries were a source of high profits because they made possible the use of large amounts of capital goods and a more rapid accumulation of capital. But, as could be observed during this whole period, within capitalist society expansion of production develops at a more rapid pace than and always tends to outstrip the growth of consumption, or the growth of the market. The latter is governed by quite different laws which act much less energetically. This is easily understandable when one bears in mind the fact that among the forces of consumption is the ever growing proportion of wage workers, and their dependents, who receive as compensation for their work only a part of what they produce. Relatively, that is in comparison to the expansion of the productive forces, the purchasing power of the workers tends constantly to decline.
The present period is witnessing a new production peak towering above all previous similar experiences. It represents a gigantic expansion of production. It is not, however, in any sense of the word a production expansion for a stable and growing market, but wholly and exclusively for war purposes.
Almost from its inception this war became a terrific accelerator of American production expansion. It is a patent fact that this present war production served as the only means of getting this country, as well as the other capitalist nations, out of the great world depression. The generally downward spiral of the capitalist business cycle fluctuated and took a sudden feverish upward leap owing to the hypodermic injection of gigantic government war orders, which now amount to almost $100,000,000,000 annually. Expansion in the means of production, in factories and in tooling, processes, i.e., constant capital, broke all records. Government building of new factories is alone estimated to have amounted to about $16,000,000,000. Including machinery and tools, etc., the total sum is in excess of $25,000,000,000. Fuller employment of every available worker and his family together with the extended workweek increased the volume of production. But labor productivity naturally went on a steeper upward curve due to this huge increase of constant capital. More work is performed more efficiently by machines. More raw materials are turned into finished commodities at a faster pace. At the same time, however, the most immediate result of this expansion is a higher organic composition of capital. This is a characteristic of all capitalist production. In the United States each prosperity peak has shown a growing disproportion between constant capital (equipment and raw materials) and variable capital (labor as represented by wages). During the period 1923–29 constant capital in manufacture rose four times as much as did variable capital: 24.4 percent as against 5.7 percent. The changes that have taken place in the organic composition of capital during this war prosperity cannot yet be illustrated in similar comparable figures. We can rest assured, however, that while there has been a great increase in payrolls, this increase is by far overshadowed by the enormous additional investments in constant capital. Government outlays alone serve as eloquent testimony.
The higher organic composition of capital increases the rate of surplus value produced by the workers. While living labor incorporated in a commodity falls, the unpaid portion, representing surplus value, rises. Under conditions of war economy, with its extraordinary pressure, production of surplus values mounts to dizzying heights. In fact, the fortunes and the vicissitudes of present day warfare depend directly and entirely upon productive labor. The very financing of war expenditures conies in the final analysis out of the production of surplus values. Capitalism knows no other way of meeting expenses. Taxation levies on employers and government borrowing from banks for this extraordinary financing increases only after there has been a previous rise in profits as a result of increased surplus values produced by labor. But the workers carry the cost not only in this indirect form. They pay directly as well. Even the compensation received by them, their weekly pay check – that part representing paid labor which is necessary for them to reproduce their own labor power – is being mulcted by ever steeper taxes, war loans and miscellaneous contributions.
Insofar as workers’ conditions are concerned it is perfectly clear that war restrictions have served to reduce the real wage. And nobody has dared deny that the deficit between the hourly wage rate and the steeply rising cost of living, and taxation, has been made up only through the lengthening of working hours and by the employment of greater numbers of the workman’s family. At the last AFL convention the Executive Council reported the average wage in durable goods industries to be $49.38, and estimated that the return to the 40-hour week would reduce this amount to $38.64. In non-durable goods industries the slash would be from $34 to $30.32.
While a higher organic composition of capital is the most immediate result of the present expansion of the productive forces, the latter also promotes two opposite developments which act in direct antagonism to this advance. In the first place, the growing disproportion between the volume of equipment and materials, on the one hand, and labor wages on the other imposes limitations upon the purchasing power and the consumption of the workers. Wages always fall relatively to output and to profits and thereby limit the market. In the second place, this change in the organic composition of capital, with the decrease of variable capital in relation to constant capital limits the production and the realization of surplus value in proportion to the total capital invested. The rate of profit on this total invested capital therefore tends to fall. Seemingly these laws, or these processes, are all upset, or nullified, by conditions of war economy. Production everywhere continues on its steep upward climb. Profits mount; workers have money to buy. The war market seems unlimited. But the upset is only in appearance, not in reality. As soon as the huge war orders cease the economic laws of capitalist society will be found to have operated in full force and the effects will stand out in their disastrous magnitude. The preponderant growth of constant capital will then appear clearly and indisputably as the outstanding factor in the American productive system. It represents an overproduction of capital which has now reached terrific dimensions. But it is typical of the capitalist mode of production. Inherent in the economic war upswing are all the elements of the coming depression and crisis.
No fundamental change has taken place in the spiral of the capitalist business cycle. It remains on its downward curve. Moreover, it is the decline and the decay of the capitalist system which produced the war. Inevitably the feverish war expansion, the hypodermic injections, will react most violently upon the capitalist decline.
At the conclusion of the war and the return to a “peace” economy excess capacity of production – excess because of the artificial fetters of capitalist ownership and control – will be expressed not only directly in bullet and gun factories, but also indirectly in steel, aluminum and other metal alloy plants, as well as in rubber, truck, airplane factories, shipyards, etc. Resumption of production of civilian goods, even if given full sway to fill what are called the banked-up demands, could only result in the glutting in short order of a drastically reduced market. The large addition of equipment and tools will require relatively less labor power than heretofore to fill this demand. And according to the U.S. Department of Commerce the employers will have 57 million employable workers to choose from: 12 million more than were employed in 1939.
 
War Prosperity, Harbinger of Crisis
The capitalist owners of industry will, of course, hire no more men or women than are absolutely necessary to produce the commodities of which they can dispose profitably in the available market. Failing a market in which to dispose profitably of the goods produced, the owners of industry bring wheels to a standstill: factories close. And the termination of the huge war orders will automatically separate millions of workers from their payrolls, thus reducing their purchasing power, not only relatively but absolutely. Other millions will be released from the armed forces and face the same prospect.
Overproduction of the means of production can no longer be turned into capital – it can no longer serve to exploit wage labor. As Marx and Engels, the founders of scientific socialism pointed out:
“The abundance of means of production becomes the source of wants and distress, the very thing that prevents the transformation of the means of production and subsistence into capital.” Therefore, “the real barrier to capitalist production is capital itself.”
The conclusion is inevitable. It is the capitalist ownership and control, and it is this alone, which stands in the way of the highest standard of living for every American.
Organization of production has become thoroughly socialized, even to the smallest details of integration within each separate factory, as well as within industry as a whole. But appropriation of the goods produced still remains individual. This contradiction between socialized organization of production and the individual capitalist appropriation inevitably leads to a violent explosion – the arrival of depression and crisis. Millions of workers without jobs, on the one hand, while on the other, fierce competition among capitalists for a narrowing market. However, with centralization and monopoly growing apace it is the small concerns which suffer the most. Many of them will be wiped out. Many more of the middle class will either be reduced to the ranks of the proletariat looking for jobs, or become declassed.
Inescapably the war prosperity will be transformed into its opposite. Like all things in society, and in nature, it is subject to change. But it is passing into its opposite not only as a result of changes in external circumstances – the change from a war to a “peace” economy. The forces of its own transfiguration were contained within it and developed within it. The overproduction of capital is a sure harbinger of depression and crisis.
Capitalism came into existence and rose to its zenith because of its ability to develop the material forces of production. Modern means of mass production, although an outcome of the insatiable lust for profit, nevertheless served as an aid to society. The higher composition of capital became an expression of economic progress; an expression of plenty. However, in terms of its social relationship, in terms of its capitalist ownership and control, it is also at the same time its exact opposite. It becomes the means of separating the wage workers from their jobs. It becomes the very means of condemning the wage workers to idleness, pauperization and starvation.
Capitalism has definitely reached its stage of decline and decay; it has become transformed into its opposite. It has become a deterrent to the further development of the productive forces, to the further development of society; and it has become a hindrance to the progress of mankind. This is the great contradiction of capitalist ownership and control. And it is so because the evolution of society has not kept abreast with the changing times. Or to put it more exactly: The change for which society has long ago matured has not yet taken place. Only a socialist society can guarantee jobs for all. Only when the producers of hand and brain take over the means of production, can production be planned and coordinated for people’s needs, for the well-being of the producers; for a standard of living undreamed of under capitalism. To paraphrase Engels: The social character of the organization of production, instead of being a source of periodic crisis, collapse and distress, will then be turned by the producers into a mighty lever for the further development of production itself. It will also be transformed into its – opposite.
 



Following the big push during 1934-37 we have witnessed a period of relative calm within the American labor movement. But it is the calm before the storm. Soon this movement will be surging toward another great advance. The prerequisite of numerical strength is at hand. And the logic of the labor movement’s present position points toward changes in a progressive direction and of far reaching consequences for its future. The American labor movement is about to enter an entirely new cycle of development.
Viewing it superficially it may seem as if the labor movement passes through recurrent cycles. That, however, is not quite the case. These cycles are not merely recurrent. Each time they assume infinitely larger dimensions and occur on a higher level of development.
The whole history of American labor shows this to be a fundamental characteristic. At their inception trade unions were met with fire and sword. They had to fight fierce battles for their existence during the whole period of early and rapidly expanding capitalism. Especially was this the case in the years of expansion following the Civil War and up to the great upheaval of the ‘eighties. Union leadership at that time was not as clearly defined as now, and by no means as separate and distinct from the rank and file membership. An official union position did not provide a financial career for its occupant. This turbulent period of necessity required militancy, and the turbulent conditions produced a measure of such leadership. In this sense the internal dynamic generated by the movement corresponded to the conditions under which it developed.
This early militancy, at times somewhat chaotic, somewhat disorganized, but magnificent nevertheless – found its negation in the era of Samuel Gompers. This era grew out of the period of more stable capitalist development with its more tranquil labor relations. Certain privileges and certain concessions given to the small, skilled, and organized section, with rich plums to its official leaders, all at the expense of the unskilled and unorganized labor majority, were the outstanding features of these relations. The relations were permeated by the spirit and method of partnership between capital and labor, from which the former always emerged the gainer, and the latter often suffered even outrageous sell-outs. It was this atmosphere that the Gompers’ political creed of “rewarding friends and punishing enemies” held complete sway. In other words, class-collaboration reigned supreme.
Of course, there were violent outbursts of the class struggle also during that period, but on the whole the changes that had taken place in economic conditions left their basic imprint. Organizationally the labor movement became adapted to these conditions by the ascendancy of the nationally coordinated union, based on craft, and engaged in the business of selling skill at a “fair” price. Politically the “rewards” and the “punishments” handed out were largely perfunctory and, while netting few gains, contributed more often to downright corruption of the officialdom. That era extended beyond Sam Gompers. It marked a cycle of development which is now approaching its end.
Basically, economic conditions furnish the key to an understanding of the evolution of organized labor. There is always a close relationship extending from the former to the latter. In the United States, for example, economic developments have touched higher peaks and lower depths than elsewhere. By and large the labor movement has followed similar lines. At times it manifested great strength and resolution, at other times it was almost wiped out For an illustration of this we need only refer to the last great depression. Insofar as organized strength and militancy is concerned the trade unions had dropped to their very lowest. But they rose quickly after the bottom of the depression had been hit. They passed through the sit-down strikes and the CIO development. And now, when American capitalism has reached the height of its wartime boom and is struggling for world mastery, the unions have reached unsurpassed heights of organizational strength.
But it is also the evolution of capitalism itself which brings this parallel to an end. Already now – that is in the sense of its political implication – the spirals of these cycles have left their junction point. Henceforth they will proceed in opposite directions. There will be ups and downs to be sure; but while the spiral of the capitalist business cycle is definitely downward, recording its decline and decay, that of the labor movement has begun to record its steady upward climb.
 
The Gompers Era
During the whole of the Gompers’ era the profits of expanding capitalism made sufficient concessions possible to the small stratum of organized skilled workers to assure the relative smoothness and tranquility of class-collaboration. With the stage of capitalist decline such concessions become much more limited. Correspondingly the room for such collaboration narrows. That it could be continued at all up to the present moment, and after the emergence of the CIO is due primarily to the exceptional circumstances created by the Roosevelt New Deal period and the war conditions that followed. To a certain extent it is also due to the fact that the form changed to one of collaboration between the higher union officials and the federal administration.
In this we have an example of certain features of one historical stage being carried over to another in spite of the disappearance of conditions for its existence. Of course, it is also a testimony to the still remaining backwardness of the labor movement. So while the relationship existing between the trade union hierarchy and the most authentic and the highest representative of the ruling class must be accepted as the very pinnacle of class collaboration it also definitely marks the beginning of its end. From now on this relationship will lead toward a head-on collision.
However, while these carry-overs have remained, this docs not at all denote a static condition of the labor movement, or even anything approaching such a condition. Considerable changes have already added new and important characteristics that are antagonistic to the old basis. At the present moment the labor movement represents the opposites of both the old and the new. These opposites interpenetrate.
Insofar as official policy and practice is concerned, the old prevails. The trade unions are still held in the vise of class collaboration. Just now this is expressed most abjectly in the form of compulsory arbitration implemented by the no-strike pledge, which is most often enforced by joint punitive actions of the governments, the employers and the union officials against striking militants. Wherever Stalinist influence has made inroads among the higher bureaucratic strata the latter has become only more abject, more debased, and more treacherous. On the whole the trade union leadership presents a sordid picture. It is, if anything, more servile, more subservient than ever before and more dependent upon the capitalist rulers. It is therefore also more devoid of actual ability of leadership for only men of mediocre stature can be made completely servile. Even the adroitness and dexterous skill in driving a bargain that was characteristic of Gompers and Lewis is entirely lacking in Green and Murray. While the former often exhibited an instinctive healthy distrust of government hand-outs, the latter have entrusted the welfare of their organizations entirely to the mercies of federal administrative agencies. Both were hoisted into their exalted positions by more cunning confederates because they were malleable. Both the former Baptist deacon of Conshochton, Ohio, who remains today a parson, and the pious Scotchman, who speaks of conscience and independence of spirit as if to persuade himself, appear equally grotesque in the mantles of their predecessors.
Simultaneously, though it may seem paradoxical, the exact opposite also exists in vigorous and healthy proportions within this labor movement A new militancy has already arisen. The emergence of the CIO marked its beginning. It became an entirely new experience for American labor: A venture into organization of mass production industry and the ascendancy of the industrial form of organization. In this alone is present a change of far reaching consequence. Moreover, the method and tactic of the sit-down strike became a modest mirror of the future taking over of industry. The labor movement began soaring to new heights. With the old, antiquated, and the decrepit still predominating in official policy, a new-found strength and a new confidence were nevertheless evolving within the shell of the old.
These opposites interpenetrate. Even the CIO is weighed down to this day by a leadership, by policies, and by methods of the past. This in spite of the fact that the leaders under modern economic conditions can no longer deliver any important results to the rank and file on the basis of the old policy and outlook. Consequently their leadership and control becomes further enfeebled.
 
Revived Militancy
Within the ranks, however, there is again discernible the beginnings of a revived militancy. So much so that in disregard of the combination of war reaction, war restrictions, and the dangers of joint governmental and bureaucratic punitive actions to enforce the no-strike edicts, unofficial strikes mount and multiply. For example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that in 1943, after the enactment of the Smith-Connally anti-strike law on June 25, there were, all told, 1,919 strikes of which only 34 were called in compliance with the law. In other words, less than 2 percent were legally sanctioned. This year has brought the tempo to a higher pitch. And there need be no doubt that, while the joint punitive actions will be intensified, we will likewise witness a crescendo of actions of revolt. This is taking shape primarily in the new industrial unions in mass production industry; but the AFL, as experience has already shown, is not immune from these developments, either. The recent convention of the United Automobile Workers presents another side of the same process – a side that is even more significant. The overwhelming sentiment displayed there against the no-strike pledge is basically a revolt against the still remaining class collaboration policy. As such it represents a great advance toward class consciousness.
A new leadership growing out of this renewed militancy exists so far only in an embryonic stage; and it is therefore still rather formless. But the important thing is that these new factors are in the making. They are a product both of the changes of internal circumstances as well as of the higher level of internal dynamics. These new factors in the making are decisive. For while the old and the sordid still exists alongside of the new developments the latter already carry impressive weight because they are destined to supersede the former.
The emergence of the CIO and the simultaneous growth of the AFL has brought the labor movement up to approximately 15 million members. This is a very impressive record. This in itself is an enormous quantitative change which has not failed to produce a qualitative difference: A new and higher quality is added. Millions of workers have become union conscious. And many of them have also learned that lasting benefits and permanent security can be gained only by their own solidarity and actions. Naturally, a greater and better organized labor force generates a far greater consciousness of strength and a readiness to make use of it. Every actual experience of effectiveness can only add to this consciousness. And the fact that labor organization now embraces the workers in practically all of the major basic industries – the decisive section for both industry and labor – has added a full measure to this potential effectiveness. This movement is now a much more complete expression of labor as a distinct and powerful social force. Moreover, the turbulent emergence of the CIO and the simultaneous growth of the AFL reintroduced into the ranks of organized labor the spirit and method of revolt.
 
A New Cycle
It is now quite certain that the specific features of the Gompers’ era of development will be negated. The forces for their destruction and change are already at work. That the new cycle of development will assume infinitely larger dimensions and occur on a higher level is equally certain.
The logic of present social relations leads inescapably to this conclusion. The decline and decay of capitalism already carries ample evidence of becoming much more stormy, dramatic, and even much more violent than its rise. The more desperate its position, the greater the fury of its attacks upon organized labor. But also, while at its inception the labor movement fought only for the right to bargain collectively and for the establishment of trade unions, it will now be fighting for its very life. Moreover to attain any success at all, it will have to take on the fight for a new social order.
The lines are being drawn for the conflicts to come. How well is the labor movement prepared to meet the test? Organizationally it is reaching its manhood. Politically, however, it is still an infant; “mai c’est l’enfant terrible,” Its political growth and maturity are now about to begin. And, remaining true to its recent past it will most likely progress in gigantic leaps. Thus history will once again record a change of far reaching consequences; for its coming political growth and maturity will have a terrific impact on all future social developments.
This turning point is linked up directly with the war’s end and a return to a peace economy. Of course, we are not going to witness anything even approaching what is called a normal peace economy. Under declining and decaying capitalism this is no longer within the realms of possibility. On the contrary. Depressions, crises and wan – relieved only by temporary ebbs and flows which in no way alter the basis – this is all that capitalism can offer. And this is also the fatal weakness of its economic structure.
Existing governmental regulations, restrictions and controls of the productive forces were established as a matter of necessity – the adaptation to total warfare. Because of the highly integrated and socialized organization of production there was no other way for capitalism to assure the colossal requirements of war and to secure the manpower needed for production. Nor was there any other way for it to make sure that labor be held in check while it reaped super-profits out of war. So, naturally, the restrictions were not applied to profits at all. Yet the employers were not entirely free to deal with labor in their own way. The government took charge of industrial and social relations.
In order to provide a cover for the fiction of national unity the governmental regulatory and controlling agencies, from the War Labor Board, the War Manpower Commission, etc., to the Economic Stabilizer and the War Mobilization Director, had to appear as “impartial” arbiters. This complex of agencies supposedly represented equally capital and labor together with the so-called public. But, alas, in class society the government is always and exclusively the executive authority of the ruling class. In a society based upon capitalist production the government functions in the interests of capitalism and can function in no other way. No matter how deftly these agencies manipulated they turned out to be instruments of the employers against labor. Through repeated and bitter experiences the labor movement found them to be by and large one-sided affairs. The big corporations had little difficulty in securing ever mounting profits; labor however, was thwarted.
As a result of this the workers are now beginning to assimilate their first lesson. They are learning that the much touted impartiality is a hollow mockery; that the no-strike pledge defrauded them of their only real weapon.
 
The Primacy of Politics
The labor movement had to deal directly with these governmental agencies and it found itself again and again in conflict with them. The conflict extended beyond the framework of the agencies. United States Congress became an anti-labor forum. So much so that trade unionists today pretty well accept the Smith-Connally Act as typical of the Congress attitude. What is less clear to them is the general relationship between these various branches of government and between the government and the employers of labor. Vaguely they understand that the monopoly concerns always get the best of bargains in Washington. Most often, however, they tend to absolve the President of any responsibility for the hostility or the actions of his officially appointed subordinates. Consequently they do not yet see the full implication of class government. But once the logic of this relationship makes itself sufficiently felt, which will not take long, the second important lesson will follow quickly. They will learn that labor has no friends among the political agents of privilege.
Nevertheless the labor movement cannot at all relapse into political indifference. Every problem that it faces becomes increasingly political in character. Not only is this the case with ordinary civil liberties but it applies ever more and more to questions of wages and working conditions, the union shop, the cost of living, and above all it applies to the rapidly approaching post-war problem of jobs. Workers are now restless, demanding higher wages and showing their fear of coming unemployment. Promises made by the politicians for jobs are greeted with growing doubts and suspicion. Every struggle in which the workers now engage is elevated immediately into a political struggle. And it will be no less so in the post-war period of struggles for jobs and for bread.
Under such conditions organized labor will be compelled to acknowledge the futility of continuing to play the capitalist political shell game. For just as the no-strike pledge helps to preserve and increase capitalist profits so does the antiquated Gompers’ political policy help to preserve capitalist rule.
The conclusion to be drawn from these lessons cannot be long delayed. In fact it lies immediately ahead. It points definitely and unfailingly toward independent labor political action – the organization of a labor party. That is the only possible conclusion that the labor movement can come to at its present stage of development. It is inevitable. The 1944 presidential election will be in all likelihood the last in which the traditional and exclusive two-party system is retained. If President Roosevelt, about whom many workers have illusions, is defeated in ‘this election, which is not excluded, the process will be swifter. Nevertheless, regardless of the outcome of this election, a labor party is a certainty. Sheer necessity will compel the trade unions to supplement the inexorably severe industrial struggles that lie ahead with independent political action.
It is entirely possible that this may take on a somewhat emasculated form at first. Instead of a distinct labor party, based upon the trade unions, we may witness an initial beginning in the form of a third party of labor together with so-called liberal petty bourgeois elements, including diverse and frustrated politicians. But even this would be no serious deterrent. The labor movement will be sufficiently strong and cohesive to assert its undisputed preponderance. Besides, under the conditions of the impending events, labor alone can give leadership.
We are not unmindful of the fact that any suggestion of independent labor political action has so far remained a complete anathema to the patriarchs of the AFL. To them it appears entirely too revolutionary. And anything even mildly revolutionary has about as much chance before them as before a Vatican conclave. It is looked upon as the devil’s own handiwork. But their opposition will be sure to prove much less formidable than that of the Roman hierarchs. The power and sweep of coming political developments will be even more irresistible than the great organization drive following the last great depression.
To speak of the cohesion of the labor movement may just now seem premature in view of the existing division into two almost equally powerful organizations. That, however, need not be counted as a serious obstacle. And it will prove less so in a field of political activity once the ties between the present labor leaders and Roosevelt’s coattails are severed. The likelihood is that such activity will provide a strong impulse toward organizational unification.
Incidentally, the Political Action Committee, headed by Sidney Hillman, is itself an unwitting proof of present labor political trends. It has emerged at this time only as a stop-gap. It appeared in order to create the illusion of a political departure, of projecting new policies and methods, while in reality it is only a repetition of the futile past. One could apply to the PAC the terse sarcastic remark of Marx when he said, in reference to Hegel’s statement about great events and personalities reappearing upon the stage of universal history in one fashion or another, that: “He forgot to add that, on the first occasion, they appear as tragedy; on the second as farce.” William Green carries the Gompers’ credo to the point of endorsing Congressman Dies and receives in return a protest from the unions of Dies’ own bailiwick in Texas. The Illinois AFL State Federation of Labor endorses Senator Lucas in spite of his vote for the Smith-Connally Act. And now comes Sidney Hill-man. With the greatest bravado he claims credit for the defeat of some particularly odious legislators and proclaims his power to deliver the votes to Roosevelt while remaining in deadly fear of setting the masses into motion for his own professed aims.
The PAC started out with well attended conferences in many localities. Local unions were attracted in the expectation of some sort of political action. But the top leaders, ever mindful of the latent explosive dynamics of an aroused mass movement, quickly narrowed the whole affair to their own committee and added some “respectable” citizens. After that it was sustained only by the outcries of the fearful middle class and by the publicity of those who used the PAC deliberately as a punching bag to enlarge those fears for their own partisan purposes. While its ability to deliver the labor vote to Roosevelt is questionable, its service to the labor movement is nil.
 
The Labor Party
Of course, the working class will not find the solution to its serious problems raised by the conditions of decay capitalism even in the emergence of a labor party. This is not a final answer. At best it is only a preliminary and partial answer. In its classic sense a labor party can do no more than fill an interim stage. In fact it will raise more problems than it solves. Naturally the existing interrelation of class forces in motion will determine its position, its attitude, and its actions.
However, it is not our purpose to go into this question now. That is the subject for a subsequent article. Suffice it to say at present that the formation of a national labor party will be a concrete expression of a higher level of political consciousness on the part of the working masses. As such it serves as an important step on the road leading toward workers power.
But the culmination of present political trends in the concrete form of a labor party still remains a short term perspective. If we examine the outlook for the labor movement from the long term point of view we will become only so much more certain of the impending deep-going changes of which the labor party stage is a part.
The war is now drawing toward its end. It would be idle to speculate at this time about the degree of governmental regulations and restrictions that are to be carried over into the peace economy. The salient fact is that as the decline of capitalism progresses alongside of its narrowing into fewer and greater monopoly combines, governmental regulations, restrictions and outright control will of necessity increase.
During the decades of the celebrated “rugged individualism,” capitalism resented all direct governmental intervention into or control of economic enterprise. All that it expected from the government in a field of open economic expansion was the necessary stimulus and protection. Free and untrammeled competition was the slogan. But under that slogan the exact opposite, the process of monopolization took shape and grew to monstrous proportions. Not only have automatic processes and assembly line production, vastly accelerated by the war, created a condition of complete interdependence of manufacturing operations. But monopolization means an ever greater social organization of production, integrating all spheres of social life. And – once again a paradox – the more gigantic the monopoly concerns the less they are able to stand on their own feet precisely because of this social integration. Their ups and downs affect the economic fabric. Their growth spells doom to the independent small business. The huge scope and the explosive nature of their labor relations become a threat to the whole structure. Therefore governmental regulations and controls, formerly an interference, now become a necessity to the capitalist system. This also has changed into its opposite owing to the interplay of economic and social relations.
This necessity was foreshadowed in the governmental plant seizures; but it will not be any less in the coming post-war depression. In the first place the government is confronted with the task, imposed by the capitalist system of production and distribution, of attempting to realize the profits of imperialist conquests, of attempting to keep some of the huge manufacturing plants in operation, finding outlets for the enormous surplus of finance in the hands of a few, attempting to create jobs and provide measures of relief. Above all the government is confronted with the task, also imposed by the capitalist system of production, of attempting to keep the masses of the disinherited in subjugation under conditions of stress and of class antagonisms sharpened to the point of a razor’s edge. Obviously all of these tasks require extensive governmental regulations and control.
Both wars and depressions are after all manifestations as well as the direct outcome of the mounting social contradictions of decaying capitalism.
 
Historical Alternative
The monopolists of finance and industry will be compelled to accept these extensive state interventions. But, with their lucrative war profits at an end, they will turn so much more savagely against any union restrictions, against any labor demands, and against the standard of living established by union organization. They will attack the labor unions to destroy them.
All the virulent forerunners of this attack are plainly visible in newspaper columns and clearly audible from radio commentators. With the specter of unemployment a grim reality for millions of war workers and for other millions of service men and women, the attempt to strike a crippling blow, if not a death blow to the labor movement, will not be long delayed. Capitalism will seek to repeat the methods derived from its decades of early and aggressive expansion. At that time, during depressions and panics, it more than once succeeded in striking crippling blows to a youthful labor movement. Now again it will attack with all the means at its disposal. It will utilize particularly its political power – its control of the state. All state restrictions and controls will be enforced particularly in the field of relations of production, i.e., in the interest of the employers and against labor. In that capacity the state becomes more directly and more openly the armed institution of force at the disposal of the capitalist class.
Therefore, from the long range perspective, even more surely does the labor movement become compelled to take a political class position. It will turn leftward. It will become rapidly radicalized. There will be no lack of determination as the labor movement meets the attack blow for blow; and every strike it engages in, even over the most ordinary industrial disputes, will become much more directly a part of an openly acknowledged class warfare.
Facing a struggle of life and death it cannot take long before the labor movement will be obliged to accept the revolutionary way out. It will enter the struggle for socialization of the means of production and for all power to the workers. That, of course, is a political struggle of the highest order.
Every step in this direction the labor movement will tread on the road opposite to that of its past: the exact opposite of the Gompers’ type of political neutrality. That policy was not only futile hut devoid of class content In its essence it was and it remains reactionary, thoroughly conforming to the spirit and the method of class collaboration. The fundamental change will begin. From seeking the means of preserving capitalist rule labor will henceforth seek the means of its destruction. From a political policy of helping to maintain the capitalist system labor will turn to the political struggle to overthrow it.
Changing economic conditions leave the labor movement no other alternative. The labor movement is no longer a mere bargaining representative of a narrow strata of skilled workers; it is the organized, articulate, expression of the American masses. Its growth and change began in earnest after the capitalist system had already reached its downward curve. And for the latter, the conditions of constant expansion have also turned to the opposite. Each depression and crisis becomes more deadly to its social system. It is this situation which poses the alternative of a decaying capitalist world or a rising workers world.
And let us remember that it was the labor movement which from its very inception proceeded to write some of the most glorious pages of American history. During the ’thirties of the last century this young virile body was the outstanding single force which contributed so much to basic social reforms and marked out the lines along which progress was to be made for the next generation and more. To mention only a few: the establishment of a public school system, the abolition of imprisonment for debt, the abolition of property qualifications for voting, the abolition of legal property qualifications for holding political office, and so on. Later, this same labor movement proved, in the struggles leading up to and during the crusade for the eight-hour workday, that its spirit and actions were thoroughly filled with the revolutionary tendency of the times.
The antithesis which under Gompers and his successors replaced this early grandeur is now about to pass into limbo. The class actions, born of a revolutionary spirit once prevailing, will again be restored. But the movement will assume infinitely larger dimensions and occur on a much higher level than before.
The American labor movement is reaching the turn of the road. Will it measure up to its tasks? Will it fight? To those who might have doubts I want to quote from a simple but earnest message.
It was in 1937 during the sit-down strikes in Flint, Mich. General Motors had declared its readiness for a last ditch fight. The National Guard had been brought in. Its officers were coldly discussing the methods of clearing the plants: Should it be by shooting the strikers out or pouring gas through the ventilating system? A court order set three o’clock on February 3 as the deadline. The final decision for action was in the hands of Governor Murphy. The strikers remained grimly in the plants and wired Murphy their decision:
“Unarmed as we are, the introduction of the militia, sheriffs or police with murderous weapons will mean a bloodbath of unarmed workers ... We have decided to stay in the plant. We have no illusions about the sacrifices which this decision will entail. We fully expect that if a violent effort is made to oust us many of us will be killed, and we take this means to make it known to our wives, to our children, to the people of the State of Michigan and the country, that if this result follows from an attempt to eject us, you are the one who must be held responsible for our deaths.”



At the time of the United States intervention in European affairs following the defeat of the German proletariat in 1923, Trotsky raised within the Comintern the important issue of the American imperialist struggle for world hegemony. Trotsky proceeded in his analysis from the idea that “world economy is a mighty reality which holds sway over the economy of individual countries and continents”: a genuinely internationalist approach. From then on that question became one of the major issues of conflict between Trotsky and the Left Opposition on the one side, and the Stalin bureaucracy on the other.
Trotsky did not raise the issue of American imperialist expansion merely for theoretical discussion. He sounded a warning to the proletariat, and particularly to its leadership at that time, the Comintern, to prepare itself for the revolutionary situations that were bound to ensue from this unbridled expansion.
 
European Capitalism’s Blind Alley
The development of the United States, said Trotsky, has driven European capitalism into a blind alley. It has placed Europe on more limited rations in world economy. For Europe this is
“a situation ten times worse than before: the same capitalist social forms, but more reactionary; the same tariff walls, but more rigid; the same frontiers but narrower; the same armies but more numerous; an increased indebtedness; a more restricted market ... If today England rises a little, it is at the expense of Germany; tomorrow it will be Germany’s turn to rise at the expense of England. If you find a surplus of the trade balance of one country, you must seek for a corresponding deficit in the trade balance of another country ... European capitalism has become reactionary in the absolute sense of the term, that is, not only is it unable to lead the nations forward, but it is even incapable of maintaining for them living standards long ago attained. Precisely this constitutes the economic basis of our revolutionary epoch. Political ebbs and flows unfold on this basis without in any way altering it.”
Later on, when he submitted his criticism of the draft program of the Comintern to the sixth congress, Trotsky formulated the question still more concisely:
“Furthermore,” he declared (referring to the draft program), “it has not been made clear that the inevitable further development of American expansion, the contraction of the markets of European capitalism, including the European market itself, entails the greatest military, economic and revolutionary disturbances such as will leave all disturbances of the past in the shade.
“It has not been made clear that the inevitable further onslaught of the United States will place capitalist Europe on a constantly more limited ration in world economy which, of course, does not involve a mitigation, but on the contrary, a monstrous sharpening of the inter-State relations in Europe with furious paroxysms of military conflicts, because States as well as classes, are even more frantically fighting for a hunger ration, nay, a diminishing ration, than for a lavish and growing ration.
“In the draft it has not been made clear that the internal chaos of the State antagonisms of Europe render hopeless a more or less serious and successful resistance to the constantly more centralized North American republic and that the overcoming of the European chaos in the form of the Soviet United States of Europe is one of the first tasks of the proletarian revolution, which, in not the least degree as a result precisely of State barriers, is much closer in Europe than in America and which will therefore most likely have to be defended from the North American bourgeoisie.”
 
Revolutionary Solution of Problem
To those who tried to minimize the issue raised by Trotsky, by referring to the imminent economic and industrial crisis in the United States, he replied:
“In a critical epoch the hegemony of the United States will prove even more complete, more open, more ruthless, than in the period of boom.”
Needless to say, Trotsky’s warning was not heeded by the Comintern and his prognosis was, from the outset, met with a hail of abuse by the Stalin bureaucracy. The most diversified accusations were leveled against him. He was accused of a pacifist denial of the existence of European contradictions. He was accused of acceptance of Kautsky’s theory of ultra imperialism, and of many other sins. The simple truth of the matter was that Trotsky’s international approach, his prognosis as well as the conclusions he drew therefrom, ran exactly counter to the reactionary Stalinist theory of “socialism in one country.” These basic differences have, of course, been vastly accentuated since then. In fact they are in the very crucible of world politics today.
 
Trotsky’s Analysis Verified
History brought its own verification of Trotsky’s analysis. The dialectic interplay of world relations created by the United States advance has, indeed, erupted in violent outbursts. The monstrous sharpening of inter-State relations in Europe has actually brought furious paroxysms of military conflicts. The advent of Hitler only accelerated the pace, and the fury. Events are now moving in more rapid strides toward the climax of our revolutionary epoch.
But history has also added a new chapter. It is as yet unfinished, but nevertheless destined to command major attention in the days ahead. Trotsky indicated the main outlines of this new chapter before his assassination; but he did not live to see it unfold in all its fearsome consequences.
While the might of American imperialism is pervading the entire planet, the red star of the Soviet Union grows more luminous. The great achievements of the Red Army have thrust the Soviet Union forward to a position to be reckoned with seriously even by the dominant American imperialists. To them this question is indeed paradoxical. On the one hand they see the enormous proletarian power embodied in the nationalized economy. On the other, Stalin, heading it, reveals himself as their friend and ally. They know that there can be no lasting peace between nationalized economy and capitalist economy. That is not their aim. Which will prevail? That is the question plaguing the rampaging imperialists. And so, history is already raising the curtain for the most gigantic conflict still to come.
But the Stalin bureaucracy has turned the lessons of October entirely upside down. It attempts to transform the Soviet Union, created as a bridge to the world revolution, into a barrier against it. In the advancing revolution it sees its own doom. Consequently, Lenin’s struggle against imperialism has been perverted by Stalin into collaboration and political agreement with imperialism. Stalin has only now, twenty years after Trotsky’s warning, recognized the expansion and the power of the North American republic. Moreover, he has accepted its world hegemony as an already established fact. Now he is endeavoring to subordinate the Soviet Union to the economic, political and military might of the capitalist United States for the defeat of the European revolution. For the European revolution is the specter haunting them both.
 
American Imperialism at the Soviet Frontier
With the doom of Hitler – and this is a foregone conclusion – the power of the United States will virtually touch the borders of the Soviet Union. Will this then mean that it has thereby settled the problem of Europe? No! On the contrary. That problem will then really arise in all its complexity.
An unofficial spokesman for the Roosevelt administration, Forest Davis, has made this quite clear by his statement that “when Germany falls, there will be no military power, no barrier, between the Soviet Union and the English Channel.” In the strict sense of his terminology this is perfectly true. Whatever border lines the imperialist chess-players may draw; whatever interim bourgeois democratic regimes they may be forced to support, with or without the connivance of Stalin; and even backed by a “united nations” police force, these can furnish no more stable equilibrium than when European capitalism was originally driven into its blind alley. In the world of reality, however, there will be a power between the Soviet Union and the English Channel – and it will have supporters across the Channel. When Hitler falls, the revolutionary proletariat will be the decisive power in Europe. And that is the power destined to begin the end of the capitalist system.
This is the reason why the United States is again primarily preoccupied in European affairs, economically, politically and militarily. Its overwhelming preponderance in world economy, and its struggle for complete hegemony, makes this mandatory. The more it advances, the more it becomes interested in maintaining “order” in every corner of the globe. Obviously this means the maintenance of the capitalist order.
 
Soviet Economy and the European Revolution
Then what about the mighty power represented by the nationalized economy of the USSR? In many ways, and in spite of the Kremlin oligarchy, this power is inextricably bound up with the dawning of the new day in Europe. It is bound up as well with the present threat to the capitalist economic system. Even now the victories of the Red Army and those of the allied armies do not have the same meaning in the minds of the European masses. Nor are the results the same.
Inadvertently the unofficial spokesman for the Roosevelt administration submits the evidence when he says:
“The administration’s Russian policy becomes the cornerstone of its approach to the whole complex of post-war Europe ... Central and Eastern Europe is in our war diplomacy of planning for the future the important point where the Western powers meet the dynamics of the Soviet Union.”
And the unofficial spokesman hastens to make it really clear that the concept he is defending is that of a world policy and of world conquests. He hastens to make it clear that at the present conjuncture this embraces the whole of Europe, including the Soviet Union, when he adds,
“the focal point of the United States diplomacy is Moscow ... Why? Because political activity radiating from Moscow concentrates attention upon the lands into which the Red Army is likely to march.”
The lands are named: Poland, Finland, the Danube Basin, the Balkans, and Germany.
But the relations of Washington and Moscow to the postwar problems of Europe are completely contradictory. On the threshold of the great revolutionary events in Europe, Roosevelt placates Stalin and plays upon his fears of these events. He seeks to enlist the Kremlin oligarchy for a joint partnership to strangle the European revolution.
Foreseeing Stalin making such a choice, Trotsky wrote in an article in Liberty, January 1940, in which he discussed the Stalin-Hitler pact:
“Stalin is completely ready to repeat his Spanish performance on a world wide scale, with the hope of better success this time in buying the friendly attitude of the future victors through having proved that no one better than he can curb the Red specter, which for terminological convenience will again be labeled ‘Trotskyism’.”
Yet, Stalin’s fear of, and hostility toward, the proletarian revolution are entirely matched by the American imperialist fears of and hostility toward the Soviet state and its nationalized economy. So long as its means of production remain national property, backed up by the state monopoly of foreign trade, it will constitute an insurmountable barrier in the way of complete American world hegemony. And, to the same degree, it will remain an inspiration and an example for the proletarian revolution to follow in other countries. Therefore, if expressed forthrightly and bluntly, the statement by the unofficial spokesman, quoted above, would read: Control of Europe and the maintenance of its capitalist system presupposes the annihilation, or at least the complete neutralization, of the Soviet Union.
 
Contradictions of the Kremlin Oligarchy
However, the contradictions in this situation beset the Kremlin oligarchy itself. A partnership to strangle the European revolution, if successful, would destroy the only real support of the Soviet Union. Simultaneously, and antagonistically, it would leave the field open for inundation by American economic and political control. On very good grounds the Kremlin oligarchy fears any attempt by the United States to consolidate its power and hegemony over Europe. That would bring to the Soviet borders a foe much more formidable than Hitler’s Germany.
Of course, the Stalinist bureaucracy is committed to the defense of the Soviet border. Motivated by sheer self-preservation, it will be compelled, in order to forestall a bigger and more deadly assault, to strive for the extension of these borders further westward, in one form or another. In fact, plans are already being hatched within the Kremlin walls for the building of its own cordon sanitaire. Poland and Yugoslavia are now being drawn into its orbit. Simultaneously the Kremlin masters no doubt nourish the vague hope that they will be able to subordinate the European revolution to their own bureaucratic interests by extending the specific sphere of Stalinist influence. That much is indicated by Stalin’s decree of a federation of “autonomous” republics. In other words – a Stalinized federation of Europe as against a Socialist United States of Europe.
Trotsky, in his Liberty article mentioned above, already gave the undeniable answer to such “hopes.” Referring specifically to Germany, he said:
“The totalitarian regime can be crushed only by a tremendous attack on the part of the German workers. They will carry out their revolution, surely, not in order to replace Hitler by a Hohenzollern or Stalin.”
Trotsky added:
“The victory of the popular masses over the Nazi tyranny will be one of the greatest explosions in world history and will immediately change the face of Europe. The wave of awakening hope, enthusiasm, will not stop at the hermetic borders of the USSR. The popular masses of the Soviet Union hate the greedy and cruel ruling caste. Their hate is only dampened by the idea; imperialism is watching us. Revolution in the West will deprive the Kremlin oligarchy of its sole right to political existence.”
 
Trotsky’s Prediction
In the relations between Roosevelt and Stalin, each personifying in his own way a mighty power, insurmountable contradictions remain the outstanding characteristic of their respective political positions. At the same time these individual positions furnish a classic example of the interpenetration of opposites.
Stalin and his bureaucracy at the head of the Soviet republic, which was created originally as a bridge to the world revolution, have become Great Russian nationalists. This is an inevitable outcome of the reactionary theory of “socialism in one country.” At the same time the “nationalism” of this bureaucracy is also its exact opposite. It is that of a usurping clique having attained its power against the Soviet nation, for the Kremlin oligarchy is motivated in all its political acts solely by the idea of the preservation of its own power and privilege. Essentially, this is what spells its inevitable doom.
Roosevelt, on the other hand, heading the most powerful national capitalist aggregation, which was able in past decades to expand on its own national territory, has now made “internationalism” his basic political thesis. This is dictated, of course, by the struggle of American imperialism for world hegemony. Yet, simultaneously this “internationalism” represents the exact opposite of extreme nationalism. It is even more the latter than the former, for in its onslaught in every corner of the globe. American imperialism is attempting to subordinate the rest of the world to its specific national aims. Precisely this, however, will also prove its fatal weakness.
On this particular point Trotsky also drew the unassailable conclusion, as valid today as when it was submitted in his criticism of the Comintern draft program:
“On the other hand it has been left entirely unmentioned – and this is not the least important phase of the same world problem – that it is precisely the international strength of the United States and the unbridled expansion resulting from it, that compels it to include powder magazines throughout the world among the foundations of its structure – the antagonisms between the east and west, the class struggle in old Europe, uprisings of the colonial masses, wars and revolutions. This on the one hand transforms United States capitalism into the basic counter-revolutionary force in the present epoch, becoming constantly more interested in the maintenance of order in every corner of the globe, and on the other hand prepares the ground for a gigantic revolutionary explosion of this already dominant and still increasing world imperialist power. The logic of world relations leads to the idea that the time of this explosion cannot be very far apart from that of the proletarian revolution in Europe.”



The following article is a contribution to the discussion on the problems of the European revolution. Comrade Simmons defends the position of the SWP majority which was set down in the European Resolution, adopted at the Eleventh Convention of the Socialist Workers Party (see Fourth International, December 1944). – Ed.

History has now written its finish to the fascist era in Europe and out of its smouldering pyres of death and destruction new life, new hope, begins to grow. This is manifest in the revolutionary events already unfolding. But these are still in their very early stage and a successful conclusion is not yet assured. Such an assurance can be given only when the proletariat follows a revolutionary policy.
The policy pursued is therefore the crucial factor. Upon that depends whether the revolutionary possibilities are advanced or retarded. And, as we know very well, the question of policy is decided in each instance, and at each stage of development, by whichever party gains the adherence of the masses.
Unfortunately, however, revival of political life has shown in Europe so far an overwhelming mass support for the social reformist parties, the Stalinist and the Social Democratic parties. Compared to these, the parties of the Fourth International are still very small, very young and inexperienced. We can therefore readily agree that the first task is the building of the Marxist party. But how is this task to be approached? What strategic and tactical methods is to be employed? What should be the character of slogans and demands advanced? The posing of these problems have led to disagreement and discussion.
To this discussion Comrade Morrow has made a contribution in the article entitled The First Phase of the Coming European Revolution published in the December 1944 issue of this magazine. Concerning the specific question of how to build the Marxist party I think it is fair to say that Morrow’s attitude can be summed up in his insistence upon the method of democratic demands. He says:
I repeat: the main danger within the Fourth International appears to me to lie in the direction of ultra-leftism. It is necessary, as we approach the first period of the European revolution, to emphasize and underline the role of democratic demands.
It is true that Comrade Morrow foresees for Europe a more or less protracted stage of bourgeois democratic developments. This he makes perfectly clear in his article. To support this view, and to support equally his insistence upon democratic demands, he adduces some factors which emerged from European developments at the time. Some of these factors still exist, perhaps in an even clearer form today, without, however, supporting in the least either of his conclusions. Insofar as the possibility of bourgeois democratic developments in Europe is concerned, this is determined by far more fundamental factors than those cited by Morrow, and this question has already been discussed extensively in these columns. I shall therefore confine myself here entirely to his insistence upon emphasizing and underlining the role of democratic demands. I do not think that I can be accused of an artificial separation of related questions inasmuch as Morrow makes it clear that his insistence applies especially to the immediate tasks and does not necessarily depend upon what he calls the tempo of developments. In the above quotation he says that it applies, “as we approach the first period of the European revolution.” And, besides, it is the immediate tasks which present the most pressing problem.
Among the important factors emerging from European developments, as listed by Comrade Morrow, are the following: “the revival of democratic illusions among considerable sections of the masses,” because, “... new generations have grown up without any experience of bourgeois democracy and without active participation in political life.” This is undeniably so. He estimates that “these masses may well have to go through a certain body of experiences before they will understand that their needs cannot be satisfied within the framework of the democratic republic.” No doubt this is true, although the experience may be gained in a concentrated form and within a brief period. Comrade Morrow also concluded from Italian experiences so far that, “the traditional workers’ parties, as well as centrist and liberal-democratic parties, will emerge throughout Europe as the principal parties of the first period after collapse of the Nazis and their collaborators.” This is already the case in a number of European countries. It cannot yet be said for Germany, the most decisive sector of the European revolution, although, to a much more limited extent, it may also come true there.
Still there is no need, or desire, on my part to quarrel with these general formulations cited in the above paragraph. In fact, it should rather be necessary to add that the period of fascist dictatorship quite naturally produced, not only a swing toward democratic liberties; but also created a genuine need for such liberties.
In this situation the parties of the Fourth International, whether small or large, must go with the masses through this body of experience. And they must do so regardless of whether the experiences can be assimilated within a brief period, in concentrated form, or at a relatively slow tempo. In conformity with the needs of each situation they must advance, and fight for, democratic demands. Of course they dare not stop short there or permit these demands to become a noose to strangle the masses. They must follow out the theory of the permanent revolution and recognize that the genuine democratic needs cannot be satisfied without the workers’ conquest of power.
At the same time we must not for one moment lose sight of the fact that the social reformist parties, the centrist and liberal parties, advance democratic demands to one degree or another, in one form or another. Regardless of any failure on their part to conduct a serious struggle; yes, regardless of open betrayals of their own professed reformist and liberal programs, they will make democratic demands. Even the Stalinists will make them. Neither of these parties can operate without them. They will in fact, after the collapse of fascism, endeavor to capitalize particularly on existing democratic illusions. They will sponsor demands for social reform within the framework of capitalism as their only means of maintaining mass support, and as a means toward keeping this system intact. They have no other means.
Although the actual situation in Europe is by no means too clear to us, it seems to emerge quite positively that such is the position of these parties now. In Northern Italy the militant partisan movement, evidently under the leadership of Stalinists, Social Democrats and left wing liberals, demand the republic.
Even the Belgian Social Democrats have given feeble voice to such a demand. In France and elsewhere demands have been made by these parties for a constituent assembly, always taking care, of course, that actual measures are delayed as much as possible. Similarly, demands have been made for a certain degree of nationalization.
The mere advancing of democratic demands will not serve in itself to distinguish the Fourth Internationalists from the position of these parties. It is important therefore to recognize the fact that democratic demands are for us only incidental and episodic in the independent movement of the proletariat; and they are now especially so in view of the utter capitalist collapse. They are at the present stage of developments, whenever and wherever they come into use, essentially a bridge to, and subordinate to, the more fundamental demands of the revolutionary socialist program. Standing alone the mere episodic slogans and demands are, of course, entirely inadequate.
 
Essence of the Problem
And so we come to the essence of the problem of what method to pursue to build the Trotskyist parties in Europe.
It is hardly necessary to repeat the fact that everything is relative. The brutal fascist dictatorship created a genuine need for democratic liberties; and slogans corresponding to these needs can and will serve as powerful means to set masses into motion. At the same time this is by no means the only pressing need emerging in present day Europe. Fascism itself represented the last desperate resort toward preservation of the tottering capitalist structure. This brief experiment with the most hideous system of oppression did not strengthen the structure in the least. Its gaping holes have become veritable cataracts. The capitalist crisis retains all its characteristics of permanency. Indeed its whole structure teeters over a precipice. On the other hand, revival of democratic illusions among considerable sections of the masses, due to lack of participation in political life of the younger generation, is not the only present phenomenon. Far more pressing for them is the very lack of the most meagre means of subsistence. Therefore, with all its weight this catastrophic crisis pushes the proletariat relentlessly on the road toward the revolutionary mass struggle for power.
A revolutionary situation is beginning to unfold. Objective conditions are favorable to the proletariat. And yet at this very beginning we are presented with a paradox: A proletarian revolutionary policy does not yet prevail; the principal parties of the proletariat are the social reformist parties.
Yes, these are the crucial factors emerging from the European situation today. And at the same time these are the conditions that determine the strategy and tactics of the numerically small Trotskyist parties, rather than any speculative estimates of the viability of bourgeois democracy. The question of policy pursued by these co-thinkers is equally crucial. Their most immediate, and their main, adversary is made up of the social reformist parties against whom they must carry on the unrelenting fight for mass influence. In a very immediate and in a very pressing sense this is their main struggle.
How are they to win out in this crucial conflict for leadership? By emphasizing and underlining the role of democratic demands? No! Our conclusion must be the exact opposite to that drawn by Comrade Morrow. This conclusion must proceed from the idea that the parties of the Fourth International possess the enormous advantage of a revolutionary program. This is the main program which they must bring forward now. Therefore, if in this main struggle anything is to be especially emphasized and underlined, it is the revolutionary content of this program.
They must emphasize the socialist way out of the capitalist collapse in clear and precise revolutionary slogans. In fact they must put forward as their most pressing demand the expropriation of the capitalists and the socialization of the means of production.
 
The Correct Formula
Comrade Morrow’s formula should be reversed to read: it is necessary to emphasize and underline the tasks of the socialist revolution as the most pressing problem before the working masses. At the same time we should say: Use every opportunity available to demand and to fight for more and more democratic liberties; to demand and to fight for ever greater political and economic concessions from capitalism. Remember, however, that such liberties and such concessions can, at the present stage of social developments, be won only as a byproduct of the revolutionary struggle. The bourgeoisie will grant such concessions only when in fear of losing all its privileges. And finally: Do not fail to make it crystal clear that a successful struggle for the socialist way out of the frightful capitalist collapse can be waged only by the forces and the methods of the proletarian revolution.
Such a policy is imposed upon the European Trotskyist parties by the unfolding revolutionary situation. Ultimately this alone can secure for them the necessary mass influence. But it is no less imperative in its more immediate sense.
The small Trotskyist parties do not yet dispose of forces sufficient to set millions into motion. Far from it. In the first instance their appeals must be addressed therefore to the more advanced, the more politically conscious, and the more militant workers. But these are still by and large within the folds of the Stalinist’ and the Social Democratic parties. Paradoxical as it may seem, we can be sure that the militant workers adhere to the parties still carrying the names of socialism and communism not as a sign of approval of the policies and actions of social reformism, but rather because of their burning desire to find the socialist solution or the communist solution, as the case may be. What else could be expected in the absence of any other working class means of political action sufficiently known to them?
Should we say that in order to win them it is necessary to emphasize and underline the role of democratic demands? That would be utterly inadequate. In fact it would be a flagrant mockery. Everything would in this manner be turned upside down. Let us try rather to place the problem right side up and affirm again without equivocation, the basic proposition: in the struggle to win the more advanced stratum of the European proletariat the Trotskyist parties must especially emphasize their revolutionary program. They must demonstrate beyond a shadow of a doubt, by means of slogans, demands, propaganda, agitation and action, that the genuine Marxist program, together with the method and the forces of revolution alone can lead to the socialist solution.
 
The Socialist Solution
Objective reality will naturally present different and varying stages in the general political process of development. But these stages interpenetrate and they are directly interrelated with the movement of the masses. Changes in the one will involve changes in the other. The moods of the masses will of necessity show similar variations. And it would be illusory to expect changes continually in a progressive direction. Initial set-backs, reverses, and even possible defeats have to be counted on. Obstacles in the path of European revolutionary developments are still tremendous. In several respects they are even greater than those that followed in the wake of World War I. Direct allied imperialist and Kremlin bureaucratic intervention on the side of reaction in every serious situation is now a very real, a very potent factor of enormous proportion. Then, in addition, we have now not merely one but two reformist parties in the service of imperialism. But the small revolutionary forces have also learned from the rich experiences and possess infinite advantages. And, while it is not possible in a discussion here to attempt to formulate detailed tactical plans for every changing situation, it is possible and necessary to emphasize both the importance and the character of their conscious intervention in the general process. Above all, that must mean that they project their revolutionary policy for the socialist solution.
While we have no textbooks telling us how to make a revolution, the Marxist method is available. It has stood the tests in the laboratory of history. The October Revolution, the greatest test of them all, brought its verification, and much of it is available in written and amply documented form. We should not attempt to present the conditions of October as analagous to present conditions; yet we must by all means learn from its experiences.
We can afford to learn especially from the role of Lenin in the “rearming of the party.” Trotsky relates in his History of the Russian Revolution how prior to Lenin’s return the whole party leadership feared to go beyond the boundaries of the democratic republic. He says:
“The proletariat did not seize the power in February because the Bolshevik party was not equal to its objective task, and could not prevent the compromisers from expropriating the popular masses politically for the benefit of the bourgeoisie.”
 
Lenin’s Course
And then Lenin arrived, and the History relates:
“He swept aside legislative agrarian reform,” complains Sukhanov, “along with all the rest of the policies of the Soviet. He spoke for an organized seizure of the land by the peasants, not anticipating ... any governmental power at all.
“We don’t need any parliamentary republic. We don’t need any bourgeois democracy. We don’t need any government except the Soviet of workers’, soldiers’, and farmhands’ deputies!”
The next day Lenin presented his famous Theses of April 4, which expressed, says Trotsky, in simple words comprehensible to all:
The republic which has issued from the February revolution is not our republic, and the war it is now waging is not our war. The task of the Bolsheviks is to overthrow the imperialist government. But this government rests upon the support of the Social Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who in turn are supported by the trustfulness of the masses of the people. We are in the minority. In these circumstances there can be no talk of violence from our side. We must teach the masses not to trust the Compromisers and defensists. “We must patiently explain.” The success of this policy, dictated by the whole existing situation, is assured and it will bring us to the dictatorship of the proletariat, and so beyond the boundaries of the bourgeois regime. We will break absolutely with capital, publish its secret treaties, and summon the workers of the whole world to cast loose from the bourgeoisie and put an end to the war. We are beginning the international revolution. Only its success will confirm our success, and guarantee a transition to the socialist regime.
All accounts from these fateful days of rearming of the Bolshevik Party agree that Lenin’s theses, when presented, were greeted as ultra-leftist even among leading Bolsheviks. And to the democrats, says Trotsky, it appeared fantastic: “The Bolsheviks are a tiny minority in the Soviet, and Lenin dreams of seizing the power: isn’t that pure adventurism?”
Pravda, under the editorship of Stalin and Kamenev, said four days later:
As for the general scheme of Comrade Lenin, it seems to us unacceptable in that it starts from the assumption that the bourgeois democratic revolution is ended, and counts upon an immediate transformation of this revolution into a socialist revolution.
History nevertheless proved Lenin correct. Due to his insistence the Bolshevik Party became armed theoretically for its struggle with the compromisers. He was concerned primarily about the party’s understanding its basic objective task, namely: to lead the struggle directly toward workers’ power and the socialist system. He was concerned equally about making it clear to the masses that the party understood this as its basic task and was determined to strive for its realization. This is one great lesson for us to learn from Lenin.



The Seattle general strike stands out to this day as an important signpost in American labor history. It was the first general strike on the American continent. Extending to the nearby cities of Tacoma and Aberdeen, it tied up an entire fair-sized city from 10 A.M. Thursday, Feb. 6 until 12 noon on Tuesday, Feb. 11, 1919.
At the time this strike was proclaimed by big business newspapers from coast to coast as an attempt at revolution. Bolshevism, they said, had made its first actual appearance in the Northwest. Businessmen in Seattle took out riot insurance on their warehouses, and purchased guns. Just before the strike the local capitalist press, headed by the Hearst-owned Post-Intelligencer, made appeals in threatening undertones to the workers to state “which flag they were under, and, if under the American flag, to put down Bolshevism in their midst.”
Of course, the Seattle general strike was not an attempt at revolution. Nevertheless, it was thoroughly permeated by the revolutionary spirit of the time of which it was itself a product. Above all it was permeated by the spirit of the Bolshevik revolution in Russia and the subsequent revolutionary upheavals in Europe. The names of Lenin and Trotsky, the unfamiliar terms of Soviets and Bolsheviks, were then well-known to the Seattle workers. And in the minds of most of them these names, these terms, became associated favorably, though as yet not very clearly, with their own most cherished aspirations. Workers’ power in place of Czarist corruption, capitalist oppression and exploitation: that seemed to them to signalize a better world in the making.
In part this general spirit appeared in the pages of the Seattle Union Record, a daily paper published by the Seattle Central Labor Council, and enjoying at that time the largest circulation of any paper in the northwest. The day before the strike it said editorially:
On Thursday at 10 A.M.
There will be many cheering and there will be some who fear. Both these emotions are useful, but not too much of either. We are undertaking the most tremendous move ever made by LABOR in this country, a move which will lead – NO ONE KNOWS WHERE! We do not need hysteria. We need the iron march of labor.
The editorial then referred to the Wall Street agents, including Charles Piez, Director General of the Emergency Fleet Corporation, who provoked by remote control the original strike issues which arose in the shipyards:
The closing down of Seattle’s industries, as a MERE SHUTDOWN, will not affect these Eastern gentlemen much. They could let the whole Northwest go to pieces, as far as money alone is concerned.
BUT, the closing down of the capitalistically controlled industries of Seattle, while the WORKERS ORGANIZE to feed the people, to care for the babies and the sick, to preserve order – THIS will move them, for this looks too much like the taking over of POWER by the workers.
After 10 A.M. on Thursday not a wheel turned in any of the industries employing organized labor and in many others which did not employ organized labor. 65,000 workers, members of 110 different, regular AFL unions, all of organized labor in the city, came out solidly after a referendum vote carried by overwhelming majorities. They were joined by Japanese unions, by IWW local unions and by numerous unorganized workers. Headed by a General Strike Committee, composed of three delegates from each local union, plans were laid, and executed, concerning not only the immediate issues of the strike but the important affairs of the city as well. Under the management of the culinary trades 21 large eating places were established feeding about 30,000 people daily. For admission to the especially low-priced meals IWW cards were recognized as well as AFL cards. Within their own ranks the strikers maintained perfect discipline and order in their own way through their own Labor Guard. Persuasion was the only weapon employed by them. Nothing else was required inasmuch as the stern, overwhelming power of the complete tie-up made idle and deeply-awed onlookers of the regular police and its reinforcement of 600 brand-new cops together with 2,400 specially deputized thugs, all armed with rifles or shotguns. It was no secret either that a large contingent of soldiers, fully equipped, had been brought into the city from Camp Lewis. But commanding officers kept them discreetly in the background.
 
Police Provocations Fail
As a matter of fact the large police force was called into provocative duty only once and that effort fell flat. One of the daily capitalist papers, The Star, managed, with the help of printers ordered back to work by an international union official, to get out a small single sheet on the second day of the strike. Police cordons were drawn up at both ends of the street. Armed deputies attempted to pass out the sheet. But, outside of the “better” residential district where deliveries were made by machines full of armed guards, it found so few takers that the strikers dubbed it the “Shooting Star.” It appeared no more during the strike.
Heads of the city departments, including the mayor himself appeared before the General Strike Committee to ask for strike exemptions for various city institutions. Such exemptions were granted, for example, to hospitals for necessary deliveries, light, heat and repair; for city firemen; for drug clerks, to fill prescriptions only; for city garbage collectors, to pick up only such garbage as might otherwise cause disease, etc. Requests for exemptions from commercial institutions were rejected.
Wherever exemptions were granted the specific handling of each problem was turned over to the union concerned. The leadership could well afford to do so because the membership of every union was wholeheartedly in the battle, felt themselves an integral part of it, and, besides, the union men of each separate trade knew their own problems best. In some cases an ingenious system was worked out. Milk drivers, for instance, assigned to supply milk for infants and for the strikers needs, ignored the bosses’ organizations, collected their supply from small dairies outside the city and maintained firm control of distribution of 3,000 gallons daily through 35 stations established by the union. Members of the culinary trades were assigned to certain specified union shops and commissary stations where they worked voluntarily, their wages being deducted from the price of meals to the strikers. All exemptions carried large signs of authorization by the General Strike Committee.
No other authority had any real force during the fateful five days. No other power really prevailed but that of the strike. And while no attempt was made to dislodge the mayor or any of his councillors from their official seats the General Strike Committee was the city government in fact.
Thus, while the strikers serenely carried out their demonstration of solidarity, of power and of determination the mayor, Ole Hanson, found himself in such a dilemma that he finally wound up in babbling and impotent rage. Starting out as a patent-medicine salesman who did well for himself, it was said, with his Kikapoo Indian Saga, he was known before the strike as a rather jovial mayor, a miniature pork-barrel politician who attempted to play both sides. He was a man of limited vision and less integrity.
When the strike paralyzed the city his type of politics came face to face with the stern realities of the class struggle. At first Ole Hanson assumed the mediator’s role. However, to remove all doubts on this score the head of the local banking fraternity, J.W. Spangler, curtly informed the mayor that there would be no mediation. He said that “his people” took the stand that this strike was a revolution and they would not deal with revolutionists.
The mayor responded quickly. The next day, Friday morning, he issued a proclamation to the citizenry calling upon them to resume their business under his protection. From the labor movement he demanded peremptorily that the strike be called off by Friday noon or he would declare martial law. Later he demanded that it be called off Saturday morning, renewing the threat of martial law. Nothing happened. Saturday saw the strike still in full swing. Against the power of labor these threats were unavailing.
Equally futile, though far more bombastic, was the mayor’s account to the nation:
“We refused,” he said, “to ask for exemption from any one. The seat of government is at the City Hall. We organized 1,000 extra police, armed with rifles and shotguns, and told them to shoot on sight anyone causing disorder. We got ready for business.
“I issued a proclamation that all life and property would be protected; that all business should go on as usual. And this morning our municipal street cars, light, power plants, water, etc., were running full blast.
“There was an attempted revolution. It never got to first base.”
Seattle learned about this piece of bravado only at a later date. It was not meant for “home consumption.” In fact the light and water never had been shut off. The only visible effect of the mayor’s proclamation was that seven street cars attempted to start a run on the city’s one municipal car line and got stranded.
 
How the Strike Ended
How then did the Seattle general strike come to an end? Clearly, a strike of such a nature, paralyzing a whole community, had soon to find the limit of its duration in one way or another. After all, the general strike was a sympathy action in support of the struggle of some 35,000 shipyard workers for higher wages. Working under a closed shop and a single blanket agreement for all of the unions in the yards the Metal Trades Council, which was the bargaining agent, had sought an upward revision of wages particularly for the lower-paid and less skilled trades. The Metal Trades Council requested the general strike.
As could be expected, the more conservative and timid local leaders, who dreaded the whole idea, attempted vainly to fix a time limit to the strike at its inception. Failing then, they soon renewed their effort, spurred on by the tremendous pressure from international union officials. On Saturday afternoon the Executive Committee of Fifteen brought into the General Strike Committee a nearly unanimous resolution fixing 12 midnight that same Saturday as the time for the general strike to come to an end.
All that afternoon and night the debate raged in the General Strike Committee. Finally, at 4:12 in the morning the vote of this general body showed such an overwhelming defeat for the resolution that it was unanimously decided to continue the strike. The larger committee of the rank and file had showed its greater fortitude and greater determination.
At Monday morning’s roll call, however, some unions were missing. Those affiliated with the Teamsters Joint Council had been ordered back to work on instruction of their International Auditor Briggs. Some of the printing trades had returned to work as a result of severe pressure from their international officials. Rump local executive board meetings of the street carmen, the barbers and the newsboys had taken similar action on orders from higher-ups. In no instance did any one union desert as a result of action taken by the membership. On the contrary, in every one of the unions reported as returned to work, information was sent that they had called special membership meetings and were ready to come out again on an instant’s notice in response to whatever the General Strike Committee would decide. And they did respond readily and completely when this leading body decided practically unanimously at its Monday session that they should come out again so that all would return to work unitedly with ranks closed on Tuesday at noon. The solid ranks of the workers were entirely restored, thus bringing to a magnificent close one of the great chapters of American labor history.
What was the Seattle general strike intended to be? What were its aims and objectives? What lessons can be learned from it? As the American working class at this moment faces problems which will inevitably come to a head among other forms, in a gigantic strike wave, questions such as these assume prime importance. Strikes, whether won or lost, convey valuable lessons. The present generation of trade unionists can learn from the experiences, the successes as well as the mistakes, of the past.
Insofar as Seattle was concerned, it was at that time one of the best organized cities in the United States. Trade unions had made numerical gains throughout the country during the war years, rising from a total membership of 3,104,600 in 1917 to a peak of 5,110,800 in 1920 before the decline set in which reached its lowest point during the great depression. The Seattle unions had, however, made relatively greater numerical gains due to the heavy concentration of shipbuilding there. Not less than 26¼ per cent of all ships built for the United States Shipping Board was built in the Seattle yards alone. From the relatively small numbers existing before the war the union membership in the yards rose to 35,000, all solidly knit together in the Metal Trades Council.
The general strike came in the wake of war demobilization. Industrial activity, however, was still at a high level with the employers’ “open shop” offensive clearly in the offing. War restrictions were relaxed. All the pent-up restlessness and dissatisfaction generated by these restrictions came into head-on collision with the budding “open shop” campaign. The clash came quicker and earlier in Seattle than elsewhere because the labor movement there found itself in the position of a strong outpost. The conviction took hold among its membership that they had to meet the preliminary assault and defeat it.
At the same time they were neither prepared nor eager to advance too far ahead of the movement in the rest of the country. Union consciousness and union solidarity had reached a high level in Seattle. Nevertheless these workers had no illusions that the general strike could stand or fall on the concrete issue of winning the wage demands of the shipyards unions. Their real purpose was to make a powerful demonstration of solidarity. Since it was necessary to make a test of strength, these unionists were ready to show that labor dared, to show that labor would fight it out.
 
True Significance of the Seattle Strike
It is in this connection that the stimulus given by the stirring events taking place abroad stands out in its true significance. The Seattle workers were also inspired by the great idea of struggling for a new and better world. They definitely considered their general strike as a contribution toward this end. But, in contrast to Europe, their generally awakening class consciousness had not yet reached beyond these more modest objectives.
Seattle had long been a rendezvous for lumberjacks and loggers of the Northwest. Among these largely unskilled migratory workers, radical and revolutionary ideas, mostly disseminated by the IWW, had made considerable headway. Their militant struggle for human conditions in the lumber camps had its repercussions within the Seattle labor movement. Seattle was also the shipping port for rugged proletarians migrating annually to Alaska, not to stake gold claims, but to toil in the fisheries, canneries and mining ventures of a virgin territory. Their return with experiences of bitter exploitation also made its impact.
These factors contributed to the existence of numerous radical elements and large-scale left-wing influence within the Seattle unions. It was of a definitely Marxist trend, coming in part from the Socialist Party and in part from the IWW. In justice to the latter it must be said that there they were not too strongly influenced by syndicalist ideas nor did they conceive themselves too definitely as builders of a union in opposition to the AFL. Rather, they accepted the role of a militant minority carrying the message of revolutionary industrial unionism. For purposes of practical activity they carried the membership cards of both organizations.
This somewhat inchoate left-wing movement was at best only loosely organized. It made up in fervor and zeal for what it lacked in ideological training and experience. It lacked a revolutionary program of action. It lacked a revolutionary party. The Socialist Party had then just begun the process of producing the left wing which later led to the organization of the American Communist Party. Despite all of these shortcomings, due entirely to the immaturity of the revolutionary forces, the influence exerted by them had struck deep roots. The Seattle labor movement would never have reached its high level of union consciousness and development without them.
One result of this left-wing influence was manifested in the organization of the Seattle Workers and Soldiers Council. Ideologically the idea was inspired, of course, by the Russian Soviets. Practically it found good solid ground in the war demobilization, the closing-down of war industries and the return of soldiers and sailors. This experience graphically illuminates the temper of the Seattle trade unionists at the time.
Agitation for a Workers and Soldiers Council received great impetus from the general strike. The idea took hold within most unions of the city and became a movement. In fact it became so powerful that local conservative leaders stepped right into the middle of it, if not to behead it, then at least to regulate it and keep it “within bounds.” The agitation came to a head first in a large mass meeting called by the Central Labor Council. One of the largest halls in the city was jammed while some of these leaders in drooling monotones extolled the virtues of the Soviets. But the rank and file impatience with such a performance turned into enthusiastic acclaim when left-wing elements sprang to the platform and gave the idea flesh and blood by proposing steps toward concrete action. The ensuing conference that formed the Workers and Soldiers Council had an attendance of more than 300 local union delegates.
Of course this venture had its grotesque side in the amateurish attempts to transplant not merely the spirit but the body of the Bolshevik revolution so mechanically to American soil. A resolution was introduced calling for the creation of a Red Guard which was to receive pay only during actual hours of drill and active duty. But more realistic intentions predominated. Gropingly the left wing elements had sought means for better expression, for greater influence and leadership. They did not have illusions that the Workers and Soldiers Council could become a Soviet in actuality. But it did become the publishing medium for a considerable length of time of a weekly paper of revolutionary contents. And it did become an important medium to bring returned soldiers and sailors together to fight shoulder to shoulder with their fellow workers.
 
Lessons of the Strike
For us today there is a serious lesson in that latter fact alone. Now the organized trade union movement has become a much more complete expression of American labor. Problems growing out of World War II demobilization are far greater. At the same time the ranks of the American Legion are swelling to huge proportions. Its potentialities as an anti-labor instrument are well-known. And as yet, the trade union officialdom has remained criminally negligent in the face of these problems.
The Seattle developments also demonstrate how, due to active left-wing influence within the labor movement, international solidarity and concrete support of labor’s international struggles can take on real meaning. Toward the fall of the year of the general strike trainloads of ammunition arrived destined for Kolchak’s counter-revolutionary army in Siberia. The Soviets were very hard pressed at the time. The steamer Delight came into port to take the ammunition aboard. However, the longshoremen said “NO.” The steamer eventually pulled out – but with other cargo.
While this left-wing exerted an important influence within the Seattle labor movement, it was not the leadership. We all understand the determining role of policy and leadership in all labor developments. In a strike situation it becomes particularly acute and immediate. In regard to this problem also the Seattle workers enjoyed certain advantages. Over a long period of time the Central Labor Council had built up considerable authority and prestige. It functioned in actuality as a centralizing and guiding force. Delegates rarely failed to attend its meetings and to participate in the lively debates which sometimes ran into the late night hours.
City officials and city educators would often appear in the gallery reserved for the public. All important questions of policy and action were brought to the Central Labor Council for discussion and decision. And with the priceless aid of a daily paper, published under its ownership and control and enjoying a circulation at that time larger than any daily paper in the Northwest, its influence extended throughout the city and beyond. It was primarily through this local central body that the left-wing functioned most effectively, articulating the interests and aspirations of the rank and file and seeking to influence the council decisions.
Thus a broad representative leadership had been established which was progressive in nature and enjoyed the confidence of the membership. While the general strike set up its own special and immediately directing organ, the previous integration of the various important elements remained in effect. By and large this accounts for the unity, determination and breathtaking power of the general strike.
Only in this way could the difficulties of a strike involving one whole community have been overcome. They were indeed complex. Imagine joint action by 110 different local unions, all subject to the arbitrary rule and avarice of almost as many sets of more or less reactionary international officials. These were the serious limitations of an antiquated form of organization. Yet the unity of purpose was complete from the beginning to the end. It defeated intervention to the contrary from above. For the official record shows that in each case where influence from international officials was exerted it was against the General Strike Committee, against working class solidarity and on the side of the bosses. Whereas decision by membership vote in each case showed overwhelming support for the strike, and for its leadership, even to the point of overriding the intervention of the high moguls.
It is true that the significant events of the general strike took place so swiftly that this official hierarchy did not have much chance to interfere. That itself is an important consideration in a strike situation. Once decisions are made, swift action is essential. Equally important is the democratic procedure of the unions. Preservation of democracy throughout made it possible here for the rank and file to assert its will. In practical experience this had proved to be an integral part of the larger and broader struggle for labor’s democratic rights.
To the credit of the Seattle trade union movement, its leadership included, it must be said that it remained ever vigilant about labor’s rights in this broader sense. One instance alone will illustrate the point. Soap-box orators had held forth regularly on a large space at Fourth Ave. and Virginia St., when suddenly – not during the five days of the general strike – the police violently broke up a large gathering. The Central Labor Council immediately decided that this constituted an infringement on the rights of free speech. It voted full support and set a date for a test of the validity of this constitutional right. Many thousand workers turned out and thereby fortified effectively the already established tradition.
 
Aftermath of the Seattle Action
The aftermath of the general strike led to another eveii more telling example. No sooner had business activities been resumed than the county authorities raided the IWW and Socialist Party headquarters and held a number of IWW members on charges of being “ringleaders of anarchy.” The Central Labor Council responded quickly and effectively. Naming this “an invasion of fundamental rights,” it adopted a resolution practically unanimously:
“That the Central Labor Council immediately take up the defense of these men, in order that the fundamental rights involved in these cases which are necessary to our own existence shall be preserved.”
The Seattle general strike also had its weak points and its mistakes. I shall mention here only one which, however, is of singular significance because of the lesson it conveys. It concerns the all-important medium of publicity – in this case the Seattle Union Record.
When the general strike began the Executive Committee of Fifteen took upon itself to decide that this daily paper would suspend publication for the duration. A small strike bulletin was to appear in its place. No other motivation was given for
this decision but the namby-pamby one about fairness to competing dailies closed down by labor. An overwhelming protest from the strikers followed. The Union Record was “their paper.” Despite their desire not to give excuse for any incident arising from mass demonstrations, thousands of them jammed the streets surrounding the office of publication on the first day of its absence. The craving for news, for strike publicity, was almost greater than that for food. So on Saturday the General Strike Committee directed the Union Record to resume publication. The successful conduct of the strike had itself made that imperative.
The lesson is clear. An army fights well only when it is conscious of its aim. That is especially true for an army of strikers. But its aim must be clearly stated; the reasons must be given as clearly and precisely as possible. Every related event, every important development of the strike, must be made known and publicized as broadly as possible, especially to those who carry the burden of the fight, in order to keep them aware, to keep them alert, and to maintain the necessary confidence between the leadership and the ranks. That is why publicity by and for the workers becomes the life blood of a strike. It is one of the strikers’ best weapons. The lesson of the mistake made in suspending labor’s own paper was learned quickly in Seattle.
Viewed in retrospect the Seattle general strike signalized the appearance of a new labor generation. It was the first step taken toward breaking the deadly grip of the Gompers regime. Greater labor battles followed in a whole chain of events that passed through peaks of prosperity and depths of depression, until today the American labor movement stands out as a good deal more mature. The battles it now faces are far more gigantic and far more serious. Yet the experiences of the past retain their full validity. This brief account of the Seattle general strike can be appropriately concluded with a quotation from its Official History Committee. The Seattle workers, it said, were
“glad they had struck, equally glad to call it off, and especially glad to think that their experience would now be of use to the entire labor movement of the country.”



Amongst the belligerent powers the United States alone could afford the luxury of a wartime national election. American capitalism alone could grant such a democratic concession to the people. Compared to present day Europe this stands out naturally as an enormous concession. Viewing the question, however, in the light of the realities of American political development, the concession is small indeed. After all, American capitalism was in a position to face this election, as it has faced so many before, without a serious political challenge to its rule.
Had there been in this election even the mere parliamentary opposition from a virile and popularly supported workers party, there might have been a different story to tell. As it was, the traditional two party system again saved the day. It offered the electorate the choice of Roosevelt or Dewey; either the Republicans or the Democrats. This made the people’s ballot a yes ballot regardless of which name headed the slate.
Only the undeveloped political expression of class relations can account for such a situation. In Europe – except during periods of fascist or semi-fascist dictatorships – bitterly contending parties mirrored existing class antagonisms. Here the unequalled concentration of economic power has brought a similar concentration of political power. This political power is lodged securely in the grasp of organized wealth. And so, the country which is most advanced economically and technologically, still retains within its social system a backward political development. While class conflicts have found violent outbursts in economic action, they were rarely in the past reflected in politics. The proletariat produced by super-modern American industrial conditions has thus far remained, to all intents and purposes, politically inarticulate.
The traditional two parties have for many decades served equally as instruments of the dominant class. And they have long since become elevated into a system of politics. This is not to say, however, that there never were any differences between them, or that neither ever served a progressive purpose. Each of the two parties is a product of two different historical stages of development. At one time they came to contest issues of life and death, a conflict which culminated in the Civil War. While neither party expressed fully the conflicting interests of classes, both parties did mirror currents in the conflict over fundamental issues involving the advancement or retardation of the productive forces.
The division into two national parties arose originally out of the clash between the industrial system in the North, based upon wage labor, and the plantation economy of the South, based upon slavery. As northern capitalism grew stronger, more united, became more conscious of its interests and developed definite objectives, it created a political party to advance these interests and aims. That was the Republican Party. In this historical setting it became a progressive instrument for the advancement of the productive forces. On behalf of industrial capitalism it challenged, at its inception, the Democratic Party for governmental control. And it became the party of the golden age of capitalist expansion.
The Democratic Party entered the stage much earlier. It emerged as an expression of the need for centralized government at a time of clashing sectional interests, as, for example, the conflict between the commercial Northeast and the agricultural plantation-owned South in regard to the frontier, as well as the conflict between the settled areas and the frontier.
 
Capitalists Maintained Both Parties
But while the increasingly powerful capitalist masters challenged the Democratic Party for control of the government, they took good care never to attempt to destroy it. On the contrary, they soon found it useful to maintain and support both parties in order to maintain the fiction that the totality of public interests was being served by a two party system.
During the golden age of capitalist expansion, political patronage, public plunder and robbery on a colossal scale were the distinguishing characteristics of American politics. Loathsome corruption, nefarious scheming and outright debauchery of municipal, state and federal government became its natural corrolary. And this happened not only in the long forgotten past. Just recall the scandals under the Harding administration. Or take the testimony of a Chicago Commissioner of Public Works at the time of his resignation in 1906:
“Application to the State Attorney,” said he, “evolved the fact that our present laws – passed in the interest of capital – make it no offense for capital, i.e. the privileged few, to steal from the community, i.e. the unprivileged many.”
Corrupt legislative assemblies and law courts set their seal of approval upon the plunder of the public domain. In fact the entire machinery of government functioned at the bidding of organized wealth, regardless of which party occupied the seat of authority. Politics became business. Specialization extended from industry into politics where specialists in corruption operated. Laws and judicial decisions were made to conform to this custom. It was class rule in its most outrageous guise. And, of course, class rule it remains to this day, even though the plunderers have adopted somewhat more refined methods. American capitalism has had the good fortune, owing to its enormous resources and its ability to pay above European levels, to exercise this class rule through bourgeois democratic forms. The two party system became an important element in this setup. It kept alive the illusion of freedom of choice and it was therefore religiously preserved.
American capitalism could well afford to extend this measure of democratic liberties without too great fear that its rule would be challenged. It had been generously favored through decades by what Marxists recognize as the law of uneven development. Its most striking expression is the distinction between advanced and backward countries. In their development they have passed through different stages, through different forms and at an uneven tempo. In the United States capitalism could draw on an unequalled abundance of natural resources; and it therefore experienced the most rapid expansion within the system of growing capitalism. It could constantly avail itself of the most efficient utilization of productive forces and was finally able to overtake all of its capitalist competitors and even advance further at their expense.
But within this uneven development there emerged also the stages or the features of what Trotsky called a combined development. Backward countries, for example, supplement their backwardness with some of the latest advances. Here it was a case of the latest advances existing alongside carryovers of a deeply rooted backwardness. Within the same social system appeared at certain stages the extreme opposites. But these exist dynamically, that is they must undergo change or disappear.
So far as the United States is concerned such features were and still are apparent. In the first place, the United States enjoyed the most rapid growth of productive forces and yet emerged late as an imperialist power, owing to the fact that the greatest possibilities of capitalist expansion remained for decades within the borders of the 48 states. In the second place, industrialization, beginning in the East, advanced constantly into new regions. At the same time backward forms of split-up tenant holdings, amounting to virtual peonage, together with Jim Crowism, persisted in the South. But during the early decades of westward advance, class distinctions rose only slowly along the frontier. There, mutual cooperation prevailed; social and political organizations remained democratic. As long as free land was available, competition-crushed or blacklisted workers found a place to start life anew. Class and social antagonisms often found their outlet in pioneer rebellions. In this manner and for quite a long time a variety of social stages existed side by side.
Moreover, vast numbers of immigrants arrived in the United States every year,
“and while they did not bring over any medieval institutions from Europe,” as Engels said in a letter to Sorge, “they did bring over masses of medieval traditions, religion, English common (feudal) laws, superstition, spiritualism, in short every kind of imbecility which was not directly harmful to business, and which is now very serviceable for making the masses stupid.”
Therefore, when we take into consideration these historical conditions together with the ability of American capitalism to maintain a relatively high standard of living for the masses, it is only natural that this finds its expression today in a retarded political development. Herein are likewise to be found some of the important reasons for the paradoxical situation of opposite extremes existing within the United States. Despite this country’s advanced industrialization and technology, the most backward political ideology of the masses has prevailed to this day as evidenced by the absence of a mass working class political party, whether reformist or revolutionary. At the same time this is also the most outstanding illustration of the combined development in the United States.
This does not mean, however, that where, as Marx said in a letter to Sorge, “capitalist economy and corresponding enslavement of the working class developed more rapidly and shamelessly than in any other country,” there were no popular political movements or no influence of revolutionary or socialist ideology. History shows examples of both. But Socialist influence never penetrated in a sustained fashion deeply into the ranks of the American masses. And so far as Popular movements are concerned, they were mainly middle class in make-up and in ideology, hodge-podge affairs, mostly limited to certain sections of the country; and they were shortlived. They were in the nature of a by-product of the class struggle rather than its direct expression. The rapacious plunder of big capitalism often forced the middle class to the wall. It became rebellious at times. Some of these movements used to attract labor support during periods of strike upheavals and the ensuing vicious persecution of the workers.
Outstanding among such movements was the Greenback Party which started as a reaction against the depreciation of the Civil War greenbacks. During the late ‘seventies amidst strikes and labor agitation, the party emphasized labor demands and in 1878 it received about a million votes and elected fourteen representatives to Congress. From then on, however, it declined rapidly and disappeared.
Later arose the Populist Party. It originated in Kansas and spread in the Middle West and West. The closing decades of the nineteenth century had witnessed the industrialization of agriculture, thus requiring more efficient and more expensive implements. As a result heavily mortgaged farms went into the hands of financial and industrial corporations. A census of 1890 reveals that mortgage indebtedness had already passed the one billion mark carrying an interest rate of 7 percent. Only 47 percent of the nation’s farmers actually owned their farms unencumbered. On the remainder 34 percent were tenants or sharecroppers.
The populist Party grew out of this situation. The party also endeavored to gain support from the industrial workers in the East, and succeeded primarily as a result of the furious strikes then in progress in Homestead, Pa. and Pullman, Illinois. At the 1894 elections the Populists polled over one and a half million votes, only in order to disappear shortly thereafter.
 
The LaFollette Movement
This was the last of the lower middle class political challenges to the American ruling class. From then on such political opposition as did arise originated by and large with the working class. Yet nearly all these attempts suffered equally from feebleness of principle and poverty of numbers. Only the campaign for LaFollette Sr. in the 1924 presidential election netted a vote of almost five million. But this movement was expressly stipulated not to be a third party movement and its program did not go beyond anti-monopoly, anti-injunction and anti-imperialist demagogy in the Wilsonian sense of the term. Otherwise labor parties of a sort have come and disappeared, none of them passing beyond a sectarian, local or statewide basis.
The official trade union leadership reluctantly agreed to support the LaFollette campaign. But otherwise it has, throughout its history, always constituted a brake upon political development of the masses. At times it would be aroused from its political stupor by some especially outragepus anti-labor legislation; but it has always been beset by a greater fear of any radical or socialist influence, or anything tending toward independent labor political action. The worst scare it experienced, no doubt, was at the 1892 convention when a resolution, sponsored by the Socialists, to the effect, “that the AFL advise the working people of America to organize their economic and political power to secure for labor the full equivalent of its toil”, was defeated by the narrow margin of 4,897 votes to 4,171. At that point however, the Socialist Party leadership became helpful. What if that resolution should be carried next year? They might really have to do something about it. The resolution was not reintroduced and the AFL leaders were free to continue their activities in either Republican or Democratic political machines or cliques, on a local, statewide or national basis. This activity would yield at times some small concessions to labor. Above all it yielded patronage to these officials.
But politics develops its own logic: and today, the tighter the union leaders, both AFL and CIO cling to Roosevelt, the wider grows the gap between them and the rank and file. The longer these leaders succeed in retarding labor’s independent political development the more complete and thorough will be the breakthrough.
Meanwhile both of the old capitalist parties have long since outlived the conditions under which they came into being. And hence, the progressive features which they once possessed have disappeared. American society could in the past, at different stages of its development, find political expression through either of these two parties, because of the essential need to advance the productive forces. Both parties were able to survive practically as sole contenders beyond the period of their own progressive role because the class historically destined to challenge capitalist rule had failed to develop its own political party.
Today the productive forces have not only advanced but the owners of the means of production have exhausted the long term factors of expansion. With this capitalism itself has ceased to be progressive. Class contradictions and class antagonisms have assumed gigantic proportions. Interrelations of class forces have also changed. The working class, now more homogenous, more conscious of its position, and better organized, can no longer find any political expression whatever through the old parties.
The last election marked the zenith of the two party system. Opposition parties, i.e., those actually running their own candidates and not just merely furnishing a new buckler for old “friends,” appear to have reached the lowest ebb. But this election also signalled the breakdown of the two party system.
Basic social cleavages are now reflected not between the two major parties but inside both of them. Major political issues engender serious political conflicts within both parties. This is the case notably with issues of world affairs. But problems of domestic economy also often create deep fissures. The democratic Party in fact was held together in this election only by its one indispensable candidate. What we witnessed in 1944 was the forerunner of the political division along class lines. For class lines are now much less in flux. They have congealed and settled down to permanent conditions of conflict. From now on class lines will form the basic alignments of the American body politic.
 
The Dominant Imperialist Power
While American politics are still confined to the 48 states its problems embrace the entire planet. The United States is now the dominant imperialist power. President Roosevelt’s four terms in office are not merely an extraordinary wrinkle of present-day politics. They mark the beginning of a new turn of events. For his administration has introduced American capitalism to largescale world conquests and – to the world revolution.
Right now the United States is proceeding in rapid strides to Americanize the world; but, at an even more accelerated tempo, will American politics become Europeanized. And while the former is bound to fail ultimately, the latter, that is the political expression of class antagonisms, will start here on a far higher level. Hence we can confidently expect that its social impact will be so much more explosive.
This is the general framework within which the labor party will develop and by which it will be molded. It is therefore impossible to conceive of any absolutely fixed pattern for the role and function of such a party. There is no historical line of march laid down once and for all. A labor party will be conditioned by the framework within which it grows and develops. Its pattern can be envisaged at best only in outline form. At its inception it will denote only the fact that the workers have at long last engaged in political action independently of the capitalist parties. All-inclusive and broad in scope, as it must of necessity be, it will embrace conservative minded workers as well as radicals, trade union members as well as officials. And its limitations will be conditioned by the extent of its reformism. A distinct reformist stage after the emergence of a labor party is, of course, not excluded. But in the epoch of wars and revolutions this is bound to be shortlived because of the increasingly limited ability of capitalism to grant reforms and because of the acuteness of its contradictions. Historically, reformism, as such, has long ago exhausted its progressive role. It can now only prolong the agony of a decaying system. For capitalism will henceforth not even be able to maintain for the people the standard of living once attained.
Yet the organization of a labor party will be a progressive step, while at the same time also a drawback. Like everything in nature and society it will contain opposite elements. It will be progressive first of all in the sense that it means a declaration of political independence by the workers – an enormous step forward as compared to the present conditions. It will be progressive also in the sense of filling the gap, before the workers in their majority are ready to follow the revolutionary party. Thus it becomes both a stepping stone and a preliminary school.
At the same time it is also a drawback because it will tend to enlarge and prolong the gap – naturally not by the conscious or willful desires or actions of the membership. Once, however, it attains strength, influence and prestige, its leadership will certainly tend to consider the labor party in terms of permanency, as an agency for reformist purposes as well as in terms of permanency of official positions.
 
The British Labor Party
Examples of this are seen in England today. The British Labor Party leadership is not only so deeply rooted in the idea of permanency of its own positions, but it is also so completely bound up with the British Tories in furtherance of imperialist aims, that its own pretended reformist objectives have been drastically watered down or completely forgotten. As a result, the British Laborites are in ever more deadly fear of separation from the Tories and of standing up independently. Applicable to them is what Trotsky once said about the Austrian Socialist leaders, namely: that, while they maintained a firm majority in Vienna, they always took good care never to poll more than 49 percent of the vote in Austria as a whole, lest they might have to make good on their professed Socialist aims. The British Labor Party has now decided to stand independently in the next election. But who knows? By that time we may witness a section of the leadership splitting away like Ramsay MacDonald did. This leadership’s record during recent years has been one of increasing conspiracy with the Tories against the workers – a conspiracy against and a brake upon the revolutionary mission of the workers. Of course, the British Labor Party arose as a product of the period of expanding capitalism, the period of greatness and superprofits of the empire, and it is not yet adjusted to new conditions. Nevertheless its example should serve as a lesson, and a warning.
A labor movement is strong and progressive when it is conscious of a goal and strives for its realization along class lines. When the class lines become obscured, its strength is dissipated. From a progressive instrument it is turned into dead weight.
The British Labor Party leadership has attempted to erase the class lines; not so the membership. The latter are moving leftward. In this country the emergence of the labor party itself will be a result of the leftward march of the workers. It will arise under the conditions of decaying capitalism. It must fight from the outset. It is most likely to be quite radical from its inception, influenced by world revolutionary developments. It may even arise over the prostrate bodies of some of the worst diehard labor lieutenants of capitalism, while others may go along in an attempt to behead it. In any event it will start here on a relatively high level.
Of course, a labor party is not an end in itself; it is only a means to an end. It is only a political class expression on the road toward the abolition of capitalism and class society. Nor does it come into being purely as an automatic process. Men must exert their conscious influence and action. The conscious revolutionists particularly must be the leaven in a field of such fruitful work.



During the decades between the two world wars it was possible and necessary, at different intervals, to pose the questions: Whither England? Whither the Soviet Union? Whither France? etc. Now the question appearing immediately before mankind, and rising in ascending magnitude, is: Whither Europe?
No longer can any fundamental social question be decided for any one nation alone. The whole world is now much more integrated, more interrelated and more interdependent, not only economically, in terms of the world market, production and living; but also socially and politically. Redrawing of national state boundaries and division of spheres of influence among the stronger powers become complex social and political problems loaded with explosive possibilities. For Europe this holds true even in a more acute form and in a more immediate sense. Above all the European nations are now much more thoroughly integrated in regards to the question: Which system shall prevail?
This question includes the USSR. Whither Europe also decides whither the Soviet Union.
Outwardly the decision for Europe appears to be in the hands of the so-called “Big Three.” Through the complexities of interrelations now existing this has become true to a certain extent. But only to a certain extent. There can be no denying the fact that immediate events will be, if not shaped, then at least strongly influenced by their attitude and actions.
Moreover, any serious consideration of European perspectives must take into account several important problems flowing from the above. First, the American imperialist preponderance in world affairs; its specific role in Europe as well as the contradictions arising therefrom. Secondly, we must take into account the role of the Stalin bureaucracy as ally of this world imperialist power, and its contradictions arising in face of the coming European revolutionary upheavals. Finally, connected directly with this is the question of which way the USSR: Forward to socialism or backward to capitalist restoration?
All are dialectically integrated. But so far as the outcome is concerned we must never forget that fundamentally the decisions remains in the hands of the European proletariat.
Allied imperialist policy in Europe pursues two basic objectives. The first and most important objective is to prevent the proletarian revolution and to preserve the capitalist system. The Kremlin has left no doubts that it is fully and completely committed to this. That much is borne out, if not clearly by its proclamations, then certainly by its actions. At the same time the imperialist policy also includes the objective of eliminating an adversary and crushing a capitalist competitor. In concrete terms it means the dismantling of Europe’s workshop and the partitioning of Germany. For the European masses, however, this could not possibly have any other implications than that of being condemned to virtual starvation.
 
Kremlin’s Role
Apparently the Kremlin supports also this second objective, even though its support may flow from its own particular set of motivations. But these two objectives are utterly contradictory. They present an inextricable dilemma. For every step taken toward the destruction of European capitalist competition will inevitably lead toward the strengthening of its revolutionary forces.
This may not be entirely unknown to the “Big Three,” hence their determination to avoid issues of friction and their greater unity of purpose. No doubt this will be reflected likewise in increasing ruthlessness.
Despite irreconcilable antagonisms flowing from different property relations the main fears of the Allied imperialists of what they always considered as Kremlin duplicity have been allayed. They now feel assured that Stalin will not proceed to nationalize property in territories occupied by the Red Army.
They see that capitalist property relations have remained by and large undisturbed in Rumania, Bulgaria and Poland. But the boss of the Kremlin also understands the logic of class relations. He knows that any serious steps toward nationalization would immediately raise the dreaded specter of revolution. Committed as he is to the imperialist objectives, he could not possibly pursue such a double policy. He has now made it perfectly clear that he fears the European revolution more than he fears the Allied imperialists. Consequently any double policy on this score was equally precluded. Stalin had to choose between the one or the other because the issue now is – which system is to prevail. There is no middle ground. Stalin having said A must likewise say B. When he made his choice to oppose the revolution he had to accept also the imperialist partnership.
But this is not a partnership on equal terms. Nor does it have the relation of forces that appears to exist on the surface. For example, the credulous observer may get the impression that, owing to the Red Army victories, the Kremlin has moved into the commanding position and has become the most potent force on the European continent. This may be the way things appear to be. However, in the world of reality the United States is and remains the one dominant power. It remains such in relation to Europe as well.
Stalin once proclaimed the possibility of building socialism in one country, utterly disregarding the economic interdependence of nations and their dependence upon the world market. But contrary to the Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, which because of this relationship sought its allies from the world proletariat, Stalin has made his alliance with the masters of world economy; first with Hitler, when the latter appeared the stronger, and now with the Allied imperialists. By making his choice against the revolution, against socialism in Europe, Stalin becomes their captive, committed to carry out their policy, subservient to them. Any action taken in this direction by the Kremlin oligarchy can only increase further its political dependency upon the world imperialists.
 
Growing Degeneracy
This increasing political dependency has developed in close material and ideological connection with the increasing weight of United States intervention in world affairs, and particularly in European affairs. It has developed also in close material and ideological connection with the growing degeneracy of the workers state. And, it is hardly necessary to add, that the progressive degeneration of the latter received its real impetus from the rise of reaction on a world scale as expressed by fascism and war. Such is the logic of this present day interrelation between the United States and Europe.
But as the interest of the Stalin bureaucracy approaches the interests of the imperialist masters, as summed up in the problem of crushing the revolution, we can be sure that to the same degree and at the same tempo the interests of this bureaucracy diverge increasingly from those of the Russian masses. Such is the dialectic interplay of class forces in motion.
.This is what we mean when we say that Stalin’s foreign policy springs from his internal policy; it is motivated by internal needs – the need of preserving the privileges and power of the bureaucracy. The Kremlin is concerned above all with the defense of these privileges. And the European revolution becomes a threat to these privileges just as much as it is a threat to the capitalist system. These privileges cannot be maintained in face of the European revolution. Conversely the delay or a serious setback of the revolution would mean a devastating
increase of bureaucratic degeneration in the USSR. It would elevate these privileges to a new and monstrous plane. What else could follow but a revival of class distinctions and of class antagonisms, the liquidation of planned economy and the restoration of capitalist property? It would mean the counterrevolution triumphant and carried out, as Trotsky once said, by a Russian type of fascism, far more savage than anything hitherto witnessed. And for the European masses such a defeat could imply only a return to virtual conditions of barbarism.
Victory of the European revolution, on the other hand, will give a gigantic impulse to regeneration of socialism in the USSR and will establish the Socialist United States of Europe. The conditioning factors of both are dialectically integrated. Both are socially and politically interdependent. Whither Europe also decides whither the Soviet Union.
Ancient empires have been torn apart by their own inner contradictions. Their cultures succumbed to so-called barbaric invasions and perished. But these empires existed in conditions of isolation within a backward world. Today no such isolation exists. At the present historically decisive turn, society cannot go backward to start all over again from the bottom up. It must proceed from and continue further on the basis already prepared by preceding developments.
 
Capitalist Bankruptcy
Capitalism, however, is utterly bankrupt and offers no way out at all. World War I signalized the beginning of its absolute decline and decay as a system. In Europe this was only the more accentuated. Simultaneously World War I also signalized the beginning of our revolutionary epoch. On this score enough has already been said in the columns of Fourth International, and the facts are so conclusive, that there is no need of repeating. Only it would be well to recall Trotsky’s comment, during the early ‘twenties, concerning the blind alley of European capitalism resulting from the developing economic preponderance of the United States.
“European capitalism,” said Trotsky, “has become reactionary in the absolute sense of the term, that is, not only is it unable to lead the nations forward; but it is even incapable of maintaining for them living standards long ago attained. Precisely this constitutes the economic basis of our revolutionary epoch. Political ebbs and flows unfold on this basis without in any way altering it.”
Political ebbs and flows have unfolded since then. And meanwhile Europe has gone through the experience of fascism, which came into being as a last desperate resort of capitalism to preserve its tottering structure and to prolong its system and its rule. At that stage already it could no longer live and operate under any kind of working class pressure exerted by workers’ organizations. Capitalism could live only under a type of government which would destroy these organizations and wipe out utterly and completely all their past gains. It is needless to deny that under fascism and the conditions of World War II the greater part of Europe, with Germany as its nucleus, has experienced a further concentration and centralization of industry and finance. This has also brought about a higher intensity of mechanized mass production, more labor saving machinery and a higher productivity of labor. But there has been no further actual capitalist expansion; there has been no increase of Europe’s wealth. On the contrary, the absolute decline, decay and destruction of capitalism has reached hitherto unprecedented proportions. The standard of living of the European masses has sunk frightfully. For capitalism itself this further process of concentration and centralization together with the war has produced new contradictions speeding it onward from decline to complete doom.
In the first place, the restoration, or the redrawing, of national boundaries and the further dismemberments can prove only a greater obstacle than were the ancient and much narrower feudal boundaries. For in a world market ruled by mechanized mass production the multitude of small nations cannot survive as separate entities. Moreover, survival at all for the whole continent under victorious Allied imperialism could be only on a semi-colonial existence.
 
New Contradictions
In the second place, the situation which has prevailed in Europe during the last few years has altered considerably the relations of class forces in favor of the grave diggers of capitalism. Hitler has further proletarianized the whole of Europe. New and large segments of the middle class have been reduced to the ranks of the proletariat. Numerous farmers, peasants, artisans, tradesmen, white collar workers and professionals have been herded into mass production industries. With this the social weight of the proletarian class forces has increased enormously. That is the weight which will be felt in the course of events to come and it will make itself felt more powerfully than anything the imperialist masters can put forward.
All of this in the words of one celebrated newspaper reporter presents a picture in which 360,000,000 Europeans and 900,000,000 Asiatics are “compelled to think of what they do not have, of what they have never or rarely touched or tested – and why.”
Historically capitalist production and its quantitative changes have already brought forth a qualitative difference. Production has steadily extended and expanded to satisfy the demands and necessities of so-called civilization from handicraft to manufacture and through the factory system to mechanized mass production. But production has now also become socialized organization of production despite the existing anarchy of production. A new and higher quality has appeared. The foundation has already been laid for socialization of ownership of the means of production and distribution. The foundation of the new society has evolved within the shell of the old.
This is the economic basis upon which the political superstructure rests. And in the final accounting the economic basis is of course decisive. Therefore the following question arises concerning the European perspectives: After the collapse of the fascist governmental system is it possible for capitalism to take up again where it left off before and continue its rule by democratic means, i.e., to re-establish a reign of bourgeois democracy? The answer must be – decidedly no! For it is important to remember that bourgeois democracy does not exist and thrive only on the illusions of the masses. It must be able also to offer and actually deliver something that is concrete and for the material benefit of the masses. In other words, it requires a stable economic basis.
Bourgeois democracy depends for its sustenance principally upon the ability of capitalism to live and operate while giving a minimum of material concessions to the class it holds in subjection. Only then can it grant the limited liberties necessary to hold the subjected class in check. Because of this very fact bourgeois democracy has reached its highest stage in the United States, whereas since world War I such remnants of it as did exist on the European continent, with the possible exception of the small Scandinavian nations, were unstable and lived constantly in the throes of crises and upheavals.
The Weimar Republic, for example, which in its time became the pattern for Europe, existed by and large only as an aftermath of the long reign of bourgeois democracy which had preceded it. It became a combination of equally unstable interim stages existing in variously changing forms, from a Social Democratic government to an outright Bonapartist police regime, and remaining in power only because the basically antagonistic class forces were still preparing and sparring for a decision. And remaining in power, it must be added, because of the failure and betrayals of the worker-parties’ leaderships. It became a grotesque imitation of what had preceded before the first World War. It could solve none of the problems of the masses, or for that matter, of the capitalist system. It could only postpone them and finally succumb to fascism.
Is this to be repeated after World War II? Is it to be repeated when the problems of the European masses can no longer be postponed? Even to this extent society cannot now go backward to start all over again, nor do the workers begin history all over again each time that they face a crisis. They always learn some lessons from preceding events.
 
Imperialist Impasse
Or is this to be repeated on a lower level and in a more contracted form of a bourgeois democratic stage propped up by Allied imperialist bayonets? On what would this be sustained economically? Perhaps on relief from the United States? But remember the fact that American imperialism can maintain and fortify its world hegemony only by constantly limiting the rations of European capitalism in the world market, which will include the contraction of the European market itself. And besides, any relief from the United States, either in shipments of food or of certain machinery of production, will be purely incidental to its objective of destroying the European competitor.
That competitor is primarily Germany. And thus Germany becomes the key to the future European developments. This does not mean to say that events in other parts of the continent will await the outcome in Germany. Not at all. Upheavals start wherever economic and political necessity set masses into motion.
What happens in Germany, however, will not only reveal the final grand imperialist pattern for Europe but the developments ensuing from this pattern will be decisive for the whole continent. Germany is Europe’s workshop. The period of fascism and war brought her to the very horns of the capitalist dilemma. Germany’s bourgeoisie is in the deepest crisis. Her social forces are the most dynamic and the most convulsive. Her proletariat is the strongest and carries the decisive social weight.
What are the prospects in Germany for a bourgeois democratic stage? Not only are apparently all the bourgeois elements there completely identified with the Nazis, whose aggressive world policy made Germany such a dangerous Allied adversary; but it is now clear that the Allied imperialist policy, with the connivance of the Kremlin, contemplates a rule of Germany by naked military force. This policy implies also the dismantling of Germany’s basic industries with control of others, including, of course, the appropriation of surplus values produced: a new and extended form of slave labor.
It seems possible therefore to conclude that in Europe, issuing from World War II, a bourgeois democratic system, even if more shortlived than the Weimar Republic, is precluded by objective conditions. Such regimes can, however, come into being here and there, at different intervals between Allied military regimes, as interim stages, as a by-product of a whole series of
revolutionary struggles, and on a level advancing ever closer to the revolutionary decision. The early beginnings of these are already in evidence in France, Italy, Yugoslavia and Poland, but they are bound to change again tomorrow or to pass away. Most likely some of these interim stages will exist only as puppets of, and enjoying actual support only from the Allied imperialist overlords. In and by themselves none of them can have any stability whatever, not even when flanked and buttressed by social reformist leaders.
And, of course, these interim stages will be possible only until the proletariat attains its stature of political maturity and its revolutionary vanguard gains the necessary mass influence.
The various liberation movements which have been carried over into the present stage, in one form or another, are themselves an expression of the lack of political maturity of the working class forces. In essence these movements were of similar make-up and had similar objectives. They constituted an alliance of antagonistic classes, united only in the struggle against the Nazi oppressor, not, however, against the capitalist system as such. For that would have been impossible within a movement embracing also those elements of the bourgeoisie who did not share in the profits of Nazi collaboration. In fact, if not entirely in methods, the “liberation” movements became replicas of the People’s Fronts which had existed prior to the war. There is this essential difference, however, that the conditions under which the People’s Fronts then came into power and succeeded in beheading the working class movement, are now definitely behind them.
 
“Liberation” Movements
For example, even at the early stage of the “liberation” movements class antagonisms developed within them and alongside of the struggle for liberation. And as the latter reached toward its culmination these antagonisms came more and more to the fore. With it the role of the working class forces became more pronounced. But the “liberation” movements could fulfill only a limited role, primarily with respect to the expulsion of the Nazis. That completed, and upon emerging from the underground, these movements must begin to dissolve into their component parts. Coming into the open, however, not only gave to these movements a far broader basis but it also produced a difference in quality.
The issue of the Nazi oppression having disappeared – -and we do not in the least attempt to minimize its frightfully devastating toll in human lives and sufferings – brings forward the far more burning and far more fundamental issue of which system shall prevail – an issue which is made more acute by Allied imperialist intervention. The largely negative aspect of the struggle for national liberation, under the auspices of the Allied imperialists, gives way to the positive struggle for a new system under which the masses of the people can live – the struggle for a socialist system.
And with this the reformist parties, Stalinist and Social Democratic, which have gained steady influence, both in the underground and since, come face to face with their dilemma. Both parties being in the service of world imperialism are, of course, committed to the defense of the capitalist system which the masses by the logic of events must attempt to tear asunder. In defense of the capitalist system the leadership of both parties are compelled to use all their efforts, including open betrayal, toward continued collaboration with their national bourgeoisie, and with the victorious imperialists, regardless of the interests of the masses, and against these interests. Concrete evidence to this effect has been furnished already by Greece. Additional evidence is gathering in Italy and in France where the reformist leaders encounter mounting difficulties in bridging the cleavage between the rank and file followers and the imperialist puppet regimes. As the cleavage inevitably deepens mass disillusionment and mass defection from the reformist leaders is bound to gather speed. And so, the qualitative difference arising out of the “liberation” movements acquiring a broader mass basis, will be expressed also in the rapid denouement of the reformist leaders.
 
Role of Stalinism
In no sense do the reformist parties reappear now in Europe with their past prestige intact, but rather with the onus of past defeats. In reality both parties declined and decayed with the capitalist system. Especially is this the case with the Stalinist party which must now become a partner in all of the Kremlin’s counter-revolutionary plotting and conniving. Stalinism now begins where Social Democracy left off before the advent of fascism by being the “rottenest part of putrifying capitalist Europe.”
From this putrifying corpse what can the social reformist leaders extract that can be for the material benefit of the masses? Are they not bound to fail at the very first really serious test?
If it is agreed that Germany is the key to the coming developments in Europe then this prognosis will appear only so much more conclusive.
Thirteen years ago we said that Germany was the key to the international situation. The question then posed was: victory of the proletariat or victory of fascism? But the curve of the proletarian revolutionary struggle inaugurated by October 1917 went downward, with the consummation of Social Democratic and Stalinist treachery, to its lowest depth to be engulfed by the fascist victory. Today these conditions are turning in the opposite direction. The European proletariat has begun the upward climb. The essential task is now the forging in the fires of the struggles already inaugurated a principled and determined revolutionary leadership – a task which can be undertaken only by the Fourth International.
Trotsky never tired of repeating that in spite of fascism the German workers will rise again; but they will not return to that policy which led them into the noose of Hitler.
“They will carry out their revolution, surely, not to replace Hitler with a Hohenzollern or Stalin ... The wave of awakening hope, enthusiasm, will not stop at the hermetic borders of the USSR ... Revolution in the West will deprive the Kremlin oligarchy of its sole right to political existence.”



From his fundamental social and economic studies Marx drew the conclusion that all human relations are rooted in the material conditions of life, or more specifically, in the prevailing mode of production and distribution of each historical stage of development. This is the basis for the existence of social classes and it gives rise to class antagonism and conflicts as well as to consciousness of class position.
“It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but on the contrary, their social existence determines their consciousness.”
Economic conditions are not the sole determining factor. They form the basis for the political and legal superstructure with its philosophical, cultural and religious attributes. But between all of these there is reciprocal interaction with a fundamental economic necessity which in the final analysis always asserts itself.
Since the beginning of civilization human society has developed on the basis of dominance of class contradictions and class struggles. Whenever new productive forces were attained the mode of production was altered and social relations changed correspondingly. New classes appeared in place of the old; and the social contradictions and conflicts became the motive power of all historical development.
This, holds true for each historical stage, to which capitalism forms no exception. On the contrary, capitalism has intensified these contradictions and enlarged the scale of conflict.
From these contradictions, constantly transformed from one series of connections into another, Marx formulated the objective laws of development of the capitalist system. And he found that the very forces which operate to yield an equilibrium of its elements generate counter-forces which disrupt that equilibrium. These contradictions and their reciprocal interactions, expressed in violent conflicts, crises, and wars, account for the instability of the system. Historically, its character is transitory. The ever-expanding productive forces and their ceaseless revolutionization of capitalist society prepares the way for new and higher social forms.
While material conditions of life have thus made necessary a certain order of things during the historical stage of capitalism!, they make equally necessary another order into which these must inevitably pass over at the next historical stage.
This we accept as our fundamental concept. It enables us to understand the variations and changes of social relations at each successive stage of development. It enables us also to understand the corresponding changes in the reactions, the moods, and the consciousness of the working class. And the application of this concept provides the key to a correct appraisal of the future course of development.
 
American Capitalism
The analysis made by Marx of the objective laws of motion of capitalist society is most fully confirmed by the evolution of its American sector – its most highly developed expression. The history of the United States is the history of capitalism in its most modern and its most advanced form.
Since its birth the United States has been built on a capitalist foundation from its economic substructure to its philosophical and religious summits. American history reveals an abundance of bold ventures, great spurts, and revolutionary leaps. Its oustanding phenomenon is the remarkably compressed character, and unexampled speed and tempo, of social development. Within this framework American capitalism displayed its special traits of audacity, aggressive enterprise and ruthless pursuance of its struggle for class supremacy.
As is well known, the secret of its success lies primarily in the unique position enjoyed by American capitalism, during the earlier and greater part of its development. It had possibilities aplenty for sustained expansion on a virgin continent rich in natural resources. This provided -the essential prerequisites for technological advance. Rapidly growing labor productivity created abundant surplus values to furnish the life blood of an ever greater accumulation of capital, all of which existed alongside of an organically expanding internal market. As it unfolded, this process was interrupted periodically by crises and panics, yet in its dialectic interactions it became a self-sustaining process.
The United States became the land of plenty and of opportunity. Its ever-mounting wealth enabled American capitalism to give greater concessions expressed in a relatively higher standard of living for the population and greater degree of formal democracy than was the case with capitalism elsewhere.
These unique possibilities available to American capitalism set its definite seal upon the corresponding social developments. While the working class movement often challenged the capitalist drive toward complete class domination, its own evolution during this early state followed an irregular pattern. Robust and militant, from its inception, it forged ahead in turbulently explosive struggles, especially during each boom period, to retreat and almost disappear for a time. But it rose again to make further gains. Bold venture and revolutionary leaps became a distinguishing characteristic also of the early American labor movement, reaching its highest point during the upheavals of the eighties of the past century.
The equilibrium of class relations suffered rude shocks, sometimes merely causing a shift of fighting advantage between the opposing forces, at other times, however, having a sufficiently shattering effect to necessitate its reconstitution on a new plane.
Such a reconstitution took place after the explosive period of the eighties. A relative stability of class relations ensued, but it was attained primarily by narrowing the scope and influence of the unions to the skilled sector at the cost of keeping the great mass of the labor population unorganized and helpless. Finally the unions were in actuality divorced from mass production industry. And as American capitalism, still enjoying the fruits of its unique possibilities, advanced toward its most healthy prime in the boom period of the twenties, the labor movement retreated and lost ground.
 
The Great Depression
With the great depression the unique position which American capitalism had enjoyed came to an end. The long-term factors of organic expansion of its internal market had been exhausted. But exhausted also were its historically progressive qualities. The great depression marked the end of one era and the beginning of a new.
Since the crash of 1929 the social and economic structure of the United States has been subjected to a transformation which is qualitative in its content. Correspondingly, certain important functions of the political superstructure have been altered. As a consequence, social and class relations exist now on a foundation which is also qualitatively different. A new molecular process was set into motion; and the mutual interaction of these basic changes will influence decisively the course of future development.
Several features of this transformation stand out in bold relief and warrant careful examination. Let us consider first among these what an inventory of national wealth reveals.
 
1. A study of income and wealth published by the National Bureau of Economic Research presents illuminating facts and figures. Estimates of this study are carried through from the year 1896 to 1948. But their real significance lies in the sharp contrast revealed by the two periods, before the depression and after. The figures given in constant dollars based on 1929 prices read as follows:
From 1896 to 1929, both inclusive, national wealth rose from $164 billion to $426.3 billion with a fairly regular upward curve of an increasing ratio, and amounting to an average annual rate of growth of about 3 percent. From 1929 to 1948, however, the figures present an entirely different picture. The rate of growth of national wealth now becomes highly irregular. Starting from a total of $426.3 billion in 1929 the increase over these years is very slight, the actual total of 1948 is only $461.8, of an average annual gain of less than one-half percent (to be exact, 0.45 percent).
Projections made of the above mentioned study by the US News and World Report, carried through 1951, reveal the fact that while we have a plethora of automobiles, radios, televisions and innumerable gadgets, the total value of home buildings, measured in constant dollars on a per capita basis, is today 13 percent below that of 1929. These projections summarize as follows:
“Even now, big as the US wealth has become, the country is still a little below 1929 in real wealth, population growth considered.”
The basic trend revealed by these estimates is clear and beyond dispute. It does not conceal the fact that the American bourgeoisie has become fabulously enriched by vast profits made in peace-time as well as in war-time. But the twofold effect of ravages of depression, and a vast scale of arms output in the place of production of use values, during this latter period, created a different reality for the American people. Relatively the country as a whole is now poorer than it was in 1929. In terms of population growth this relationship becomes absolute.
What does this basic trend portray if not a system in decline? The powerful internal dynamic once generated by American capitalism, out of its past unique position, to be sure, and not out of any inherent quality, this internal dynamic is now being rapidly dissipated. American capitalism now squanders, recklessly, the wealth accumulated by past generations. This is the surest indication that it has in actuality entered the state of decline of its world system as a whole.
 
2. A second feature of the transformation carries implications of more immediate and more basic concern. The great depression revealed the fact that American capitalist economy had lost its capacity to operate as a self-sustaining process. In place of an ever-growing market, keeping abreast of the expanding productive forces, a yawning disproportion appeared. The whole process had been thrown into reverse; it could no longer proceed unaided and on its own momentum. Artificial stimulants had to be injected to keep the economy, a going concern.
At first these stimulants took the form of simple “pump-priming” through public works expenditures as an effort to close the gap between production and consumption. But the efforts of the first phase quickly proved insufficient. They were superseded by war and armaments expenditures together with foreign economic and military grants.
Thus, while in 1929 expenditures for the armed forces amounted to less than one percent of the gross national product, in 1944 at the height of World War II expenditures, these were not less than 45 percent. Today the arms program accounts for 20 to 25 percent of the gross national product.
 
The Arms Program
War and armaments production became, and has since remained, a sector of decisive importance to the whole economy. It was decisive not only in the sense of its central imperialist aim to which all other economic efforts had to be subordinated. It was, and remains, decisive also in the sense of maintaining a balance in a precarious economic equilibrium loaded with explosive elements of crisis.
While the armaments program represents a terrific burden of overhead expense on the nation as a whole, its real paradox lies in the fact that the economy under capitalist relations of production could not be sustained without it. This has already become a demonstrated fact, it is the fact of a qualitative change. The truth is that this economy is no longer expanding organically in the sense of either rapidly enlarging old industries or creating new ones. Those of the latter category which have appeared during the period under consideration, such as radio and television, do not absorb a sufficient part of the immense productive capacity to provide a serious impulsion to the economy. Hence only arms production remains to provide an artificial stimulant. In the absence of an organically growing market these components of the economic structure lay the basis for more devastating crises to come. Thus all the factors which in the past stimulated and strengthened the prodigious growth of the American economy are either disappearing or turning into their opposite.
 
3. Alongside these changes in the economic foundation and closely integrated with them should be noted the vastly enlarged scale of function of the political superstructure. The paralyzing effect of the great depression made necessary a much more direct state intervention in all aspects of social and economic life. Beginning with the New Deal, this intervention continued through the Fair Deal and it will, all appearances to the contrary notwithstanding, become more complete under Eisenhower.
Greater and more direct intervention in social and economic relations is an outgrowth of, and at the same time a particularly distinguishing characteristic of, the capitalist world system in its stage of decline. Its appearance in the United States serves to underline the fact that basic elements of decline have also reached these shores.
Increasing anarchy of production in general, pushed to its extreme by the greater concentration of monopoly capital, generates ever more malignant elements of economic crisis. Complexities of international relations, expressed in wars and revolutions, and reflected as well in the astronomic costs of the war program, tend to invest every manifestation of economic crisis with a distinct social and political character. They tend to become manifestations of crisis of the bourgeois regime. The combination of these factors has necessitated constantly more direct state intervention in an attempt to preserve the social stability of the regime.
World War II, the Korean War, and the continued war program has brought this intervention to its highest form of development in the United States. The government became the centrally directing force in all social and economic activity. Major risks of capital investments in the war program were assumed by the government with guaranteed lucrative profit returns for the big monopoly concerns. The government took charge of labor relations and set patterns of wages and working conditions. Through heavy taxation, the government controls an increasingly large share of the national income. This constitutes its operating capital – social capital – which is used primarily to promote imperialist aggression in an effort to keep the economy on an even keel and safeguard capitalist profits.
 
Shifting Class Forces
On the whole, the powers of the political state are strengthened immeasurably; its preponderance, however, renders the political state so much more vulnerable to the tremors and eruptions of social and economic relations with which it is now so thoroughly integrated. The impact on the future political life of the nation will tend in this sphere also to bring forth new and higher forms of development.
 
4. Yet the most important aspect of the transformation of the American social structure since the depression is the change that has taken place in the relationship of class forces. While .the outward stability of its social fabric still remains, this relationship now rests on an entirely new foundation. The working class has emerged as a distinct social force foreshadowing today its ‘great potentialities of tomorrow.
From the lowest depth of its long period of ebb-tide the labor movement advanced in one mighty leap. A volcanic eruption climaxed the long accumulated pressures of capitalist exploitation which were intensified by the mass unemployment and destitution of the depression days. From virtual atomization the working class went ahead and built the most powerful union movement in the world. In the process of growth, quantity changed to quality. Union consciousness, cohesion and militancy replaced the diffusion, inertia and backwardness of the past.
The hitherto prevailing equilibrium of class forces was shattered and it could be restored only on an entirely new basis: on the basis of recognition of this new power. For the American social structure this change of relationship more than any other development signifies the end of an era and the beginning of a new.
Outwardly this new equilibrium still remains relatively stable. The apposite and antagonistic class forces have maintained a certain balance of power. How was this manifested in actual life? In the first place, the war and the arms economy provided a guaranteed market, relatively free of competition, for the products of capital investments. But it permitted also a vast expansion and a greater utilization of the available productive forces which in turn permitted a more complete realization of surplus value. On the whole this made possible the continuation of a measure of concessions to labor. Through full employment, including overtime, and by means of winning several wage rounds, the working class standard of living maintained a rising trend. Out of these concessions the so-called Welfare State gradually evolved.
Conservative tendencies within the working class grew and became more pronounced as a result of these conditions. And the labor bureaucracy, supported tacitly by the rank and file union members, drew closer to the government, seeking its protection against the power of monopoly capitalism. In effect this new relationship took on the form of a political coalition, not formally recognized of course, but existing in fact. The government needed the collaboration of the labor’ leaders to assure the indispensable prerequisite of mass acquiescence in its war program; the latter wanted to miaintain the benefits of the “Welfare State.” This was the essence of the political coalition which served as an essential prop for the relative, social stability that prevailed through the New Deal and the Fair Deal period.
Working class acquiescense in the imperialist war program became an established fact, not to be disturbed seriously even by the unpopularity of the Korean War. Now the Korean war has come to an end. This, of course does not signify a change of the fundamental course of American imperialist policy. Its essence remains global war of undisguised counter-revolution; war for the survival of the .capitalist system ...
 
Washington’s Problems
But the war plans elaborated by the Washington strategists are now badly disorganized; their time-table is upset. Defeat in Korea underlines the power and sweep of the colonial revolution. Increased working class resistance to Washington policies in the European metropolitan centers unfolds alongside the mounting difficulties, insecurity and crisis of their bourgeois regimes. The overall effects cause hesitation and muffled resistance also by the latter and introduce paralysis into the NATO structure. Not because these bourgeois regimes, like, for example, that of the British Tories, are less imperialistic or less counter-revolutionary than their more powerful Washington allies. No, the real reason is the impact of more clearly defined and sharpened class relations on Tory home grounds. Stronger than the pressure from Washington is the more immediate and direct threat to Tory class rule coming from the growing consciousness and political advance of the British working class which, moreover, is displaying its hatred of imperialist war. Tory hesitation and resistance reflect their awareness of that danger.
This is paralleled by significant changes in the Soviet Union since the death of Stalin; and the totality of these developments has introduced further modifications in the world relation of class forces which compel a considerably slower tempo of the imperialist war drive. In turn these modifications, together with the change of tempo, tend to aggravate the contradictions of the American social and economic structure. The artificial stimulants which had Operated to yield an equilibrium of its elements generated counterforces which threaten to disrupt that equilibrium. Out of their mutual interaction elements of crisis once again become predominant.
A twofold dilemma confronts the American bourgeoisie. In the field of foreign policy the relationship of class forces, on a world scale, is evolving more distinctly to the disadvantage of its projected counter-revolutionary strategy. Internal policy faces the beginning of economic decline which is fraught with serious consequences for the stability of the social structure. Dynamic forces have been set into motion in both fields which easily pass beyond the control of policy makers at imperialist headquarters. Both pose problems of social crisis.
At the imperialist home base the program of arms production did not mitigate, let alone remove, a single one of the basic causes out of which crises arise. Not only did these persist, but they have grown more malignant. This can be illustrated quite simply.
Commodities produced in a normal peace-time economy for the most part return to further sustain that economy. By and large they return either in the form of capital goods employed as means of production, in the form of raw materials of production, or in the form of means of consumption to sustain the labor force. In this manner they serve to build up and strengthen the economy and increase national wealth. The output of war material, on the other hand, is in its entirety unproductively consumed. Arms production on the present scale, therefore, constitutes a terrific drain on the economy and on all the resources of the nation. The debt load, both government and private, has reached astronomical proportions; credit inflation extends its disintegrating influence into every pore of the economy; heavy taxation cuts deeply into the lowest income brackets. And yet, a serious reduction of arms expenditures would spell disaster to the economy.
But the program of arms production promotes also the exact opposite tendency. Military needs, stimulated by the ravenous appetite for imperialist conquest, demand an accelerated and unrestrained expansion of productive capacity which quickly surpasses the absorbing ability of the market. Precisely this is now the case. Elements of a crisis of overproduction appear alongside of, and in spite of, the leverage of vast arms expenditures. It is clear now that the war and the armaments economy tends to push all the contradictions of the capitalist mode of production to the extreme. Tendencies toward crisis, merely held at bay by the injection of artificial stimulants of arms expenditures, are now due to erupt. Their explosive fury tends to become greater because of the consequent unrestrained expansion of the material forces of production.
 
Depression or War
The basic transformation of the economic structure now reveals its real nature: economic decline amidst an enormous armaments production. Indeed, this poses more sharply the terrible alternatives: depression or war. Any other course is definitely excluded. And implicit in both alternatives is the social and political crisis of American capitalism. Its decadence is approaching a deadly climax.
Once again the Marxist analysis of crisis arising inevitably out of the many-sided contradictions between the productive forces and the productive relations of capitalism finds its verification in the actual march of events. But these relations of production, as Marx made equally clear, are capable of final explanation only in terms of the social relation of classes and the position they occupy in the process of production. Iri other words, all these developments can be interpreted only in the sense of their dynamic interplay with existing class relations, or they cannot be interpreted at all. The reaction to these developments by the contending class forces therefore becomes the decisive question. What the power-drunk bourgeoisie intends to do is already clearly indicated. Its course of action is determined by its economic and political needs as a class owning and controlling the means of production.
Economic decline imposes serious restrictions on the full and complete realization of surplus value. While the magnitude of the latter must inevitably diminish, the magnitude of arms expenditure remains, and it will eventually increase. Yet these terrific “overhead costs” of Wall Street’s program of world domination can come from one source, and one only: national income.
Concerned first and foremost with profits and its accumulation of capital, the bourgeoisie, therefore, plans to effect a drastic redistribution of national income. It will not tolerate concessions to labor that approach anywhere near the previous scale. It needs an ever greater part of the purchasing power of the workers to finance the tremendous costs of armaments production. At the same time the bourgeoisie is less and less disposed to tolerate a social relationship in which the labor movement holds a certain balance of power. And in order to strengthen its own class position it is equally determined to change this relationship. Nothing less will satisfy the American bourgeoisie as a minimum prerequisite in preparation for the next stage of aggressive moves in its predatory war plans. As these unfold, the titanic immensity of the contemplated desperate venture would cut the working class standard of living to the very bone and tax the manpower requirements to the point of virtual slave labor.
From these general considerations a two-pronged attack on labor unfolds. Instead of the measure of concessions previously granted, the chiefs of big business and finance are now determined to reduce the workers share of the national income, while they themselves plunder the nation’s resources. Austerity will replace prosperity.
But this part of the program cannot be carried out successfully unless it is combined with measures to curtail the power of the trade union movement in order to assure complete command for the capitalist monopoly concerns. The witchhunt, attempts at thought control together with repressive and union-busting legislation is being fitted into the whole pattern of attack. Step by step these measures can be expected to unfold alongside of the production decline and the consequently more abundant supply of labor power. Flank attacks at the initial stage developing to a full-scale offensive for which all of the essential groundwork has been laid down carefully and consciously: this is the real significance of Eisenhower’s Millionaire Cabinet.
 
Anti-Labor Program
The political coalition between the government and the trade union bureaucracy has been brought to an end. It was terminated, not on the initiative of the labor leaders, but by the very same chiefs of big business and finance who have taken charge of the execution of the anti-labor program. Now the political coalition has been replaced by open, unabashed and completely unchallenged control of the government by monopoly capitalism. Its first objective is to carry the anti-labor program through to the end. Indeed, state intervention in social and economic relations will become more complete under the Eisenhower regime.
Even in this most highly developed capitalist nation, no clearer proof has ever been provided of the real role and function of the political state as an instrument of class rule. It was to be expected, of course, that this should become more pronounced as fissures of decline and decay begin to crack the capitalist foundation. Increasing state intervention in social and class relations arises on the whole, out of the reactionary necessity to prevent the disintegration of the old order, to hold the working class at bay, and to preserve the bourgeois relations of production. State intervention can therefore occur only on behalf of the interests of capitalism, whose class rule it symbolizes and translates into action.
But the relationship of class forces is not at all as favorable to the bourgeoisie as may appear on the surface. By virtue of its economic and social weight the working class is in possession of a far greater power than that of its adversary. It is now a class socially transformed to the highest level of union consciousness and organization. And the trend toward economic crisis together with the two-pronged attack on labor will tend to alter correspondingly the further course of the class struggle.
(To be continued) [1]
 
Footnote by ETOL
1. Actually this article was reprinted in the next issue with a short concluding section (18 paragraphs).



ONE perplexing question has haunted the imperialists of Washington and Wall Street since Sputnik I was hurled into orbit around the earth. It appears generally in their own crude formulation: which side is ahead in the cold war, the “free world” or the Soviet?
In their search for an answer they have concentrated most immediate attention on the military implications of the question. These range all the way from fantastic notions of control of space to the much debated missiles gap between the two major powers. But the debate often extends to far broader ramifications, including the more fundamental question: what about the increasing disparity caused by the rapid rate of scientific, technological and production growth achieved by the Soviet Union?
For the American imperialists these are profoundly disturbing questions. They can neither be ignored nor explained away, for they arise in relation to conditions at home as well as to policies abroad. The impact of Soviet advance is reflected more and more in the minds and the consciousness of people everywhere. And it is all the more effective because it occurs in the face of capitalist decline and stagnation. This impact is felt no less within the tenuous imperialist alliances where Washington diplomats are kept busy easing strains and mending ruptures. But their ability to speak and act from a posture of strength is subject to doubts because the once predominant US world position is now challenged in every part of the globe by the rapidly rising might of the Soviet Union.
Far-reaching social and political consequences flow from the weakened imperialist position. Several setbacks have already occurred, a series of retreats have been made with more likely to follow.
It is said that whom the gods would destroy they first make mad. It is not too surprising, therefore, that in their dilemma the imperialists turn toward fantastic notions of control of space. Apparently they hope that this will provide the means to restore their former position of power and extend their conquests on terra firma.
Senator Lyndon Johnson is the most ardent among the hopeful. Fancying himself the “space conscience” for Congress, he stirred the never failing credulity of his senatorial colleagues early last year with this kind of awesome prospect.
“From space,” said Johnson, “the masters of infinity would have the power to control the earth’s weather, to cause drought and flood, to change tides and raise the level of the sea, to divert the Gulf Stream and change temperate climates to frigid.”
And who were to be the “masters of infinity”? Johnson left no doubt on this score. “If, out in space,” he added, “there is the ultimate position – from which total control of the earth may be exercised – then our national goal and the goal of all free men must be to win and hold that position.”
At the Pentagon the sights are set accordingly. Brig. Gen. H.A. Boushey, Director of Advanced Technology, US Air Force, lists these space goals, assuming “a vigorous program” in years ahead: 1959, unmanned space and moon probes; 1961, unmanned surveying, scouting and attack warning satellites; 1965, manned space vehicles, including repair and resupply types; 1967, manned defensive and offensive military space vehicles; 1969, manned base on moon, start of construction. The purposes are stated to be military, commercial and scientific.
Notions of military control of space originate in the hallucinations of madmen. Commercial interest in such a venture seems no less far fetched. And scientific exploration of the cosmos has no need of military space control. Without it, valuable scientific data have already been obtained by the instrumented satellites hurled into orbits by both East and West. But it should not be forgotten that the vehicles developed to send the instrumentation skyward have been constructed chiefly and primarily for military purposes. The scientific discoveries made have scarcely attained the status of useful by-products that are painfully overshadowed by the sinister implications of an arsenal of missiles.
In combination with the intense activities of the International Geophysical Year, instrumented earth satellites have served to extend our knowledge of the structure of the earth’s atmosphere. Some of the scientific data gathered concern the relation of solar activity to magnetic fields, cosmic rays, etc. Magnetic fields associated with sunspots were found to be much stronger than expected. A clearer picture was obtained of the relation between sunspot cycles and cosmic-ray cycles; when the former are at peak, the intensity of the latter is low. And, according to information so far processed, it appears that clouds of charged particles ejected from the sun give rise to strong magnetic fields in space which deflect cosmic rays that approach the earth.
But the scientific data point also to a new discovery. Apparently the earth is surrounded by an intense belt of energetic electrically charged particles spiralling around the magnetic lines of force. This has been named the Van Allen belt. A hypothesis suggested is that this heavy concentration of charged particles is due to break-up of nuclei of atmospheric atoms by cosmic rays, with the particles held captive by the terrestrial magnetic field. In turn, the discovery of this heavy radioactive concentration appears to have created new difficulties in the way of prevailing ideas for manned space flights.
Another aspect of rockets, artificial satellites, their instrumentation and their degree of development enters the area of social significance. It is directly pertinent to the crudely formulated question: which side is ahead in the cold war?
Commenting on the awesome triumph of the Soviet rocket, Mechta, the first to clear the earth’s gravitational field, a writer in the British magazine, The New Scientist thinks it was impressive. It was impressive not the least, he says, “for the clarity with which the Russians let the world know what was happening. Right from the start they gave its distance and position in the sky. At no time was there confusion about the rocket’s course.”
The writer hoped that this demonstration “will cause blushes where they are needed in Washington.” For, as he added: “things went quite differently at the launching of Pioneer.” As far as he could tell,
“No position in the sky was ever given ... and every hour or so some general or scientist would make a statement like ‘Pioneer has now escaped the earth’s gravity.’ (A few days later this nonsense was accorded the dignity of an official denial.) It all culminated in the wonderful myth that Pioneer took twenty-two hours to reach the apex of its trajectory and only twenty hours to return from there to earth. Nobody in charge appeared to know that if Pioneer had really behaved like this it would have been the instrument of a scientific discovery far more important than anything since the formulation of Newtonian mechanics.”
The writer states quite bluntly:
“... it is plain that too many people in senior positions in US space research projects do not know what they are doing.”
Strong as this indictment may seem, charges of no less serious consequences have been presented in hearings before congressional committees on the gap in missiles production.
None of the experts, real or fancied, outside of the lunatic fringe of bourgeois propagandists, will deny the existence of the missiles gap that is so unfavorable to the United States. In fact, a report released on January 10, by the House Select Committee on Aeronautics estimates that Russia may be more than one and one half years ahead of this country in rockets and space technology. “Even if the Soviet rate of progress is no greater than that of the United States,” the report avers, “the gap would never be closed, but would progressively widen.”
The US lag in rocket and space technology is confirmed by government space experts before the Senate committee inquiries. Dr. Wernher von Braun and others gave full credence to Khrushchev’s truculent claim that the USSR now has intercontinental ballistic missiles with pin-point accuracy “to any point on the globe.” The experts based their appraisal largely on the mathematical precision of the guidance technique displayed by the Soviet cosmic rocket launched January 2.
At the same time the insinuations of the British writer about bemused bewilderment in Washington appear to be well founded. McElroy, the Secretary of Defense, is in this respect typical of the perplexity in high places. His previous success as a soap manufacturer cannot be denied; but now he sees a rising new world which he does not understand, yet he is unable to hide his confusion. A few days after insisting that there was no missiles gap, he told the senators that the USSR would soon have a substantial margin of such weapons, perhaps three to one.
So far the relative military position of the two world powers has occupied the center of attention. But the construction and the launching of instrumented space rockets is an extremely complex undertaking. It requires deep-going theoretical study, diligent application, a high level of scientific development, labor skills and a technological structure of the greatest perfection and production capability. And this well known fact adds a fair quota of dismay to the uneasy apprehension in American capitalist circles whenever comparative production potentials between the two systems enter into the debate.
Efforts to paint an illusory picture by downgrading the Soviet potential and embellishing the American out of reasonable proportion do not ease the apprehension. The real contrast intrudes unceremoniously to shatter the illusions.
Among the efforts of such self-deception the February 1957 Fortune luxury magazine presents a striking example. In this issue Albert Burck and Sanford S. Parker made the usually distorted type of comparison. The authors granted that Soviet production might sustain an annual rate of growth of 6% compared to 4% for the United States. Still not satisfied with the latter claim, they quickly interpolated: US industrial production “is two-and-a-half times larger than Soviet industrial production ... The actual or absolute additions to annual US industrial output are thus running half again as large as the Soviet Union’s.”
Reading this, one is reminded of the mathematical riddle said to have been propounded by the Stoic philosopher, Zeno of Elea, concerning the race between Achilles and the tortoise. Even though Achilles runs ten times as fast as the tortoise, if the latter has a hundred yards start, Achilles is always getting nearer to the tortoise but can never quite catch up to him. When Achilles runs 100 yards the tortoise runs ten yards; the next lap is ten yards for Achilles and one yard for the tortoise; thereafter one yard and one-tenth of a yard respectively, and so on through the constant addition of ever smaller fractions. To be sure, Zeno could have no doubt that Achilles would overtake the tortoise; what troubled him was, where is the catch? The quantitative additions seemed difficult to question, only they failed to account for the qualitative relationship.
The importance of the qualitative difference between the two conflicting systems should be obvious. Without a thorough comprehension of this there can be no sound foundation for an objective appraisal of their relative economic potentials. We shall return to this aspect later; meanwhile, another look at the estimates presented by the Fortune analysis will prove instructive. It grants that Soviet production might sustain an annual rate of growth of 6% although Soviet figures relating to past performances are somewhat higher. But the claimed 4% annual growth for the United States does not at all correspond to reality. More recent comparisons with the new Soviet Seven Year Plan point clearly to a far greater differential.
At the Twenty-First Communist Party Congress, just held in Moscow, Khrushchev laid emphasis on the planned average annual economic expansion of about 8.6% for the next seven years. He said this compared with an annual rate of growth in the United States of 2%. Commenting on this latter figure Edwin L. Dale, in the January 29 New York Times suggests that Khrushchev “was being unnecessarily kind. Since the end of the Korean War, the annual economic growth of this country – after correcting for higher prices – has averaged less than 1.5%.”
Bourgeois economists are well aware of this situation. No matter how much they insist on the supreme virtues of capitalist free enterprise, arrayed against this are all the stubborn facts of life. For their edification we shall recite some of these facts.
From the end of the Civil War to about the turn of the century the American economy expanded at an average annual rate of 5%. From 1900 to 1929 the rate had slowed down to about 4%. There was a further drop between 1929 and 1950 to slightly less than 3%. And now, during the last six years, annual economic growth has been reduced to a rate of less than 1.5%.
This is the actual picture. The figures given speak far louder than words, whether coming from the bourgeois academic circles or from the innermost sanctums of Big Business. Moreover, it is the actual picture of the most exalted, the most powerful, the most efficient – the richest and the most highly developed among capitalist nations. This picture becomes so much more devastating when expressed in human terms, of the privation, penury and distress inflicted by the crises of the capitalist mode of production. Facing these facts, there can be no concealing, much less disputing, the reality of capitalist decline and stagnation.
By the same token, the incomparable superiority of the Soviet mode of production, with its nationalized property and state planning, over that of the capitalist free enterprise, stands out more sharply. This is the qualitative relationship; it arises out of the qualitatively different foundations of the two opposing world systems.
To be sure, the United States, still has a very large lead over the Soviet Union in total volume of production. An authority no less than Khrushchev himself verifies it. He informed the Twenty-First Communist Party Congress that Soviet industrial production was about half that of the United States, while agricultural output was 20% to 25% less. Considering the larger Soviet population Khrushchev conceded that its per-capita output in both categories was correspondingly lower.
These figures tell their own story about the standard of living of the Soviet people. Even though they enjoy far more universal health and welfare benefits than is the case in this country, the standard of living for the overwhelming majority who are not part of the privileged layers, still remains much below the US level. The reason for this is not to be sought, however, in the development of the Soviet economic forms; quite the contrary. It is entirely due to the incompleteness of this development.
And here we enter the area of immeasurable importance for the future, namely the respective economic potentials: a projected rate of Soviet production growth of 8.6% as against less than 1.5% for the United States. To attain this rate of growth the new Soviet plan calls for production on a scale far surpassing all previous records. For improvement of living standards it sets a target of 22,000,000 new homes while working hours are to be reduced and the purchasing power of workers and peasants is expected to rise by not less than 40% by 1965.
Comparing progress in education, science and technique there can be little doubt that the Soviet Union already now enjoys a distinct advantage. Most American experts concede as much, though few would be prepared to acknowledge the basic reason for this advantage. Explanations made fail generally to account for the social relations that have made it possible.
Educations, science and technique are social functions; they arise out of social practice. While these functions react to their own internal stimulus, their development is conditioned in the final analysis by social needs, or to be more exact, by the needs of the prevailing social order and the possibilities it affords. As a natural consequence, this development in the Soviet Union carries the distinctive mark of the material foundation on which it unfolds.
The tremendous need for advance of a once backward country, in combination with the immense possibilities inherent in the new social order established by the revolution, spurred education, science and technique on to new and greater heights. This attracted science and it generated science, alongside of working class skills and dexterity. Planned economy became committed unreservedly to the promotion of science and technique. The creative role of fundamental research merged in harmonious coordination with its technological application into the process of production and the building of a complex, modern industrial structure.
The reciprocal interaction between social and scientific development is equally evident in the capitalist world. But the objectives and the social consequences of this interaction are quite different from those of the USSR, due to the different requirements of the social order. In the United States these are determined, in the first instance, by the special interests of capitalist private enterprise.
A large segment of US scientific research is carried on in industrial laboratories set up by the dominant monopoly corporations. This imposes restrictions on the free flow of thought and initiative. The objective of such research is held within the general confines of the particular needs and the concern for profitability of these corporations. Another large segment of scientific research is linked to government projects, primarily for military purposes. In addition to these limitations, the application of science and the progress of industrial technique, outside of military considerations, tends to rise and decline with the economic cycles. At each downturn technological advance is stymied by the diminishing private capital investments.
The contrast between the Soviet and the American educational systems is no less pronounced. In the former all educational facilities through college and university, including living costs, are free, while the American similar institutions are now increasing already large tuition fees. This assures a far greater measure of mass education for the Soviet people. It is further accentuated by the combining of scientific instruction with the training of labor skills, for which the very popular polytechnical institutes, established by the revolution, function as the central medium. Moreover, compared to government support for veteran’s education in this country, a report made last year by Chancellor E.H. Litchfield of the University of Pittsburgh on the findings of a survey of higher education in the Soviet Union contains this illuminating point:
“Industry releases its employees at full pay for more than 250,000,000 man hours each year in order to permit the workers to do work in universities or in engineering and other university level institutions.”
We can add to this, that the French statesman, Edouard Herriot, was not far off the mark when he observed that “Soviet rule has bestowed upon science all the authority of which it deprived religion.”
But American scientists who have visited Russia seem most impressed with the huge scientific clearing house, set up in Moscow. The Academy of Science publishes forty-eight times a year a periodical of abstracts of major scientific papers from all over the world. The companion Institute of Scientific Information puts out 400,000 abstracts a year. US efforts in the abstracting field are puny in comparison, if not downright ridiculous.
Consider this example presented to the House Information Subcommittee on restriction on the flow of scientific information. Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, president of Associated Universities, Inc., complained that while American translation of Soviet science writing generally lags, federal bureaus have been stamping secret some public Russian articles they do translate. Thus one Soviet paper wound up being translated seven times by different groups, he said. Small wonder then that a member of President Eisenhower’s committee of scientists and engineers, Dr. Eric A. Walker, cried out in anguish:
“Unless we awaken to the enormous implications of Russia’s formidable scientific achievements – and soon – we are inexorably headed downhill to the status of a second-rate world power.”
With the ambitious projections of the Soviet new Seven Year Plan the same question recurs that has been posed so often before: can the main objectives be attained? Considering the solid foundation of construction already completed, the Soviet capacity for exceptionally rapid advance is clearly demonstrated. By the past achievements its economic potential is immensely increased. Its free access to the world market, an essential prerequisite, can no longer be denied. Not hampered by private profit motives, Soviet industry is able to skip stages in mass production developments and leap directly, on a broad scale, into the new technology of nuclear energy, electronics and automation. In combination with the vast expanse of its territory containing enormous natural resources laid down in this heartland of the earth during past geological epochs – this enables economic planning in the boldest terms. American experts do not question seriously the Soviet capacity for more rapid economic growth than is the case in the West. Where their opinions divide is on how much more. Some of them assert that conditions of dictatorial command grants unlimited ability to mobilize available resources; others invoke the so-called law of diminishing returns. From this Malthusian doctrine they draw support for their scepticism; they point to the tendency of economic expansion to slow down as it matures and begins to crowd against the available outlets. In doing so, they transplant their own views of capitalist production to Soviet soil regardless of the fundamental difference in existing relations of production.
Marx explained the laws of the capitalist mode of production much better, and in a strictly scientific manner. Observing the development of machinery and modern industry, Marx noted the tendency of constant capital (equipment and materials) to increase at the expense of variable capital (labor, wages) with the result that the demand for labor falls relatively to the magnitude of the total capital. The workers, therefore, produce not only the accumulation of capital but also the means by which they are themselves made relatively superfluous. Excess capacity of production shows up alongside of an industrial reserve army of unemployed.
Simultaneously the capitalist mode of production sets in motion a restriction of the market by imposing limitations upon the purchasing power of the great mass of the workers. Their wages tend to fall relatively to output and to profits. Capitalism thus develops the forces of production more rapidly than it develops the conditions of consumption.
But Marx also insisted that general laws valid for all societies and for all social and economic structures do not exist. On the contrary:
“Every historical period has its own laws ... But as soon as life has gone through a given period of development and emerged from one stage to another, it begins already to be governed by different laws.”
And Marx viewed the capitalist mode of production as a transitory stage in the history of human evolution.
Soviet society is in a stage of transition from capitalism to socialism. It still partakes of certain laws of capitalist development while others disappear to be replaced by new laws. A full and complete assessment of the laws of production that came into force during the period of transition is not yet possible; that should have been the task of Soviet political economy. But so long as this pursuit remains subordinated to the stunting perversions of bureaucratic rule any serious and objective analysis cannot be expected. Nevertheless, a few basic elements of the new order of things are discernible and can be set down in outline form.
Most assuredly, the law of labor value is still the basic regulator of Soviet economy; its living labor power remains the basic determinator of all values produced. The process of accumulation takes the form of a proportionately greater expansion of constant capital than that of variable capital, as is the case in the capitalist world. The accruing higher organic composition of capital similarly reduces the demand for labor. Likewise, Soviet economy has so far developed the forces of production more rapidly than the conditions of consumption. But here the similarity ends.
The contradiction between social production and capitalist appropriation of the products that is typical of bourgeois society, has been removed. It disappeared together with the private ownership of the means of production. Planned economy has replaced the capitalist anarchy of production; and cyclic crises are unknown. Social appropriation in the Soviet Union parallels social production. True, an inordinate share of this appropriation is devoured by the privileged caste, leaving monstrous inequalities as the most distinguishing feature of the bureaucratic rule. But working class pressure for a more proportionate share of the national income has brought gradually improved living conditions. Targets set by the new Seven Year Plan indicate the possibility of a more rapid rise of Soviet living standards, approaching continually closer to those of the United States.
This points up another striking difference between Soviet and capitalist economic forms. From the general tendency of the development of the latter – the increase of constant capital at the expense of variable capital – Marx drew the conclusion:
“The greater the social wealth ... the greater is the industrial reserve army ... the greater the mass of the consolidated surplus population ... the greater is official pauperism. This is the absolute general law of capitalist accumulation.”
This absolute general law is now painfully evident precisely in the United States – the wealthiest among capitalist nations. The reality of this law, the chronic unemployment, is demonstrated to the American workers with compelling bluntness. In the Soviet Union, however, this law is in the process of being turned into its opposite. In this the Soviet workers enjoy an enormous advantage. Unlike the Western workers, they need not fear radical labor-saving operations put into effect by application of nuclear energy, electronics and automation. Their educational system affords them the opportunity to learn new skills; they can thus ease the physical and mental crippling that befalls a mere appendage to a machine.
It is not the intention at this point to enter into a rounded discussion of social relations and social forces in motion and conflict either in the Soviet Union or the United States; but a couple of outstanding factors should be noted here.
The economic relations of nationalized property and state planning imparts a different status to workers in Soviet society and it impels a different direction to their aims and aspirations than is the case in the capitalist world, where in the latter instance the workers are subjected to exploitation by private enterprise, their wage standard tends to become the uppermost issue in the class struggle, while increased efficiency of production raises the terrifying spectre of over-production, unemployment and social disaster.
Soviet economic forms and relations, on the other hand, weld the workers most solidly and directly as an integral component into the whole productive system. The satisfaction of their material needs, their standard of living and their cultural elevation as well, depends entirely and unconditionally upon greater efficiency of production, better quality of products and a higher rate of labor productivity. These are essential prerequisites also for the continued advance toward the socialist society.
The reality of this relationship is deeply imbedded in the consciousness of the Soviet workers. Concretely it finds expression in more direct worker participation in the universal comparisons of fulfillment of plan quotas and in discussion of new plan targets, to which the trade unions are now also drawn in more directly. In increasing measure the workers’ voices are heard, on the one hand critical of bureaucratic waste, inefficiency and mismanagement, and on the other, by growing and insistent demands for more efficient technique.
But these objectives can be attained and the advance toward socialism assured only to the extent that the bureaucratic road blocks are removed. The workers must, therefore, of necessity strive also in increasing measure for control of production, of planning and distribution to be exercised through their own effective organs. Freedom of creative initiative, more equitable social relations and democracy become no less indispensable aims of their struggle.
“The improvement of the material situation of the workers,” said Trotsky, “does not reconcile them with the authorities; on the contrary, by increasing their self-respect and freeing their thoughts for general problems of politics it prepares the way for an open conflict with the bureaucracy.”
American workers face a different situation. Though their productivity has attained the highest levels, instead of being integrated more firmly into the economic structure as a component part thereof, they are alienated from it – the tragic victims of capitalist decline and decay. Economic expansion in the United States is not limited by lack of labor productivity nor by lack of physical capacity, or lack of capital, for all these prerequisites are available in superabundance. The roots of the capitalist dilemma lie far deeper. The decline of its system derives from the fact that the productive forces it created have long outgrown their private property relations.
Prior to the Great Depression, the ever growing internal market furnished the main base for capitalist expansion. This is no longer the case. From the emergence out of the depression, the United States has now about completed its cycle of artificial prosperity made possible by production for war and for the armaments race.
Even this vast market proved too narrow for the mighty productive forces that it called into being. The industrial boom that it generated has levelled off; and after its period of artificial revival, the home market is now beset by tendencies of contraction. The purchasing power of the great mass of the workers faces the limitations imposed by the capitalist mode of production for profits. Adequate outlets abroad are no less limited because the world market is now seriously curtailed by the advancing colonial revolution; and what is left of it is racked by cutthroat competition.
The theoretical analysis made by Marx here appears in full view as the irreproachable picture of things as they actually are, namely that “The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself.” It is merely production for capital, and not vice versa, “the means of production, mere means for an ever expanding system of the life process for the benefit of the society of producers.”
As a consequence of their dilemma the American capitalists can be expected to turn with greater fury against the working class, in order to load the heavy toll of their declining system on the backs of those who toil. The Soviet challenge to their world dominance will tend to increase their sense of urgency. But the American workers do not face such a challenge from the East. The threat to their conditions and their standard of living originates at home. It must be met. And it can be met successfully only on the grounds of struggle to transform production for profit for the few to production for an ever expanding system of rich and wholesome life for the benefit of the society of producers.



Do the ‘deep roots’ of inflation lie in the falling rate of profit?
TWO apparently contradictory phenomena are manifest simultaneously in the American economic structure today; at least they appear contradictory in the terms by which they are often described – inflation and deflation. A vastly expanded credit system, with its mountains of fictitious capital, has debased the currency almost beyond recognition. Alongside of this, excess capacity of production shows up in idle plants, or partially operating plants, and the resultant large-scale unemployment.
On closer examination, however, these apparently contradictory phenomena turn out to be directly interrelated consequences of the disintegrating tendencies that are besetting the capitalist system.
For serious students of the laws of capitalist production this poses a number of important questions. Correct answers to these questions will enrich our understanding of the operation of these laws. From this point of view the contributions to a discussion made by Albert Phillips in The Deep Roots of Inflation have their own special merit. Needless to say, Phillips adheres to the Marxist approach in his attempt to elucidate some of these questions. He starts out from one of the basic features of capitalist production: the disproportionate expansion of constant capital (equipment and materials) as against variable capital (labor, wages) and the resulting higher organic composition of capital which fosters the tendency of the average rate of profit to fall.
On the whole, many of the important points made by Phillips contain food for thought; but his general analysis suffers from a certain weakness. It tends to be too schematic. His basic thesis seems to be that the explanation of the inflationary process “lies in the falling rate of profit along with the positive effects of the class struggle; and that the growth of debt, including state debt, and the growing intervention of the state in the economy are increasing contributory effects rather than prime causes.” (Summer International Socialist Review, p.96) This thesis is not substantiated; nor can it be substantiated in the form in which it is presented. To arrive at a more exact analysis some serious modifications will have to be made in the relationship between the above-mentioned factors, while other interconnected components need to be taken into account.
But before discussing this basic thesis, let us take another look at the relative position of capitalist production during its earlier expanding period and its present declining stage. I agree entirely with the statement made by Phillips, that capitalism during its progressive youth – roughly prior to the twentieth century, – was able to lower prices and simultaneously extend the market, expand production, profits and the accumulation of capital; to absorb lowering of the hours of work and to increase both real and money wages over the long run.
The process whereby this was achieved was, generally speaking, the same for capitalism everywhere. Primarily it found its expression in the transition from handicraft to manufacture and to large-scale industry. The formerly limited and scattered individual means of production were concentrated, enlarged and transformed into giant social means of production which enabled a vast increase in the productivity of labor to occur.
For the United States, however, there should be added the fact that capitalism here, during its early stage, enjoyed the exceptional opportunity to expand on a virgin continent. This permitted the rapid mechanization of old industries, the tapping of new resources, the building of new industries and the constant industrialization of new regions, which again provided for the swiftly mounting capitalization of appropriated surplus value. This process included the extermination of the Indians, the degradation of the Negro population and the turning of the mighty flood of immigrants into producers and consumers of goods pouring out from a rapidly expanding economy. The extension of the market tended to act as a self-sustaining process promoting expanded reproduction.
The changes that have taken place in the capitalist economic structure since its progressive youth are, of course, fundamental in nature. But the changes described by Phillips do not correspond to reality.
 
A Faulty Calculation
For example, he quotes the calculation made by Lewis Corey, that in American manufactures, fixed capital rose 1,738% from 1849 to 1889, output Only 1,170%.
“But,” says Phillips, “that was in another century and before the death agony of capitalism. What is happening today in this relationship makes the figures that Corey cites pale into insignificance. The total output of all goods and services in 1953 dollars went from $187.9 billion in 1939 to $367.2 billion in 1953, a rise somewhat under 100%. But in order to achieve this increase, business expenditures for new plant, and equipment rose from $5.5 billion in 1939 to $27.8 billion in 1953, an increase of close to 500%.” [1] (Fall International Socialist Review, p.149)
This assumed relationship of 100 to 500 (a result of faulty calculation) has led Phillips astray. And it seems likewise to be at the bottom of a whole series of erroneous assumptions: for example,

that capitalism is now faced with a constantly disproportionate increase in the cost of production,
that the ratio of increased labor productivity is not keeping pace with the increased cost of capital investments,
that this also brings into question the ratio of the corresponding surplus value produced by labor.

It is my impression, moreover, that Phillips has compounded these erroneous assumptions by interpreting the tendency of the falling rate of profit in absolute form; that is, in a form which must continue steadily downward to a fatal conclusion. This process would be somewhat like an uncontrolled nuclear chain reaction resulting in the inevitable explosion that converts matter into energy and leaves in its wake only the proverbial blob of atomic ash.
The trouble is that Phillips was led astray by his own careless handling of statistics. The figures he quotes for total output are in constant dollars, the figures for expenditures for new plant and equipment are in current dollars. In other words the former are figures excluding the effects of inflation, the latter are not.
To set the matter straight one needs merely to measure both items in current dollars. Such figures are the most easily accessible and they will work out the same way for both items. These figures are as follows: The total output of goods, measured in current dollars, went from $91.3 billion in 1939 to $364.9 billion in 1953, a rise of about 400%. Also based on current dollars, expenditures for new plant and equipment rose from $5.5 billion in 1939 to $27.8 billion in 1953 (using Phillips’ figures), an increase of about 500%. [2] Thus instead of an erroneously assumed relationship of 100 to 500, we have an actual relationship of about 400 to 500.
If we extend this over a longer period we get a more complete picture. Let us compare the year of 1929 with 1956. Both represent peak years of twentieth century capitalist prosperity in the United States. The period as a whole includes its deepest and longest depression as well as its highest and most sustained war and armaments “prosperity.” During this period total output of goods and services, measured in current dollars, rose from $104.4 billion in 1929 to $414.1 billion in 1956, an increase of 396%. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment, also measured in current dollars, went up from $9.2 billion in 1929 to $35.1 billion in 1956, an increase of 385%. Thus we notice that the rise is about equal for both items or, in other words, the increase in output kept abreast with the increasing cost of capital investment. Looking at this relationship from another angle we find that the ratio of investment for new plant and equipment to total output, remained constant at a little less than 9% for both 1929 and 1956.
With these corrections introduced we can get a better view of the basic thesis propounded by Phillips. Is the falling rate of profit, along with the positive effects of the class struggle, the primary cause of inflation, while the growth of debt, including state debt, etc., adds only contributory effects?





We start out in agreement, as previously stated, that the transition from handicraft to manufacture and to large-scale industry enabled the bourgeoisie to cheapen the commodities produced.
In England, this transition dates back to the Industrial Revolution. In this, country it is possible to fix a fairly exact date. The United States Census of 1900 is authority for the statement that “the factory system obtained its first foothold in the United States during the period” of the Embargo and the War of 1812.” But the same authority informs us “it was not until about 1840 that the factory method of manufacture ... began rapidly to force from the market the handmade commodities with which every community had hitherto supplied itself,”
Let us now follow the wholesale price index from that period to the present day. We learn from the Bureau of Labor Statistics data, with 1926 as 100, that the index of wholesale prices stood in 1840 at 71.1 and reached its lowest point of 46.5 in 1896. During the Civil War and World War I the index went up quite high for a relatively short period on both occasions, to drop somewhat lower during the Great Depression and reach 77.1 in 1939. Since 1939, however, the wholesale price index has made a steeply upward climb, practically uninterrupted for two decades, without any sign of reversal of this trend. Projecting it forward with 1926 still as 100, instead of the average of 1947-49 now in common use as the base, by October, 1955, the wholesale price index stands at 184.9, a rise of almost two and one-half times since 1939.
For the United States this is an entirely new phenomenon. Its reverse side is the drastic currency depreciation; and this phenomenon of the last twenty years is rightly named inflation. Moreover, the reluctance of the American people to buy government bonds to finance the present huge federal budget deficit seems to indicate that the further rotting of the dollar is now accepted as inevitable as death and taxes.
 
The Role of Credit
Popular awareness of inflation seems to spring from a more realistic appraisal of what it really is than all the bewildered effusions of the bourgeois economists mentioned by Phillips, For if the latter were to approach an explanation of the problem, they would have to turn their attention first of all to one of the basic institutions of capitalist society – the credit system. There they would find the most direct source of the origin and growth of inflation.
Marx made the scathing indictment that “the credit system ... develops the incentive of capitalist production, the accumulation of wealth by the appropriation and exploitation of the labor of others to the purest and most colossal form of gambling and swindling, and reduces more and more the number of those who exploit the social wealth.” (Capital, Vol.III, p.522).
Marx also provided us with a thorough analysis of the function of money, and tokens of money, in capitalist society. He explained how money becomes capital in the process of production by the intervention of the commodity labor power, “a commodity whose use value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value.” Marx similarly explained the two-fold function of money in the process of circulation. In the one instance, in its abstract or ideal form, it becomes the socially recognized measure of value inasmuch as it represents the incarnation of human labor. In its concrete form, money performs the function of a socially recognized medium of exchange (including the function of means of deferred payments or credit).
In the latter case, the function is transient. After having mediated at one point, between purchaser and seller, the money moves away to repeat its office elsewhere. Because of being a “transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodities,” said Marx, money (gold or silver) is “capable of being replaced by a token,” but “only in so far as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else.” (Capital, Vol.I, pp.144-145).
Marx subjected interest-bearing capital, banking capital – which forms the essential basis of operation within the credit structure – to a careful examination. While he was aware that such capital in the hands of the banker appears as an independent self-expanding value, he demonstrated how it can in reality have no independent function separate and apart from capital employed in the process of production. And Marx found a great proportion of such “money capital” to be fictitious. From this he drew the observation:
“With the development of the credit system and of interest-bearing capital all capital seems to double, or even treble, itself by the various modes, in which the same capital, or perhaps the same claim on a debt, appears in different forms in different hands.” (Capital, Vol.III, p.553).
This purest form of gambling and swindling has today gone far beyond anything ever experienced at the time of Marx. The mountains of fictitious capital created to finance World War II, the Korean “police action” and the subsequent armaments race served as the initial means to debase the currency. Goethe was modest, indeed, when in the second part of Faust he blamed the invention of paper money on Mephistopheles. The modern bankers and their governmental agencies have done much better; they have manufactured money out of thin air to finance both public and private debt. This has left its imprint on all banking capital, on the money supply and the liquid assets of the nation. All these are debased almost beyond recognition.
During World War II, for example, the government borrowed money from the banks and from the citizens. About one hundred billion dollars were borrowed from commercial banks, giving government bonds as security. The government spent that capital. It was spent for bullets, bombs, planes, tanks and battleships blown to bits or sunk long ago. But the government bonds – gilt-edged to be sure, yet still only shadows of capital – remain in the banks as deposits upon which the bankers can again make loans to the tune of six times their face “value.” Thus the capital – whose progeny, interest, is paid by the state – is illusory, fictitious capital. It consists of certificates of indebtedness, to which corporate and private debts add their load. Moreover, the interest and principal on those bonds can be paid only by taxing the production of real capital.
The heavy injection of fictitious capital into the credit system is illustrated by the following: At the end of 1939 currency in circulation and demand deposits in banks (check-book money) amounted to about $36 billion. At the end of 1952, when the most intense inflationary heat began to subside, but not to disappear, currency in circulation and check-book money had risen to about $129 billion. It had more than trebled! The extra $93 billion entered into and vastly augmented the money supply of the nation.
For the United States this is also an entirely new phenomenon, of which the steeply rising price index expresses the other side of the reality. Never before in American history has anything even approaching such a tremendous increase in the money supply occurred. And precisely in this do we find the main roots of inflation. These enormous sums of fictitious capital flowed as an element of dissolution into every pore of the financial and economic structure. There it has remained as a parasite feeding upon productive capital and drawing value away from all money capital.
New forces were thus set in motion which generated their own internal dynamic and kept on advancing beyond the control of the capitalist rulers. The quantitative increase in the money supply resulted in its qualitative decline. The almighty American dollar suffered a precipitous depreciation. As a measure of value it shrank drastically. In the short span of twenty years it has lost more than half of its purchasing power. This is the real picture of inflation, its causes and its manifestations; and inflation has become a distinguishing characteristic of capitalist disintegration wherever this system prevails. In the European capitalist nations inflation is ravaging workers’ living standards and the same uncontrollable forces are also on the rampage in the United States.
 
The “Return” Is What Counts
What then is the relation of the tendency of the falling average rate of profit to the present process of inflation? To be sure it always enters as a component part of the commodity price system, especially of the big monopoly concerns. So do rising labor costs, or higher wages, both nominal and real, that workers have actually gained as a result of their organization.
The really important statistic that the “successful” executive of capitalist enterprise never loses sight of, is the return on invested capital. But this in no way justifies a conclusion that either the falling rate of profit or the higher wages of workers (positive effects of the class struggle) are the basic causes of the present inflation. These, as well as a number of other factors, such as productive capacity, labor productivity, consumer markets, monopoly domination, foreign investments, interest, prices and taxes, etc., are all interconnected components of capitalist economy, its industry and finance. They all function as integral parts of its process of development; and to that extent they partake in the inflationary spiral. But it is important to understand correctly the relationship between them.
The realization of profit and the accumulation of capital is the primary urge and motivating force of all capitalist production. To increase profits the monopoly enterprises are driven ceaselessly to reduce labor costs and enlarge the scale of operation. The most direct outcome is a change in the composition of capital; and such changes underlie all the contradictions of capitalist accumulation. The tremendous growth of plant, equipment and raw materials in modern industry, operated by relatively fewer workers, is an expression of the disproportionate expansion of constant capital as against variable capital. With each new labor-saving machine installed, labor productivity rises and the absolute mass of that part of labor which is unpaid, and represents surplus value, is increased.
Living labor alone produces surplus value. But the decline of living labor employed in comparison to the volume and value of total capital it sets in motion brings about the result that the surplus value produced also tends to decline in comparison to the magnitude of total capital invested. And since the proportion of the mass of surplus value to the value of total capital employed forms the rate of profit, this rate tends to fall continuously.
Marx always insisted that the fall in the average rate of profit manifests itself as a tendency and not in absolute form. Its effects become clearly marked only under certain conditions, for instance during crises, and over long periods. But Marx also established the fact that the same causes which bring about this tendency of the falling rate of profit likewise produce the forces that counteract this tendency.
The increase in labor productivity due to the higher organic composition of capital expresses itself in a progressive increase in the absolute mass of the appropriated surplus value or profit; thus on the whole, a relative decrease of variable capital and profit is accompanied by an absolute increase of both. There is an accelerated accumulation of capital. Generally the growth of the magnitude of total capital proceeds at a more rapid rate than that expressed by the fall of the rate of profit. And along with the growing mass of employed capital, the mass of profit increases, while the rate of profit may fall. The opposites here interpenetrate. The same causes which bring about the tendency of the falling rate of profit simultaneously promote an increase in the mass of profit.
However, the rate of profit as well as the realization of surplus value depends also on other circumstances. It depends quite directly on what Marx calls the second act of the process of production – the sale of the products. The constellation of the market is, therefore, pertinent to our discussion. It can throw further light on the relation of the falling rate of profit to inflation.
As we have seen, the period of inflation coincides with the existence of a huge artificial market for armaments production. Precisely t his artificial market created the extraordinary conditions in which the factors counteracting the tendency of the falling rate of profit were the most active. I leave aside here the factors which have become familiar in the past, such as: greater intensity in the exploitation of labor, cheapening of the elements of constant capital, export of capital, etc. To be sure these were still present, but more important now is a consideration of the special conditions created by the armaments markets. These can be set down about as follows:

In this artificial market, prices and profits were far less affected than usual by competition. Production of armaments did not enter into competition with consumer goods and the capitalist overhead cost of advertising could be held to a minimum.
Corporations holding cost-plus arms contracts were favored by accelerated amortization enabling them to deduct the cost of capital investment for plant and equipment from federal taxes over a period of five years instead of the customary twenty year period.
More nearly than ever, all the fixed capital (plant and equipment) was set into motion by labor, turning out products in ever greater volume and, incidentally, eliminating payment of fixed charges on idle plants.
To what extent, under these extraordinary conditions, the greater mass of surplus value or profit extracted compensated for, or exceeded, the greater capital investment is difficult to say. But it is a known fact that the artificial armaments market during most of the period of its existence absorbed a vastly enlarged output and permitted, thereby, the most complete realization of surplus value.

These factors counterbalancing the tendency of the falling rate of profit were active simultaneously. Not only did they help to overcome the effects on profit caused by the recessions of 1948-49 and 1953-54, but the rate of profit apparently experienced a new, even though temporary, rise.
That this was actually the case seems indicated by the estimated rates of profit of leading manufacturing corporations, submitted by Reuther to the 1957 UAW convention. Based on data from the First National City Bank Monthly Letter, profits after taxes per $100 of investment rose for autos and trucks from $23.50 in 1929 to $29.10 in 1955. For tire and rubber products the corresponding figures rose from $3.90 to $15.10; for aircraft and parts from $10.70 to $24.70. Other industries listed, petroleum products and non-ferrous metals, showed somewhat lesser gains. These figures, of course, reflect the inflationary process, which affects both profits and capital investments. Nonetheless, they suggest a pretty fair position for the rate of profit.
A somewhat more conservative estimate of profit rates has been presented by the Labor Research Association. It is based on tax returns to the US Bureau of Internal Revenue by all corporations from 1909 to 1946. Over this period the estimated rate of profit on total capital employed varies considerably. It starts out with 5.4%. in 1909, reaches a high point of 12% during World War I, to vanish with the great depression, rising again from 4.2% in 1939 to 8.3% in 1946. The authors admit that this estimate is on the conservative side and that it should, undoubtedly, be a good deal higher considering the particularly skillful art of concealing profits to avoid taxes that is practiced by the corporations. In this connection one needs only remember how corporation heads tremble with indignation when demands are made to “open their books.”
Meanwhile, the same causes which bring about the tendency of the falling rate of profit simultaneously promote an increase in the mass of appropriated surplus value or profit. At no other time has this been more sharply illuminated than during the period of the artificially created armaments market. Profits after taxes of all corporations rose from $5.0 billion in 1939 to $21.0 billion in 1955, an increase of 420%. Even allowing for the effects of inflation, this is a phenomenal rise indeed. Moreover, capitalists are generally enriched by a smaller yield on a larger volume of invested capital. For example, according to the Labor Research Association estimates, in 1918, the last year of World War I, corporate profits showed a rate of 6.6% on a net worth amounting to a mere $75.7 billion. But in 1945, the last year of World War II, the corporations pocketed a yield of 6.4% on a total net worth of $165.0 billion.
It is true that the tendency of the falling rate of profit and the struggle against it conditions a fundamental aspect of capitalist development. But it must be acknowledged that precisely this period of raging inflation, beginning with 1939, has been exceptionally favorable to capitalism both as regards the rate of profit and the mass of profit.
 
Labor Productivity
Obviously, this phenomenal profit gain, and the great magnitude of realized surplus value that it represents, was made possible primarily by the constantly higher labor productivity. The tremendous diversion of labor, of production and of national income to turn out armaments for hot wars and for the cold war could take place only on the solid underpinning of the high American labor productivity.
It is difficult to measure labor productivity; estimates made are usually rough approximations. However, the calculation by Edwin Clague, the Commissioner of Labor Statistics, appearing in Scientific American, September 1951, seems reasonable. Clague computed the productivity improvement for the whole economy at an average rate of 2% per year from 1900 to 1950. Phillips quotes Labors Economic Review (AFL-CIO) which computed an annual productivity increase of 3.0% to 3.6% from 1947 to 1956. These higher figures may have reference only to manufacture where such gains are always greater. Nevertheless, the constant and substantial increase in labor productivity is clearly evident.
But the assumption repeatedly asserted by Phillips that “the increase in labor productivity tends to decline in proportion to the organic change in the composition of capital,” is entirely without foundation in fact. In the long run, as we have seen, from 1929 to 1955, the rise in total output held up about evenly with the rise in total capital outlays.
Viewing this question of labor productivity from another angle, we can add the results of compilations just made public by the Federal Reserve Board, of output by US factories, and by the Bureau of Labor Statistics giving the number of production workers employed. Both cover the last decade. The results are a 35% gain in output with 6% fewer workers employed. And the auto manufacturers, who have an especially keen sense of the rate of return on their invested capital, have been quite willing over a period of years to pay the annual 2½% wage increase for the so-called improvements factor. All in all, the evidence should leave little doubt that the rise in labor productivity has kept level with the higher organic composition of capital.
To be sure this labor productivity growth does not signify a second industrial revolution. And I am in complete agreement with Phillips that a second industrial revolution under capitalist auspices is precluded. My agreement however, derives from entirely different considerations than those given by Phillips which are summed up, if I understand him correctly, in prohibitive costs.
Phillips presents a number of statements to this effect from industrial magnates, bourgeois economists and other mouthpieces of Big Business. What does it all add up to? These statements are perfect examples of the plaints, usually interlarded with brazen hypocrisy, that customarily emanate from these sources as a justification for higher prices, and as a means of counteracting union demands for higher wages.
J. Pierpont Morgan, the elder, is reputed to have been fond of saying: Every man can give a good reason for what he is doing; but these same men also have their real reasons – or words to that effect. I shall try to indicate the real reason for the statements mentioned by Phillips.
Whether or not “staggering costs” stand in the way of modern instrumentation, or automation, of the capitalist-owned productive plants is highly debatable. Wassily Leontief, the Harvard economist referred to by Phillips, states the contrary view as follows:
“The estimated cost of total instrumentation of a new modern plant to automatize it as fully as possible today, ranges from 1 to 19 per cent (depending on the industry) of total investment in process equipment. The average for all industries would be about 6 per cent.”
Leontief adds,
“... the smoother and better balanced operation of self-regulating plants has already shown that they can function with less capitalization than a non-automatic plant of identical capacity.” (Scientific American, September 1952)
To illuminate the other side of the question, let us recall the case of the steel industry during the late forties. When the cold war and the armaments race began there were loud and insistent calls for enlarged steel capacity from President Truman which were echoed by the labor lieutenants of capitalism. The steel barons had an answer; it was a resounding, No! They pleaded poverty. Because of their heavy capital investment, they asserted, their breakeven point – the point of production below which profits would vanish – had by 1949 reached 70% to 75% of capacity. But behind their pleas lurked their fear of excess capacity, the fixed charges on which would eat into surplus value and profits realized. And besides, their vested interest in existing technology paid off handsomely.
In fact, it paid off so well that Bert Seidman, of the AFL-CIO Department of Research, could comment this year:
“Since 1939 the profits per man-hour of US Steel have gone up from 13 cents to $1.80, or an increase of 1,284 per cent.”
With this, we begin to approach some of the real reasons for reluctance by the dominant monopoly entrepreneurs to take advantage of the new possibilities offered by electronics, automation and nuclear energy. They may well cast envious eyes Eastward. Already the Soviet economy with its nationalized property and state planning is infinitely more capable than is capitalism of adapting to this higher level of technology. Not hampered by private profit motives, Soviet industry is able to skip stages and make a leap directly into the new forms of production while capitalism remains hesitant – except where implements of war are concerned – on the brink of this new era.
 
Lagging Consumption
The real truth is that capitalism is incapable of continuous, planned utilization of all the means and techniques that are available. And this arises out of the simple fact that it is incapable of developing commensurately the conditions of consumption.
The higher organic composition of capital with its greater labor productivity, inherently the basis of potential plenty, tends under capitalism to lead in the opposite direction. Not only does it foster the tendency of the falling average rate of profit. It sets in motion simultaneously a restriction on the growth of the market by imposing limitations upon the purchasing power of the great mass of the workers. For it is a fact that profits always race ahead of wages, and wages fall relatively to output and profits. Capitalism develops the forces of production more rapidly than the means of consumption.
But the expansion of constant capital at the expense of variable capital also reduces the demand for labor. Compared to the total capital set in motion, the labor force employed diminishes steadily. Therefore, the greater magnitude of capital, produced by the workers, becomes the means whereby they are themselves made relatively superfluous. The workers are face to face with the twin scourge of unemployment and inflation.
In the epoch of capitalist crisis and disintegration every serious advance in technique quickly renders obsolete existing capital equipment. It raises to more menacing proportions the ever-present spectre of excess capacity, of overproduction of capital. Simultaneously it deepens the contradictions of its mode of production and thereby intensifies the inner tensions and conflicts of capitalist society.
From its earlier progressive position, the capitalist mode of production is now in the stage of decline and decay. The constant expansion of the internal and external market, formerly operating as a self-sustaining process promoting expanded reproduction, has been thrown into reverse in a relatively contracted internal market and on an absolutely restricted world market. Heavy armaments production, devoid of use values, a drain on the economy; and manipulations of the credit system, with attendant inflation, are applied in an effort to prop up the sagging economic structure. These characteristics of the epoch lead to the conclusion that for the capitalist mode of production a second industrial revolution is precluded. It is precluded because on the historical scale the capitalist relations of production, i.e., property relations, which formerly served as forms of development of the forces of production, are now fetters on production.
 
Editor’s Note
1*. This is a response to the discussion article The Deep Roots of Inflation by Albert Phillips, published in the summer and fall issues of the International Socialist Review.
 
Footnotes
1. The “$27.8 billion” should be $28.7 billion, apparently, and for 1955, not “1953.” The figure of “$187.9 billion” for 1939 likewise appears to be inaccurate.
2. All figures quoted by me, unless otherwise noted, are from official government sources as presented in the Statistical Abstract of the United States.



Reverberations from the soft coal miners revolt against the ruinous rule of the John L. Lewis machine in the United Mine Workers have come back as a resounding echo from the anthracite. So far, however, it has been only as disorganized expression of universal rank and file discontent; given voice at the recent tri-dis-[line of text missing] position of “progressive” elements, but resulting in some serious defeats for Lewis. The practically complete absence of an organized conscious Left) wing prevented further gains from being made and facilitated the obscuring of some of the most burning issues.
With deep-seated general discontent in the anthracite the sentiment at the convention testifies eloquently to the pressure of the membership for a clean-cut fighting policy. No doubt, there is a rich field and a great need for Left wing direction has been frittered away through a series of senseless mistakes everywhere in the mine fields. This is a condition for which the official Communist Party leadership is mainly responsible and has resulted in the almost complete isolation of the Left wing.
Lewis suffered defeat first in his endeavors to avoid holding the convention and when it took place despite his desires as a result of insistent demands of the local unions. Lewis suffered a defeat 5 to 1 on his main proposition to authorize his handpicked scale committee to negotiate the “best possible contract”. But the disorganized opposition, led by “progressives”, did not succeed, or did not care, to get favorable action on the needs of wage increases, shorter workday, unemployment relief and a determined fight against the contracting system.
 
New Union Grows Under “Friendly” Auspices of Operators
Meanwhile the move started by Illinois local miners unions to reinstate members previously expelled for opposition to the corrupt bureaucracy – both the John L. Lewis and the Howatt-Fishwick union are endeavoring to turn to their account. Both sides can well afford to use this method of catering to the Left wing in its present disorganized state with no intention displayed as yet to seriously contest with them for influence over the rank and file membership. The Howatt-Fishwick union, thanks to its objective position of an insurgent movement without as yet having had to face a test of struggle with the operators, is able to claim considerable gains. For example, during the first two months of its existence, the new union claims 21 new locals organized in Oklahoma, Arkansas and Texas, three locals in Indiana, one in Iowa and ten in Ohio. The total membership, dues paying and exempt, for the period, it claims to be 51,618.
From its inception the new union has “enjoyed” the most friendly attitude from the Illinois operators headed by the large Peabody Co. It was decidedly evidenced in the Springfield court decision barring Lewis from interfering in Illinois fields. The Black Diamond, organ of the Illinois operators, gave favorable publicity to the Springfield convention, commenting on the selection of John H. Walker for secretary that: “During the years he has been associated with the labor movement of Illinois, Walker has gained the confidence of leaders in all branches of business and industry”. This friendly attitude is already being translated into “harmonious collaboration” on the job in carrying out the notorious Fishwick contract to the advantage of the operators. The friendly attitude is surely to be appreciated by Fishwick, possibly also by Howatt, the coal miners, however, should have no difficulty in remembering that only the contracts had any value, which were gained by militant struggle and maintained by organized power in face of the hostility of the bosses.
Undoubtedly the Howatt-Fishwick union has prospects of growth, at least for a time. The fact that it came about as a result of a revolt against the Lewis machine, a revolt which for the moment stirred many miners into action, and now compels it to move on for organization; the fact that due to Howatt’s past militant reputation it can generate some hopes by its apparently progressive front, coupled with the important fact that conditions in the unorganized fields in particular have forced the miners practically below the subsistence level, eager for organization, these will all count in its favor. But it will be the kind of temporary gains caused by workers grasping for a last straw in a desperate situation. It cannot count on lasting rank and file support or become a factor contributing to the organization of a real union embracing all the miners without policies of militant struggle and without a leadership free from past corruptions and ready to stand solid as a rock for these policies. This, however, cannot be expected under the benevolent tutelage of the coal operators.
 
Will the Two Unions Unite?
What are the points of division between the two unions, both claiming the title of United Mine Workers? First and foremost one must judge by the rank and file membership. And there can be no denying the fact that the Howatt-Fishwick union is here as a result of the long standing deep-seated revolt against the Lewis rule of corruption, betrayal and destruction. Had the Left wing, under direction of the official Communist Party not completely forfeited its mass leadership by a series of fatal blunders, this revolt, now temporarily retarded, could have been continued in its once adopted direction -- definitely toward the Left. It could thus have become decisive for the course in the anthracite as well.
As far as the two union leaderships are concerned it has quite clearly been a contest for spoils coming with official positions from which their conflict grew and swung in one section, the Fishwick group, over to the side of endeavoring to take advantage of the mass revolt. Is there any point of division of policies in its decisive aspect, that is, in attitude towards the operators? The records of both the Lewis and Fishwick groups are already well known. They have been identically treasonable to the rank and file and there have been no statements or proclamations showing any departure from or any difference on this score. There have, however, been Statements for unity of the two unions. A unity which could be accomplished only on the basis of division of spoils of position by both cliques and to the further loss of the rank and file. For the coal miners it can at least be certain that there would be no future union progress that way.
 
Where Is Howatt Going?
It should always be borne in mind that the bulk of leadership of the new union is furnished by the Fishwick group which throughout its history has been part and parcel of all the crimes of the sell-out breaking down of working standards and union destruction carried on by the Lewis machine. The background of Howatt, and a few with him, is quite a different one. But judging by the present position there could be but scant hopes for the future to show a revival of their past. Their present route of travel is decisive and when concerning a union leader it becomes one for the rank and file to take serious note of.
The fight made by Howatt against the Kansas Industrial Court law is one of the few bright pages of American labor history. His fight during a number of years, up until his expulsion from the old union, against the Lewis corruption and betrayals added favorable weight to his record. His struggle for reinstatement into the union was a correct tactical position; but with that reinstatement the turn to the right began. He failed to renew his fight and to give any support whatever to the revolt which became particularly widespread during the period of defeat of the Pennsylvania-Ohio strike and found its expression in the “Save the Union Movement”. He failed to support its further development in the organization of the National Miners Union. Regardless of the mistakes in development and weaknesses inherent in the N.M.U. from its inception, true progressives could not fail to support it. Howatt instead later chose to join with the corrupt Fishwick group.
At the convention forming the new union at Springfield Illinois, Howatt failed to fight against the seating of Farrington, who so completely personified the agent of the coal operators in the union ranks. Honest delegates from the ranks had come there determined to fight and root out all vestiges of the Lewis wrecking machine, embodied as fully in the Fishwick group. They found in their former ally Howatt, now an opponent. Referring to them Howatt made the outrageous charge that, “a few delegates to the convention have been bought out by Lewis”. The adoption of constitutional clauses barring Communists from membership and classifying them with the reactionary Civic Federation and Ku Klux Klan met no opposition from Howatt, instead he joined in red-baiting. Yet the most decisive is the attitude towards the increased exploitation by the operators. And here the friendly “co-operation” can lead to no other career than the one so “successfully” pursued by Lewis.
 
Preying Upon Miners’ Momentary Passivity
The squabble on the appeal against the injunction, now begun in the operator controlled court at Springfield, is expected to last until late in the fall. This has become one means of holding the general membership resentment against both the cliques in abeyance and retarding its development. But enormous bills, no matter whom the operators favor in this tilt, will be due for payment by this membership and perhaps help blow the lid off again.
Throughout the fields the coal miners are suffering under the crushing weight of unemployment constantly increasing by the advancing machine loading and mechanical mining. The major soft coal fields in Pennsylvania, Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky and other places are entirely without a union and with all gains of the past wiped out. Many bitter disappointments have been experienced. A certain degree of exhaustion in addition to the general more important effects of the economic crisis has engendered in the miners a state of momentary passivity though isolated spontaneous strikes have taken place.
 
Fatal Blunders of the Left Wing Result in Isolation
Yet the problem in the mine field remains the building of a union which will embrace all coal miners and adopt the policy of militant struggle. What does the official Communist Party policy contribute to a solution of this problem? A big insurgent movement has just taken place growing out of discontent with the reactionary policies of the old officialdom. It was the first insurgency in the A.F. of L. for a long time taking place in a basic industry and important union with a generally favorable basis for the Left. Yet it did not lend strength to the Left wing at all. On the contrary, the main benefits went to social reformism. The N.M.U. is practically extinct. Its convention first scheduled for April first, then postponed to June 1, has now again seemingly been postponed to June 28th – or will there be none? What becomes of responsibility to the working class and to the miners in particular who did follow the Left wing?
The meaningless hurling of extravagant phrases of fascism and “social fascism”, coming from the top, can be no substitute for correct policies and only confuses the situation, to put it mildly. Down among the ranks the small scattered Left wing groups, still existing, become footballs for either of the two old cliques. A continuation of this inevitably brings further isolation by members of these groups becoming compelled, in order to get a job, to rejoin either of the two unions having control without any policy of carrying on Left wing and progressive activities within.
Two main reasons for this isolation are easily discernible. Progressive elements who in the past became allies of the Left wing movement and should have been properly utilized as bridges to the masses were instead, during the period of right opportunist policies of the Party elevated to leadership. Hence they are now still able to maintain a commanding position while travelling definitely toward the Right, Secondly, the failure of the N.M.U. not caused by unfavorable objective conditions but by repeated mistakes of policy during the Communist Party’s present course of opportunist adventurism.
From the Daily Worker (6-13-1930), in an article commenting upon the anthracite convention we notice somewhat of a turn at least toward a half recognition of the necessity of the Left wing working within the existing unions. This, partial though it is, is to be welcomed. But how can such turns become effective and clear to the workers without an explanation of the mistakes of the opposite direction, as for example, calling upon the progressive miners to stay away from the Springfield convention of revolt against Lewis. Precisely at that place was where all Left wing and progressives should have been to continue the fight against the reactionaries of all shades.
 
Left Wing Must Return to Fundamental Task
The problem of building a new union, we repeat, still remains. And while a certain amount of passivity amongst the miners is prevalent, while they have been put on the defensive, opportunities are available. Perhaps nowhere better than in the unorganized fields for extension of organization and Left wing ideology, for building a union with militant policies. The additional fact that masses were set into motion through the recent revolt, as well as the course this motion has followed, must be properly evaluated. If it proves anything, above all it proves the necessity of the Left wing again adopting its fundamental task, that is, as the means of building one union, take up the indispensable work of organizing and extending its influence for a fighting program within the existing unions. In such fields as Illinois, Kansas and the anthracite there should be no doubt that the proper course is to organize the Left wing within the two unions having control to build the united front from below for the demands of the Left which correspond to the needs of the miners and thus to compel a united struggle with the N.M.U. where it functions.
To this end reinstatement of formerly expelled union opposition members must be taken up as a definite policy: A policy which guarantees the continuation and organization of the fight.
The field is ripe for such tactics, The rank and file will soon learn through experience to correctly estimate the position of the “progressives” now progressing toward the Right and one of the big tasks of the Left wing is to build and broaden the union with the masses, take advantage of the conflicts between the reactionary and opportunist leaders in a manner more effectively to expose them and win the influence of the masses for its program.
 



CHICAGO – The Chicago unemployment convention, the first of its kind, sharply denoted, in more than one respect, the present degree of development of the unemployed movement in the United States. It was the first culmination point around this burning issue facing the working class. Called by the Trade Union Unity League, its policies became those of the official Communist Party.
While the crowded one day session brought out many healthy aspects it also glaringly showed the extremely narrow character of the movement to date. Moreover, the policies adopted will, instead of overcoming the difficulty, tend further to narrow a basis where now the broadest scope is not only essential but also possible.
 
Many Extravaganzas
A summary of the speeches made, all bristling with a healthy militancy, would indicate the complete absences of a serious tackling of the problem – how to set the working masses into motion against their class enemy. They were well typified by the first speaker from the floor, following the main report. This speaker, on behalf of the New York delegation, extravagantly pledged: to build the mass unemployed councils, to build the mass “revolutionary unions” – to build the mass Communist Party, etc., etc. Nor were any of the “democratic encumbrances” of “ordinary” labor gatherings apparent at this convention. All was cut ready to order, its first business being the selection of a presidium from a previously made up slate. The presidium then proceeded to select those who were to speak from the floor, as per its announcement from lists submitted in advance by district delegations. This method “gently” eliminated in advance anyone who might not hew closely to the official “line”.
On its positive side the convention had some real healthy aspects shown for example in a large Negro delegation, 153 out of a total of the announced 1,120 registered delegates. Many splendid proletarian types had answered the call and came clearly evidencing the signs of pressure of the economic crisis drawing workers toward the Left, themselves being attracted by a movement which had fearlessly taken up their battles. Otherwise the composition of the delegation showed but little sweep of the movement beyond the general periphery of the Communist Party and closely sympathetic organizations and groups. 484 delegates came from the Chicago district alone, 100 from Michigan, 73 from Minnesota, 92 from Ohio, 56 from Indiana, 53 from New York and a sprinkling from some other states. There were none of those Southern workers who had taken such splendid part in the strikes of the Carolinas.
To understand the basic cause of the present narrow limits upon a movement which has great possibilities and has otherwise displayed vitality in struggle should now be the object of serious efforts of all militants. Without that no shortcomings will be remedied. It is wrong to conclude, as the Party does, that the present situation is one of a “revolutionary upsurge of the working masses in the United States.” Riding the crest of such a wave which is artificially constructed will at best get us caught in the dip, and at the worst prepare us for serious defeat when the offensive begins. The March Sixth and other unemployment demonstrations have manifested splendid working class response, but nevertheless what is most outstanding at the present moment is a downward curve. Everywhere increased capitalist reaction: innumerable jailings of Communist and workers on strike (many delegates were arrested on the way and in Chicago); break-up of demonstrations; intensified speed-up; wage cuts, directly and indirectly; the trade unions, including the new industrial unions, losing members. With this reaction also increasing signs of workers’ resistance through small defensive strikes. There have lately been, for, example, the strikes of the southern textile workers in Elizabethton and Marion and those of the northern section in Nazareth and Aberless, Pa., and Plainfield, N.J.; the short so-called strike of the I.L.G.W.U. in New York; the strikes of the Pittsburg taxi drivers, St. Louis bus drivers and the recent strike of the Pittston anthracite miners. All these were defensive strikes and none under the leadership of the Left. Where the Left does play a role has been on a small scale in the New York cafeteria strikes and the present Flint automobile workers strike.
Such is the picture at the present moment. Within it is contained the visible outlines of the upward curve in which the resistance, as yet isolated, can become a workers’ offensive of possibly broad sweep and surely of much sharper conflicts. Each such curve requires its specific tactics. Each has possibilities of growth for the movement and the tactics of one must simultaneously be the preparation for the other.
 
First Tasks
At this moment the first necessity is the most elementary ground-work. Millions of workers are unemployed and only a small section set into motion. Millions are still blissfully ignorant of their future status as members of a standing army of unemployed. That is the first point to bring home. The bourgeoisie have set to work actively to divide the ranks of the unemployed workers from those having jobs and already with some success to isolate the unemployed movement in its organized expression from the working masses. Can these efforts of the bourgeoisie be effectively defeated in any way than the broadest application of the slogans for work or compensation, unemployment relief, shorter workday, credits for Russia, etc.? Obviously not. Certainly the successful carrying on of the struggle for the unemployed means to spare no efforts really to unite the working class, which cannot be done within the narrow framework of the T.U.U.L. There could hardly be any situation where correct united front policies are so essential than precisely in this one. Could the hypocrisy and deceit of the social reformists and self-styled progressives on the burning issue of unemployment be better exposed than just through a correct and genuine united front policy?
These, however, were not the matters given serious consideration at the unemployment convention. It was keyed up to a very revolutionary phraseology but forgot its elementary tasks. William F. Dunne, in his report for the T.U.U.L. correctly stressed the necessity of unification of all of the struggles of the workers. But from that came the wrong conclusion, in the program of action adopted, entirely to limit the unemployed movement within the framework of the T.U.U.L. Thus the exact opposite of unification. Each union and industrial league is to set up unemployed councils in their industry as a part of the T.U.U.L. General councils, according to the program, are not to be organized where a section of the T.U.U.L. exists. These are mechanical limits which isolate the movement and confines it to that section of the workers ready to join the “revolutionary unions”. There could be no better way of actually preventing a mass basis of struggle for the unemployed. The social reformist will thus have a free field to rally all those workers who by vain search for a job are turning away from capitalist ideology but are not yet ready to join the “revolutionary unions”. In that broad field they can continue to sow their seeds of illusions and deceit. And it is precisely also in that field where a united front struggle around the burning issue of unemployment as well as Communist activities has such rich potentialities.
 
The Program of Action
The program of action lists the immediate demands to be made: Work or wages, unemployment relief, no evictions, 7-hour day, free employment agencies, etc. A total of 17 demands. Unquestionably the few most pressing ones, which are also the most elementary ones, must become the outstanding slogans. It would, however, have been more correct and realistic to advance the demand for the six hour day. More realistic, if for nothing else, in view of the fact that all of the railroad unions have officially gone on record recognizing the six hour day as a necessity.
But among all these demands no room could be found for the pressing one of large scale credits from this country to the the Soviet Union to further insure her successful industrialization and build the bonds of solidarity between the working classes of both countries. The Stalinists will probably answer that the Soviet Union “does not need” such credits. But that is contrary to facts. Simeon Zuckerman, vice president of the Amtorg, reports that orders in the United States for machinery, equipment, etc. averaged $10,000,000 monthly for the first six months of the fiscal year. In April and May of this year, they fell to $3,000,000 while orders placed in Germany ran to $10,000,000 because Germany offered a full 100 per cent credit for eighteen months and on some deals for two years or more. He adds:
“A big Soviet construction program in the Urals – metallurgic plants, tractor and machine plants – were planned with the aid of American specialists who are cooperating in building. But in the present difficult period, which our leaders never attempted to deny or disguise (so!) credits play an important role. If we get better terms from Europe we must place orders in Europe instead of America.”
The Chicago unemployment convention did not take up or attempt adequately to solve the tasks which the present situation had placed upon it. Despite its narrowness, a correct policy could have made a substantial beginning toward laying the foundation for a broad genuinely united movement of the working class against the present capitalist reaction and in the struggle for the unemployed. The Left Communist Opposition must intensify its fight for such a policy.
 



The epoch-making events in India today compel even the “theoretical” pigmies in the Stalinized Comintern, to cast an occasional glance at the historic lessons of the Chinese revolution of 1925–27. Unfortunately they continue to sink into the quagmire of their own confusion.
For the working masses who may not be able to follow the rapid changes of leadership in this “third period” we volunteer the information that Earl R. Browder is the latest Stalinist appointee to the position of superficial political director and “theoretician” in America. In 1927 he spent several months in China during the height of revolution and beginning of its defeat. Upon his return Browder wrote the pamphlet Civil War in Nationalist China. In its foreword he promised an extensive work on the “more fundamental aspects of the Chinese revolution”. We venture to predict that Browder will not keep his promise for fear of exposing the whole house of cards built up of the Stalinist policies.
 
Browder – Professional Confusonist
On the Chinese lessons and the standpoint of the Left Communist Opposition Browder says in the Daily Worker (6-8-30), in an article entitled Opportunists and India:
“On China, where the revolution is in a much higher stage of development than India. Trotsky also issues the slogan of Constituent Assembly, putting it up against tho slogan of ‘Soviets’ as organs of power of the democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants.”
And further:
“The Trotskyites cover up their own surrender to the bourgeoisie in India and China with ‘very left’ phrases about the dictatorship of the proletariat’, violent opposition to the slogan ‘democratic dictatorship of workers and peasants’ and then practically replace both with the open bourgeois slogan of ‘Constituent Assembly’.”
(Could opportunist confusion be more “eloquently” put?)
Browder goes on to explain that in a period when the bourgeoisie is historically a revolutionary class overthrowing feudalism, the Constituent Assembly is a revolutionary measure. But today the bourgeoisie as a class, as well as its organ, the Constituent Assembly, is reactionary standing in the way of the completion of the “bourgeois democratic revolution”. Proceeding from this he draws the conclusion that the Left Opposition has united with the Right wing, and he then repeats all the cheap calumnies always held in stock for the Left Opposition hoping thereby to prevent the revolutionists from engaging in an objective study of the Chinese lessons.
Browder, in these passages quoted, commits one “little” error. He completely confuses the question of the essential character of the Chinese revolution with the question of a slogan to be applied at a certain stage of its development. To make our case clear let us recall a few important factors in the Chinese developments.
 
Browder’s Confessions
In his pamphlet, Civil War in Nationalist China, Browder tells of reports of Chinese trade union and peasant union leaders on March 16, 1927: “The countryside is in terror, the Kuominchun (revolutionary army) has turned against the people. At Kanchow, the second division has assassinated the secretary of the General Trade Union and occupied the union offices; the leaders are all in hiding and communication with the city is cut off.” This is one side of the picture showing the so-called Right wing of the Kuomintang in its actual role, later repeated precisely by the so-called Left wing. For the other side of the picture Browder reports that during the northern expedition (from Canton to Shanghai), when the nationalist armies captured half of China, all the military victories were accomplished by the revolutionary masses who even overthrew and drove out the military rulers before the nationalist armies arrived. There were 2,800,000 trade union members and 10,000,000 members of the peasants union, several hundred thousand of them under arms, pledged to the revolution.
What do we find in these reports? In the first half of the picture those upon whom Stalin and Browder had pinned their hopes as liberators of the working class, and harbingers of the proletarian revolution and supported by the Stalin policies the Kuomintang:, first its “Right” wing and later its “Left” wing, were already then beginning to show themselves in their true role as the hangmen and butchers of the Chinese revolutionary workers and peasants. In the second half of the picture we note the wide mass ferment, the mounting revolutionary wave of workers, peasants and soldiers; the ruling classes collapsing and power slipping out of their hands with a systematic struggle for power begun by the workers – the conditions for organization of Soviets as organs of power. But what in this situation was the policy of Stalin and Browder?
 
Stalin for Hankow
As late as the E.C.C.I. plenum, May 18, 1927, the Stalin policy still held to the theory of the Chinese revolution as based upon four classes (bourgeoisie, petty-bourgeoisie, workers and peasants). The plenum decided that the organizing center of the revolution must be the Hankow government of the Kuomintang, the hangmen of the Chinese workers. It hog-tied the Chinese Communist Party in subordination and political subjection to the Kuomintang. We quote from the resolution adopted:
“The E.C.C.I. regards as incorrect the view which underestimates the Hankow government and which in fact denies its great revolutionary role. The Hankow government and the leaders of the Left Kuomintang by their class composition represents not only the peasants, workers and artisans, but also a section of the middle bourgeoisie. Therefore the Hankow government being the government of the Left wing Kuomintang, is not yet the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, but is on the road to it and will inevitably, in the course of the victorious class struggle of the proletariat and in discarding bourgeois camp followers, develop in the direction of such a dictatorship. (?!)
“The E.C.C.I. calls the particular attention of the Communist Party of China to the fact that more than at any other time is it now necessary to maintain the closest contact between the revolutionary government and the masses of the people. Only if such close contact is maintained – and obtained primarily through the Kuomintang – only by maintaining a determined course toward the masses, will it be possible more and more to strengthen the authority of the revolutionary government and its role as the organizing centre of the revolution. (!!)” (1927 – Emphasis ours – A.S.)
Trotsky, speaking for the Left Opposition view at that plenum, demanded the striking out of these paragraphs and all references of support to the Hankow government and the Kuomintang; to openly fight this center of counter-revolution and to proceed to organize Soviets as the revolution.
Whom did history, that is the actual revolutionary experiences, prove correct? The policies of Stalin. Bucharin and the Menshevik. Martinov, who had fought, Bolshevism for twenty years? No! Their policy of strengthening the ene
 my led to disastrous defeat. The Hankow government established the organized bourgeois counter-revolution and drowned the workers and peasants in blood. Only after the turn downward, with the disarming, defeat and slaughtering of the workers and peasants, did Stalin propose the organization of Soviets. But then – too late. It could lead then only to miscarriages and blunders culminating in the Canton insurrection – to adventurism as a product of opportunism. Yet even the Canton insurrection holds valuable lessons forged in the fire of revolution. It became a curtain raiser for the third Chinese revolution. Despite all its weaknesses and mistakes it indicated definitely this next stage. The shortlived Canton Soviet, not elected but merely appointed from above, proceeded to confiscate feudal lands, establish workers control of industry, nationalize big industry and banks and confiscate bourgeois dwellings and all property for the benefit of the laborers. Automatically it led to the proletarian dictatorship.
Browder in his present Daily Worker article, either in blissful ignorance, or else in a deliberate attempt to obscure all these historical experiences, proceeds to outline the tasks of the Indian and Chinese revolutions as follows:
The Bourgeois Democratic Revolution
“Revolution in India and China today has as its first task the completion of the bourgeois democratic revolution, that is, to carry out in India and China those measures which were the characteristic feature of the transition from feudalism to capitalism – national independence, distribution of the land among the peasants, breaking the power of the feudal elements, establishment of certain popular rights of organization and individual liberties.” (So, this is the task!!)
He adds that it cannot be carried out by the bourgeoisie but only the workers and peasants can carry out the bourgeois democratic revolution,
This is the crux of the problem. Here we see that Browder like Stalin, still holds to a policy which could only spell another defeat for the Chinese workers and peasants.
 
Lenin on the “Democratic Dictatorship”
It was precisely on the problem of the bourgeois democratic revolution that Lenin, upon his return to Russia in April 1917, took auch decisive issue with the views of the Pravda fraction, and Stalin as the editor of the Pravda. The Pravda fraction, through its spokesman Kamenev, demanded the completion of the bourgeois democratic revolution – that is the carrying out of the measure listed by Browder – Lenin replied that the bourgeois democratic revolution could find its solution in the proletarian, revolution. Referring to those “old Bolsheviks” who more than once have played a sorry role in the history of our Party when they repeated a formula, once acquired, without thinking, instead of studying the peculiarities of new “living realities” he added:
“He who now speaks of ‘revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry’ only, is behind the times, is therefore in practice on the side of the petty bourgeoisie and against the proletarian class struggle; such a one should be placed in the archive of Bolshevik pre-revolutionary antiques (it may be called the archive of ‘old Bolsheviks’).” (Lenin, Letters on Tactics, Vol. 20 part 1)
The bourgeois democratic revolution took place in China in 1911 and was completed in so far as a bourgeois democratic revolution in China could be completed, sufficient to prove that its problems could not be solved under the leadership of the bourgeoisie. The second revolution in China proved that the solution of these. problems could be found only in. the proletarian dictatorship. It further proved that it could not remain in the state of the bourgeois democratic revolution but would have to become transformed in the permanent revolution to find its final solution on the world arena. In 1927 the proletarian dictatorship in China was raised by history up to the first point on the order of the day. Its realization was sabotaged by the Stalin policy. The organization of Soviets was rejected by Stalin who chose the bourgeois leadership of the Kuomintang. The revolution, with the decisive sections of the masses of workers and peasants in revolutionary ferment, therefore took the road of the only other alternative – the establishment of the bourgeois counter-revolution which still rules today.
 
A “Revolutionary Upsurge” Here and in China
Browder now speaks glibly, in the seventh Party convention thesis, about the “revolutionary upsurge of the working masses of the United States” while demanding the bourgeois democratic revolution for China. Adventurist phraseology on an opportunist basis. He is now riding the peak of this “revolutionary upsurge in the United States” which may soon collapse because it rests on nothing but paper.
The actual revolutionary upsurge of the Chinese masses in 1927 Browder failed to recognize and understand correctly, therefore he is now trying to turn its history backward.
Did the democratic revolution in Russia solve its problems – that is, the measures listed by Browder. No. These problems were solved by the dual power, by the rising proletarian revolution based upon the Soviets and culminating in the proletarian dictatorship. We repeat – from history these pigmy theoreticians have learned nothing.
The problems of the Chinese workers and peasantry, including the measures listed by Browder, which will rise more in the coming third Chinese revolution can find their solution only in the proletarian dictatorship. Since today, under the established rule of the bourgeois counter-revolution, it cannot be expected that the Communist Party can arrive at the seizure of power in one jump – the slogan of the Constituent or National Assembly becomes a correct slogan to mobilize the masses.
It was after the establishment of the bourgeois democratic revolution in Russia that the Bolsheviks demanded the speediest convening of the Constituent Assembly. This as well as its final dissolution proved a correct tactic. And as Trotsky now points out:
“The millions of the toiling masses (of China) can come to the dictatorship of the proletariat only on the basis of their own political experience and the National Assembly would be a progressive step on this road.”
 



Recently two events, little known and little noticed, have rendered splendid proof of increasing unemployment pressure by the rank and file, at least within certain sections of the trade union movement, to the point where some officials have felt compelled to endeavor to get into some sort of motion so as to stave off what they consider “something worse.” They have, of course, been entirely overshadowed by the din of the noisy charity campaigns to which capitalism has resorted in every city. But they grew from the same cause, the unemployment crisis, and likewise materialized because of the fear of real working class action.
 
The Railroad Conference
The first event was the national conference of some seven hundred general chairmen and executive officers of the five railroad transportation brotherhoods, the Engineers, Firemen, Conductors, Trainmen, and Switchmen, convening in Chicago on Nov. 12 at the fashionable Palmer House, in the gorgeous main ball room, for a two weeks’ session to consider the six-hour day. The second event was the meeting of the Chicago Federation of Labor, Nov. 16th, adopting a resolution for the shorter workday for all federal employees.
The Palmer House gathering had a good proportion of paid officials, though some were specially elected delegates, more than fifty per cent being actual workers. It came about entirely as a result of the growing pressure from below, from among the railroad workers for relief in the present heavy unemployment situation. At the inception, the conference selected a committee of 25, representing equally all the five trades present, to work out a program of action. This committee submitted a majority and a minority report. The majority report, which is most significant, recommended a campaign for the six-hour day, without any reduction in the day’s pay, to be obtained by all organizational measures possible, tho not the strike weapon. It had the backing of the Firemen, Trainmen and Switchmen. But during the days of sharp debate the representatives of the Engineers and Conductors absolutely refused to go along with this program and instead backed the minority report which provided for a request that President Hoover call the railroad executives, financiers, and bondholders together and endeavor to have them stop their present drastic retrenchment and lay-off policy.
Meanwhile, the Chicago Tribune appeared with editorials paying some pious attention to the stress of the railroad workers but admonishing them not to help tax the industry out of business and thus “kill the goose that lays the golden eggs.” The railroad executives also managed, opportunely enough, to make their big splurge about an allegedly new policy of “maintaining and expanding” present employment on the roads, which will eventually turn into the opposite, like all the other “golden” promises. Evidently it helped. On the last day of the conference the five brotherhood presidents, always eager for a compromise and the eradication of class lines, threw themselves into the breach of the sharp differences, proposing that all agree to unite on first trying out the minority plan of appeal to Hoover before the majority project of eventual strike is to be further considered. It carried.
The resolution adopted by the Chicago Federation of Labor states that industry is paralyzed, commerce is bankrupt, unemployment is growing due to increased mass production, a situation which can be met only by the palliative measure of reduction of working hours without reduction in the standard of living. It calls attention to the more than one million federal employees working as high as twelve hours a day and places this as a direct government responsibility. From this it proceeds to petition the A.F. of L. to urge President Hoover to proclaim the shorter workday and shorter work week in all governmental employment, national, state and local, adding that this is not a radical measure but a “hope to inspire confidence in government, respect for law,” etc.
 
“The Capitalist System is Shot”
The animated discussion, lasting a whole session, brought out much sharp criticism of the utter failure of the A.F. of L. executives, conservative delegates exclaiming: “The capitalist system is shot, if we don’t do something, somebody else will.” Others piped up: “Yes, now we are all radicals and revolutionists” but put heavy emphasis on labor party ballots. Throughout, a sharp undercurrent of pressure, with its reaction, some cunningly contemplating, others merely hesitant, some willingly, but above all a fear of real working class action.
What the actual results will be of the railroaders appeal or of an A.F. of L. request to Hoover for either proposals need not be the least in doubt. Designed purely to prevent what has been named “something worse”, it will mean for those workers who may cherish hopes, only new disappointments, but also added experience. Nevertheless, these manifestations of pressure of discontent from the masses and the slight response, no matter what the motive or design of the latter, is significant. It points but further to the beginning of the upward curve of working class struggle tn the United States. It also propounds again, rather forcefully, the question of just what part can and must the demand for a shorter workday without reduction in pay play in revolutionary unemployment tactics.
* * *
It is imperative that the tactics of the revolutionary forces at all times correspond closely to the level and to every stage of development of objective conditions, and be in harmony with the readiness of the subjective factors, becoming sharper and bolder with the rise of the level. In this instance, it means the development of the economic crisis and the readiness for struggle of the working class in general and its unemployed section in particular. The curve has been continually downward. The crisis has moved step by step to greater severity, greater unemployment and, at the end of 1930, is still moving in that direction. Unquestionably, general discontent is spreading among the working masses suffering the wants of unemployment with wage cuts and more speed-up for those having jobs. No let up in the capitalist offensive but the workers’ discontent so far expressed, in its political sense, is chiefly in the “stupendous” step from the republican to the democratic party. These demands for the shorter workday without reduction in pay are the early signs of their pressure showing concrete manifestations.
 
The Party’s Tactics
The exact opposite of corresponding with these developments have been the unemployment tactics pursued by the Communist Party leadership. It started from the top and coming downward, not increasing in boldness or sharpening its line, but modifying it, turning to the Right and losing its revolutionary basis. The very beginning was made with the organization of unemployment councils – without preparations, without mass propaganda, without mass basis but voluminous in demands. Next came the concentration on the social insurance bill (purely a parliamentary proposal, of the kind which will most likely not even reach parliament and thus at best be able to move workers only toward a social reformist direction). The third step has now been reached in the complacent settling down to collecting signatures for this bill.
The mass propaganda, which should have preceded organization, was neglected. The councils did not grow out of a movement, did not represent the unemployed, could not gain their adherence and have remained for all practical purposes almost non-existent. The party proceeded from the premise, of a “revolutionary upsurge of the American working masses” and was stunned by the Democratic landslide. Will it now jump back and endeavor to fill the gap; when there should be a sharpening of its line and a greater balance?
Much of the necessary mass propaganda and preparation must, still be done. Correct issues, demands and slogans are still to be formulated and undoubtedly the demand for the six-hour day with no reduction in pay can become a powerful lever to help set the masses into motion. A concentrated propaganda campaign now could soon lead to the organizational steps and become real preparations for the coming stage of working class offensive.
* * *
It is well, in this connection, to remember the great movement for the eight-hour day of the Eighties. Following upon a decade of unexampled growth and expansion of industry and immediately upon the heels of a severe economic crisis – very similar to the present moment – it became a sharp offensive struggle immensely advancing the working class movement of those days. The Chicago revolutionists, the Haymarket martyrs – commonly dubbed anarchists – showed their ability to turn this eight-hour day demand into something more than just a reform measure. They gave it militant content and made it an integral part of the general struggle against the capitalist system.
There is much for us to learn from this.
 



Chicago, the “great” metropolis of the Middle West, is in a financial dilemma. Actually the city government, and the county government, too, have gone bankrupt, of course, without any official declaration being made. With thousands of workers tramping the streets in vain search for work this bankruptcy becomes but one more evidence of growing inability of capitalism to govern society.
Much excitement was stirred up throughout the city when by a majority vote the City council passed upon the 1930 budget, calling for an expenditure of $55,000,000. This was 7½ million below the last two years budget but claimed to be within the revenue of the city which has suffered an indebtedness of $13,000,000 during these last two years. Twice the mayor, the “famous” Big Bill Thompson, vetoed this budget merely to have it pass as often in a slightly amended form. But then the cuts necessitated layoffs. The first to come under the axe were 473 policemen. The excitement became a panic among the “better” citizens. Various rescue “Citizens Committees”, with which Chicago has been so much “blessed” in the past were again formed.
 
The “Poor Policemen”
Some of the “very best” citizens even thought it a damnable outrage that these alderman had voted a sum of $45,000 in the budget for their own automobile maintenance but would not appropriate enough to pay these “poor” policemen and thereby deliberately throw the city into “darkness and crime”. Last year by their own efforts these “best” citizens had succeeded in adding 750 huskies to the city’s force, and now – that seemed to have been all in vain – who would protect their property?
Meanwhile, 40,000 city employees are running far behind in wages. County employees have been voted a cut of 10 months pay for one years’ work. These are the white collar workers being hit. In addition many white collar workers and regular city and county maintenance workers have been laid-off, increasing the ranks of the unemployed. The city government is short of funds because the large property owners, the big corporations have paid no taxes for 1928 and 1929, awaiting a reassessment of tax valuation. The city government in its pinch is peddling tax anticipation warrants to such bankers and corporations willing to take them over, receiving an interest of 6 percent. This interest paid by the city now amounts to $36,000 per day. Even at this handsome return the corporations have been very unwilling to buy. But now a ray of “hope” appears. The Down Town Property Owners Association has declared its willingness to take over $10,000,000 worth of such warrants, to be returned in tax payments when the reassessment some day shall be completed. Meanwhile they collect 6 percent on their own tax payments they are thus withholding.
As an example of tax valuation in Chicago, it suffices to mention a couple of instances – not, however, those of workers who happen to own a shack, and are assessed up to the hilt. The Union Stockyear company is assessed, upon its property covering 135 acres, a valuation of $11,000 per acre, making a total of less than a million and a half for taxation. The company’s own appraisals, filed by the Department of Agriculture, shows a claimed valuation of $130,000 per acre, amounting to a total of $18,000,000. The Stevens Hotel claimed a property valuation of thirty one million dollars for bonding purposes; on the tax books it stands at a valuation of eleven million. These are but two examples.
 
Tax Valuation Cut
In 1926 and 1927 a big campaign started in the city, supported by the A.F. of L., for a reassessment of tax valuation to catch these big tax dodgers. A reassessment was finally granted, and although not yet completed, has already resulted instead of catching any dodgers, in further cutting tax valuations from 1927 to 1928 by over $400,000,000. The big down town properties alone cut over $300,000,000 with none of these taxes paid as yet. Injunctions, suits and political manoeuvering keep this money in the pockets of the exploiters. As one City Hall authority stated significantly to a newspaper reporter in regards to the fight stirred up over the budget:
“The finance committee group (who fought for the cut) will win a victory or two. The mayor will save his face. The appropriations may be a million or two above the estimated revenue, but no more. The battle was decided in advance by the bankers.”
Oscar Nelson, the alderman who carries a union card, vice President of the Chicago Federation of Labor and floor leader for the Big Bill Thompson administration in the city council, has voiced aspirations to become candidate for mayor in the Spring elections. But such change of personality would mean not the slightest break in the continuity of capitalist politics. The Chicago workers are, of course, not so much stirred by the budget fight, one way or the other. While they could, by acting politically in their own name and using their own mass power, easily catch some of these big thieves and tax dodgers, their real task will still remain ahead until they chase all the capitalist politicians out.
 



That increasing working class struggles will grow out of the present advancing industrial depression is a foregone conclusion. As to their present extent and rapidity of development we might only cast a glance back at the historical tradition of struggles of the American workers, marked by their convulsive but determined expressions. This may be said to be the prospect made possibly so much more acute by the rapid violent development of industrialization, its increasing class distinctions and the sharpness of the class struggle, which today makes up a special part of the internal contradictions of American imperialism.
This was strikingly set forth in Comrade Trotsky’s letter to the American Opposition:
“We must not for a minute lose sight of the fact that the might of American capitalism rests more and more upon a foundation of world economy with its contradictions and crises, military and revolutionary. This means that a social crisis in the United States may arrive a good deal sooner than many think and have a feverish development from the beginning. Hence the conclusion: It is necessary to prepare!”
 
The Workers in the Basic Industries
The unskilled and semi-skilled workers in the basic industries compose the great majority of the working class and must naturally be the main basis of new union organization activities. Particularly during times of exceptional conditions, such as industrial crises, when many of the regulations of “normalcy” disappear, can these workers be expected to move readily into action. Their moves will not be hampered by special privileges. While today almost entirely unorganized, yet they are potentially the most revolutionary. But the American Federation of Labor and similar unions, even as now constituted, will not remain immune from changing economic conditions.
It is well to remember the widespread Left wing and progressive influence, particularly in its more elementary aspects, as represented by the movement for amalgamation, a labor party and recognition of the Soviet Union, growing out of the period of industrial depression and great strikes from 1919 to 1922. Many A.F. of L. local unions, and even higher bodies, were swept by that sentiment. The tactics pursued by the Left wing were correct. True, since then many expulsions have occurred. Yes, but is that not a certain form of proof attesting the correctness and effectiveness of the tactics of the Left at the time?
Our objects in endeavoring to arrive at a correct union building program today are mainly twofold: actually to organize the workers for the struggle and to extend Communist influence through the unions to the masses. Hence the conclusion that it is necessary to initiate organization of the unorganized, to give them fighting leadership as well as to build the Left wing movement within the existing unions in opposition to the capitalist policies of the reactionary leadership. These two tasks go hand in. hand. This should be the essence of a correct Communist union building program. While this is today half-heartedly acknowledged by the Communist Party – on paper – it is entirely negated by its practice.
Just now can be noted the first effects of the pledges made to the Hoover industrial conferences. The big employers gave “promises” of extended activities and of no wage cuts. The A.F. of L. heads gave promise not to initiate any movements for wage increases, without even attempting to demand such elementary guarantees as: No further lay-offs, no further speedups and support for the unemployed. The employers naturally broke their so-called “pledges”, never seriously made, and a few hours later the offensive against the workers began. It will become more intense as capitalism endeavors to overcome its economic difficulties by increased exploitation. As it proceeds, although contented swine can be moved only with a heavy stick, even the A.F. of L. “leaders” will have to answer to a rank and file becoming more critical.
 
Communist and Conservative Unions
The next important question then arises. Should Communists help to organize unorganized workers into the existing conservative unions? The answer must be, YES: wherever these unions can be made to move. The inevitable pressure from below in that direction should be intensified and unorganized workers drawn into the unions on the basis of the program of the Left as an additional reservoir for the necessary struggle against the domination and ideology of the labor lieutenants of capitalism. With such activities must be combined the fight for the organizations to be transformed to an industrial basis (amalgamation), which is absolutely indispensable; the fight for ordinary trade union democracy, for divorcing them from the capitalist political parties; for militant methods, etc.
Foster argues in his book Misleaders of Labor (published 1927) for the organization of the unorganized into the existing unions, as well as in some cases independently of them. He states in part (page 319) as follows:
“... Besides, it must not be overlooked that, with the close of the present era of industrial activity and the precipitation of the inevitable industrial crisis, the trade unions, under capitalist attacks, will despite the reactionary bureaucracy veer sharply to the left, slough off many of their present conservative aspects, and tend to become very much more proletarian fighting organizations. The arguments of Lenin, Losovsky and others in 1920–22 against dual unionism applies today. Under present conditions there is no room for a general dual union movement in the United States, reactionary and decrepit though the existing unions may be.”
Here we have the matter stated, although with some exaggerations, fairly correctly. Yet the party leadership, headed by Foster, in its official policy and practice carries on the exact opposite. What has happened since to make this prediction, estimation and conclusion, in its main aspects, incorrect? Have the existing unions disappeared or become worse than stated above? That is impossible. These unions have even made, under pressure, the first slight moves toward organization of the unorganized. True, the working class has shown unmistakable signs of radicalization; but that was implied in Foster’s prediction from which the conclusion was drawn. Still it could not be claimed that in the United States, political, economic or working class developments have reached a point (or seriously approached it ) where a mass basis can be secured for a (dual) independent “revolutionary union” movement. The major section of the workers have not even had actual experience in ordinary trade unionism; not to speak of being able to correctly estimate the strike-breaking role of the present trade union “leadership”. What then has happened? Oh yes – we have entered the “Third Period” with its blatant drivel about social fascism.
With the Stalin leadership of the Comintern the case stands no better. The thesis of the 10th Plenum shows utter confusion particularly on this important point of conservative mass unions and “revolutionary unions”. It is characterized by the complete absence of a definite line.
 
Problem of the United Front
The third question of importance to consider is that of the united front policy. Unity of organized and unorganized in times of struggle is always essential. Of similar importance is the need of unity of action, between employed and unemployed. Carried out correctly the united front become an important medium in certain important stages of the class struggle. It can unquestionably become so in the organization of the unorganized and particularly where a situation exists of rival unions – new industrial unions and old conservative unions. The struggle of the textile workers in the South is about the best example. Violent assaults upon both unions as in Gastonia and Marion; the rank and file defending themselves and fighting back, in Gastonia under militant leadership, in Marion under reactionary leadership, from which a sell-out could be expected more readily than a forward move, for such was the record established.
 
Practical Strike Demands
A fourth question which, because of recent experiences, requires consideration is the one of correct slogans for organization and demands in strikes, for there can be no doubt that organization of the unorganized will be closely connected with strikes. In the recent Illinois miners strike for instance, led by the N.M.U., most of the demands were entirely too general and even too abstract in character. There was little or no concentration on the simple demands most closely connected with the actual working conditions and corresponding with the most outstanding grievances. Slogans and demands must not overshoot their mark.
Perhaps the best example of such wrong direction can be found in the manifesto of the party at the time of the murder of Ella May Wiggins in Gastonia, calling upon the workers to “Prepare for a strike of protest and sympathy for the heroic fighters in Gastonia who are fighting your battles”. The best test of this overshot aim is the fact that there was no response anywhere. The workers, not even the new industrial unions, were by no means prepared for such a political strike. A far more correct way would be to stress particularly the issues of the workers in industry, the grievances at the job, to lay the proper basis for extension of strike action in order to, on that basis, impart more political content. From such experiences lessons should be learned.
Very closely connected with this also is the necessity of actually giving the new industrial unions a mass basis. Without that they will become impotent sects and will not serve the cause of the general advance of the revolutionary movement.
To conclude from the few points emphasized hero that revolutionists may hold out hopes or possibilities that the existing trade unions can be captured, in so far as taking possession of the apparatus is concerned, is, of course, ridiculous. While this may or may not be accomplished in certain instances, it is not the issue. As stated at the outset, the real object is to actually organize the workers for the struggle and to extend Communist influence through the unions to the masses. And these points here emphasized, in harmony with the Communist Opposition platform, certainly go in the direction toward a correct solution of the problem.
 



Herbert C. Hoover, the “engineer in politics” has again assured the “public” that economic conditions are “essentially sound”. He sees a new upward trend. Undoubtedly this is not very assuring to the growing numbers of the millions already tramping the streets in vain search for a job.
There could perhaps be no better proof that the selection, of the president of the United States is made entirely in accord with the interests and policies of the dominant imperialists. Prior to Nov. 1928, the coming lean period could be foreseen. A mediocre Coolidge would not do to carry the scepter. An engineer was required who could step forward and boldly carry out these policies, which, as the coming period will witness, have intimate relation with world shaking events.
Immediately the “Hoover prosperity” was made proverbial. At the beginning of this present crisis he set out on his first task – to restore “public faith”. His economic conferences were heralded as the unfailing stabilizer. Did he set out to materialize the program of the Committee on Recent Economic Changes, headed by himself, which summarized the problems of American capitalism as follows?
”To maintain the dynamic equilibrium of recent years is indeed a problem of leadership which more and more demands deliberate public attention and control. Research and study, the orderly classification of knowledge, joined to increasing skill, well may make complete control of the economic system a possibility.”
If so, the answer can already be given categorically: Not until the capitalist system of production with all its cancers and conflicts is abolished will complete control of the economic system be a possibility. And then no more in the interest of the capitalist exploiters, but in the interest of the proletarian producers. Opposition Platform Forecast Present Crisis The phenomenal rapid expansion of American imperialism during the last decade; the extreme rationalization of its industry; the gigantic development of productive forces, outstripping the expansion of the market; the immensely increased exploitation by speedup of the workers bringing in its wake an immense standing unemployed army; the reduction of skill and sharpened economic contradictions; – these have brought the first inevitable result in this present cyclic crisis.
We described this in our Communist (Opposition) platform, of April 1929, as a “growing disproportion between the rate of expansion of productive capacity and the rate of growth of production and consumption”. We cited the index figures of production in big industry as having risen from 148 in 1919 to 171 in 1927 (1914 equals 100). The index figures for workers employed in big industry fell from 129 in 1919 to 114 in 1927 (1914 equals 100) although population growth for the same years was from 106 to 120 respectively (this includes the period of so-called prosperity), in addition there has been an influx into the ranks of the unemployed of declassed farmers, it has also been estimated by most economic authorities that during the last decade the improvement of machinery has increased the productivity of labor by 45%.
 
Hoover’s Program
Hoover in stepping forward with his program for maintaining “economic balance” did not call upon Congress; but openly proclaimed where the real power lies by calling upon financiers and executives of the big corporations and banks. Compare for one moment this present arrogant dominance of American imperialism with the United States of pre-war days. President Rousevelt, also the “choice” of the Republican party, became the best possible public front to express and simultaneously to allay the large middle class suspicion and antagonism toward trust combination. Only under the shield of his “trust busting” program could the basis be laid well for the further rapid capitalist monopoly developments. The Sherman anti-trust law proved no real obstacle whatever.
Gigantic mergers have been on the order of the day ever since, yet representing only attraction of such developments to come. The Interstate Commerce Commission proposal for merger of the existing railroads into 19 systems is but a beginning. Monopoly capitalism has had its development par excellence in the United States. The great resources have been sufficient to keep the biggest enterprises solidly in the hands of private owners, without much need of the government taking over such functions, save such examples as the U.S. Shipping Board. The government could serve capitalism better by appearing to stand separate and to maintain the illusion of “democratic regulator of relations of production”. Now the first actual tendencies are indicated toward the higher stage of development – toward state capitalism. Not, of course, in the same forms, ramifications and methods of developing state capitalism of the fascist state in Italy, nor even the forms of the actual tendencies toward state capitalism in Germany; but rather as one capitalist economic writer “hopefully” puts it in the Forbes Magazine:
“An experiment of social control of business ... as a substitute for the utter anarchy which in the past characterized the government of industry ... with a new code of rationalized co-ordination and stabilization in the interest of the larger economic group.”
 
Capitalism Can Only Intensify Anarchic Production
The first steps in the direction of this “experiment”, the most important aspect of the Hoover economic conferences, gives to the building program the role mainly of the public front. The projected economic council, now being formed, is to become the experimental instrument. It can be expected to have far reaching powers; but the mere shouting of “fascist council” without full understanding of the process becomes empty chatter, despite the fact that fascist methods will be employed against the workers in an increasing degree.
What are the prospects of this experiment, this attempt to institute “social control for the utter anarchy in the government of industry”? The present crisis and its consequences are the answer to developments to date. Moreover, the whole history of development of productive forces under capitalism points to the inevitable conclusion that precisely this which is aimed for “social control of business”, based as it is upon further expansion of productive capacity, instead of becoming a substitute for, becomes the lever to further increase anarchy in production as a whole. Instead of decreasing or doing away with present contradictions, “social control of business”, which in the capitalist system could only mean strengthening of the control of one class – the capitalist class – will increase and sharpen the contradictions both within the country and in the international sphere. The question, however, just how this “experiment” will appear in the United States and the possible manifestations of its effects, both in general and upon further working class developments are of particular interest to Communists.
 
Lenin and Trotsky Combat Bucharin’s and Stalin’s Economic Theories
Between the Center and the Right (the Stalinists and the Bucharin, Brandler-Thalheimer, Lovestone, etc. group) of the Communist movement a battle of quotations is mow taking place on this problem of effects of capitalist developments in the post war period – monopoly capitalism with its tendencies toward state capitalism. Both sides quote Marx and Lenin profusely for their own ends. The Center quite easily proves the similarity of the reformist position of the Right wing to that of the socialist imperialists of the Seoond International. The basic proof [some words missing] we have ever done in this field; and it [was] advanced by Bucharin in his book, Economic Theories of the Transition Period, published in 1920. This whole opportunist theory of Bucharin, which did not then in the least prevent his leadership of the Leftists supported by Pepper who also then posed as a Left, was criticized by Lenin at the time. Trotsky has never been sparing in his criticism of Bucharin’s opportunism; but from the Stalin regime nothing was heard. Nay, more, this opportunist theory was the basically accepted theory of the Right-Center bloc, one of its expressions being “socialism in one country” with the kulaks gradually developing into socialism, already nine-tenths attained! The Leninist opposition to this theory was expelled and exiled. The international character of the revolution was forgotten. Its international development and organization became subjected to opportunist combinations on top with the betrayers of the British general strike, the Purcells and Hicks in the Anglo-Russian Unity Committee; with the hangmen of the Chinese proletariat, the Chiang Kai-Sheks in the “four class government”.
The position of social democracy on the development of monopoly capitalism and tendencies toward state capitalism, given its classical expression by Hilferding, can be summarized into: A new era of transition from competitive capitalism into organized capitalism overcomes the anarchy inherent in the former; then the further transformation into an economy directed by the democratic state. From organized capitalism to socialism (?!). The Socialist Party in the United States, although it can still afford to pose in some respects as a Left wing within the Second International, being yet far away from governmental responsibilities, takes essentially the same position in greeting the Hoover economic conferences as something the socialists have always advocated.
 
Lovestone and Bucharin Approach Social-Democracy’s Views
The sharp gravitation of the Bucharin-Lovestone Right wing toward the Hilferding position is, of course, clear. It is swinging from the view of recognizing external contradictions on a world scale by development of monopoly capitalism, but eliminating internal contradictions, to the view of overcoming anarchy in production by organized capitalism.
Says Lovestone in Revolutionary Age (No. 2):
“The plethora, the superabundance of capital in the country – the basic cause of the panic (stock crash) – brought on a condition of the most serious dislocation between the security stock and the fundamental conditions of the capitalist productive economy...” (!!)
A mere dislocation from the “sound” economy – and further :
“The panic in Wall Street did not come as a result of the decline of American capitalist economy. It came as a result of the very strength of American capitalist economy (?!) magnifying and sharpening the contradictions of world capitalism.” (emphasis in original)
Bucharin says in his book Economics of the Transition Period, published in 1920:
“Finance capital has destroyed the anarchy of production within the countries of large scale capitalism. Monopolistic associations of enterprises, the combined enterprises and the penetration of finance capital into industry created a new type of production relations, turning the unorganized capitalist system of goods exchange into a financial-capitalistic organization.”
 
The Centrist Phrases and the Results
Yet today the Centrists, all their declarations notwithstanding, continue to repeat parrot-like supposedly revolutionary phrases devoid of the content which will secure a mass basis. They proceed with their false concept of “revolutionary unions” rejecting possible labor party developments isolating the Communists from the basic section of the working class; they thus negate the correct analysis of growing gigantic contradictions with its opportunities for growing mass contact and for laying the foundation for a class movement of the American workers. The “Left” policy of the leadership still represents the strategical conjectures from which sprang the opportunist tactics of yesterday.
* * *
The growing capitalist contradictions of the imperialist stage will be taken up in another article in the next issue of the Militant.
 



The new industrial unions organized under Communist Party leadership, have in the short period of their existence in several instances succeeded in inspiring workers to militancy; they have thrown fear into the hearts of the exploiters. But they also have shown serious failures caused by basically wrong policies.
The efforts to organize new unions in the unorganized industries remain as necessary and as correct as ever. But since the new line of the “third period” these efforts have become caricatures of what they should be, mainly through the basically wrong conception of “revolutionary unions”, from which so many other mistakes flow. If this were merely a matter of grandiloquent phraseology with which this period is “enriching” itself, it might possibly be ignored. But unfortunately it has become an actual conception. The results of this can only be that the splendid opportunities available for organization become entirely neglected; the working masses, growing more ready for struggle, become alienated from these unions and the unions themselves will come to occupy a position of narrow sects, isolating the Left wing from the working masses.
Revolutionizing the Unions Unions become revolutionary in revolutionary periods, and in general, when, having a mass basis, they reflect the degree of development of the workers. When separated in exclusive crafts of skill trades they naturally lag behind this development; but even the most backward ones can in such periods be pushed forward, though they usually remain several steps behind the working class. It is the duty of Communists to help and to guide this process of revolutionizing: the unions. It will certainly require the most persistent, devoted activities and struggle of the revolutionists to organize new unions in the unorganized industries, but the false conception of “revolutionary unions” in the United States at the present degree of development of the working class, when even a revolutionary party does not yet exist as a mass factor, if continued, completely annihilates the necessary mass basis of the unions. This is what is happening now, made yet worse by extremely adventurist, Leftist enterprises, manoeuvering without any regard for responsibility to the working class.
As a natural consequence of this essentially wrong conception, the Party appears in the role of exercising complete mechanical control over these unions. It prevents the development of a leadership coming from out of the ranks of the workers – a leadership which could stand on its own feet and gain the confidence, of the membership. Selection of leadership thus becomes arbitrary, based exclusively upon the prerequisite of ability merely to accept orders and such leaders usually have the least experience. Independent views, in general conformity with the Left wing program of the unions, are not even tolerated. Communists and Left wingers who disagree with Party bureaucrats are arbitrarily removed from office and barred from participation in the work. These digressions are quite inevitable when mechanical control becomes substituted for the correct method of establishing Communist influence. Mechanical control has nothing in common with Communist leadership and the results cannot be without effect upon the union membership who see in it only a repetition of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy. It destroys the confidence of the workers in the unions, narrows its leadership basis and separates the Party ever more from many valuable experienced elements. This in turn becomes one of the important reasons for many mistakes in policy.
 
The Third C.I. Congress on Trade Unions
The correct relationship of the Communist Party toward the unions could not be more explicitly stated than in the theses of the Third Congress of the Communist International, then still under the leadership of comrades Lenin and Trotsky:
“To increase the union of the Party with the masses means above all a closer alliance with the workers’ organizations. The task does not at all consist in mechanically and outwardly subjecting the unions to the Party and thereby denying them the autonomy required by the very nature of their work, but in the revolutionary, Communist elements within the unions giving them that direction which answers the general interests of the proletariat in its struggle for the conquest of power.” (Emphasis in original.)
And further, under the heading The Tasks of Our Parties:
“The real test of the strength of every Communist Party is the actual influence it has on the workers in the labor unions. The Party must learn how to influence the unions without attempting to keep them in leading strings. Only the Communist fraction of the union is subject to the control of the party, not the labor union has a whole. If the Communist fractions persevere, if their activity is devoted and intelligent, the party will reach a position where its advice will be accepted gladly and readily by the unions.”
The establishment of the “revolutionary trade union center”, the T.U.U.L. could have become an important factor in strengthening Left wing influence. The organization of a center for Left wing activity and groups is not only correct but a pressing necessity. Its basic conception, however leads it in the opposite direction. The conception of a center in the sense of a new federation at the present time, naturally means a head on clash with the old unions for the control of the workers, coming long before the Left wing has succeeded in establishing and extending its influence.
 
New Unions Everywhere?
From that follows competition for building of unions all along the line also in organized or partly organized industries. The fight of the Left wing becomes one not against the reactionary leadership of the existing unions but against the unions as such, and certainly it can appear in no other way to the workers. Where some Left wing elements are still within the old unions they split off – as the whole policy is a split policy – and completely withdraw all Left wing activities from the A.F. of L. and kindred unions. It is a split policy, not applied when it is necessitated by developments, but resulting in the “revolutionary center” getting the small fraction outside isolated from the mass section of organized workers while the reactionary bureaucrats, who are an integral part of the capitalist structure are enabled to solidify their influence over these masses.
One of the most recent examples of this development is the creation of a couple of small unions in New York with big pretensions to an industrial form and affiliated to the T.U.U.L., appearing as split off sections: the new Subway Workers Union and the new Building Service Union. Their course will be one of so many of its small split-off predecessors. They will lead a sectarian existence until they disappear, unless they grow sufficiently conservative to again become part of the organizations from which they split. In industries where the existing unions are more firmly established the result will just be much more fatal because such policy has nothing in common with the conquest of the majority of the working class by the Communists.
Of the new industrial unions none has escaped suffering under these wrong conceptions and wrong policies. The Needle Trades Workers Industrial Union is but a fraction of the once powerful Left wing influence among these workers. The National Textile Workers union is now facing a decline in the South despite the favorable objective conditions. In both instances may be noted the failures of the Left – which means the Communist Party – to attempt to develop united front actions with the workers in A.F. of L. unions. It might be objected that reactionaries oppose it, that they betray the workers or lead them in fake strikes, etc. These are not valid objections. The workers in both industries suffer intolerable conditions, they have been engaged in struggles which would give the Left wing the opportunity through efforts for united action to broaden their contact with the masses, better expose the betrayers, turn the demands of the struggles into more genuine accord with the interests of the workers and give them more political and revolutionary content. The growth of the National Miners Union has certainly suffered from the mechanical manoeuvers. The recent, experience of wrong policies preceding and during the Illinois strike is already making its effects felt more deeply.
Every mistake made strengthens the position of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy. But these mistakes are typical of the Centrist leadership as directed throughout the International by the Stalin regime. They zig-zag from Right to Left, from unity with the betrayers of the British general strike to extreme leftists chatterings, which in reality isolate and weaken the Left wing in the labor movement. It should be remembered that at the time we introduced the correct conception in to the Communist Party of organizing the unorganized industries, Foster joined with the Lovestone group in opposition. Ever since then the Centrist Party leadership has been feeding and strengthening the Right wing Lovestone group by giving it apparent justification for much of their criticism.
 
The Responsibility of the Right Wing
The Right wing in turn carries heavy responsibility for the present Leftist rantings and irresponsible mechanical manoeuvering with workers interests. When in control of the Party, it proved itself master of such manoeuvering. It consistently opposed the conception of organization of the unorganized into new unions. Now it is trying to take up our criticisms as a cover for the introduction of its own tendency toward social reformism into the labor movement.
The present epoch is the epoch of capitalist decay and proletarian revolution. It is now further accentuated by the present advancing industrial depression. If it teaches Communists anything in winning through the unions an influence over the majority of the working class, it teaches that the new industrial unions must have a mass basis and that the policies must be shaped so as to accomplish this. One necessary part of this is the correct coordination of the Left wing within the unions with the Left wing and opposition movements within the A.F. of L. There can be no disputing the necessity of taking up in earnest the work of building a revolutionary ideology and understanding within the existing mass organizations and giving it organized expression, We must also accept the duty of organizing workers into these mass organizations where they exist and stop the senseless split off of small sections.
The advancing period of depression poses many serious questions to the Communist movement; but especially does it pose the one of correctly applying the united front policy in such a manner as to bring the largest sections of both the old unions and the new unions into united struggle for their class interests. Once that is learned, a big step will have been taken toward extending Communist influence among the American workers.
 



In various sections of the country the Socialist Party has during the last few months been unfolding a greater activity than hitherto. It is attempting, and with some success, to plant its roots in the present favorable soil of mass unemployment. In inverted form it becomes a testimonial to the fact that among the American workers there are now visible trends toward the shaping of a class movement.
The Socialist Party is very consciously “radicalizing” in phraseology its general slogans and platform demands, although the fact that all references to the class struggle have long since been obliterated from its program is momentarily glossed over. The object is clearly to head off the working class movement, to prevent its natural development towards a revolutionary position and to harness it within “safe” reformist channels, in order ultimately to strike the blows of defeat. The capitalist political strategists of the somewhat moderate type, will not be slow in faking advantage, for their own purposes, of this situation and help push the S.P. forward to extend its influence and thus enable it to fulfill that role. These are ominous signs for the future. But firstly, success for such designs have to count with the tempo of growing working class consciousness which may become so accelerated as to confine the reformist ideology to a rather brief period. Secondly, much depends upon the degree to which the Communist movement can establish its mass influence.
 
The S.P. and the Middle Class
Whom does the Socialist Party represent and of whom are its ranks composed? In the United States it has by no means established the traditional influence upon working class ideology or the broad mass organization enjoyed by the social democracy is the foremost European countries, In fact it became almost obliterated by the 1919 split which resulted in the founding of the Communist movement. Ever since, its existence has been a rather obscure one, finding scant support largely from the lower middle class strata with a sprinkling of immigrant trade union officialdom. Today the hard pressed middle class, in its lower sections, the small business and professional man, becoming “radicalized” by bankruptcies, are undoubtedly the first to harken to the message of the S.P. But there are also evidences of its penetration into working class ranks through trade unions, through gaining labor votes at election times and otherwise. It is quite understandable that among American workers, now developing radical thoughts nourished by the unemployment crisis and consequent disillusionment with Republicans and Democrats, there should be many whose first steps are directed towards support for the Socialist Party.
In the United States the Socialist Party has as yet no governmental responsibilities. It can therefore still afford to appear as an “opposition” party and keep a gentle rhythm in accordance with the throbbing vibrations of the class struggle. With the cunning adroitness, which for a long time “distinguished” the more experienced European social democrats their American counterpart has, since the beginning of the present crisis, given much more front page publicity to demands for social insurance in general and unemployment insurance in particular. It is now inaugurating a sort of a national campaign for the six hour day slogan. Naturally this is designed to catch the mass sentiment and gain influence among such workers just casting off from their old moorings of capitalist ideology. Having had little experience in a proletarian movement such workers do not immediately distinguish the objective role of the Socialist Party nor the fact that its leadership has not the slightest intention of ever fighting for these demands. They do not as yet notice that the methods of the S.P. are not at all those of class struggle but merely of giving lip service to social reforms in order to gain the mass influence necessary to play its ordained role.
Growth of the S.P. is noticeable today in three main, directions: First in increased votes obtained at local elections last year as demonstrated particularly in the New York municipal elections. Undoubtedly a goodly section of the vote gain was furnished by the working class. Secondly, it is noticeable in extended influence and control in certain trade unions, mainly through the re-establishment of the Right wing leadership in the needle trades unions at the expense of the formerly powerful Left wing under Communist Party leadership. In these unions, where the workers are generally further politically advanced, the role of “socialist” union officials has also developed to a “higher” stage. Hence the more outspoken autocratic control; more outright, unconcealed co-operation with the bosses and their government in the anti-Communist offensive as well as in the severer suppression of the rank and file workers. More recently, through the C.P.L.A., the Socialist Party is making inroads, into other union fields, for example, in the miners union of the Howat-Walker-Germer-Fishwick combination.
Seemingly there is a paradox in the fact that in such unions, when compared to the needle trades, the Socialist Party elements appear in a more “progressive” position. However, it is a very natural phenomenon completely in harmony with its flagrantly opportunist policy of winning mass influence and control and accordingly change its methods and phraseology whenever found advantageous. In these unions of more distinct A.F. of L, type a “progressive” front makes more rapid advance possible. Secondly the Socialist leaders do not as yet consider Communist sentiment there of sufficient strength to warrant a violent attack. Such, however, will be the course as soon as sufficient mass influence has been gained, or in the event of rapid growth of revolutionary sentiment among the workers. The whole record of the “socialist” needle trades union officialdom testifies to this.
The Socialist Party now claims a gain of 6,000 new members since September last, the founding of two new weekly papers on the Pacific Coast strengthening of its general press, greater leaflet distribution’, revival of branch units in several sections of the country and more preparations made for publicity, for participation in the Fall congressional elections, etc. In the unemployment situation not only does it put forward “demands” for social insurance and the shorter workday but in New York and a couple of other points attempts have been made to create broad unemployment conferences. These conferences had, of course, no actual contact with the unemployed masses and were “safely” controlled for the S.P. bureaucrats, nevertheless they gathered quite a substantial representation from the trade unions and other working class organizations.
 
Communists and Unemployment
Only the Communists have actually dramatized the unemployment issue and begun to set masses into motion through the March 6th demonstration and subsequently. That alone is a distinct service to the working class cause and has increased Communist influence. But there are now serious dangers that this motion, despite the intensity and pressure of the crisis, maybe diverted into social reformist channels by the Socialist Party acquiring an ever more solid organizational basis – once more at the expense of the Communist movement. Particularly does that danger become apparent when the official Communist Party advances slogans, which at this time are entirely abstract and devoid of any revolutionary content, such as the slogan of the “political general strike”. The same is true of its refusal to broaden the actual organization of the unemployment movement beyond what can be gathered in under the tutelage of the “revolutionary unions”, the T.U.U.L. and the Party itself.
That the Socialist Party will not even seriously struggle for its own reform demands has been amply demonstrated by experience here and elsewhere. In the European countries as the Social Democracy grew in mass influence and bourgeois respectability and in several places became the government, its upper hierarchy became the tools of capitalism to curtail the social reform legislation already gained, to use the state machinery of suppression to carry it through and to crush its revolutionary opposition. The social democratic governments pursued exactly the same imperialist policies as their capitalist predecessors in office.
One notable case in point just now is the MacDonald government of Great Britain and it’s attitude to the rebellion is India. MacDonald has decided to carry on more openly the imperialist policies and crush the Indian rebellion. He does it conscious of the fact that it will seriously stimulate the rebellion going on within the labor party against the reactionary leaders, a rebellion now already growing in momentum. This is inevitable. It is in the very nature of things flowing from and becoming the expression of further increased economic pressure upon the workers and growing inability of the social system of wage slavery to feed the masses of the workers.
Within the American Socialist Party can now be noticed some faint ripples, expressed in New York in proposals for a more “progressive” trade union policy and for opposition to the black reactionary policy of the Daily Forward. Even the S.P. is not immune from the economic pressure upon the workers. But the present stupid attitude of the Stalinized Communist Party blankly characterizing it “social fascism” strangles all possibilities of taking advantage of such developments and plays directly info the hands of the Right wing reformists. There could of course, be no reason whatever to place any reliance upon the leaders of the “oppositions” within Social Democracy, unless they were ready to break with that ideology and accept the revolutionary position. In England at this moment, for example, the “Left opposition” leaders take that position fearing that the rapid swing to the Right, to the full employment! of the imperialist forces by the MacDonald government will too seriously compromise the cause of reformism. Hence they sound the alarm to save it.
In the United States, in a less developed stage, “Left opposition” leaders who appear within the S.P. fear that it is not basing itself sufficiently upon winning specific working class influence to strengthen the cause of reformism and thus more effectively preventing the masses from marching to a revolutionary position. It is evident that such elements are weather cocks of the pressure upon the workers but it is otherwise with the workers themselves who are subject to the pressure. Those workers who have taken the first step away from their capitalist ideology and are going toward the S.P., as well as those who are class conscious but temporarily disappointed by set backs experienced, are precisely the ones the Communist Party must win for the revolutionary struggle. Whenever “‘Left’ oppositions” develop within the Social Democracy the ground becomes more favorable for that task.
But above all the Communists, instead of lumping together all organizations and groups, based on social reformism, leaders and rank and file members, to be combated as social fascists, must make clear the role of the Socialist Party. That is, to show that in a period of beginning radicalization of the workers, the S.P. or sections of it will take on a more radical appearance and make a pretense of fighting for the needs of the workers illustrated now by its “demands” for the six hour day and for social (unemployment ) insurance. When the radical wave rises to higher stages and the workers move forward, actually pressing for their needs, the S.P. will become even more of an open brake upon the movement. When the workers go over to revolutionary action for their needs the S.P. will finally reveal itself in the open as a most ardent defender of capitalism, using all the means of force of the capitalist state to suppress the workers’ action. This is the history of Social Democracy and then; can be no other role for a Party not based upon the proletarian revolution.
 
For Correct Policy Towards Socialists
The ebb and flow of the movement are part of the natural laws of motion which Marxists will not fail to understand. However, to continue shutting their eyes to this and the failure to apply correct policies in this respect by the Stalinized Communist Party, can in a large measure be responsible for any additional lease of life given to social reformism and for the strengthening of the role of the S.P. as an instrument to attempt to suppress the proletarian revolution.
It becomes quite evident that precisely today, in the unemployment crisis in the United States, the most effective method of concretely and practically demonstrating to the working masses exactly what the position of the S.P. is, would be for the Communist Party to make all efforts to win socialist workers for a united front on unemployment demands. Moreover, a broad united front with all workers, including those of the socialist ideology is an imperative necessity.
The S.P. leadership would not accept this, which would only aid in clarifying reformist workers. With the struggle going forward, their exposure could be facilitated and the influence of social reformism limited accordingly. However, it is hardly reasonable to expect that the present Communist Party leadership would be able to pursue such a policy, which would have real revolutionary content. At least not until the “third period” gymnastics have been eliminated.
It is perhaps well once more to emphasize what comrade Trotsky has already pointed out: that conditions of development in the U.S. are now such that the class struggle may become sharply intensified to a quick tempo, with turbulent upheavals What will it bring to the workers? Victory, in the sense of marking a step forward to a stronger position from which more effectively to continue the struggle, or defeat, in the sense of giving the movement an actual setback? This in a large measure depends upon the ability of the Communist Party to prevent the extension of the influence of social reformism upon the workers and to assemble them, instead under the Communist banner.
 



For two mouths the American Federation of Labor has been “campaigning to organize” the South. About 100 special organizers are claimed to be in the field covering the five states of Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia and the two Carolinas, to concentrate mainly on the textile industry.
Results to date have borne out all the serious indictments made by the revolutionary movement against the A.F. of L. policy and methods. They have shown also that the Southern bourbons have not in the least relented in their hostility to union organization, even of the reactionary brand, but have rather intensified the offensive against the workers. The latter are giving ample proof of militancy and in the now less spectacular but still continuing sharp conflicts are making a mockery of the deceptive practices of the A.F. of L. with its spineless appeals to the bosses for friendly cooperation. Certainly there is a fertile field for union organization
 
Green Meets the Bosses
President Green is again touring the South to try further to put the Federation in the “right” light, to renew his pledges and, if possible, fully to win the favor of business (!!). On his last visit he did not forget to advise the employers to organize in order to make an end to cut-throat competition and particularly to emphasize common struggle against the Communists: “Accept us, or the alternative will be the Communists,” said Green. No wonder that certain of the more far-sighted capitalist dailies give him a rather favorable reception, comparing him to a successful banker or head of a large business institution. The mayor of Memphis, Tenn., in welcoming Green to the city could therefore, think “hopefully” of the future, remind his audience that he (Green) had “saved the Federation from the Bolshevik tide in 1922.”
Meanwhile even children under 16 years of age work the twelve hour shift in North Carolina. Just as the “organization campaign” started, the Piedmont mill in Gastonia administered a 20 per cent wage cut, reducing spinners from $14.30 to $11.78 per week and card hands from $14.40 to $12.00. This is at a twelve hour night shift and eleven hour day shift.
 
The Wage-Cutting Campaign and the Strikers
At the Riverside and Dan River mills at Danville, Va., a 10 per cent wage cut took effect on February 1st, bringing the average wage down from $18.69 to $16.75. Many, however, receive much less. The company claims, of course, that the workers, through the company union, voted the cut. In these mills Negroes are barred from the company union but not from the wage cuts. The president of the company, H.R. Fitzgerald, appears still able to draw his yearly salary of $85,000; and the dividends paid on its $7,500,000 common stock have kept the level of 10 per cent.
In general profits coming, out of the sweat and blood of the Southern textile workers, have piled into the coffers of the absentee owners. Senator Wheeler, quoting from a report in the Senate, stated that the American Viscose Co., producing two-thirds of all rayons, averaged a net profit of 48 per cent on $184,166,000 gross sales for the three year period 1926-29. Net profit, after all expenses, taxes and depreciation, amounted to $88,306,000, although the capital Investment in 1922 was only $10,000,000.
The Marion Clinchfleld mills, N.C., have announced that the stretchout system 10 to be put back into effect and, according to reports, there is strike talk among the workers. 135 families are still evicted from the company houses since the last strike. At Swannanoa the weavers in the Beacon Blanket Co.’s mill have struck against the stretchout system and predict that their ranks will grow.
At the American Bemberg Glanzstock Co. mills at Elizabethton, Tenn., the workers succeeded in obtaining control of the company union. Immediately wholesale discharges followed, against which the workers struck on March 3rd. Over 2,000 workers responded to the call and are now carrying on active picketing.
 
Southern Workers Show Militancy
Such are the reports from the South. The present Elizabethton strike is the third within less than a year. Without any financial backing and without any strike relief whatever, nevertheless, these Southern workers show splendid examples of class solidarity, worthy of becoming object lessons for the worker north of the Mason-Dixon line. McMahon and other leaders in charge of the “drive” have been the most emphatic in stating that they did everything in their power to avert strikes. Unquestionably so; that is the particular mission of the A.F. of L. in the South. Vice-President Gorman of the U.T.W., one of the committee of three in charge, offers the mill barons “cooperation of the U.T.W. in stabilizing labor costs and removing inefficiency in accordance with the labor-management cooperation plan worked out on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad”. The Southern workers, however, have already had lessons aplenty in company unionism, for which the B. and O. plan is but another name. By their own initiative they show the way, even forcing these reactionary leaders to move a step ahead.
 
Left Wing Must Adopt United Front Policy
Meanwhile the National Textile Workers union under Left wing leadership has apparently left the southern field uncontested to the A.F. of L. Not because the field for organization and militant struggle is less fertile now than before, to which the reports cited above bear witness. No, it is the penalty of false policies which now leaves the reactionaries in complete command. Undoubtedly the Left wing could yet have been an important factor. With correct united front policies, particularly at the height of the bourbon lynching campaign, at the time of the assaults at Gastonia and the killings at Marion, the whole crew of A.F. of L. organizers could not have separated the Left wing from the working masses of the South. Such a policy would have become a mighty lever to extend, to unify and strengthen these many scattered strikes, and thus become a mighty weapon against the bosses. There were conferences held at the time, at which delegates of both unions participated, which could have become splendid opportunities for the practical organization of the united front. Naturally, the A.F. of L. leaders would have opposed this most strenuously; that was to be expected. But, with this policy, whom would the workers follow? The Left wing, of course.
Lessons of the past should be taken advantage of to help guide the present and the future; and it is time that the Left wing learns this lesson.
 



Open rebellion on a wider scale than ever before is once more the answer to the rule of corruption and reactionary policies which have long dominated the United Mine Workers Union and reduced it to a mere shadow of its former strength. Its main result to date, that of setting important working class forces into motion, notwithstanding its as yet obscure direction, may have far reaching significance for the immediate future of the American labor movement. Without recognition of these facts, a correct estimate of the events in connection with the split producing two unions, both laying claim to the title, United Mine Workers of America, cannot be reached.
The old union now even more securely lodged in the grip of John L. Lewis, with his arbitrary powers extended and his past reactionary wrecking policies given the seal of approval by a delegation largely representing locals and districts long since defunct, at the Indianapolis convention, is well known to the coal miners. As far as the rank and file membership is concerned, the past history has left its marks. The cowardly retreat of the Lewis administration in the face of the government injunction in the 1919 national strike and subsequent crushing of insurrectionary strike movements; the sell-out of the 1922 national strike, leaving some 100,000 Pennsylvania miners who had just joined the union in the lurch; the betrayal of the Pennsylvania and Ohio miners and the defeat of their strike in 1927–28, the breaking up and destruction of district after district with the suppression of all opposition, expulsions and gunman rule – these are but a few high points of Lewis’ regime. They are so commonly known that it cannot be expected that the coal miners should now hark back to support the remnants of his union or even have much sympathy left for it.
A most vital question therefore is what the new union signifies and what its prospects are. Its leadership, apparent at the Springfield convention, can be recognized at a glance: A combination of forces composed of a section of the old corrupt and reactionary officialdom – the Fishwick-Farrington machine; socialist party types like Gernaer and Ameringer; and progressive, or one time progressive, elements, typified by Howat, Brophy and Hapgood.
 
Serious Errors of Wrong Analysis
The official Communist party disposed rather quickly of the significance of this new union and the perspectives for it. It was viewed merely as a matter of Peabody, the coal operator magnate, hiring some more help and already asserting his ownership of the union. That, of course, is no analysis whatever, since it falls entirely to recognize the workers set into motion or take account of the objective position of the new union. Conclusions for a policy based upon such an analysis, can lead only to further fatal mistakes, to neglect of opportunities for extension of militancy, and to even further isolation of the Left wing directed by the Party. It is upon just such stupidities that the Fishwicks and Walkers thrive and are able still to maintain a hold upon the miners.
A series of tactical mistakes have been made by the Left wing under the official Communist party direction, which in sum and substance has assumed the character of a system of wrong policies ever since the formation of the National Miners Union. It culminated in the last ill-fated Illinois strike, and to a great extent made it possible for Fishwick, Farrington and Walker to leave the sinking ship of the Lewis administration and to edge in on the crest of the naturally maturing rebellion. Moreover, the Left wing became impotent and no positive factor at all in these events.
 
What Does the New Union Signify?
First of all, it should be remembered that the new union came about as a rebellion against the worst features of the corrupt regime of John L. Lewis and threw into its foremost ranks, Howat, the one who to the miners symbolizes their traditional militancy. In that sense it certainly signifies a step in a progressive direction. Secondly to regard this first step as a finished product would be sheer folly. This important section of the working class set into motion, breaking the bounds of the Lewis rule, cannot be expected to be checked or cowed by a Fishwick or other, like him, coal operator agents. Thirdly, there is the objective position of the new union, with a basis of rebellion, to be considered. Competition with Lewis in delivering the goods to the operators, after what has happened to his union, does not lead one to believe that much rank and file support could be gained along that road. No; to avoid stagnation and early death it will be compelled at least to move in a forward and a progressive direction. The rank and file, who have proved their fighting capacity in the past, will be certain to press in that direction and there is no better way at present to eliminate Fishwick and all his henchmen of the old machine. This forward course should be aided and given definite meaning by the Left wing.
Rather indicative of the trend of developments, aside from the factors already mentioned, is such an incident at the Springfield convention as the driving of Fishwick from the chairmanship at the first session and the election of Howat for that post, and later on for the Presidency of the union. This is solely because Howat symbolises to the miners their militant struggle against the operators. On the other hand, the fact that the seating of Frank Farrington – an openly acknowledged agent of the Peabody coal company, who had the crust to tell the delegates that he accepted his $25,000 a year position in order to “step aside, secure a wage cut for the membership and thus save the union”; – the fact that the acceptance of his credentials could command such a big majority vote clearly show the immense strength of the reactionary Fishwick-Farrington-Walker combine within the union. But even that relationship can be changed, and more swiftly so, with a broadly organized Left wing in this union giving the necessary direction for the struggle: Or – will anybody perhaps maintain that Left wing workers have no business within a union which has in its ranks the majority of the organized soft coal miners in the United States and has union control over their jobs?
 
Reactionaries Strengthen Hold – But Workers Move On
At times, when workers are stirred into action, one can always observe reactionary forces, labor lieutenants of capitalism, becoming active. They endeavor to follow the tide, try to get into a commanding position and assume, if necessary, a progressive front, both to advance their own personal interests and to serve their masters at the opportune moment by using their position to check the movement, to lead it into harmless channels, and to work for its complete annihilation. At present the wrecking career of John L. Lewis has left him much discredited in the eyes of the workers; but the Fishwick machine is there to continue Lewis’ role. That has been sufficiently established by its record in Illinois of wage cuts and sell-outs, expulsions of militants and the use of gunmen, police and militia against struggling miners. History has repeated itself, and this machine has been able to maintain itself in a commanding position within the present rebellious movement. The militants cannot compromise a single one of their principles with this outfit. Against it the ceaseless struggle must continue.
Concerning the so-called progressives, Brophy, Hapgood and the others who as yet, in the eyes of many miners, symbolize militancy against Lewis and the operators, there can be no illusions whatsoever. They are careerists who regard Communism as weakened and compromised today; they do not find it useful at present to cover themselves with sympathy for it. These American species of trade union centrists need to be steadily exposed for their weaknesses and vacillations. The miners must continually be on guard to thwart inevitable betrayal and treachery from them. A powerful Left wing in this new union will be one of the ways to guide this movement into militant channels, and at the same time to expose more effectively these so-called progressives who will more and more openly, as time passes, be the fig-leaf for the Fishwicks, Lewises, etc.
At this very moment additional evidence has been given to indicate that the miners will continue in motion in a progressive direction. A number of Illinois local unions have already made decisions to reinstate all members expelled by the Fishwick machine since 1928. These are the expelled militants who were with the “Save the Union” movement.
 
How Far Will the Rebellion Reverberate?
Unquestionably, this open rebellion and split, which brought about this new miners’ union, set a precedent dangerous to reactionary machine control in other trade unions. It is certain to produce reverberations within the A.F. of L.; if nothing else, then at least the problem of facing a new “dual” union with a considerable base among the workers. Indicative of this already is the support thrown by Green to John L. Lewis as against the new union.
The impotence of the present A.F. of L. officialdom, from the top down practically speaking, and failure to secure even the slightest assistance for the workers during this crisis, has been glaring. Their absolute partnership with capitalism is now laid even more open and bare. The assaults of the employers, who take advantage of the crisis and permanent and mass unemployment, as well as the prospect for coming, perhaps turbulent, defensive struggles by the workers may also seriously shake the apparently secure position of this trade union bureaucracy.
In regard to the present status of the coal miners, one must not fail to take into account the several serious defeats suffered during the last few years, in which official treason was no small factor. The immediate effects of a serious economic crisis and the extensive displacement of labor by machine and mechanical mining, coming closely upon the heels of these defeats, will not tend to produce the swift development of offensive battles by the workers. But on the other hand, these very problems, embodying continuous assaults upon their meager existence, become bound up with active resistance – with struggle. Under these conditions, plus the quite solid phalanx presented by the coal operators toward the workers’ aims, the most thorough preparations and most complete organization possible become questions of serious import. We reserve this particular point for another time. But certainly it must be admitted that with three unions in the field, this problem is, at best, yet more complex. However, that fact merely serves to emphasize the continuous process of development and change in the social world. In this case it represents a new “stage in a long struggle to reconstitute the miners’ organization on a national scale on a militant basis.”
 
Left Wing Facing Serious Problems
The National Miners Union remains the only union resting programmatically on a class foundation; but, as has often been emphasized, despite its objectively favorable position and the courage and determination displayed, the other two unions retain the membership of these miners who are at all organized and have union control over their jobs. Will the Left wing and the Stalinized Party leadership continue its policy of trying to withdraw the best elements from these unions where they have job control, thus eliminate these elements from the industry and isolate itself from these important sections of organized workers; or will it again take up the correct Leninist
position of maintaining the closest contact and extending its influence among them? That is now the decisive question. A return to a correct policy can yet make the National Miners Union – that is, the organized Left wing – an important factor, both in developments in the unorganized fields as well as within the organised sections. But its methods and functions must of necessity constantly change in conformity with developing conditions.
The union still under control of John L. Lewis embraces important sections of coal miners. Within it are, particularly in the light of the latest events, possibilities to spread the ferment and to do away with this corrupt regime.
The new union is officially committed to the aim of the six hour day, the five day week and unemployment insurance. These were adopted at the Springfield convention, the presence of the Fishwick machine elite notwithstanding. These two points, the shorter work day and social insurance, were the two specific points correctly emphasized in the Comintern address to the American Party membership last year as practical demands to be put forward in the daily struggles of the workers. Their adoption by the new miners union should serve to make it a more favorable starting point for further development toward a greater militant basis. Bat this will require systematic, correct Left wing activities and devoted work.
In conclusion it is well to restate the position of Lenin:
“Undoubtedly, the leaders of opportunism will have recourse to all the tricks of bourgeois diplomacy, will appeal to the help of bourgeois governments, to priests, police courts, in order to prevent Communists from entering the trade unions, by all and every means to put them out, to make their work inside these organizations as unpleasant as possible, to insult, hound and persecute them. It is necessary to be able to withstand all this, to go the whole length of any sacrifice, if need be, to resort to strategy and adroitness, illegal proceedings, reticence and subterfuge, to anything in order to penetrate into the trade unions, to remain in them, and carry on Communist work inside them at any cost.” (“Left” Communism, page 36.)
 



The American workers are now confronted with the prospect of an already advancing industrial depression. The questions of their preparations to meet it, the political development of the workers themselves, their degree of organization and their conception of the tactics to be employed, become vitally important. There need be no doubt about growing discontent and more severe struggles in the coming period.
That this is recognized by the capitalist class is most clearly evidenced in the increased anti-labor drive. It was demonstrated in the editorials carried by the Scripps-Howard Newspaper syndicate at the time of the American Federation of Labor convention at Toronto. The employers have become thoroughly alarmed at the appearance of Communists organizing, by militant methods, among a formerly backward but now awakening working class in the South. Hence they turn to the A.F. of L. officials demanding that they be the ones to organize and “lead”. More recently it was shown in the Hoover “building conferences” in which A.F. of L. heads promised that there would be no movements for wage increases undertaken in the immediate future – that is, during the depression.
 
The Role of the A.F. of L.
This also indicates the role to be played and the perspectives of the A.F. of L. in the coming period. It is worth noting the most recent developments among the needle trades workers in the ladies garment and furriers sections, formerly largely under left wing influence. The A.F. of L. has actually succeeded in re-establishing its organization and “leadership”. It has gained in co-operation with the employers, almost complete control of the jobs and membership dues payments. Among the New York food workers, where militants have lately been active in organization work, the A.F.of L. is now initiating an organizing campaign. The Toronto convention resolved to organize the South and the plans worked out are about to be put to test. The United Textile Workers union will have leadership and what it terms any form of spectacular mass drive is banned. Negroes will be organized on approval of “white locals” in the district, and – in separate locals.
Comments on the general organization policy to be pursued in this drive are quite superfluous as it is clearly indicated that there will be no departure from the general, practice established by the A.F. of L. officials. Even among the hard boiled Bourbons of the South the main effort will be directed toward winning the bosses for co-operation with the labor “leaders” who have sufficiently proven their willingness to the greatest reciprocation in selling out the workers at the crucial moment. One question of the greatest importance, however, is whether or not the campaign will succeed in actually bringing the Southern textile workers into the U.T.W. The oft repeated statements of the Daily Worker that these workers, disgusted with the betrayals of the A.F. of L. in 1920–21 and recently, will never join its ranks are neither convincing nor true.
A comparison of events in the South, the frame-ups in Gastonia and the killings in Marion, clearly reveals that the Southern textile barons are set against any form of union or organization, whether led by Communists or by A.F. of L. officials. They will tolerate A.F. of L. “leadership” only so long as it is effective in helping to wipe out militant unions. Yet it would be idle to speculate on no results in the A.F. of L. organization drive. There are many reasons to assume that the Southern workers, driven by increasing speed-up pressure added to which there now appears the misery of unemployment, will respond and join, perhaps in large numbers, despite the sell-outs of the past. So much more so because the National Textile Workers union, under Communist Party direction, follows the usual method of practically abandoning a field when the opportunity for spectacular activities disappears. All recent history shows that during periods of industrial crisis workers flock to conservative unions. Nor is there anything horrible in this prospect when one remembers the development of the British trade unions from one of docile support of the capitalist empire to a situation where the general strike could become a possibility in 1926. Now the process of developments proceed at a much more accelerated, pace.
 
The Pressure of the Banks
The prospects of growth of the A.F. of L. are not confined to the South. The developing industrial depression not only offers excellent opportunities for organization but is certain to throw large sections of the unorganized workers into the lap of the A.F. of L. Extended organization in this period will inevitably mean greater pressure from the ranks against the present wage cutting, speed-up campaign and for more persistent struggle to obtain the demands corresponding to their growing needs. If anyone doubts the probability of such struggles developing on the basis of A.F. of L. organization, or denies their probability, we might refer to such recent examples as the New Orleans street carmen’s strike and the Marion textile workers’ strike.
That this will not in the least mean any change of policy or outlook in the upper layer of the A. F. of L. bureaucracy is of course amply proven by all past experiences. On the contrary, the demands of their capitalist masters will increase correspondingly and their faithful service will be expressed in more co-operation with these masters and the state powers in the violent suppression and cunning betrayal of workers’ struggles. Especially will they attempt to buttress their own dominance over working class ideology by efforts to exterminate Left wing unions and any form of organized Left wing sentiment.
Yet is is under such conditions that new opposition develops. The “progressive” movement, already emerging within the A.F. of L. since the Left wing practically abandoned that field, was a natural first expression. But it was stillborn. It appeared in the form of the Conference for Progressive Labor Action, dominated by the Socialist Party and, although having a progressive platform, it was based rather upon certain sections of the trade Union officialdom than upon the main stream of organized workers. Hence, while being an outgrowth and expression of dissatisfaction with the official policies of the A.F. of L., it lacked the dynamic force for becoming a real opposition and its course of complete merger with the bureaucracy is pretty well decided unless pressure from below and from within forces it in a Leftward direction. To conceive of relying upon the “progressive” leaders to develop a real opposition would of course be folly. But the gap created among the workers by their leadership of a growing progressive sentiment – leading it backward – and that of the Left wing leading it forward, can most successfully be bridged by correct united front policies of the latter. In the recent period the exact opposite has been the case with the result of further isolation of the Left within the mass organizations and easier diverting of opposition sentiment into harmless channels. Nevertheless, such sentiment remains and is bound to grow. Its correct direction is still a task to be performed.
The present trends among workers are characteristic of what can be expected from the future course of development. There is a restlessness over the prospect of employment with the ranks of the unemployed increasing. There is discontent with the growing speed-up exploitation, and here and there distinctly manifested readiness for struggle, with some instances of workers swinging toward the Left. These are some of the outstanding features. With a protracted severity of industrial depression it can easily lead to convulsions. But this does not mean that the working masses recognize the role of the A.F. of L. “leadership”, of the so-called progressives, of the social democrats, or that they are ready for the leadership of the Communist Party. They are still far from it and several steps will yet have to be taken considerable experience will still have to be accumulated before the workers reach that point.
 
A False Assumption
It would be preposterous to assume that for instance the main body of the steel workers, actually enrolled into unions in the 1919 drive and then left in the lurch have learned a sufficient lesson to be able to distinguish between leaderships. Even among the coal miners, where union official corruption and betrayal have yielded numerous bitter experiences, where the rank and file are far ahead of the workers in other industries in their readiness for struggle, the National Miners Union, under openly acknowledged Communist leadership, has thus far succeeded in enlisting the support of only a very small fraction (this, in large measure is also due to wrong policies which will be dealt with in separate articles).
Growing radicalization of the American workers, while likely to be accompanied by sporadic, unorganized struggles, essentially mean their turning more definitely toward union organization – mainly toward the existing mass unions without being able to comprehend the character of the A.F. of L. “leadership”. A turn toward the building of a labor party is also likely. In one instance – the last New York City elections – the large increase in votes by the Socialist Party ticket, reaching a total of tens of thousands while that of the Communist Party ticket decreased to a little less than 6,000, is, despite the seeming paradox, an expression of radicalization in an American scale. Thousands of the workers who voted for the S.P. did so with the conviction of taking a step toward the Left, away from capitalism and toward socialism, without being able as yet to understand the character of the S.P. leadership or the distance that the party has moved away from socialism. In that sense and to that degree they expressed their growing radicalism. There is no other basis upon which that vote increase can be evaluated. If these workers had wanted to remain ideologically as they were before – supporters of capitalism – they would naturally have continued to vote for the Republicans and Democrats, This and subsequent events also indicates that the S.P. and its social reformist leadership will change from its years of relative obscurity and paralysis, and become more of a factor misleading the workers. The course of working class radicalization in this course and the blunders of the official Communist party, gives it that opportunity. Nevertheless, the fact of the workers actually taking the first steps away from capitalist ideology and toward union organization is what holds out great hope and great possibilities for the revolutionary movement.
* * *
The problem of the new industrial unions will be considered in the next issue of the Militant. – A.S.
 



With ever increasing signs of deep-going changes facing the American workers, which are partly already beginning, It is of the utmost importance to recognize the present actual level of development to be able to prepare correctly for the next steps. Proceeding from that point it becomes clear that the movement toward a conscious class position, will of necessity first pass some stages of rather elementary expression. Will the reformist labor party stage be one, and if so what should be the attitude of revolutionists?
The practically complete allegiance of the workers, in so far as they give any political expression, to the capitalist parties has almost become proverbial in the United States. There is no reason further to elaborate on this, except to add that particularly here parliamentary elections can only be a partial indication of working class sentiments. But in the field of economic organization there is no less backwardness shown by the vast number of workers in the manufacturing and basic industries. They are almost entirely unorganized. The Handbook of American Trade Unions claims a total membership today in all unions of 4,331,251. It was never higher at the peak figures in 1920 than 5,110,800, thus clearly informing us that the great majority of the working class have not had experience in any kind of unionism. Here we must also record the fact that within these unions there, is today practically no organized left wing in existence.
 
Status of the New Unions
Would it be correct to say that these unorganized workers are ready for organisation but have been denied the opportunity because of the reactionary and craft ideology of the present unions? Undoubtedly that is so in the case of a good many thousands; but one must not lose sight of realities. Nowhere have the workers as yet begun in the unorganized industries to move toward elementary forms of shop organizations.
How does the case then stand with the new industrial unions sponsored by the Trade Union Unity League? Healthy growth here would naturally be a very strong indication of rapid ideological advancement of the working class. Unfortunately that is not so. These unions have remained at a very small membership and although the future holds good possibilities if correct policies are formulated for their function, the fact remains that a swing toward mass support for the new unions cannot yet be recorded.
There are other means of gauging working class development, for instance, through its press. However, compared to the capitalist dailies mounting into many millions of issues per day throughout the country the press representing labor is limited indeed. Its revolutionary section reaches only some thousands of readers. Many former labor papers of a somewhat progressive tinge have disappeared, sold out or exist as a shadow of their former strength.
 
The Labor Struggles in Recent Years
Perhaps, despite all these facts, the field of actual working class struggle by way of strikes, organized or unorganized, gives a different impression of the level of development. As yet, that cannot be said to be the case. While latest figures are not available it remains a well known fact that since 1922 the number of actual strikes and workers participating in them has shown a steady decline. Only, and that is important as a trend of recent events, there has been a healthy sign of militancy displayed in such strikes, as among the textile workers in Passaic, New Bedford, Gastonia and Marion; in the ill-fated Illinois miner’s strike; in the New Orleans street carmen’s strike and at present in the Pittsburg taxicab strike and the Philadelphia Aberle mill strike.
This is how matters stand just now with the working class, the actual level from which changes will proceed; and they are not the conditions of pre-war America, but of today, under a highly developed capitalist imperialism. On the other hand, we note the extremely important beginnings of militancy – indicative for the future.
Nevertheless, all factors considered, the most elementary steps toward a class movement of the American workers are yet to be taken. The response given in several instances to the unemployment demonstrations on March 6th, led by Communists, although not yet signifying a conscious class basis, is however, one of the definite indications of the accelerating speed of developments in this present epoch.
But proceeding from the actual level of the working class organizationally, politically and ideologically, it is hardly possible that the political reformist stage can be avoided as a definite part of future developments. In the main European industrial countries this stage has assumed its definite place, embracing almost the entire working class and is in most instances yet at its height. The forces which will initiate and furnish leadership to it in this country can already be discerned.
 
Perspectives in the A.F. of L.
From the upper hierarchy of the A.F. of L. the mildest labor reformist movement has met decided opposition in the past. Its political policy is a natural reflex of its own position as part of the employers’ industrial staff. This is important because of the strategic role of the organized section, even if relatively small in numbers, in the course of labor developments. But with a continued radicalization of the workers in general, the very pressure will be furnished from below which may easily strike a response among certain strata of the lower union officialdom and impel them forward to give leadership to a breakaway from the traditional two party system toward a labor party. More surely is this so since it will simultaneously afford the opportunity to ward off the masses, at least for a period, from any inclination toward the revolutionary movement, and to steer it into the safer channels of political reformism. Thus, such breakaways may become closely associated with a revolt against the policies and class collaboration practices of the A.F. of L. hierarchy. The miners’ insurgent convention in Springfield, Ill., held March 10th, may be come one classical illustration of just such revolts. Although not yet a breakaway, still through the working class forces it sets into motion, it can become rich in potentialities. The radicalizatlon already manifest, the beginning of a stir within the trade unions, all speeded on by the general critical conditions, present a seeming paradox: – defensive struggles, containing explosive material, with mass demonstrations and possibly open violent outbursts, yet politically only the reformist stage of a labor party approaches. Upon closer investigation, however, it will be seen that this seeming paradox is but an exact reflex of the dialectical process.
 
Some Labor Party History
It would hardly be an exaggeration to state that no issue has manifested so much confusion within the revolutionary movement during the last few years as has the labor party issue. In 1922, after a sharp struggle within the Workers Party, the correct conception of the possible growth of a labor party as an elementary expression of political development of the American workers and the duty of the Communists to function as a revolutionary factor in these developments, was adopted. But soon, digressions into adventurism and opportunism took the upper hand, making a caricature of a correct conception. The Communists, regardless of forces available and of the tempo of development, embarked upon the building of a labor party. It had its beginning in the August thesis, whose author was John Pepper. This thesis visualized each group within the labor movement – the Socialist party, the trade union group and the Communists with its own labor party. Two classes in one party, the farmer-labor party, became the accepted thing and from there it was just a short step to the formation of the Federated Farmer Labor party. As it never became a party in reality, the tide rapidly turned toward the fiction of the La Follette alliance. This fallacy became decisively exposed only after the direct intervention of comrade Trotsky, then not yet exiled from the Comintern. But with the intensified Centrist struggle against the Russian Communist Opposition, headed by Trotsky, the rapidly Stalinized Comintern became intoxicated with these entirely false farmer-labor practices of the American Communists. This was best expressed in the report of the Comintern political secretary, comrade Kolaroff, to the Fifth Congress, running in part as follows:
“The small farmers in the United States have organized a farmer-labor party, which becomes constantly more and more radicalized, comes closer to the Communists and is saturated with the idea of the establishment of a farmer-labor government in the United States.” (?!) (Pravda, July 6, 1924)
Nothing more and nothing less.
 
The Sectarian Party Policy
With the American party leadership the zig-zag still continued at dizzying speed. At the Cleveland T.U.U.L. convention last summer a most ridiculous resolution was adopted providing for the – establishment of a labor party which would be against the left social democrats, the Musteites, etc., where “no reformist elements could sneak into its ranks” (!!!). Finally the party leadership has adopted a standpoint rejecting any labor party perspective, while the Sixth Comintern Congress still adhered to one organized from below. But then, changes to the exact opposite are simple matters today under the Stalin leadership.
Of late, the labor party question has been discussed in the party press. Joseph Zack in articles in the December and January Communist, takes the position that reformism has already run its course in the United States through the period of the labor aristocracy organized in the A.F. of L., although not appearing here in the European clothes of a social-democratic or a labor party. He seems further to contend that while labor parties were possible in this country in the pre-monopolistic era, now, under monopoly capitalism, they are out of the question because of the sharpened class struggle. Of course, Zack has always shown aptitude in building up a series of arguments based upon seemingly perfect logic but entirely forgetting the dialectical process from which working class developments are not immune or separated.
It is somewhat different with the article of Max Bedacht in the December issue. He appears to recognize the correctness of the Party position arrived at in 1922 and subsequently approved at the Fourth Comintern congress. Remembering his sinful past as as important cog in the Lovestone-Pepper Right wing faction, and not underestimating the weakness of the flesh, he rushes in ahead of Zack and proclaims: “Me for the ‘left’ too”. He discovers that now in the “third period” matters stand differently than way back in 1922. The “social fascist” Socialist party, the petty bourgeois liberals and the sections of the labor aristocracy bribed by imperialism, will be in the labor party too and hence he concludes:
“Under the present conditions, when the reality of the labor party does no longer represent independent political action of the working class (so!) but represents open imperialist policies under cover of an anti-imperialist firm, propaganda for a labor party can no longer represent propaganda for independent political action but becomes propaganda for an under cover instrument of imperialism ... My conclusion therefore is that it is impossible at this moment to use the labor party slogan and the labor party movement unqualifiedly in the campaign for the development of independent political action of the workers.
 ”
Role of Labor Fakers and Socialists
But was not already in 1922 the role of the Socialist party, petty bourgeois liberals, etc., not only indicated but appearing in all its maturity; if not here, then at least elsewhere? Was it not then clearly recognized that, although Socialist party leaders, labor fakers and labor party leaders will cunningly and violently betray the workers when the latter can no longer be fooled by reformist illusions, nevertheless the separation from the bondage of the capitalist parties would mean an important step forward for the workers? Was it not recognized that in that process the Communists must move with the masses and always endeavor to extend its revolutionary influence? Of course it was, although the “third period” had not yet been invented. But despite all this well-known history, Bedacht, by theoretical magic, constructs a jumping-off board designed to make the leap over the political reformist stage in one easy jump. That is to be the “political united front”. An elegant expression, whatever it may mean. He solves it very simply by basing it upon the Communist nuclei in the factories. Unfortunately, this leap will most likely never get beyond the stage of their theoretical dreams and the penalty for such false conclusions spells further party isolation from the masses.
The conclusions and formulations of the Stalin bureaucracy would be more nearly correct if we were in an immediately revolutionary period. That is just the little thing which is yet missing.
 
The Labor Party – A Perspective
The correct way to put the question is that all indications and historical experiences indicate that the labor political reformist stage is quite unavoidable also in the United States, with possibilities of some form of a labor party; and that such must be our perspective. It will surely produce leaders as reactionary as those produced in any other country who will betray, and help imperialism butcher the workers, as well as endeavor to use the labor party for that very purpose. But despite these leaders, it will also help to set the masses into motion against their class enemy. The worker will suffer bitter disappointments and experience severe struggles both of a political and industrial character in the process. But with the present rapid developments, the reformist illusions will possibly be of a very short duration. Hence our conclusion is: The Communists must remain in the most intimate contact possible with the working masses in all their experiences and struggles in order to help draw the proper lessons and lead the fight against the reactionaries; to proudly unfurl the revolutionary banner of Communism through the labor reformist stage and through the labor party, from within and without; utilize all means most speedily to help elevate the American working class to its final revolutionary position.
 



Arising largely out of the present conditions of a deep depression and widespread unemployment, working class forces are now being set into motion. The most pressing question of the moment before the American revolutionary movement therefore, is a correct orientation as a base for formulation of its strategy and tactics among the masses.
It is not yet possible to estimate the extent, the depth and the duration of the present deep depression of American capitalist economy; but certain characteristic features are clearly visible. Financial experts, when speaking seriously and not for mere public consumption, acknowledge the depression but stress every production increase in single industries, particularly the recent gains in steel output in some quarters, as signs of an early recovery. This, of course, is a deliberate policy, which does not alter the actual situation in the least. However, there is today a noticeable difference from the various pre-war crises. The latter were distinct symptoms of growth which were chiefly stoppages in the violent growth of productive machinery and the expansion of markets to make possible certain adjustments necessitated by this rapid process.
Today the United States has reached the stage of large scale structural unemployment, which, in other words, means a standing army of unemployed. This is not merely of those cast out from some industries to be quickly absorbed into other or new, developing ones, but “superfluous” workers eliminated by the rapid development of machinery and immensely increased labor productivity in practically every sphere. This is sufficiently borne out by all available reliable statistics.
 
Unemployment – A Spur to Class Action
The spectre of the standing army of unemployed will hence be haunting the exploiters and become a mighty spur moving the workers toward class action. The direction and the speed this will take in its first stage depends, however, a great deal on the present level of development. Unfortunately, it cannot be expected, or even hoped, that the workers will as a mass more with one leap to the Communist party or the “revolutionary unions”. Any orientation based upon such hopes will surely come to grief. On the contrary, it is the duty of Communists to be with the masses set in motion and to show the proper direction through such steps that the workers are now ready to take.
With the lines of those seeking work growing longer in front of factory gates, it cannot be expected that the working class will engage in widespread offensive battles. But we know, from what is inherent in the capitalist system, that precisely in this situation the capitalists seek to get out of economic difficulties by increased pressure upon the workers through further reduction of their standard of living and conditions of work. This added pressure leaves no way open for the workers but one of resistance. The logic of this deduction leads to the conclusion of a coming period of defensive battles. The history of the American workers throughout the various crises of capitalist production is replete with defensive battles, before the offensive could again be assumed during the period of recovery. It is also one filled with many attempts to seek a solution in political reform activities, as the most immediate outgrowth of the crisis. This suggests another conclusion that this is the trend of development we face at this moment.
 
Some Labor History and Struggles
A cursory glance at labor’s history from the beginning of trades unionism in the thirties, through the various periods of cyclic crises, shows with almost unfailing regularity the same phenomenon. During times of “prosperity”, with its labor shortage and the cost of living invariably outleaping raises in wages, aggressive strike offensives and expansion of trade unions were on the order ot the day. These just as surely changed when a new crisis set in. While these were often accompanied with desperate and violent revolts, the character and often repeated defeats of the defensive strikes turned the workers’ attention toward struggle for political reforms which were often expressed through various forms of labor or middle class parties. This may be said to have been particularly marked up until the “great upheaval” in ‘85 and ‘86; but a similar recurrence of developments of more recent date can be noticed. As an example a few facts from the last industrial depression at the end of 1921 and beginning of 1922 will prove very instructive.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics gives the following figures on the character and cause of disputes during the depression. We quote from the years 1919 to 1923, which, although incomplete, are very suggestive. Disputes for wage increases (offensive character) reached in the year 1919 a total of 1,074; for the year 1920 a total of 1,328; 1921 a total of 120; 1922 a total of 133; 1923 (first six months) a total of 310. Disputes in resistance of wage decreases (defensive character) were as follows: Year 1919 a total of 86; year 1920 a total of 147; year 1931 a total of 895; 1922 a total of 256; 1923 (first six months) a total of 20. This is sufficient to show clearly the large extent of disputes of a defensive character, to ward off wage decreases during the depression, to be immediately reversed and become offensive struggles, for wage increases, during the period of recovery. Similarly, the disputes around demands tor union recognition reached their highest during these years with a total of 350 in 1919 and its lowest with only 53 in 1921. The employers’ offensive netted them the highest number of direct victories in these disputes in 1921 with a total of 701.
 
The Political Action of Labor
How does the matter stand, then, with labor political action? One can, of course, speak only of labor political reformist action since the American workers as a mass have not yet learned the necessity of revolutionary action. The more recent labor and farmer-labor party developments arose in 1919 with the formation of the National Farmer-Labor Party at Chicago. In 1920 there was the first appearance of the Farmer-Labor Party of the state of Washington, in some other states there were labor activities within non-partisan political leagues. But in 1922 this movement received a pronounced impetus. During the summer the American Labor Party of New York City was organized; the Minnesota non-partisan political league became re-organized to the Farmer-Labor Party, while a similar reorganization took place in South Dakota. The same year saw the organization of the Progressive Party (farmer-labor) in Idaho and one year later the Farmer-Labor Party of West Virginia. At the “Conference for Progressive Political Action” conference in Cleveland in 1922, at which a number of international unions and central bodies were represented, a motion made by the Chicago Federation of Labor group to “declare for independent political action by the agricultural and industrial workers through a party of their own” was defeated with a vote of only 64 to 52.
It is significant that these were the developments following right upon the heels of the last industrial depression. The culmination and beginning of the decline of this movement were reached at the July, 1923 convention in Chicago at which the Federated Farmer-Labor Party was formed, but alas – on paper. From the last gasp at the Farmer-Labor Party convention at St. Paul the following year, there have been but little actual signs since in this direction.
 
The Rising Struggles
The present depression finds the vast gulf of class distinctions greater than ever in the United States. According to government reports the total net profits of all corporations in 1929 after all deductions were made have almost doubled since 1922, rising to an estimated amount of $9,900,000,000. While profits thus soared, wages paid to workers in manufacturing industries during the same period advanced but 19 per cent, not to speak of the level of the cost of living from December, 1928 to September, 1929 the Labor Bureau, Inc. estimates that the average wage in the country decreased 2 percent.
It is a foregone conclusion that American imperialism will make efforts, abroad to get out of its economic difficulties, through war and otherwise, while simultaneously strengthening its world hegemony. The first steps are already being put into operation. Leaving aside here the matter of the effects of these efforts abroad, American capitalism of course likewise tries to make the workers at home bear the increased burden. The results will almost surely lead to a repetition of past history. But this will take place now, however, under conditions of a higher development of capitalism and also on a higher plane for the working class. The crushing capitalist offensive during the present heavy unemployment, with the aim to reduce wages, increase speed-up and to cripple the unions, will bring forth resistance through workers’ defensive struggles. It will certainly involve workers organized in the existing trades unions. The necessarily accompanying despotic use of the capitalist machinery of the state, to carry the offensive through more effectively, points to the workers’ resistance in this field taking a direction towards political reformist activities, most likely to be expressed in a labor political party.
 
The Labor Party and the Communists
Under such conditions would a labor party spring forth as a full fledged instrument of imperialism? Reactionary labor “leaders” would surely become part of its composition and strive for “leadership” there the same as they do in all other broad non-revolutionary workers’ organizations. They will, of course, continue in their role as tools of imperialism. Very consciously American imperialism will learn to utilize them as “saviours” of their system and privileges fully as well as in the case of the McDonald government in England today. The American McDonalds in turn will exert all energies to subject the labor party as a whole to further this aim. But their success in this endeavor depends precisely upon their ability to keep Communist influence isolated on the outside. Nevertheless, as a means of helping to separate the working masses from their political bondage to the historical capitalist parties, the labor party would serve as well today as in the past and would occupy the same place ia history as previously assigned to it. In that sense it will be one step toward the logical revolutionary position that the American working class must finally assume.
So far, this working class, as its history shows, has only reached the point of more or less localized and sporadic attempts in reformist politics. It is still completely bound within the capitalist political party system which thereby serves as a mighty brake upon the essential character of any economic struggles of the workers. That is today decisive, and the problem is to break through this barrier. Increased pressure upon the workers will lead to finding the forms for breaking through. What road will the first steps take? The road of the revolution with the Communist Party? That is quite inconceivable, even with a rapid tempo of development. Can we in America avoid the stage of a national scale of labor political reformist activities? That is the way to put the question, and to also add, that even though it can hardly be avoided, it will of necessity be of short duration in the present epoch of rapid development. It then becomes pertinent to ask how can the working class best and most speedily draw the correct conclusion from such political reformist experiences, and how can it best be helped on the further road to a revolutionary position?
Upon the Communist movement devolves the duty of giving a correct answer to this question as well as to employ the tactics which will really be a help in the right direction. This we intend to discuss further in another article.
 



Marx has given to the movement his brilliant terse definition of the true nature of the capitalist system of production. In his description of the transformation of the individual means into social means of production with the social product appropriated by the individual capitalist, he demonstrated the basic contradictions whence arise all the contradictions in which our present day society moves.
The specific features of the development of monopoly capitalism are, alongside the higher stage of socialization of production, also an intensification of contradictions and sharpening of the class struggle, as indicated most vividly in this present depression. Its extent and depth cannot yet be estimated, but whatever the degree, the depression itself will accentuate these conflicts. Any steps taken toward “social control of business” – to use the phrase of the capitalist economic writers – by monopoly capitalism and its government, will naturally mean not merely attempts at new divisions, but first of all a further expansion of productive capacity with increased exploitation of the workers. Evidence of this has already been given in the Hoover conferences. Discounting all the window dressing from the “promises” for building and expansion of activities by the big corporations and retaining that part which will actually find a place in their “normal” development, what have we left? Just such building and expansion which makes each corporation a more effective competitor and bring results in increased production of surplus values, at reduced cost by further rationalization, labor saving machinery and speed-up.
Lenin, distinctly emphasized that capitalism in its imperialistic phase leads to the most extensive socialization of production, that the fundamental contradictions of capitalism are not eliminated but become intensified, that the general structure of free competition remains and the oppression by a few monopolists becomes much harder, more painful and unbearable.
 
The Imperialist Struggle for Market Control
Concretely, the further developments will manifest themselves today first of all in efforts by American monopoly capitalism to overcome its economic difficulties by further pressure upon the workers. The theories of the capitalist economists of the high wage standard, labor stock ownership in enterprises and capital and labor partnership, also valiantly championed by the A.F. of L. “leadership”, are due for some rude shakings: for the indispensable and fundamental condition of the capitalist method of production is a starvation standard, with, however, continued imperialist bribings of certain sections of the more skilled. This is already on the order of the day. The working class as a whole is suffering both by outright wage cuts, by the fact of a standing army of unemployed hitting most families, as well as increased speedup. The working class will find itself compelled to ever more resistance, thus sharpening the class struggle.
American imperialism will further seek to overcome its economic difficulties on the international arena by conquests of new markets. But the division of the world among the groups of capitalists, as far as colonial territory is concerned, was already completed at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century. Now only re-divisions are possible which usually find this “solution” in war. The American exports to foreign markets are increasing, and already presage an immediately sharpening trade war, because the European imperialist powers will do their best to retaliate. In answer to the new U.S. tariff policy, for example, similar steps are indicated in Europe. The French parliament is laboring over a bill providing for an exceptionally high duty on import of automobiles. The recent League of Nations Report shows Germany increasing her foreign trade much faster than the United States. One of the special tasks of the McDonald government is to carry through a complete reorganization of British industry to become a better competitor with the United States, and, if possible, to make the British workers “like” the speed-up system. A trade war of imperialist cut-throats will be based primarily upon their ability to cut wages and increase the pace of the workers. This struggle for the world market, or for redivision of the world, is but the prelude to the imperialist war, in other words – a continuation of the trade war with different means - which now finds its reflection in the jugglings for position at the London naval conference in the race for armaments.
 
American Expansion Will Bring Revolutionary Disturbances
“The inevitable further development of American expansion, the contraction of the markets of European capitalism, including the European market itself, entails the greatest military, economic and revolutionary disturbances, such as will leave all disturbances of the past in the shade.” (Trotsky – Criticism of Comintern Program)
As for any beliefs of the ability of the often appearing world trusts or syndicates actually to divide the world spheres between them and eliminate competition, historical experiences should teach a good lesson. Lenin cites some examples in his book Imperialism:

The petroleum market already in 1905 was divided between two groups: The Standard Oil Co. and the Rotschild-Nobel combine. Both of these groups were closely connected, but their monopoly became threatened by newly developing oil fields mainly backed by German banks. A struggle ensued between the Standard Oil and the German banks, involving the German government, with the result that the former became victorious. We can add, that now this struggle is continued between the Standard Oil and the Royal Dutch Shell.
 
Lenin further cites the field of mercantile navigation where the gigantic growth of concentration led to division of all routes between the two German groups, Hamburg-American and North German Lloyd on the one hand and the Morgan trust of Anglo-American companies on the other. An agreement for division was concluded in 1903 to run for 20 years. It became void by the world war.
 
Similarly in 1904 the steel rail cartel was organized with a definite basis of division of the market between England, Germany and Belgium. Later France and the United States Steel Corporation, followed by Austria and Spain, joined. The war scattered it again.
 

Capitalism Can’t Harmonize Contradictions
Recently rumors were current of American steel trusts entering the new European steel syndicate. Here again the prospects of the coming imperialist war indicates its short lease of life, if the conflicting interests of the national capitalist groups can be harmonized even that long. However, the decisive conclusion from such developments was drawn by Lenin:
“Some bourgeois writers were of the opinion that international cartels, being one of the most striking expressions of the internationalization of capital, give hope that peace among nations will be possible under capitalism. Theoretically, such an idea is an absurdity, and in practice it is a sophism and a means of dishonest defense of the worst kind of opportunism. The international cartels show the point to which capitalist monopolies have now grown and what the struggle among groups of capitalists is about. The latter point is the most important; it alone explains to us the historical-economic meaning of what is going on at present, as the form of the struggle may change and does change constantly, being dependent on various comparatively trifling and temporary causes, but the essence of the struggle, its class character cannot change as long as classes exist.” (emphasis in original.)
 
Finance Capitalists Direct Government
It would be foolish, however, to close one’s eyes to the possibilities for further expansion of American monopoly capitalism even on the home market. The tendencies manifested in the Hoover conferences toward “social control of business” (state capitalism) is keeping that well in mind and is based upon such possibilities. They envisage the prospects of bringing the government into more direct participation, support and responsibility, that is: – to establish a more perfect synthesis of control by the dynastic oligarchy both in the economic and political spheres. In this country the personal union, or fusion, of banks, industrial establishments and the government has not been lagging. The banks are no mere intermediaries in business but powerful monopoly holders; finances are completely interwoven with direction of industrial activities, industrial magnates are on board of directors of the banks and ever more openly this whole gentry fills the seats of government. Mellon, whose family cleaned up nearly 300 million dollars during the month of May last year in the rich stock market harvest, has long been the most outstanding directing force in the cabinet. Recently, as part of the general Hoover program, he was able to hand down a small subsidy in the form of a 160 million dollars tax cut on all incomes between 1 and 30 millions. Now Grundy has been put in the Senate and Morrow, Morgan’s partner, will soon also take a seat there.
It follows incontestably that any such further expansion on the home market as well leads to further contradictions, further sharpening of the class struggle, further competition between the monopolies themselves and with the smaller capitalist enterprises. This is inherent in capitalism and substantiated by all historical experience. The present industrialization of the south is the most vivid example. So far only in the first stage, it is already developing acute class conflicts. The Petty Capitalists are Ground Under There are throughout the country plenty of advocates for extension of super-power developments; for damming of mighty rivers and irrigation and fertilization of extensive tracts of land or for a waterway from the Great Lakes to the Atlantic. Unquestionably the resources are available but within lie also sharpened competition and conflicts. We witness the uneven development not merely between the capitalist countries but also of capitalism within the country itself – not in the least softened in its monopolist stage. There are constant competition and encroachments upon the lighter or finishing industries by the heavier industries in control of raw materials, sometimes represented by horizontal versus vertical trusts. There is constant developing competition for new raw materials made possible by inventions of new methods. The new Edison process of making rubber from goldenrod or other weeds, for example, is likely to make great changes in the world struggle for rubber. Even the mere advocacy of the expansions mentioned above has struck opposition and conflicts between the various capitalist groups and monopolies. Conflicts between the capitalist groups is reflected in the dispute around the proposed high tariff legislation.
 
The Increase of Bankruptcies
The present depression, as with others, is taking its toll in bankruptcies. According to the R.C. Dun Review there were 2,759 bankruptcies during the month of January, the greatest number of any January for years. This offers the usual “splendid opportunities” for finance monopoly capitalism to proceed to organize these concerns or buy them for a song. The smaller capitalists and the middle class elements, who are thus being hit and who suffer in general from the oppression of the few monopolists have always looked for saviours to free them from the monopoly domination. They thus looked to and followed Roosevelt and LaFollette and they are now cherishing hopes that the present “progressives” in Congress will take up the cudgels against Grundy and Morrow and lead another “trust busting” campaign. It presages disturbances and splits within the important props of finance monopoly – the capitalist parties, mainly along economic lines. Many of the middle class elements, however, will be reduced to the ranks of the proletariat and become disillusioned.
 
The Growth of Communism
These are the dialectics of the capitalist system of production standing out more clearly in its greater maturity in the imperialist epoch. Every expansion of productive capacity; every step for more perfect stabilization of production, produces and intensifies its exact opposite – greater competition although in changed forms, and sharpened class antagonisms. These develop opportunities to advance the Communist movement. They should not be wasted in academic debates over primacy of external or internal contradictions; not to proclaim, as the Stalinites do, that the Right wing view of the disappearance of internal contradictions and the growth of anarchy in the international arena means that they hence “lead a purely metaphysical existence in the cosmic space”. This is not the way to combat wrong theories. Crises in the specific country may focus particularly its internal contradictions; wars may focus particularly the external contradictions. Nevertheless these contradictions interrelate and are in the imperialist epoch inseparably bound together. The fact that American imperialism rests upon a foundation of world economy with its international conflicts hastens and sharpens the conflicts within.
 



V. Grey’s article, Steel: Achilles of US Industry, published in the October Fourth International, graphically illustrates some of the inexorable contradictions inherent in the process of accumulation of capital. His analysis is excellent, and it follows the Marxist approach to these problems. Moreover, he demonstrates that American industry and especially the steel industry, precisely because of its high technological development, provides the fullest confirmation of the analysis of the laws of capitalist production made by Marx.
Grey lays bare some of the fundamental aspects of these laws as they apply to the steel industry: the disproportionate expansion of constant capital (equipment and raw materials) as against variable capital (labor-power, wages) and the resulting higher organic composition of capital which fosters the tendency of the average rate of profit to fall. This is most apparent in this giant among powerful American industrial combines.
On the whole Grey has performed a most commendable job. But his analysis suffers from a certain weakness. If not directly, at least indirectly, there appears to be an implication that the tendency of the falling average rate of profit is synonymous with what the steel barons proclaim as the “break-even” point for their industry.
In 1939 the steel magnates estimated the “break-even” point to be 50 percent of capacity. Today they insist that this figure has reached between 70 and 75 percent. And this change happened during a decade of war and unprecedented prosperity. Proceeding from this point onward in arithmetical progression one could easily visualize the time – not in the too distant future – when this figure might reach 100 percent, whether or not a depression intervenes. Would the steel industry then have to produce at a loss, go out of business, or be taken over by the state?
On the other hand Robert Nathan, presenting the case for the steel workers union before the Presidential Fact Finding Board, was equally insistent on a “break-even” point for the steel industry today of only 33 percent of capacity.
It is possible, of course, that Nathan does not understand the theory of the tendency of the falling rate of profit or, at least, ignores it. And it is perfectly obvious that the steel magnates would apply every trick of their accounting devices to move the so-called “breakeven” point up to the highest plausible level.
 
A Page of Skulduggery
It would be a mistake to identify the industrialist’s “break-even” point – arbitrarily and artificially established – with the tendency of the falling rate of profit. It represents rather a page from the chapter of skulduggery and swindles perpetrated by these predatory capitalists essentially for the purpose of defrauding the steel workers of a livable return on their toil.
These techniques were carefully analyzed and presented in great detail by Donald Montgomery, chief of the Washington office of the UAW-CIO, to the Joint Committee of the Economic Report in the hearings on corporate profits held in Washington, D.C. during December 1948. In the case of US Steel these hearings brought out the following:

At the end of 1940 US Steel adopted the “last-in, first-out” (Lifo) method of reporting most of their inventories. With inventory valued at the last or higher cost in a period of increasing prices, with the so-called inventory profits having been written off.
During the war (from 1941 through 1945) capital facilities were depreciated under the five-year amortization certificates (“accelerated depreciation”). This accelerated depreciation during the war amounted to a total of $223 million for the five-year period over and above normal depreciation charges. In the postwar period depreciation allowances were substantially increased to cover “higher replacement costs.” Thus, in the middle of 1947, an additional 30 percent was added to the depreciation allowance. In 1948, this was advanced to 60 percent.
In the twenty-year period – 1928-1947 – depreciation charges amounted to a total of $1,555 million while capital expenditures were $1,594 million. Thus the increased value of the US Steel Corporation since 1928 has been financed almost entirely by depreciation charges and not from any re-invested profits.

But none of these exorbitant depreciation allowances are included in reports of net profits made. Profits appear correspondingly reduced; and the “breakeven” point, moving upward at an accelerated pace, becomes pure fraud.
The realization of profit and the accumulation of capital is the primary urge and the motivating force of all capitalist production. This and this alone is given serious consideration by the steel magnates when demands are made for expansion of productive capacity, or when demands are made for increased wages by the steel workers union.
The phenomenal expansion of the steel industry during the last century of its existence has subjected it ever more to the fundamental laws as well as to the contradictions of capitalist production. Its gigantic machinery operated by relatively few men, so vividly described by Grey, represents the disproportionate expansion of constant capital relative to variable capital. With each new labor-saving machine, labor productivity rises to greater heights and the absolute mass of that part of labor which is unpaid and represents surplus Value is increased.
Living labor alone produces surplus value. But in the steel industry this has meant a continual decline of living labor employed in comparison to the amount of constant capital invested. As a result, the surplus value produced has also continually declined in comparison to the total capital invested. And since the proportion of the mass of surplus value to the value of total capital employed forms the rate of profit, this rate tends to fall continuously.
 
Falling Rate of Profit
Marx always insisted that the fall in the rate of average profit manifests itself as a tendency and not in absolute form. Its effects become clearly marked only under certain conditions and over long periods. But Marx also established the fact that the same causes which bring about this falling tendency of the rate of profit also produce a counterbalance to this tendency.
The growth of the social productivity of labor expresses itself also in a progressive increase in the absolute mass of the appropriated surplus value or profit; thus on the whole a relative decrease of variable capital and profit is accompanied by an absolute increase of both.
There is an accelerated accumulation of capital. Generally the growth of total capital proceeds at a more rapid ratio than that expressed by the fall of the rate of profit.
According to R. Weidenhammer’s analysis in the American Economic Review for March 1933 the rate of profit on the invested capital of the US Steel Corporation fell from approximately 8 percent in 1902 to 4.5 percent in 1927-1929 (the rate rose sharply during the war years of 1916-17). But the corporation’s surplus rose from $25 million in 1902 to $700 million in 1929 while its assets increased more than threefold. In other words a vastly increased mass of profit compensated for the diminishing rate of profit.
One of the outstanding factors counteracting the tendency of the falling rate of profit is represented by a greater intensity of exploitation of labor. This tends to raise the rate of profit by increasing surplus value without a corresponding increase in the value of fixed capital. Various methods of rationalization of production including actual speedup are applied. US News and World Report, July 1949, states: “All US factories, as a group, operated at a rate of efficiency that was 7 percent higher during the first four months of this year than it- was in all of 1948, on the basis of official indexes.” It is to be assumed that the steel magnates enjoyed their share of this greater intensity of exploitation of labor.
The tendency of the falling rate of profit is checked also by such means as the cheapening of the elements of constant capital. This may apply to both equipment and raw materials.
Prices of raw materials are often cheapened by the development of synthetics and other substitutes, by greater efficiency of production and greater supply, and, not least of all, by more intense exploitation of colonial labor. Apparently it was not too difficult for Robert Nathan to prove before the Fact Finding Board that Big Steel could grant the thirty-cent-an-hour package demanded by the union out of the saving from the recent fall in the cost of raw materials alone.
It is just as true for machinery and other fixed capital as for raw materials that value does not grow in proportion to their mass. Both the quantity and the productivity of the former tend to increase more than their price. For the machinery and tool-producing industry this trend is more marked than in the average of capitalist production as a whole. Thus the same development which increases the mass of constant capital relatively over that of variable capital, reduces the value, of its elements as a result of the increased productivity of labor.
 
Effect of Monopoly
However, the rate of profit within the process of production itself depends also o,n many other circumstances. Even entirely apart from surplus values produced or economies affected in constant capital, the rate of profit depends on what Marx calls the second act of the process of capitalist production – the sale of the products.
The rate of profit depends not least of all on the constellation of the market. For instance, during the recent war period monopoly capitalism sold its output at arbitrarily set prices to the government in which the monopoly capitalists were also represented in person. In addition the government helped to hold down costs of production through its OPA measures. Prices and profits were not lowered by competition, and advertising costs could be held to a minimum. All of fixed capital, including its new additions, was set into motion by labor.
This “market” absorbed the enlarged output of commodities and permitted a complete realization of surplus value and profit. No doubt the rate of profit experienced a new even though temporary rise. Of this booty, to be sure, the masters of the steel industry pocketed their bountiful share, and they are now giving a demonstration of their determination to fight to. the bitter end against any encroachment on their swollen profits.
On the whole the monopoly control of American industry, with its arbitrary price-fixing and tariff protection for the big internal market, exerts its effect in checking the falling rate of profit. Externally, American imperialism, after its victory in the war, endeavored to extend this check to the world market by the elimination of such competitors as Germany and Japan. However, it thereby extends also all its own internal antagonisms and becomes more inextricably bound up with the malignant growth of paralysis and decay of world capitalist economy.
For the sake of clarity on some of these important aspects of the laws of capitalist production I thought it necessary to submit these remarks as an extension to Grey’s article. However, I can readily agree to Grey’s forecast of the future vulnerability of the steel industry which holds true in general for capitalist industry as a whole.
 
Life and Death Struggle
Like a “floating” foundation threatening collapse, the tendency of the falling rate of profit shows the constantly deeper cracks and fissures in the structure of capitalist economy. The industrial overlords are compelled to struggle incessantly to brace it up. Both the tendency of the falling rate of profit and the struggle against it condition the most fundamental aspect of capitalist development.
Since the rate of profit is the incentive to capitalist production, its falling tendency checks the formation of new independent capital. Even the efforts to offset the tendency by increasing the mass of profit through changing the organic composition of capital succeeds only temporarily, inasmuch as this change again asserts its downward pressure. The tendency of the falling rate of profit aggravates the contradictions between the absolute development of production and the limited conditions of consumption.
That the steel industry gave a resounding “NO” in answer to the big clamor for further expansion of productive capacity is quite understandable from their point of view. From its roaring infancy, the steel industry grew with the development of new industry and the industrialization of new regions. Now the decline of the rate of expansion is easily observable. Roughly this corresponds to the declining rate of expansion for American industry as a whole.
But.it would not be correct to ascribe this entirely to the tendency of the falling rate of profit. The constantly higher organic composition of capital also sets into motion simultaneously and antagonistically a restriction of the growth of the market by imposing new limitations upon the purchasing power of the great mass of the workers. Capitalism develops the forces of production far more rapidly than the forces of consumption, and the latter are subject to a number of specific laws. Thus, wages tend to fall relatively as output and profits rise. Consumer income rises at a slower pace than investment income. That is why the steel barons get cold chills as they anticipate the ultimate effects of the high cost of excess capacity.
The decline of the rate of expansion of capitalist production gives expression also to a decline of ability, or of the means of converting profits into capital. This carries with it a decline of the ability to create a consumers market. Marx put this whole question in a nutshell when he said:
“The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself. It is the fact that capital and its self-expansion appear as the starting and closing point, as the motive and aim of production; that production is merely production for capital, and not vice versa, the means of production mere means for an ever expanding system of the life process for the benefit of the society of producers.” (Capital, Vol.III, page 293.)



“The development of modern industry ... cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. What the bourgeoisie therefore produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.”
With this prediction two of the greatest minds of human history concluded the most brilliant, the most powerful, and the most authentic indictment ever made of modern capitalist society. Marx and Engels made this unequivocal statement in the Communist Manifesto one hundred years ago. Presented as the summation of their critique it embodies the fundamental hypothesis of Marxism.
It is this fundamental hypothesis which has been called into question, maligned and denounced time and again by “critics” of Marx, both astute and mediocre, during the hundred years that have elapsed since the appearance of the Communist Manifesto.
One of the recent arrivals among this host of “critics” is a Jean Vannier, whose denunciation of Marxism appeared in the March 1948 Partisan Review. Lacking both self-restraint and modesty, a common failing of the mediocre, Vannier presumptuously proclaims the “collapse” of this “century old hypothesis.” It has been “proved invalid,” he says. But Vannier’s confusion is revealed when he explains his conception of Marxism. He tells his readers that there is “no necessary logical connection between Marx’s fundamental hypothesis and his economic doctrine”; and adds that “the former was by no means logically implied in the latter.”
According to Vannier, Marx arbitrarily formulated his fundamental hypothesis without regard to his analysis of the development of productive forces under Capitalism. Such methodology has nothing in common with Marxism. It is rather an expression of the most profane bourgeois method of thought.
Marx never tired of attacking the philosophers who “always bad the solution to the riddle laying ready in their writing desks.” In stating the aims of the movement around the Deutsch Franzoesiscbe Jahrbuecher Marx declared:
“It is precisely the advantage of the new movement that we do not seek to anticipate the new world dogmatically, but rather to discover it in the criticism of the old.”
And in the same article he added:
“We should develop new principles for the world out of its old principles. We must not say to the world, stop your quarrels, they are foolish, and listen to us. We possess the real truth. Instead we must show the world why it struggles, and this consciousness is a thing it must acquire whether it likes it or not.”
To discover the new world in the criticism of the old, that is the Marxist method. It was precisely this method which led Marx to discover from his analysis that the development of capitalist productive forces “cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products.” Hence the conclusion: “Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.”
It is true that Marx addressed the European workmen as follows in 1850:
“You will have to go through fifteen, twenty, fifty years of civil wars and international conflicts, not only in order to transform your circumstances but to transform yourselves and make yourselves fit for political power.”
He could, of course, have added another fifty years or more. He laid down no timetable. Nor did he visualize that process as a straight upward line of battle without setbacks, defeats, or betrayals. It was Marx who laid the basis for our understanding of the ebbs and flows of the class struggle.
The history of the modern proletariat is a chronicle of great heroism and almost unlimited audacity. On more than one occasion from the Paris Commune to the Russian Revolution, and since, it has scaled the greatest heights of triumph, while the impact of this mighty power shook society to its very foundation. But it is equally true that this mighty proletariat has often stopped short of its goal, often retreated. Temporarily swept off its progressive path it has been deceived, betrayed, and defeated, while the class enemy recuperated and putrid bourgeois society won a new lease on life. Usually it is this alleged failure of the working class which becomes the first excuse on the road to renegacy.
In arguing against the validity of Marx’s fundamental hypothesis Vannier says:
“The answer to such a question could only come from experience itself ... the political capacity of the proletariat could only be measured in the reality of class conflict.”
But strangely enough Vannier does not now want to thus measure this political capacity. For him the question is already settled in the negative. Or maybe this is not so strange at all; for what is already settled is only his own renegacy.
Is the proletariat politically capable of taking over power in society and transforming property relationships? Is it a historically progressive class, capable of selecting a leadership and creating a party for this purpose? These questions can be answered only in terms of the whole historical process of development of the material forces of production under capitalism, its relations of production, and the conflict of the former with the latter. Above all these questions can be answered only dialectically. In other words, an answer must take into account the interrelationship of social forces in motion and in conflict in present-day complex society. What is involved here is not merely the problem of strategy but the far broader and all-embracing question: Is the Marxist system scientific? Is it realizable? This is the question we will attempt to answer on Marxist grounds.
It would be a mistake to place any undue importance on Vannier’s anemic product. It is merely typical of so many others. So in attempting to find the correct answer only the subject itself will have real importance; and the attempt must start from fundamental propositions.
In the Author’s Preface to the Critique of Political Economy, Marx summarizes his materialist conception of history, from which we quote in part:
“In the social production which men carry on they enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will ... The sum total of these relations of production constitute the economic structure of society – the real foundation, on which rise legal and political superstructures and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness ... It is not, the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence determines their consciousness.”
 
How Men Make History
Marx thus makes clear his discovery that all human relations are rooted in the material conditions of life, or more specifically, in its prevailing mode of production. This is the basis for the existence of classes and gives rise to class antagonisms and conflicts, as well as to consciousness of class position. In thus summarizing his position Marx does not imply that the aims, ‘the purposes, or the wills of men are of no importance or play no role in this process. He affirms the contrary in the Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte:
“Men make their own history, but not just as they please. They do not choose the circumstances for themselves, but have to work upon circumstances as they find them, have to fashion the material handed down by the past.”
What Marx clearly indicates is that the aims, the purposes, and the wills of men, while becoming objective parts of the historical process, are at the same time subject to the laws of historical- development. Individuals, says Marx, “have their position in life and their personal development assigned to them by their class.” It is this subsuming of individuals under the class which causes their susceptibility to ideas, to conceptions, and even to the prejudices of their class.
Social contradictions and resultant class struggle are the motive power of historical development. And since the conflict between the development of the material forces of production and the existing property relations can find its solution only in the social revolution, the highest form of proletarian consciousness is revolutionary consciousness. To this must correspond, of course, a revolutionary program and a revolutionary party.
The class struggle is essentially a political struggle. Political parties arise out of existing social contradictions. They function in the defense of class interests. And only through the medium of its own political party can the proletariat assume an independent role. Only through this medium can it attain its class aims. The party is that historical organ by means of which the proletariat enters upon the road to class consciousness.
If this progress toward class consciousness proceeded uniformly the problem of building the party and selecting a revolutionary leadership would be relatively simple. But this is not the case. By its very nature the process is complex and contradictory. The class itself is not homogeneous. It is made up of different strata occupying varying economic positions. These various strata arrive at class consciousness by different roads and at different times. Political division arises out of this situation, which leaves room for conflicting tendencies apd ideologies. Moreover the bourgeoisie intervenes and takes art active part in this process. Above all it intervenes ideologically by the superior means at its command.
In one of their earlier joint works, The German Ideology, Marx and Engels stated this very simply. They said that
“the class which is the ruling material force of society is at the same time its ruling intellectual force. The class which has the means of material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to it.”
 
The Corruption of Social Democracy
The ideas of the. ruling class were challenged by the social democracy from the moment it entered on the stage of history under the banner of Marxism. It set as its goal the overthrow of bourgeois rule. But the powerful and dynamic expansion of capitalism exerted a corrupting influence. The working class grew in numbers, socialist votes mounted at elections, resulting in greater representation in parliament; the parties became mass parties, growing and prospering institutions. Capitalism. could afford certain concessions. The social-democratic mass parties won some’ democratic reforms which the more conservative layers of the membership were anxious to preserve. Social-reformism found nourishment in such a soil.
The leaders, whose influence grew with the growth of the parties, like the plebeians’ leaders of ancient Rome, became anxious to preserve the political status quo. They entrenched themselves. They smothered critical opposition by creating a powerful apparatus and emerging in the role of a bureaucracy with vested interests in capitalism. The practice of class collaboration replaced the policy of class struggle. The bureaucracy usurped and emasculated the traditions of the party which had gained the confidence of the working class. And the party became a mere medium of maneuvers to further the interests of the bureaucracy.
The intervention of the bourgeoisie in this process was not merely ideological in nature. It consisted of various forms of coercion as well as concessions which pitted one section of the workers against others. The bourgeoisie fostered the social-reformist bureaucracy, and while the latter drew closer to the state for protection against rebellion from its own membership, it was itself strengthened by this collaboration with capitalism. And so, in the name of reform, this bureaucracy betrayed the revolution. Its whole task consisted in reconciling the workers to capitalism.
But in the next historical stage of disintegration and decay of capitalism, this bureaucracy was driven to its last refuge: it sought to make society safe for capitalism even at the cost of sacrificing reforms.
Basically it is the intervention of the bourgeoisie in the historical process which accounts for the emergence of social-reformism as a political tendency within the working class. This is one of the by-products of the class struggle. But in the course of its sway and development social-reformism itself assumes the role of an intermediary historical force, and, more than any other phenomenon, serves to stunt and deform proletarian progress toward consciousness of class position. It is the main factor impeding socialist emancipation. Especially is this the case in the present stage of capitalist decay when social-reformism has become both objectively and subjectively a historical force of retrogression. The degeneration of bourgeois society is equaled, if not overshadowed, only by the appalling degeneration of the social-reformist parties.
All of these factors, fitted together in a complex fabric, become a part of the general relations of production. They become a part of the social existence which determines men’s consciousness. To ignore or to disclaim the existence of these factors in order to reduce the relations of production to the simple equation of exploiters and exploited is to vulgarize Marxism.
Most assuredly the bourgeoisie produces its own grave-diggers. But in the process it erects innumerable barriers blocking the historical mission of the proletariat. The means of coercion, complemented by the means of corruption and deception, grow and multiply in direct proportion to the growth of class antagonisms within society. In this sense social-reformism is, in the final analysis, a product of bourgeois rule, produced alongside the grave-diggers of capitalism. But being a product of bourgeois rule, social-reformism was also bound to decay with it. Thus, owing to the subsequent historical process, the tradition of past progressive advance became purely negative and was bound to be broken.
 
Bolshevism Restores Marxism After Betrayals
Did this lamentable role of the social-reformist bureaucracy in any way prove the proletariat politically incapable of taking over power in society? Did it furnish proof of its alleged inability to select a revolutionary leadership? Not at all. The very contradictions that arose from this lamentable role also created an opposite current, as was inevitable.
Out of the betrayals, the left wing grew and gained strength within the working, class. Bolshevism restored Marxism to its rightful place in history. In Russia in October 1917, proletarian revolutionary consciousness reached its very apex. Under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky, the Bolsheviks broke through and demolished the social-reformist barriers. Their aims and objectives expressed the interests and the welfare of the whole working population, and they, showed the way to the realization of this program.
Thus the subjective factors entered into reciprocal relations with the objective development by which the revolutionary situation matured. The Bolshevik Party became the important link in the chain of objective historical forces. And in this manner the Russian proletariat selected its revolutionary leadership, thereby assuring its own political supremacy. Subsequently the existence of the Comintern, under the same leadership, dealt a severe blow to the social-democratic bureaucracy from which it has never fully recovered.
 
Stalinism and Bolshevism
But Stalinism supplanted Bolshevism! And here the most malignant “critics” of Marx interpose to tell us that Stalinism grew organically out of Bolshevism as a natural process. If that were really so we would be compelled to seriously question the social qualities of the proletariat, to reexamine our fundamental Marxist concepts.
Nothing could be further from the truth. Stalinism came into power only by physically annihilating the whole of the leading Bolshevik cadre. It would be just as preposterous and equally as false to contend that the vulgar and decrepit reformism of the social-democratic parties grew organically out of Marxism. The rise of Bolshevism proves the contrary.
In reality what we have in both instances are not at all logical developments but rather the emergence of direct opposites arising out of the contradictions of society and out of the lack of homogeneity of the working class. In both cases the opposites represent the conflict of social-reformism with revolutionary thought and action. Whichever predominates at a given period can disappear and give way to its opposite. That is the case of all phenomena in society as well as in nature. However the predominance of social-reformism or revolutionary thought and action is not decided in a vacuum. It is decided in the living struggle of the classes.
In its essence Stalinism is social-reformism based on the “theory” of “socialism in one country” and its peaceful co-existence with the capitalist world. But this does not. make Stalinism identical with the social-democratic type of reformism. Nor is Stalinism impelled by the same motivating force. While reformism had its origin in expanding capitalism, Stalinism emerged essentially out of the economic backwardness of the Soviet Union and its isolation in a capitalist environment. The proletarian political and ideological rearmament accomplished by the Bolsheviks through the Russian Revolution and the Marxist policies of the Comintern, suffered’ a horrible relapse under the Stalinist bureaucracy.
The substitution of Stalinist policy, to use Trotsky’s phrase, generated proletarian defeats on a world scale; the defeats generated the rise of the bureaucracy. In place of the Bolshevik tradition there appeared the interests of the powers and privileges of the bureaucracy. For the defense of the latter there grew up a totalitarian police state.
 
Crisis of the Soviet Bureaucracy
The Stalinist bureaucracy thus represents a parasitic growth upon the workers’ state. As such its transitory nature must be recognized. Its totalitarian regime reflects the condition of acute crisis brought about by the contradiction of a bureaucracy superimposed on a nationalized economy. Moreover, this crisis is again reflected in organic form within the bureaucracy itself.
The problem of Stalinism transcends Soviet borders, and its fate will ultimately be decided on the world arena. There it has already been brought face to face with a fundamental and twofold contradiction which in the end will only further aggravate the crisis of the bureaucracy. On the one hand, the existence of nationalized property relations is the basic reason for the growing imperialist encirclement against the Soviet Union. On the other hand, the bureaucracy, concerned only with the protection of its own privileges, collides with the interests and the needs of the masses everywhere. Moreover, the base of the bureaucracy is constantly narrowed by its organic fear of the development of uncontrollable mass movements. Hence, the retreat the Kremlin is now compelled to execute.
Stalinist expansion into Eastern Europe led to the open conflict with Tito, the first serious eruption of the organic crisis of the Soviet bureaucracy. At the same time the Stalinist parties of Western Europe have suffered defeats and decline after experiencing a mushroom growth in the revolutionary period which followed the war.
Unquestionably the economic and political aggression of US imperialism, together with its ominously growing military preponderance, have been a strong factor in forcing the Kremlin to yield ground. But far more fatal in its consequences have been the policy of plunder and the totalitarian police methods pursued by the Soviet bureaucracy itself. Sooner or later the combination of its own contradictions will force the Kremlin to give up the struggle for political hegemony of Europe.
The crisis created by its postwar expansion will be deeply aggravated when the Soviet bureaucracy is compelled to retreat from these positions and abandon many of its privileges. The desperation of a bureaucracy faced with curtailed arid dwindling privileges knows no bounds. All prudence disappears and even the tenuous internal loyalty of partnership in crime collapses. The explosions that are certain to follow must in the end lead to the downfall of the Kremlin gang. In the final analysis the laws of history will prove stronger than bureaucratic combinations. Whatever its temporary fortunes, the Stalinist bureaucracy cannot circumvent the course of the class struggle.
But one important question arises: How could the proletariat have been deceived for so long by the Stalinist bureaucracy after its experience with social democracy? How was the recent Stalinist resurgence possible? History must here again furnish the answer. In the first place it has been demonstrated that the proletariat rarely switches allegiance, or attempts to create a new party, until experience has thoroughly proved that confidence in the old organization is no longer justified. Mass allegiance in the Stalinist parties stemmed originally from the conquests of the October Revolution. Although these parties have degenerated to a particularly odious reformist position there is still another element to consider.
Nationalized property relations still remain in the Soviet Union, investing the state with its working-class character. To the masses of American workers this fact may not yet have great significance. To the European proletariat, however, for whom such a social transformation has become
a life and death necessity, this relationship appears in all its decisive importance. Because of this fact, above all, the European proletariat maintained its confidence, in spite of disappointments, in the Stalinist parties, expecting them to lead the way to the socialist solution.
The spreading disillusionment, resulting from repeated failures and outright betrayals by these party leaders will in the next stage turn into open proletarian hostility toward the degenerate ward-heelers of the Kremlin. The lessons learned from the history of Stalinism, including its defeat and downfall, will serve as an enormous contribution toward, transforming the proletariat and making it fit for political power.
Proletarian progress toward political consciousness, we repeat, develops in close relationship with.the interplay of all the forces at work within present-day society. While the bourgeoisie, by its intervention, seeks to delay this progress, it at the same time creates the very conditions which in the next stage become an accelerating force. That holds true not merely on a national scale, but in the case of international intervention as well.
 
Role of American Imperialism
In Europe, for example, bourgeois class rule has faced a continuous crisis ever since the end of World War I. This has not been without its ups and downs, to be sure; but the spiral of capitalist decline has been constantly downward. Yet the law of uneven development asserts itself also in this decay stage of capitalism.
American capitalism was still able to expand its productive forces into an integrated system of mass production and attain a higher level of monopoly capitalism. Because of its greater strength it was able to intervene in Germany after the overthrow of the Hohenzollern dynasty. Through the Dawes Plan, the Young Plan, and the Hoover moratorium, it rehabilitated the social democracy and saved German capitalism. In a different fashion, American imperialism aided the expansion of the Stalinist bureaucracy during and immediately after World War II. The latter in turn served as a check on the proletariat, frustrating its efforts for a revolutionary change.
Today American imperialism has taken upon itself the task of restoring and maintaining bourgeois class rule throughout the world. Having utilized at different times both the social-democratic and the Stalinist bureaucracies it is now preparing to boot them out and to assume, in its own name, the offensive on the whole front. Diplomatically, economically, or militarily, Washington aims to crush all efforts toward a social transformation.
American imperialism has become the basic counterrevolutionary force of the present epoch. But even the mightiest of the imperialist powers is subject to the interplay of social forces set into motion by its own relentless aggression. The monopolists may appear even more formidable as the Stalinist parties lose members and influence, and as the Kremlin is compelled to retreat because of its own treachery and its utter inability to meet imperialist aggression on revolutionary ground. However such a retreat has a logic of its own. One result will be the release of the new mass forces from the bondage of Stalinist
ideology. Thus through its world role American imperialism involuntarily gives an impulse to the genuine revolutionary forces – the forces of the Fourth International. American imperialism, contrary to all its plans, accelerates the very process of social transformation which it is attempting to delay and to halt.
 
Uneven Development of Revolutionary Forces
But the law of uneven development of capitalism also, reproduces a certain unevenness in the development of the proletarian revolution and the. building of the revolutionary party. This does not take place automatically or mechanically in conformity with the rise or decline of capitalism in one part of the world or another. Rather it occurs as a result of the interaction of specific social forces at specific historical conjunctures. While the proletarian movement in one part of the world may decline or stagnate, or even degenerate because of defeats, betrayals, or outright exhaustion, it will experience a new rise elsewhere due to new historical conjunctures. Fresh forces are thus made available for the movement. That rise becomes a new impulsion for new revolutionary growth. History is replete with such examples.
The European social-democratic parties decayed politically with the decay of capitalism. It had taken a lifetime to create these parties. They enjoyed the mass allegiance and confidence that tomes with years and decades of stability. They embodied the hopes and aspirations of their proletarian builders. Betrayal led to frustration, disappointment and demoralization. The stagnation of these parties consumed a whole generation before a new start could be made.
Then a new rise came from the East. Due to its backwardness, Czarist Russia had become the weakest link in the imperialist chain. In the revolutionary situation, beginning with the overthrow of Czarism, which put Marxism and reformism to the supreme test, the Bolsheviks emerged Victorious. That victory, growing out of a specific historical conjuncture, imparted a powerful stimulus for new revolutionary growth. Throughout Europe mass forces were freed from the traditional bondage of the social-democratic parties. These forces gravitated toward the new leadership and engaged in decisive battles which further weakened the class enemy.
 
Some Examples from History
On a somewhat more limited scale history presents numerous similar examples of the dynamics of development of the proletarian movement.
The trade unions of England, after having been driven underground by repressive laws, owe their rise to a considerable extent to the impact of the great French Revolution. Similarly the election reforms in England in 1868, and the great struggles of its labor movement at the time, followed the revolutionary victory of the North in the American Civil War. In both instances the ruling class of England had supported the side of reaction while the workers displayed their sympathy for the revolutionary forces. History shows likewise the reciprocally stimulating effect of the July 1830 revolution in France, the Chartist movement in England in the early 40’s and the revolutions of 1848 on the continent. Later, the stimulating effect of the Paris Commune was not lost on the development of the early socialist movement in Germany and elsewhere in Europe. Finally, it may be difficult, because of the intervention of World War II, to trace directly the impulse given to proletarian struggles elsewhere by the stormy advance of the American workers which gave rise to the CIO. But the stimulating effect of the early postwar revolutionary wave in Europe upon the mass protests of American troops abroad as well as upon the great postwar strike wave in this country stands out most clearly.
And now once again history repeats itself. Ideologically disarmed, and fatally disoriented, a whole proletarian generation whose hopes and aspirations had been lifted to new heights by the Russian Revolution, appears about to be consumed in the degeneration and decay of Stalinism. However, even as this stagnation and decline seems to reach its lowest depths fresh mass forces are entering the arena of the class struggle.
 
Asia Enters World Struggle
Colossal upheavals, of an all-embracing nature, have set the whole Asiatic continent aflame. Its teeming millions of people, more than half of mankind, are fired with nationalist aspirations of freedom from imperialist exploitation. Events there, to be sure, have not yet reached the stage of direct proletarian struggle for power. Moreover, in China, which is the very pivotal point, Stalinism has gained new strength from the great military conquests of its peasant army.
But alongside of these gains, the organic crisis of the bureaucracy is transferred to a new and larger arena. First reports indicate this very clearly. The attempts of the Stalinist leaders to reach an agreement with the bourgeoisie have already resulted in a prohibition of further land seizure by the peasants, together with decrees tightening the shackles of the proletariat to Mao Tse-tung’s “new capitalism.” What could possibly bring the Stalinist rule into sharper conflict with the needs of the masses and the needs of the whole objective situation? Can there be any doubt that the internal dynamics generated by the civil war will produce a new and relentless pressure of class forces?
The real issues remain as stated by Trotsky in The Third International After Lenin:
“The third Chinese revolution, despite the great backwardness of China, or more correctly, because of this great backwardness as compared with Russia, will not have a ‘democratic’ period, not even such a six-month period as the October Revolution had (November 1917 to July 1918), but will be compelled from the very outset to effect the most decisive shake-up and abolition of bourgeois property in city and village.”
It is precisely because of this situation that, alongside of this recent Stalinist advance, Trotskyist parties are growing and consolidating on a firm Marxist foundation throughout Asia including China. These parties have already proved themselves capable of intervening effectively in the unfolding events. In this fact lies the priceless promise that the powerful upsurge which has begun in Asia will, not be derailed or strangled but must ultimately proceed to greater heights of triumph.
But also within the Western Hemisphere the dynamics of sharpening class antagonisms in the United States will tend to revolutionize the entire development of the American proletariat. Having attained trade union organization and consciousness in less than a decade, this movement stands forth as the strongest proletarian force in the world. As the slowly encroaching economic depression and crisis in the United States envelops the capitalist system in its deadly grip, we may confidently expect that this mighty American proletariat, relatively unencumbered by the debilitating poison of social-reformism, either of a social-democratic or Stalinist variety, will again advance – and this time toward political consciousness preparing it for the direct leadership of the revolutionary party.
Most certainly new impulsions for new revolutionary growth, on a scale far larger than hitherto, are now in the making.
Does history thus merely repeat itself in what appears as recurrent cycles? No. The cycles recur but each time in infinitely larger dimensions and on a higher level of development.
Capitalist decay, regardless of relative and temporary revival here and there, is proceeding apace. Colonial imperialism has suffered a death blow from which it will never recover. New crises, new imperialist wars, colonial upheavals, and civil wars, all merge into the ever more complex pattern of the class struggle. This complex of economic, social, and political conditions poses ever more sharply the needs of the proletarian revolution. The revolutionary movement is no longer confined to the continent of Europe. The proletariat, together with the oppressed colonial people, is being drawn into the revolutionary vortex on a truly world scale. It is this complex which again sets the proletariat into motion in its progress toward greater political consciousness, all remaining illusions, deceptions and betrayals notwithstanding.
This is how the question of the proletarian capacity of transforming society should be posed. All that is settled so far in regard to this question is the utter bankruptcy and treachery of the existing proletarian leadership. Between this hopelessly degenerate and incompetent leadership and the inexorable need of the masses to extricate themselves from the deadly consequences of capitalist decay lies a great chasm still to be bridged. Yet our epoch remains revolutionary; and the struggle for the ideological influence in the ranks of the proletariat still continues. Trotsky said in In Defense of Marxism:
“The selection and education of a truly revolutionary leadership, capable of withstanding the pressure of the bourgeoisie, is an extraordinarily difficult task.”
That task still remains the very crux of the question.
 
The Selection of Leadership
The proletarian leadership does not reflect the class simply and directly but is subject to the influence and pressure of other forces. Nor is the leadership created by the proletariat in general, or in the abstract, but rather in the concrete. Its selection proceeds from the requirements of the historical epoch and is determined essentially and primarily by the conditions previously prepared, i.e., by the lessons learned from past experiences and the resulting degree of ideological rearmament. The most conscious and the most militant section of the class takes the initiative in this selection.
The Bolsheviks gave an affirmative answer to the question of proletarian ability to select and educate a truly revolutionary leadership. Their answer took as its point of departure the responsibility of social-reformism for the failures of the past. Their victory gave concrete proof of what the proletariat can do. It is this concrete proof which has become the starting point for the present generation of revolutionists.
The Fourth International now repeats that affirmative answer. Its answer proceeds not only from the responsibility for failure of social-reformism, but even more from the causes of the monstrous degeneration of Stalinism and the defeats it has inflicted on the proletariat. This is the Marxist method: to create the new out of criticism of the old, not to discard Marxism which has stood the test of the vicissitudes of history – the exhilarating test of proletarian triumph as well as the terrifying isolation of struggle against the stream. Turncoats and renegades may do so to conceal their own cowardice and futility. But to restore Marxism to its proper place within the vast and serried ranks of the proletarian movement – that is the first task for revolutionists of our epoch.
Accepting this task, the Fourth International is proceeding to create the new proletarian leadership. Thereby it gives proof in the process of real life that the revolutionary forces constantly renew themselves despite setbacks, defeats and destruction.
As the Bolshevik Party grew out of the lamentable failure and betrayals of social democracy, so the Fourth International grows out of the horrible wreckage of Stalinism. Trotsky often stressed the incomparable role and stature of Lenin’s leadership in the ideological rearmament of the Bolshevik Party and of the Russian proletariat. So the forces of the Fourth International affirm with no less emphasis that they owe their understanding of how to carry out this first task of the epoch primarily and above all to the genius of Trotsky. Marxism has been enormously enriched by his contributions. The disciples of Trotsky, in their understanding of the history and role of Stalinism, will advance Marxism another stage higher.
 
The Method and Role of Marxism
A thoroughly scientific analysis of history is possible only through the medium of Marxism; for only through this medium is it possible not merely to view history as the process of evolution of humanity, but also to discover and to understand the laws of that process. The Marxist method is dialectic materialism which permits the study of all phenomena in their origin, their reciprocal relations, their change and their disintegration.
A study of the history and development of proletarian parties proves the great advantage of this method. Supplementing our concrete experiences this method enables us to understand the conditions under which changes have
occurred, their causes and the elements of disintegration they embody. From this flows our conclusion that the regeneration of proletarian socialism can only take place through a new party – the Trotskyist party. The very evolution of human society itself, stimulated by its unresolved contradictions and its unpostponable problems, gives this task its historically imperative character. Marxism proceeds in its analysis from the stubborn facts of reality, from the economic foundation of this historical process. Preeminent is the twofold conflict created by the capitalist mode of production which can find its solution- in no other way than by a complete social transformation, not only of the classes created by this mode of production, but also of the productive forces and the forms of exchange, or the property relations. Within the gigantic productive forces developed by capitalism there also emerges the means to end the conflict – the modern proletariat.
This invests Marxism with its scientific socialist nature. Scientific socialism in turn becomes the conscious expression of the unconscious historical process out of which it arises and through which it finds its reaffirmation in each new social and political experience. Once the laws of that historical process are thoroughly understood the modern proletariat will be in a position to take matters into its own hands and subordinate these laws resolutely to its own invincible powers.
In this sense the proletariat, and no other force in society, represents historical progress. It is the special and essential product of the development of modern industry. The solution to the otherwise insoluble contradictions of Capitalism is inherent in the very position occupied by the proletariat. Marx pointed out in his answer to Proudhon that the question is not what the proletariat “may imagine for the moment to be the aim,” but rather
“what it will be compelled to do historically ... The aim and the historical action-of the proletariat are laid down in advance, irrevocably and obviously in its own situation in life and in the whole organisation of contemporary bourgeois society.”
Let us not forget, however, that the proletarian revolution is far more fundamental than was the bourgeois revolution. The latter merely changed the forms of property relations and exploitation; it replaced older forms with newer ones. The proletarian revolution, on the other hand, does away with all forms of private property in the means of production; it abolishes classes and class rule, and, with it, the exploitation of one class by another. It follows, therefore, that the proletarian revolution encounters far greater obstacles and difficulties. Capitalist resistance to socialism is far more violent, far more stubborn and enduring than was feudal resistance to capitalism.
It is precisely in this sense that Marx contrasted the more fundamental and permanent character of the proletarian revolution with the bourgeois revolutions of the nineteenth century which were motivated by transitory and limited aims:
“Proletarian revolutions,” said Marx in The Eighteenth Bromaire of Louis Bonaparte, “such as those of the nineteenth century, on the other hand, criticise themselves ceaselessly and interrupt themselves constantly in their own course. They return to what has apparently already been accomplished in order to begin it again and deride with ruthless thoroughness the half-heartedness, weakness and wretchedness of their first attempts. They appear to throw their adversary to the ground only in order that he should draw renewed strength from the earth and rise again still more powerfully before them. They recoil again and again from the uncertain and tremendous nature of their own aims until a situation is created which makes retreat impossible and the circumstances themselves cry out: Hic Rhodus, hic salta.”



A NUMBER of strikes are crashing the periphery of the great industrial combines. They have the appearance of vanguard skirmishes, attempting to seek out the weak spots on the enemy’s flanks and gathering forces the while for a mass attack. Soon this may culminate in a mighty test of strength in the steel and the automobile industries. Probably these numerous strikes, now taking place, are the harbingers of a new great strike wave.
Industry is in the grip of restlessness and ferment. The direction of the forces set into motion by this ferment may not yet be entirely clear. The workers may not follow very closely the curves of the industrial production chart, nor do they study comparative statistics of wages and profits. The meaning of the production index of the Federal Reserve Board, recording for October last 98.9 percent of the 1928 average, while mass unemployment remains, is perhaps not so clearly understood by them. Alongside of fabulous dividends to stock-holders, employees in many industries have received a bonus; but the lean pay envelope does not measure up to the demands of the rising cost of living. The turn to recovery did not bring the much-wanted economic security, the pressure of increasing speed-up on the conveyor system; remains, and above all there is a growing recognition amongst ever broader working class layers of the need for protection through an economic organization of their own, not subject to labor relations boards, nor dominated by the industrial corporations. For the first time in many years this general ferment is taking root in the mass production industries.
The strikes take on varied forms, sit-down strikes, stay-in strikes, or massing on the picket lines. Even company unions have become saturated with the general ferment. Through all of it, it is possible to trace the line or conflict between the A.F. of L. and the C.I.O. Open rivalry within individual unions or local central bodies is not yet particularly apparent. At the present moment the A.F. of L. is quiescent while the C.I.O. has become by far the strongest center of organization.
 
Wave of “Sit-Downs”
The strikes have for their objective primarily the establishment of trade union organization. But in every instance the specific character is determined by the degree of organizational advance made. The most elementary form of these strikes is the shop action, sit-down. In the automobile industry these have become so numerous, arising entirely spontaneously at the mere drop of a hat without awaiting official sanction, that union leaders look askance, fearing a wildcat movement that may interfere with the routine of the planned organization campaign. But they have been in the most cases highly effective. Starting in the accessory plants they quickly spread to the auto plants. One notable instance was the Kelsey-Hayes Company, where 5,000 workers after a ten day sit-down strike gained union recognition and an agreement covering minimum wages.
The potentialities of this movement the manufacturers recognize as well, so much so, that at times the mere threat of action has brought quick results. Some weeks ago one large manufacturing company was notified that the workers would not handle frames sent in by a struck plant. This action served to help liquidate the strike in the frame plant. The workers are not even inclined to tolerate too much temporizing in meeting the demands for union recognition. Thus for instance, at the time of this writing, a sit-down strike started in the Cleveland Fisher Body plant, employing 7,000 workers, because of the company’s postponement of a conference with union representatives. Similarly, a remarkable degree of solidarity has been manifested throughout these strike movements. Perhaps one of the best examples in this respect is furnished by the flat glass workers union, whose action also affected very directly the auto industry. This union struck for a closed shop agreement in the five plants of the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company. The company transferred its orders to the Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass Company plants. Distance did not interfere. Even though these plants were located in various parts of the country, the workers responded quickly and the strike was extended to every one of them, tying them all up completely.
 
Company Unions Revolt
Similarly the rubber industry, the ship building industry, the radio industry, and others, have all had their quota of strikes and in every instance bringing the C.I.O. unions into action. While in the steel industry developments in the campaign for organization have been less spectacular they have been no less significant. There the most important events have originated in the most unexpected quarters. The greatest conquests of the C.I.O. have been made in the very heart of company unionism. The company unions, so carefully fostered by the steel corporations, and fostered with the intention to be a bulwark against genuine unions, have now made their own “declaration of independence” from the employee organization plan. Representatives of these company unions from no less than forty-two plants between Cleveland and the Atlantic Coast, who recently met in conference, decided to transform their employee council into a C.I.O. Representative Council. In other words, they took the first step toward transforming a whole network of company unions into becoming an integral part of the steel workers industrial union. Theoretically such a possibility could never be excluded. Militants have emphasized before this the favorable opportunities available, at the time of certain conjunctures, for work inside the company unions. But this is the first time that such work has brought concrete results, and certainly the first time that it has brought results on such a grandiose scale. This alone is an eloquent testimony to a growing ferment in the steel industry as well as to the powerful sweep of union organization. A further national convention was planned by the company union representatives who took this first significant step. No doubt, the time for this will coincide with the convention of the steel workers union which has been planned to take place this coming Spring.
The C.I.O. has now announced its plans for a concerted drive to complete organization in the steel and auto industries and to compel these powerful corporations to deal with the unions. If this is carried out – and, in the light of recent events, there need not be the slightest doubt of the fact that the workers are ready to respond – all the scattered strikes, and all militant action, will tend to converge into one gigantic movement, the impact of which is bound to have far flung reverberations. Several important mass production industries are closely connected with the two that are to be the major point of concentration. The unions in these industries are all affiliated to the C.I.O. and all face the problem of becoming stabilized as the recognized representatives of the workers. It is therefore natural to expect that they will all be drawn into this general orbit of struggle. And while the United Mine Workers, the real backbone of the C.I.O., is fully established throughout the mine fields, it also faces the probability of a struggle at the expiration of its present agreement on April 1. So, on the whole, all of these present developments point very definitely toward a new strike wave far greater in scope than anyone hitherto witnessed, and far greater in its significance to the working class.
 
Effect of Struggles
It is of course inconceivable that such a titanic movement for organization, which is now under way, can be brought to its conclusion without struggles that will cut deeply into the whole social structure of American capitalist society. Its impact upon the working class movement itself is inestimable. But it is possible to say that it holds within its scope the possibilities of enormous and irresistible working class advance. Organization of the most important mass production industries will by itself mean a tremendous step forward to a new position of power not hitherto attained. That, however, may even come to seem insignificant when compared to the actual development of class consciousness that struggles on such a vast scale are bound to engender.
But we cannot afford to close our eyes to the dangers that this movement may be stopped short in its tracks. After all, we still remember that two important strike waves were smashed since the turn toward recovery began, and as a result the workers were robbed of the fruits of their struggle. The union officials had a not inconsiderable part in the responsibility for the smashing of these strike waves. And several of them now hold the most important positions, in the present movement. Moreover, this is an almost entirely new movement, wholly inexperienced, which can easily become a mere prey for unscrupulous agents of capitalism. In view of this it is so much more important not to forget the lessons of the past.
Even the fact that these leaders now begin to frown upon the spontaneous sit-down strikes, a fact that may seem; small of consequence, but which can nevertheless become a big question insofar as this is indicative of their attitude. It is entirely true that the American model of sit-down strikes, or stay-in strikes, does not compare at all with the highly developed political quality of the occupational strikes of the French workers. The latter are no doubt inspired by the general trend in France toward working class struggle for possession of the factories. It is true also that such forms of job action as the sit-down strikes which we have experienced here, unless coordinated properly by the unions, may become a disturbing influence in a general and concerted campaign of organization. They may even, if conducted purely passively, divert the actual struggle for organization into futile channels. But such features have not so far been the case. On the contrary, the sit-down strikes have served in the main to stimulate further action. They have represented in essence the ingenuity and resourcefulness of a working class which has hitherto known union leadership in most instances as a force of betrayal and defeat.
One excellent example for the role that the sit-down strikes can play in the class struggle was furnished by the Akron rubber workers, more than a year ago, when this form of action served as an effective prelude to the great Goodyear strike. There is no reason why this valuable form of spontaneous action cannot be coordinated properly to fit into the general strategy of the great struggles for union organization. After all is said and done, the most important principle of strike strategy is the utilization of all the possible means of struggle that the working class possesses and then to bear down with all its weight on the class enemy.
 
Socialist Action Necessary
The dangers of betrayal cannot be too much emphasized; they exist no matter how great the prospects of success may seem. And these prospects are great indeed. The existence of the C.I.O. itself marks an enormous difference from the conditions of the previous strike waves. Its position in a rival struggle for supremacy against the A.F. of L. compels it to go forward. The movement which it has set into motion must of necessity generate new and more genuinely progressive forces. On the field of action they will also learn the lessons that will help to steel the movement against betrayals.
With this present perspective the trade union movement will once again begin to play a really important role in all the developments of the class struggle. To the same extent it becomes not only true, but doubly true, that no working class party can lay claim to the revolutionary title unless it strikes deep roots in the trade unions. This must be the basis of our approach to the coming struggles. Keying-up the party to a full realization of its responsibility in this situation should be considered the most important task by all revolutionary Socialists. Now above all, the party must get into active trade union work without a moments delay.
 



The Council of Economic Advisers to the President has been engaged for some time in “charting a new path for the economy” of the United States. In its midyear report to the President, July 20, 1951, this “new path” – the armaments economy – is elaborated in great detail. Special emphasis is placed on the problem of inflation. Proposed measures for counter action are grouped together under the subtitle, The Stabilization Effort, and have one objective: to direct an ever greater share of the purchasing power of the people to financing the armaments program.
“Stated most simply, inflation develops when there is a general excess of demand over supply at current prices.” Such is the verdict of the high-placed councilors. It is as simple as it is grotesque.
The councilors do admit, however, that this simple statement “does not penetrate very deeply into the manner in which inflation is generated or how it affects the economic and social structure.” Still they persist that “the most fundamental cause of inflation we are facing, is that a rising defense effort leads to the creation of additional income, without a corresponding increase in the supply of civilian goods.”
Their explanation is
“that while there were two buying waves set off by events in Korea, the inflationary trend resulted from demand, backed by ability to pay, expanding more rapidly than production. As more spendable dollars became available in ratio to the available volume of goods, prices rose; and, in turn, price increases were among the factors producing further increases in other incomes.”
Apparently as an afterthought, the councilors indicate a slight recognition of the part played by the credit system in the inflationary process.
“The significant rise in the general price level, since the outbreak of hostilities in Korea” they say, “has been accompanied by a rapid expansion in private credit, particularly bank loans. The loans, of all commercial banks increased by more than $9½ billion in the 9 months period ending March 31, 1951.”
Everything here is turned upside down. The manifestations of inflation are singled out and made to appear as its causes. A situation in which the purchasing power of the people is seriously curtailed is presented as one of too much income. Credit expansion is viewed as a mere corollary to a rise in price levels.
By such perversions the distinguished councilors brand themselves as vulgar economists. They are not far removed from the mountebanks who cry out constantly about the “wage-price spiral” of inflation which is a cruder way of saying the same thing and has no other purpose than to conceal the predatory character of the capitalist system of production and distribution. In both instances the real cause and nature of inflation is completely obscured.
 
Production and Consumption
Moreover, the case presented by the Council of Economic Advisers on inflationary trends since the Korean war began, flies in the face of the facts. Statistics submitted by the Council showed the rate of industrial production in June 1951 to be 12 percent higher than June 1950. During this same year personal consumption expenditures rose by 8.7 percent. But during the period from 1939 up to the beginning of the Korean war, personal consumption expenditures had increased at an average annual rate of 16 percent. In other words, there was an actual decline in the peoples’ purchases during the first year of the Korean war. The increase of wholesale prices during the year by 16 percent makes the decline all the more evident. Most assuredly, there is no evidence here of too much income for the broad masses of the people.
However, the real way to measure personal consumption expenditures, not only in the sense of the well being of the people, but also from the point of view of stability of the economy, is to relate these expenditures directly to production. And, following the same official statistics, we find that in 1929 personal consumption expenditures were 75.9 percent of the gross national product. By 1939 these had dropped to 73.9 percent and by the first half of 1950 there was a further drop to 68.8 percent. But during the first year of the Korean war, from June 1950 to June 1951, personal consumption expenditures were only 66.1 percent of gross national product. Yet corporate profits, after taxes, which had maintained an average annual increase of 25.4 percent from 1939 to the first half of 1950, rose by 28.9 percent during the first year of the Korean war.
These figures tell the sordid story of capitalist exploitation; but they also delineate the shape of the brutal effects of inflation.
In face of a substantial increase in the physical volume of output and of a corresponding rise in corporate profits, the people were able to buy only a constantly diminishing part of the goods they produced. Their wages fell below the rising price level. That wages always fall in relation to output and profits, thus restricting the purchasing power of the people, is here illustrated with compelling bluntness.
Unquestionably a part of this steep rise in the cost of living during the first year of the Korean war can be accounted for by the monopoly practise of forcing prices upward to the very limit of what the traffic will bear. Capitalism always remains true to its rapacious nature.
Armaments appropriations and business credits, flow with equal ease into the economic structure. Speculation and gambling, along with reckless business spending filling the pipelines of inventory in anticipation of extraordinary profits, grow by leaps and bounds. To the extent that wages follow the upward trend, this is a consequence of inflation not its cause. All of these factors become a part of the inflationary spiral, interacting on one another.
However, to understand the real nature of inflation it is necessary to start out from basic objective laws of capitalist economy, finance and credit. Let us turn to Karl Marx, who understood them best:
 
Marx on Money
“The first chief function of money,” he said, “is to supply commodities with the material for the expression of their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, qualitatively equal, and quantitively comparable. It thus serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of this function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, become money.” (Capital, Vol.I, p.106).
But gold, Marx says further,
“serves as an ideal measure of value, only because it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as the money commodity. Under the ideal measure of value there lurks the hard cash.” (Ibid., p.116).
Money is the measure of value inasmuch as it is the socially recognized incarnation of human labor. For example, the value of a ton of steel is expressed by a quantity of money containing the same amount of labor as the steel. In this instance money is employed in its ideal or abstract form. In its concrete form, however, money performs the function of a socially recognized means of circulation, or medium of exchange. (Including the function of means of deferred payments or credit.)
The circulation of the material products of labor, according to Marx, is brought about by the following changes of form: Commodity–Money–Commodity (C–M–C). It is the transformation of commodities into money, and the change of money back again into commodities that serve as use values, or selling in order to buy. Money here performs a transitory function in the process of exchange; the amount of money required is determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these commodities. But in the acts of exchange, money, as the equivalent commodity, is capable of performing its function in repeated succession. After having mediated here, between purchaser and seller, it moves away to repeat its office elsewhere.
“Hence,” says Marx, “for a given interval of time during the process of circulation, we have the following relation: the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. This law holds generally.” (Ibid., p.135).
Because of this transitory function, Marx observes that the mere symbolic existence of money suffices:
“Its functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence. Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodities, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable of being replaced by a token ... It is capable of being so replaced only insofar as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else.” (Ibid., pp. 144-145).
 
The Circulation of Money
Marx observes further that the circulation of paper money is subject to the laws that regulate the function of money itself. “The issue of paper money must not exceed in amount the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually circulate if not replaced by symbols.” (Ibid., p.143). If that limit is exceeded-the paper money will in reality represent a lesser quantity of gold. It will represent less money value. Prices move upward accordingly.
As we have seen, the simplest form of circulation of commodities is C–M–C. The circulation of money as capital takes place by the inverted order of succession M–C–M, or buying in order to sell. In the first form the movement is brought about by the intervention of money; in the second form by that of a commodity (labor power). Money is advanced to buy the commodity in order to recover money through the process of reproduction; but to recover money plus an increment in the form of surplus value, i:e. the value created by labor over and above what it receives for its own subsistence. It is this movement that converts money into capital.
“The value of money, or of commodities, employed in the capacity of capital,” says Marx, “is not determined by their value as money or commodities, but by the quantity of surplus value, which they produce for their owner.” (Capital, Vol. III, p.418).
 
The Function of Loan Capital
Capital, therefore, exists only in its actual function, only in the process of reproduction, in the process by which labor power is exploited. When we observe the function of Joan capital, or interest-bearing capital, we notice a difference; and it is precisely this difference which constitutes its special character. Loan capital is advanced by a person or by a bank to another person or to an industrial concern to be returned within a stipulated time. But to return as capital, it must return as money plus an increment, in this case interest. It is that portion of the average profit realized in the process of reproduction out of the surplus value produced by labor which falls to the share of the lender or the money capitalist.
Due to the firmly established practice of definite rates of interest, money capital appears in the hands of the banker as an independent self-expanding value. This is merely appearance, not the reality. Interest-bearing capital is a derivative form. The individual owner has the choice of lending his capital out for interest or investing it directly in production but insofar as this total money capital is concerned, the interest is derived from surplus value which is created only in the process of reproduction. In the final analysis interest-bearing capital can have no independent existence separate and apart from capital employed in the process of reproduction.
Interest-bearing capital, or rather loan capital and usury, appeared in its primitive form at the very dawn of civilization, following closely upon the heels of the invention of money. A new power had emerged, and the debtor was entirely at the mercy of the creditor. This form of money was condemned by Aristotle.
Commerce he said, is
“with justice disapproved (for it is not based on nature, but on mutual cheating) therefore the usurer is most justly hated, because money itself is the source of his gain, and is not used for the purpose for which it was invented. For it originated for the exchange of commodities, but interest makes out of money, more money.”
From the primitive brutality of its youth, the power of money has advanced during the intervening centuries to employ the more subtle means of the modern banking business and the credit system. But the more subtle means have proved no less fraudulent.
 
The Credit System
The credit system, as analyzed by Marx, arose, out of the growing volume of values and as an indispensable accompaniment to the increasing distance of the market. By mutual interaction, the development of the process of production expands credit which again leads to an extension of industrial and commercial operations.
The credit system enhances the formation of monopoly combinations and with it the fusion of industrial capital with financial capital. Inordinately large and speculative profits accrue from promotion of stock companies, holding companies, trust companies etc. Developing alongside the socialized mode of production, credit endows capital directly with the form of social capital as distinguished from private capital. Its enterprises assume the form of social enterprises. But as an inseparable and integral part of the capitalist mode of production, the credit system also serves to magnify and sharpen all of its contradictions.
In the words of Marx, the credit system develops, “the accumulation of wealth by the appropriation and exploitation of the labor of others, to the purest and most colossal form of gambling and swindling, and reduces more and more the number of those who exploit the social wealth.” At the same time, however, it “accelerates the violent eruptions of capitalist antagonisms – the crisis – thereby, the development of the elements of disintegration of its mode of production.” (Ibid., p.522).
Banking capital forms the essential basis of operation within the credit structure. Marx subjected the various components of this capital to a most careful examination and he found that its greater proportion was fictitious. First and foremost in this category are government bonds. The state, of course, pays interest on the money borrowed for which the bonds are deposited. But the creditor cannot call for the principal. He can merely sell the certificate of indebtedness. The capital itself has been spent by the state. It does not exist any longer.
It. does not matter for what purpose this capital was spent, whether for public construction or for the manufacture of weapons of destruction; only the bonds remain, gilt-edged bonds to be sure, but still only pieces of paper. Thus the capital – whose progeny, interest, is paid by the state – is illusory, fictitious capital. It consists of certificates of indebtedness. Moreover the interest and principal on these bonds can be paid only by taxing the production of real capital.
“Not only does the amount loaned to the slate exist no longer, but it was never intended at all to be invested as capital, and only by investment as capital could it have been transformed into a self-preserving value.” (Ibid., p.547).
 
Mountain of Fictitious Capital in US
Today the amount of government bonds held by American banks has reached enormous proportions. In fact the constant growth of such fictitious capital has already reached the point at which the quantative difference has been transformed into a qualitative change. What appears as an accumulation of capital is in reality an accumulation of debt. The heavy fictitious proportion has left its decisive imprint on all banking capital and on the whole money supply and the liquid assets of the nation. All these arc debased beyond recognition.
At the end of 1950 the indebtedness of line United States government totaled 256.7 billion dollars. Of the bonds issued in the same amount, the sum of $61.8 billion were held by commercial banks, $20.8 billion were held by Federal Reserve banks, and $60.5 billion were held by non-banking private corporations. The remainder were distributed among individuals, state and local governments and trust funds. These bonds, which are in reality only a shadow of capital already spent, enter the banks as deposits upon which new loans are made. They become a part of the money supply of the nation. Thus the fictitious capital flows as an element of dissolution into every pore of the financial and economic structure. There it remains as a parasite feeding upon productive capital, drawing value away from all money capital.
Marx made the observation that,
“with the development of the credit system and of interest-bearing capital all capital seems to double, or even treble itself by the various modes, in which the same capital, or perhaps the same claim on a debt, appears in different forms in different hands.” (Ibid., p.553).
In the year 1863, about the time when the first volume of Marx’s Capital appeared, total deposits of all the banks in the United States were $394 million. By 1929, total deposits and currencies (the money supply of the nation) amounted to $54,742 million and by the end of 1950 these had reached the stupendous sum of $180,574 million. Of course it is not savings of workers that are embodied in these figures. They would be only an infinitesimal part of the total sum. These figures reveal both the enormous accumulation of capital due to the fabulous profits extracted out of the exploitation of labor and the extraordinarily bloated portion of fictitious capital – bank-made money – the purest form of gambling and swindling.
Such tremendous sums of money capital could not have accumulated without “pyramiding credit,” to use a banker’s expression. New credits were piled on substrata of other credits. Long established rules of traditionally conservative banking were thrown to the winds and new forces were then set into motion which have since escaped the control of the ruling class and its financial experts.
 
Wars Speed the Process
Two world wars accelerated the process. Money was literally manufactured to meet the enormous expenditures of World War II. The government borrowed about one hundred billion dollars from the banks, giving government bonds as security. The transaction took the form of a sale of the bonds, and in “payment” the banks “created deposits” on their books in equal amount, on which the government could draw. These deposits were created out of nothing. The government spent that capital; it does not exist any longer. Not only was that capital created out of nothing, but the government is now paying interest to the bankers on loans spent for bullets and shrapnel fined long ago, for planes shot down long ago, for battleships sunk long ago, for tanks blown to bits long ago, and for a huge remaining war surplus sold to speculators and gamblers for a song.
Leon Trotsky already called attention to this problem after World War I. The following illustration which he gave in 1921 applies with even-greater force to the present-day situation:.
“When a government issues a loan for productive purposes, say for the Suez Canal, behind the particular government bonds there is a corresponding real value. The Suez Canal supplies passageway for ship, collects tolls, provides, revenue and, in general, participates in economic life. But when a government floats war loans, the values mobilized by means of these loans are subjected to destruction, and in the process additional values are obliterated. Meanwhile the war bonds remain in the citizens’ pockets and portfolios. The state owes hundreds of billions. These hundreds of billions exist as paper wealth in the pockets of those who made loans to the government ...” (The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol.I, p.185).
Bourgeois economists attempt to find comfort in the fact that the World War II period also witnessed a great expansion of productive facilities. But even they have some difficulty concealing their apprehension of the disproportionate growth of money capital. From 1929 to the end of 1950, gross national product increased by 172.3 percent, while total deposits and currencies (the money supply of the nation) made a leap of 229.9 percent. Thus the ratio of growth of accumulation of money capital, including its fictitious component, proceeds at a pace outstripping the growth of productive forces and outstripping the growth of production. In this is to be found the real cause of inflation, as well as an explanation of its real nature.
We recall the observation made by Marx, that money, in its transient function, is capable of being replaced by a token; but he added emphatically, “only insofar as it functions exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing else.” Gold encounters the commodity as an equivalent. The value of both are measured by the socially necessary labor embodied in them. The value of paper money, on the other hand, owes its existence only to the function it performs in circulation; outside that function it is worthless.
Experiences of currency inflation have clearly demonstrated the fact that, whenever the quantity of its emission exceeds the limit imposed by organic laws of economic development the paper money depreciates accordingly. Let us say that the sum of the prices of all commodities appearing in the process of circulation represent a certain given value, no matter how great the quantity of paper money functioning as the medium of exchange, the sum of the latter will always represent the same total value. Conversely, the actual value of its unit (the dollar) – or its purchasing power – depends upon the quantity of paper money in circulation.
 
Motor for Inflation
This analysis may appear to apply only to direct currency inflation, but that is not the case. It applies equally to the more indirect method of “creating” money capital as it is practiced in the United States. Whether this capital enters circulation as bank loans to the government for the manufacture of weapons of destruction or as loans to industrial enterprise, whether it enters circulation as subsidy to uphold parity prices or as medium of exchange of every day necessities, it is all part of the geqeral money supply. And the preponderant growth of money capital relative to growth of production, must of necessity have the same disastrous, long range effect as if printing presses were grinding out ever larger volumes of paper currency. The outcome in either case is inflation.
The quantitative increase of the money supply, beyond a certain point, resulted in its qualitative decline. The dollar represented less purchasing power. And the forces thereby set into motion generate their own internal dynamics. This qualitative decline of the monetary unit compels a further expansion of its total supply at an increasingly accelerated ratio.
There is no other way to evaluate the significance of the recent budget presented by President Truman. For the fiscal two-year period ending June 30, 1953, eighty-five percent of the steeply rising budget expenditures are to be thrown to the molochs of war. These will cover rearmament at home and abroad, veterans’ services and interest payments on the national debt. Despite the biggest tax collection in history, the budget anticipates a deficit of $22,647 million. The inflationary whirl is likely to be moving at a more breath-taking speed.
 
Capitalism’s Universal Disease
Inflation is inherent in, and grows directly out of the development of the credit system and its heavy component of fictitious capital. Doubling and trebling of capital leaves inflation as its residue. Armament expenditures and war production accelerates this process and invests it with, an especially acute form. For world capitalism inflation is a universal phenomenon. The rulers of the system have no means of controlling the forces which they have themselves set into motion. Inflation has become a distinguishing characteristic of capitalist economy in its decay. Even the almighty American dollar, the “sovereign” of international finance, has suffered a precipitous decline. In less than twelve wars it has lost about half of its value. Inflation is ravaging the workers’ living standards in European capitalist nations, the same uncontrollable forces are also on the rampage in the United States.
In real life the superabundance of money capital, which is now available, resolves itself into an accumulation of claims upon future yields of production. In turns this generates an inexorable pressure for new and greater fields of investments, inasmuch as the use value of money capital consists precisely in it being able to serve as capital and thereby produce interest. But money capital can yield interest only by performing a productive function and thus realize surplus value of which interest is but a part. And so, the financial overlords, whose role is speculative, adventurous, and wholly parasitic, were the first line promoters of the current arms program. It embodied their fondest hopes not only as preparations for world conquest but also for the stimulation of production and large scale employment of capital.
But this cannot under any condition reduce the disproportionate growth of accumulation of money capital as compared to the growth of production; nor can it in any way serve to control or check the scourge of inflation. On the contrary, the effect will be the exact opposite. A yet greater preponderance of money capital, including its fictitious component, is the inevitable outcome of the gigantic arms expenditure.
Only an increase of production of use values, serving the needs of the people, and growing up to the same level as the money supply could begin to counteract the inflationary pressures, But that would presuppose a constantly rising standard of living of the people, reflected most directly by an increased purchasing power. Such a change the armaments program prevents. Moreover, such a change is no longer within the realm, of possibility under the capitalistic property relations of production.
The transformation of the individual limited means of production of past stages of society into social means of production, and the development of the material forces of production, was the historic mission of capitalism. But the fundamental character of the capitalist mode of production subjects it to the interplay of effects from uncontrolled forces set into motion by its own inherent contradictions. Capitalist property relations, formerly an aid to the development of production, turn into their opposite. During the earlier progressive stage of capitalism the material forces of production advanced with giant strides. The hideous reality now in stage of decay is the transformation of these mighty forces of production into terrible forces of destruction. An advance in one sector of the capitalist world is paid for by destruction in other sectors. Redivision of the world market could take place only by one capitalist sector destroying the productive powers of others. The true physiognomy of capitalist decay is revealed in crises, armaments and wars.
The enormously expanded productive capacity of the United States collides against the limits of a shrunken capitalist world market that no longer includes one-third of Europe – not to speak of the USSR – and is now being pressed back even further by the raging flames of colonial revolution. From this flows the aim of the American imperialist rulers to reconquer the world and again subject it to capitalist exploitation – an aim, that can find its full realization only through war. The whole economic structure of the US is therefore being transformed to meet the requirements of the merchants of death. All major economic activity is increasingly geared to the strategic plans of the armaments program.
However, the salient fact here is that the present arms program is superimposed upon an economy carrying already a terrific overhead of the unliquidated great depression and the astronomic costs of the last war which can never be recouped. This economy is saddled with the burden of sustaining alone a declining, decaying and fearfully impoverished world capitalist economy. In turn, this serves as a gigantic drain upon the wealth and the resources of this country. Alongside of this we witness the debasement of the whole capitalist currency system which now also includes the “sovereign” dollar. Due to this colossal undergrowth of capitalist decay, the fearful consequences of the armaments program are infinitely multiplied.
 
Arms and Economic Activity
The imperialist rulers initiated this program to provide the material resources for their predatory war plans. But it was designed in such a way to fulfill also the purpose of sustaining the economy which would otherwise, once again, run head-on into a crisis of overproduction. Ostensibly, the most immediate aim of the armaments program was to continue the high level of production and assure full employment of the labor force in order to maintain the hitherto prevailing equilibrium of social relations.
Armaments expenditures now serve as a stimulus to economic activity. Stimulating production, no matter what is produced, helps to provide both profits and wages. And, what is far more important, postponing the crisis of overproduction is of the greatest political concern to the bourgeoisie. It avoids, for a time at least, the possible eruption of social upheavals which otherwise might prove fatal to their system. It is like playing with dynamite.
The outlays together with companion expenditures of world wide capitalist aid for armaments approach ever closer to the financial stratosphere. But these outlays are not transformed into capital employed in the production of commodities serving as use values, either for the needs of the people or for the further accumulation of real wealth of the nation. In essence they are unproductive capital investments which impose a staggering load of overhead expense on the economy. This exerts a terrific pressure for higher taxes, higher prices, and greater exploitation of labor.
The execution of the armaments program presupposes that the floodgates of easy money, credit and deficit financing be left wide open. It could not operate on any other basis. The very fact that the expenditures involved consist of social capital, which is employed by people who do not own it, tends to remove all restraints, all caution in the production of implements of war. At the same time, the elements of inflation grow in direct proportion to the debauchery of the credit system- And the dynamic interplay of the effects of these uncontrolled forces – the terrific pressure for higher taxes, higher prices, and for greater exploitation of labor, on the one hand, and inflation on the other – tend to disrupt the social equilibrium that the armaments economy was expected to maintain.
Such is the process of economic developments today. And from Marx we have learned that the general character of any given historical epoch is determined by the prevailing mode of production. But it is important to remember also, that by “mode of production” Marx did not refer merely to the technical aspect of the operation of the forces of production. He included within this category especially and specifically the “social relations of production.” These are the relations into which men enter with one another by reason of the various positions which they occupy in the productive process. In its essence these are the relations of social classes.
Wages, prices, interest and profits, together with taxes and inflation, become ever more crucial elements of contemporary capitalist economy and its world wide arms race. These are capable of final explanation only in terms of the class relations which underlie them, and any decision concerning these questions is subordinated entirely to class interest.
 
The Giant State
Under the focus of the armaments program existing class relations in the U.S. are more sharply defined; the role of the political state in relation to social classes is more clearly illuminated. The government has taken over the direction of all major economic activity. It stockpiles and allocates raw materials, and decides industrial and manpower build-up; it decides tax policy, credit policy and investment policy, as well as wage and price policy. Due to this overall direction by the political state, capital, which rests on a socialized mode of production, attains a higher form, that of social capital and the government appears in the all-embracing role of its collector and dispenser.
While this provides conclusive evidence of the decline and decay of the so-called free enterprise system, it should not lead to the mistaken idea that the preponderant power of the dominant capitalist monopoly owners has been replaced. On the contrary, what is taking place is a more complete integration of both function and interests between the latter and the political state, “the ideal collective body of all capitalists.” The role of the political state as the manager of social relations, on behalf of monopoly capitalism is more openly, more clearly revealed. At the same time corporation agents, financiers and industrialists, who stand to profit the most from the dispensation of social capital, have personally taken over the chief posts in Washington in the growing integration of monopoly capitalism with the government apparatus.
 
Monopolies Plunder the Nation
Once this relationship is clearly understood, no room for doubt is possible about the important question that will next arise: In the interest of which class is this social capital dispensed? All the “planning”, all the measures taken to execute the armaments program serve in intent, as well as in fact, only one end: to increase the share of those who exploit the social wealth at the expense of the producers.
There is no evidence that this program will assure full employment of the available labor force which is ruled out by the growing disproportion between the ever rising productive capacity and the relatively declining purchasing power of the people. The parasitic character of the arms program, which in effect eats up national income, thereby imposing further restrictions on the home market, introduces elements of crisis, that exist alongside of the armaments boom. For the workers the result is growth of unemployment, chronic in its implications, while the super-monopolists enjoy the richest bonanza.
The armaments program assures large scale employment of capital at very profitable rates of return. The government collects the capital from the people, employs it as social capital invested in arms producing industry with huge profits guaranteed in advance for the capitalist monopolies. They in turn, by virtue of their power as the ruling class, use the political state increasingly as a means of plunder of the public domain; they live high on the profits of social capital, profits guaranteed at the expense of the whole nation. Most notorious is the example of government grants through accelerated tax amortization. Corporations especially favored with armaments contracts may construct and equip plants in return for which, upon the claim of being “vital for defense”, they receive a certificate of accelerated tax amortization. This enables them to deduct the cost of the plants from federal taxes over a period of five years, instead of the customary 20-year period. Such certificates have been issued in the sum of almost fourteen billion dollars. And after five years, this total amount must appear on these corporation’s books as an outright gift. Indeed, the “Welfare Slate” is not dead. It now really appears in its true form.
Higher prices, resulting from inflation, presents a qualitative difference of positive advantage to these super monopolists. Each price mark-up adds an extra bonus to the lucrative cost-plus profits of armaments production.
“Flexible price controls” do not act as a deterrent because they are, as has been clearly demonstrated, designed to maintain the high profit level rather than to hold prices !n line. In this respect also the prime objective is nothing else than to continue the incentive to capital investments and the accumulation of wealth by the exploitation of labor.
 
How the Workers Are Effected
Thus the armaments economy aids the further concentration of wealth in the hands of the monopoly capitalists while the country as a whole becomes poorer. The diversion of an increasing share of the purchasing power of the people to finance the arms program has become a monstrous reality. The burden of the costs is successfully unloaded on those least able to bear it – the lower income groups.
An ever greater portion of the working class is being drained off through taxation to finance the guaranteed profits of capitalism. Tax levies, of course, follow also the pattern of class relations. Two individual tax increases have been enacted by Congress since the Korean war began. For a family of a man and wife with two dependents the total adds up as follows: An income of $500,000 gets a modest 14.7 percent increase; but for an income of $3,000 to $5,000 the tax increase is 33.7 percent.
What remains for the worker as a take-home pay is mercilessly reduced by the ravages of inflation. Its qualitative effect is the same as a direct lowering of the standard of living. This could not have been done more completely by a leveling downward of existing wage rates. Not only has labor experienced a relative decline of income in relation to total output; but the overwhelming majority of the working class has suffered an absolute decline of real wages. The cumulative effect of this whole development is a growing disproportion of the relative share of the national income received by the different social classes. Out of this relationship, and out of the ever more explosive political conjunctures, which will inevitably ensue from the American imperialists’ counter-revolutionary role in world affairs, the crucial question arises: What will be their effect on the existing stability of class relations? For adequate treatment, a question of such magnitude will require a separate study. Suffice it now to say that continued and increasing expenditures for war preparations must of necessity lead to more devastating inflation. Simultaneously the pressure for lower costs of production can be expected to take
the form of more direct attacks upon the working class standard of living.
 
The Real “Prosperity”
This is the reality of the much vaunted armaments “prosperity”. How does this compare with the often repeated claims that the American economy, since the end of the great depression, has succeeded by its own resources in overcoming the cyclical crises of overproduction and thereby refuted the analysis made by Marx?
Newspaper and magaxine editors, radio commentators, have been pouring out a constant barrage of such claims. This is a frantic effort to resurrect the exuberant confidence of the bourgeois propagandists of past decades in the superiority and stability of capitalist ownership of the means of production. It represents also an effort to make the workers accept this gospel. Servile labor salesmen of imperialism echo these outpourings, less skillfully to be sure, but with no less conviction. The reality refutes all these presumptions.
What the American economy has experienced since the great depression has been a series of crises. Following in succession we have witnessed a world war, imperialist assaults on colonial people, cold war, and armaments in preparation for World War III. These have revealed the hideous physiognomy of capitalism in decay. Throughout this period the disproportion between the vastly augmented productive capacity available and the impoverished, disrupted and shattered world market, together with the restricted consuming ability of the masses at home, has grown to more colossal dimensions. Elements of crisis of overproduction have recurred in ever more malignant form. The alternatives of a depression or war are still poised on a razor’s edge.
March 1952



The housing shortage is becoming more and more acute with no real relief in sight. The mounting cost of living and the shrinkage in housing are the twin burdens that weigh most heavily upon the mass of the people. And they can lead to the most serious upheavals. We are not speaking about ravaged, war torn Europe where millions of suffering human beings must seek shelter among ghastly rubble and charred ruins. We are speaking about the richest country in the world.
Labor productivity in the United States has reached undreamed-of heights; skills are available and so are the raw materials. Technology made new and great strides during the war years. And yet, not even the socially necessary minimum of shelter is available to the people who produce. Does not this indicate the bankruptcy of a system?
The housing shortage is not a new phenomenon in the United States. It existed before the war; it existed during and before the great depression of 1929. It becomes more and more aggravated as the capitalist system declines and decays. The housing problem, as well as the problem of other necessities of life, is indissolubly linked with the social and economic conditions of the masses. Nowhere in the world can capitalism point to having provided adequate housing for the people. Conversely there can be no real or lasting solution to this problem without a radical solution of the social and economic conditions of the masses.
The most conservative estimates for needs for dwellings in the United States vary from 3,500,000 to 5,000,000 housing units, with a minimum annual construction of 1,250,000 units. These estimates, however, do not at all touch the problem of rehousing that section of the population which is now condemned to live in the slums of the major American cities. To replace these sub-standard dwellings, according to the National Housing Agency, would require at least twenty years of record building which would provide 25,000,000 housing units.
Meanwhile the slum areas keep spreading relentlessly and irresistibly. Overcrowded, filthy, dilapidated buildings, in frightful state of disrepair, poorly heated in winter, suffocating in summer, lacking in toilet and bathing facilities, vermin and rat infested, disease-breeding hovels – this is the picture of the slums in the cities. These are the conditions in the teeming tenements of New York’s Lower East Side and Harlem; they are repeated in such well known areas as the “alley dwellings” in Washington, the “Hill District” in Pittsburgh, the “Irish Channel” in New Orleans, Detroit’s “Black Bottom,” Cincinnati’s “Basin,” Columbus’ “Sausage Row.” Among the worst is Chicago’s “Black Belt” where – although building experts agree that the density of urban population should not exceed 25,000 to 30,000 people per square mile – the density is 70,000 per square mile. This means 10 to 12 persons to a room in many buildings, and, five to six families sharing one toilet.
Those who live today on the rim of the slums are swallowed up on the morrow by this pestilential tide. Supplementing the big city slums are the shanties that are called “homes” in company towns. Here there is virtually no limit to the number of people per room.
 
Hovels and Palaces
From these hovels of the pariahs, let us now turn to the other side of the picture – the luxurious palaces of America’s “blue bloods.”
It is in their palatial country estates – says Ferdinand Lundberg in his monumental work America’s Sixty Families – that the rich families, niggardly in philanthropies, really extend themselves, for in these places they are sheltered from the prying eyes of the sweat-stained, fatigue-racked proletariat and the ever-trusting, infinitely gullible middle class.
It has become the recent fashion to point to the four estates and many apartments of William Randolph Hearst as representing the apogee of contemporary extravagance; but Hearst is merely “keeping up with the Joneses” and is doing it very noisily. We must disagree with Dixon Wecter when he writes in The Saga of American Society:
“The greatest attempt ever made to achieve lordly splendor in America is William Randolph Hearst’s 240,000 acre estate at San Simeon, California, with its estimated cost of $15,000,000 for furnishings and antiques alone. Its great dining hall hung with Sienese banners and a magnificent Gothic chimney piece from the Chateau du Jour, its sixteenth-century refectory tables, Flemish tapestries, seventeenth-century Spanish candlesticks and old English silver, six Gobelin tapestries costing $575,000, a notable collection of armour, and Cardinal Richelieu’s own bed, are witnesses to the spoliation of Europe.”
Mr. Wecter is impressed by the fact that Hearst once transported a castle from Spain to New York in packing cases, that he purchased St. Donat’s Castle in Wales, and that at San Simeon he owns a private railway spur and three cars and a diner to transport his guests to the main palazzo. Overlooking an entire Bavarian village that Hearst has constructed at Wyntoon, California, Mr. Wecter also overlooks the fact that all this is merely the minimum standard equipment of the contemporary American multimillionaire.
From this juxtaposition of hovels and palaces we cannot fail to draw the conclusion that the housing problem, as well as all other social problems, reflects the distinction of class, of economic position, of wealth and poverty. On the one hand, boundless luxury – on the other, an ocean of want and misery. But, as we well know, in a system whose production is governed exclusively by the profit motive, the needs of the people must of necessity be left utterly disregarded. Production for profit and peoples’ needs constitute two opposite poles.
The truth of this has never been more strikingly illustrated than in the whole record of the housing question. It is illustrated in the attitude and actions of the government and its agencies, in the conduct of the mortgage bankers, the real estate sharks, the material manufacturers, all the way down to the home building contractor.
That housing is one of the basic needs of the people nobody denies; and yet every housing program that has been projected since the end of the war has been stymied by the profit motive.
All that the Federal Housing Administration has to show to date are its so-called veterans’ temporary emergency units, to be exact: 187,000 Quonset huts, trailers without wheels, chicken coops on stilts. All these are potential new shanty-towns and Hoovervilles. And even this program had to suffer cutbacks first of 13,000 units and then of 12,000 additional units because of constantly mounting reconversion costs.
 
“Low-Rental” Housing
The Patman Bill, enacted into law early last year, set up a housing expediter with broad authority to issue directives for allocation of materials, prices and priorities. The aim was to speed construction of 2,700,000 homes, by private enterprise, over a period of two years. The Bill provided for an increase of one billion dollars in government authority to insure home mortgage loans. It authorized $400,000,000 in subsidies to increase production of scarce materials. Thus the basic provisions of this Bill served to protect the profits of mortgage bankers and material manufacturers. The Bill, however, did little, if anything, to speed the construction of homes for needy people.
Although allocations were made for subsidies, the materials went by and large into the black market. Naturally, building labor followed the flow of the black market materials – mainly into speculative commercial enterprises. And at the end of the first nine months of the building expediter’s tenure, only 286,200 permanent family home units had been completed in the entire country. Now “building expediter” Wyatt has quit.
The Wagner-Ellender-Taft Bill, which did actually contemplate some modest federally supported “low rental” housing, riot to exceed 125,000 units, during each of the next four years, contained in one of its provisions a guarantee of a certain fixed return to investors in apartment house projects built on slum land.
But even this modest proposal for federally subsidized housing proved too radical for the profit-minded legislators. The Bill never reached the floor of the House of Representatives. Such is the government’s record to date in relation to this urgent need of the people.
This do-little record dates back beyond Truman’s administration. Let us recall what happened when President Roosevelt, during the first year of his reign, proclaimed that one-third of the nation was ill fed, ill clothed and ill housed:
“We seek,” he said, “the security of the men, women and children of the nation. That security involves added means of providing better homes for the people of the nation. That is the first principle of our future program.”
These words were spoken to mollify the millions who were then out of jobs. A bone had to be thrown to the workers. So the President proceeded to set up such alphabetic agencies as the WPA, the FHA and the others. Yet no more than 133,000 units constituted the sum total of all public housing for the lower-income brackets constructed before the war began.
The FHA became one of the most substantial of these agencies, and it is still in operation. What is its achievement? Did it produce homes for the one-third who were ill housed? For the year 1940, according to FHA’s own report, 47 per cent of all American families earned less than $1,500 annually and only 5 per cent of FHA insured homes were built for them, while the other 95 per cent went for the higher income brackets.
Thirteen years later one-third of the nation still remains ill housed yet the government has not given any consideration whatever to the question of public housing. The reason is not far to seek. Champions of “free enterprise” are bitterly hostile to any public housing program. They understand very well that low rental housing for the working class would slash their juicy profits from speculative real estate values and from exorbitant rents. Thus the peoples’ needs collide with the profit motive; and the government, by its failure to act, makes it perfectly clear on which side it stands – on the side of the big profiteers. This is the fundamental contradiction that besets the housing program inaugurated by the Patman Bill. Moreover, this program is itself based by and large upon the outmoded idea of building for the individual home owner.
 
Plight of the Workers
Private home ownership is definitely on the decline. In 1930, for instance, not less than 46 per cent of families living in towns and cities owned and occupied their own homes. By 1940 a survey made of six large cities, not including New York, showed that private home ownership had gone down to 25 per cent. So far as the American working class is concerned, it can by now – in 1947 – be affirmed quite certainly that the workers’ standard of living will hardly permit the luxury of private home ownership – at least not in the urban centers.
Who can afford to own a private home today? On the basis of standard FHA practices, say its own housing experts, the average family cannot afford to pay more for a house than the equivalent of twice its annual income. To illustrate what this means it should be borne in mind that right now the minimum cost of any house, including the well-known type of jerry-built “defense” home, in any large city or suburb is $10,000. To afford such a home an annual income of $5,000 is required. Obviously the average worker’s income falls far short of sustaining such home ownership.
The end of 1946 saw even this minimum-cost housing washed away when President Truman swept aside all major controls, priorities and price ceilings, including the $10,000 ceiling on new buildings. Construction of new homes will henceforth become further and further out of reach of those who are in the most desperate need of housing.
World War II veterans are supposed to have first call on new housing. Not less than 4 millions of them, according to a survey conducted by the Census Bureau in June last year, want to rent new quarters or buy or build new homes. But they are now civilians and in the overwhelming majority are not any more fortunate than their fellow workers. The foregoing survey revealed that the average, veteran in need of new quarters is able to pay not more than $43 monthly for rent and not more than $5,500 to buy a house. The survey further revealed that the average weekly income of prospective renters was $44 and of the prospective buyers $48.
Proof that the housing problem is indissolubly bound up with the degraded economic and social condition of the working class becomes still more conclusive when we examine these conditions in greater detail.
The Federal Reserve Board and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics have published a survey of the nation’s 46 million families, their 1945 income and their liquid assets, including previous year’s savings. The survey lists its findings for the lower income brackets as follows:



Income


 


Number
of families


Liquid assets
per family




Under $1,000


9,300,000


$   20




$1,000 to $1,999


12,400,000


$ 230




$2,000 to $2,999


10,300,000


$ 470




$3,000 to $3,999


7,000,000


$ 900



The figures are for 1945. Most of these families are hardly in a position to own their own homes. And it may not be amiss to ask the question: What has happened to the liquid assets of all these family groups as a result of the steeply rising cost of living during 1946? By and large the liquid assets of the lower categories have been already wiped out. Besides, the lower incomes listed can only in rare cases be called secure incomes. Buying a home with a twenty-year amortization, under such conditions, would indeed appear a risky venture.
Much ado is being made over the high cost of building. It is high, of course, as are all other costs under the profit system of production. The high cost is usually attributed to the archaic conditions prevailing in the building industry, wherever it is not simply blamed on the high wages of building labor. The first explanation merely begs the question. So far as labor costs are concerned, all of the numerous surveys made of the “high” hourly rate of building labor nevertheless agreed that this category is on the same low economic level as other workers, when the seasonal nature of the building industry is taken into account. As for the high cost of building materials it is necessary to note merely the fact that during 1944 profits of the lumber industry were 164 per cent above the 1936-39 average!
 
Archaic Conditions
The building industry is the fourth largest industry of the nation, employing some 2,500,000 workers. Its archaic structure is disclosed by the fact that, at the last count in 1939, building contractors numbered 31,000 and sub-contractors 187,000. The natural outcome of this atomization is that production becomes snarled up in a multiplicity of small scale endeavors while additional charges accrue because of small scale material purchases and deliveries.
On the other hand, let us examine the huge project of Park-Chester, an outstanding example of efficiency, put up by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in the Bronx, New York, at a total cost of sixty-two million dollars. This project accommodates about 17,000 families. It was built according to the most up-to-date plans, with the greatest possible standardization, mass production methods and wholesale material purchases. Nevertheless rentals in Parkchester’s 51 apartment buildings average $15 a room. This project, reports the Metropolitan Life, renders a return on invested capital of better than 6 per cent.
Right here we come to the nub of the problem which is called “the high cost of building.” No industry is so speculative. Speculation enters into every phase – from the buying or clearing of the land to the finished product, and, for that matter, throughout the tenant or owner occupancy. The industry is infested with a veritable wolfpack of profiteering speculators and gamblers in real estate. Land prices, says the National Housing Administration, summarizing the experience of 200 pre-war projects, averaged a cost of $1,960 per family. This is a figure for cities where low values predominate.
And what about the cost of mortgage financing? Testifying before the Taft Senatorial Committee on Housing, one mortgage broker admitted that in his company’s experience of building financing, including risks of depreciation, loss or foreclosure, the costs of service totaled not more than 1.47 per cent. Yet building loans usually carry up to the 5 per cent annual interest charge.
Those millions who are searching ever more frantically for a home may be surprised to learn that mortgage investments set an all-time high in 1946. According to the Federal Home Loan Bank Review preliminary figures indicate that the total of new mortgages made on homes for the year may reach $8 billion. This is almost 40 per cent more than in 1928, the peak year of the building boom during the Twenties. Few homes were produced in 1946 but the mortgage bankers enjoyed unprecedented prosperity.
 
Prefabricated Houses
Is prefabrication perhaps the answer to the housing shortage? One of the most widely publicized experiments conducted so far is the Buckminster Fuller house. It is constructed of aluminum, stainless steel and plastics instead of bricks and lumber. It weighs around three tons instead of the usual one hundred tons. It is circular instead of square. It hangs rather than stands. It is suspended from a central mast with cables fanning out, supporting the roof, the walls and the floor. Its construction is based on the principle that metals are stronger in tension than in compression. Moreover, the curved material parts are designed for manufacture in airplane factories. A single Wichita, Kansas plant now claims an annual capacity of 250,000 housing units.
Wyatt, the building expediter, before his resignation, made a big fight to have the huge Chicago government-built Dodge Plant turned over to the Lustrom corporation to produce enameled steel five-room houses.
Other prefabricators have experimented with plywood panel construction. One of them, the Foster Gunnison concern, a subsidiary of the US Steel Corporation, has advanced funds for the erection of a new plant with a claimed capacity of one complete house every 18 minutes.
Despite all these spectacular claims, there is little evidence anywhere of prefabricated houses. Thus far prefabricated houses exist more in the exuberant ballyhoo of the press than in reality.
Very real, however, are the efforts to squeeze ever greater capitalist profits out of the misery created by housing needs. Included in this program are raids on the public treasury. The housing expediter backed up loans from the RFC to the tune of $75,000,000 to be advanced to 11 prefabricating concerns. The Lustrom corporation demanded $52,000,000 although it had put up virtually no private capital itself. This corporation, it is estimated, would stand to make a profit of $5,000,000 during the first 14 months of operation, or a profit of 1,400 per cent on its capital investment of – $36,000. It would take thieves or bank robbers to possibly do better than that.
In addition, it is becoming increasingly apparent that these prospective manufacturers, sniffing a potential bonanza, have set their prices so high that, as they themselves admit, there is little difference in cost between a traditional house and a prefabricated one. But, claim these manufacturers, costs will ultimately be cut because of the buying of material in bulk and because of mass production of the component parts with unskilled labor. In short, unskilled labor – cheap labor – that is their great hope. The peoples’ need for housing can go to the devil so long as their profits remain secure. Meantime, in their estimation, there could be no better start in the anti-labor offensive than to strike a blow against the well-entrenched building trades unions.
These are among the factors which cause these unions to be unfriendly, if not hostile, to prefabrication. Expansion of this type of building will bring the conflict to a head.
The building trades unions and the AFL, where these unions predominate, are rather critical of the present housing program. And this critical attitude is not confined to the prefabrication aspect. It springs also from their correct insistence upon large scale rental housing. With this in mind the AFL convention last year established a permanent housing committee. It also urged President Truman to call Congress into special session for the enactment of the Wagner-Ellender-Taft Bill. But these purely perfunctory efforts remained utterly ineffective. And even the modest objectives of this bill, which faces further modification in the 80th Congress, will prove ridiculously inadequate.
To sum up: the situation in housing is basically the same as all the other problems involving the necessities of life to the workers. Workers obtain only as much as they are prepared to fight for; only as much as they are in a position to fight for successfully. And as capitalism continues to decline, this maxim becomes more and more imperative.
The need for housing is an ever more pressing issue – a fighting issue. One year of buck-passing in Washington has terminated in a scandalous mess. What was originally a poor excuse for a housing program has been stymied, sabotaged by profit-hungry monopolies to whom the Democratic and Republican politicians are subservient. To effect any change in this situation will require a tenacious, militant struggle on die part of the workers.
With this in view, the Socialist Workers Party has advanced the demand that the eighteen billion dollars, now allocated by the federal government for war expenditures, be made available for a housing program. Such a demand has nothing in common with the dribbles for federally supported low rental housing provided for in the Wagner-Ellender-Taft Bill. The SWP demand proceeds from the basic assumption that housing for the people is a social responsibility which the government is obligated to assume. Resources of greater magnitude were available for war. They should be equally available for peace. The duty is very clear: Provide adequate housing for every family, including the rehousing of the millions of slum dwellers.
Our immediate demands acquire their full meaning, of course, only in the context of the general revolutionary program of which they are a part. Above all does this apply to our demands for adequate housing. The full and complete solution of the housing question is most intimately and directly bound up with a socialist solution of all the burning problems of society.
Let us recall the celebrated housing projects of Vienna, including the famous Karl Marxhof. Magnificent homes were erected in Vienna for workers, paid by taxation, with the heavier levies on the upper income brackets. Rentals were based on the expenses for upkeep and management. These projects were the proud creation of Austrian Social Democracy. For years the Austro-Marxists held an overwhelming majority in the Vienna City Council, receiving at one time as high as 90 per cent of the popular vote. This party never entertained any idea of leading its supporters to install the workers in power and build socialism. Perish the thought. Instead, it limited itself to building workers’ homes. This was a noble venture. But in February 1936, Chancellor Dolfuss, upon the urging of Mussolini, trained cannons on the buildings, demolished them, crushed all workers organizations, and in the counter-revolutionary civil war established the rule of the reactionary Heimwehr. Gone were the magnificent workers homes.
The lesson is inescapable. Without the socialist solution even such noble ventures come to naught. Conversely, the capitalist profit system itself remains the greatest obstacle in the way of adequate housing for the people, just as it stands in the way of satisfying all the other peoples’ needs. Hence our determination to fight for the socialist solution. In the last analysis only nationalized economy with planned production under workers’ control can operate in the interest of the people.
So far as the building industry is concerned, it may appear today one of the most difficult in which to introduce nationalized planned operation. While producing one of the most essential commodities, this industry is very complex, composed of many crafts and skills and coupled with a great diversification of materials. It rests on the basis of ruthless speculative financing.
Yet housing remains a social problem of the highest order. And the complexity of the building industry emphasizes only all the more the necessity of nationalization and planning. Witness the situation that now exists. The problem of securing shelter is one of the greatest uncertainties for most working people, subject as they are to the vicissitudes of the capitalist business cycles. Those who have sufficient savings for a down payment on a home stand to lose it during the depressions. Renting tenants unable to pay are mercilessly evicted. The need for homes is never satisfied, precisely because the profit system bars the way. Assuredly it is urgent to make a change here – a change to production for use, to planning.
Such a system would first of all put an end to speculative land owners, to real estate sharks and rent-gougers, not to mention the profit hungry mortgage brokers and financiers.
Once the building industry is nationalized it would be possible to plan according to the needs and the country’s ability to produce. Not only the field of construction, but all the branches producing material would be coordinated, allocations made and measures taken for improvement where shortages appear. Every building worker would be guaranteed steady employment and a living wage. Only then would it be possible to utilize to the fullest extent new inventions, new and more efficient methods, as well as new and better materials. Healthy and comfortable living quarters would be the rule. Every family engaged in useful work would obtain housing to which it is entitled. Profit returns would no longer enter into calculations for home building. On the contrary, the needs of the people would be the highest concern.



The history of the American labor movement contains two pages of unusual importance. Each carries the imprint of a period of development significant not only for great advances, but also for valuable lessons to be learned. The first period embraces the stormy struggles and growth of organization and consciousness that culminate in the upheavals of the Eighties.
The second – decades later – witnessed the emergence of the CIO and the establishment of industrial unionism throughout the mass production industry. In each instance new and unprecedented heights of working class militancy and action were reached.
 
The Pioneer Period of the Eighties
The first period had for its economic background the extraordinary capitalist expansion following the termination of the Civil War. Monopoly capitalism began to appear. Trust builders displayed a ruthless intolerance of labor organization. Rapidly mounting profits were protected again and again by merciless wage cuts. To crush labor resistance capitalism always had at its disposal a whole army of Pinkertons, sometimes also troops. Then along came the financial panic of 1873; a depression lasting almost five years, with not less than three million workers unemployed and destitute. And, as could be expected, the strike struggles led to serious clashes in a number of communities.
To cite only a few. In Martinsburg, W.Va., two companies of militia, supplemented by 250 federal troops, were defeated in open combat by the striking workers. In Maryland the militia was routed after having killed 10 strikers. In Pittsburgh strikers chased the militia who had to flee the city when darkness fell. In St. Louis, during a strike, a Socialist mass meeting elected an Executive Committee to protect the workmen. This committee exercised full power in the city for a week.
Workers were drawn into the unions by the hundreds and thousands. The idea of labor solidarity took on flesh and blood. Great strikes unfolded in a number of industries. One strike in the entire Gould railroad system compelled that industrial magnate to sit down and negotiate with the workers as power to power. All these events reached their culmination in 1886 in the great struggle for the 8-hour workday. Involved were some 340,000 workers. Historians have recorded this struggle as a social war with no quarter given. No labor leader could restrain the rank and file, and hardly dared do so.
In drawing a balance sheet of this period, we notice first of all the great advance of labor organization. The Knights of Labor grew to not less than 700,000 members. The AFL became established as a national federation counting some 300,000 workers. The principle of the 8-hour workday became accepted and actually established for a considerable number of trade unions.
But above all, the policy hitherto pursued by the rising monopoly capitalism of resisting labor organization with fire and sword was stopped cold in its tracks. The principle of trade unionism had to be recognized.
These were enormous advances for a young and inexperienced labor movement. But the whole point is: they were made possible only by the intervention and direct participation of the revolutionary forces that existed at the time. This, it must be said without any qualifications or doubts, is the most important lesson to be learned from the period of the Eighties.
The Socialist Labor Party had been organized in 1876. Within one year, it had at its disposal at least 24 publications, weeklies and dailies. Party leaders, in many instances, were also union leaders. The closest relationship existed between this political party of the workers and the organized trade unions. By 1881 the Marxist revolutionary tendency was definitely in ascendancy within labor’s political movement. Out of it emerged the Revolutionary Socialist Party, led by such sterling revolutionists as Albert Parsons and August Spies. Later, when capitalism returned to a ferocious assault, these two heroes of the common people, together with three others, had to pay with their lives. Victims of class justice, the memory of these men has since remained enshrined in the hearts of succeeding generations of revolutionists.
Parsons and Spies, and others with them, were not only leaders of the Revolutionary Socialist Party. They were also leaders in their own right, in the trade union movement. Disdaining concealment, they proclaimed their objectives, Marxist in content:
“Abolition of the wage system ... Destruction of existing class rule by all means, i.e., by energetic, relentless, revolutionary and international action.”
We can well afford today to leave aside the fact that in the labor union and political movement of the Eighties there was also an admixture of anarchism, whose outstanding representative was John Most. This admixture was not decisive. It rather was an expression of the prevailing spirit of direct action.
The revolutionists understood perfectly well the full implications of existing class rule. With this in mind, they proceeded to carry their aims into action by organizing armed workers defense guards. Such formations existed in several large cities actively supported, in many instances, by the unions. Witness, for example, a declaration issued at the time by the Central Labor Union of Chicago. A resolution, introduced by Spies at a meeting which preceded the strike for the 8-hour workday, was adopted “with enthusiasm,” according to the historian, J.R. Commons. Here is how this resolution concluded:
Be it Resolved, That we urgently call upon the wage-earning class to arm itself in order to be able to put forth against their exploiters such an argument -which alone can be effective: Violence. And further be it Resolved, that notwithstanding that we expect very little from the introduction of the 8-hour day, we firmly promise to assist our more backward brethren in this class struggle with all means and power at our disposal, so long as they will continue to show an open and resolute front to our common oppressors, the aristocratic vagabonds and the exploiters. Our war-cry is “Death to the foes of the human race.”
This is a superb example of the revolutionary spirit of the time.
 
How the CIO Was Born
A review of the second period under discussion brings to our attention at the very outset the very same important lesson, contained in the events of the Eighties. It is necessary to say, with equal emphasis, that the mighty advance represented by the emergence of the CIO became possible only owing to the previous preparation and intervention by the revolutionary forces.
First, in order of note, is the role played by the Communist Party before it became totally Stalinized. Later the Trotskyist movement was to make its significant contributions. And, needless to say, both parties had assimilated certain lessons from the positive as well as from the negative aspects of the IWW.
After emerging from its underground phase in the early Twenties, the CP took the initiative in organizing a trade union left wing movement. That is how the Trade Union Educational League came into being. Based on a firm policy of working within the mass movement, the TUEL achieved notable results, and achieved them in the face of great obstacles. A vicious open shop campaign had been unleashed by the employers. The trade unions were in retreat and in a state of disorganization, losing ground everywhere. Accompanying this retreat, there came an increasingly stifling bureaucratization. Yet the ideas championed by the left wing movement penetrated the very marrow of the entire union structure, helping prepare the ground for events to come.
The TUEL commenced with a campaign for amalgamating the existing trade unions into industrial unions. Here was a practical approach to the idea of organizing American labor on the basis of industrial unionism. As such it was accepted, and well received. Complete records of the response to this campaign are not available; but some of the results are known. Not less than 17 AFL State Federations accepted the idea. In convention action they went officially on record for amalgamation. Included were such industrial states as Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio, and Minnesota. Other state conventions, like that of Illinois, defeated the idea only by a narrow margin. Similarly, international union conventions went officially on record for amalgamation. Among these were the Railway Clerks, the railroad Maintainance of Way organization, the Typographical Union, the Lithographers, the Molders, the Bakery Workers, the Brewery Workers, the needle trades unions, and others.
Such results show the far reaching effects of left wing activities. The progressive character of the amalgamation slogan was recognized by friend and foe alike. From this recognition the left wing drew its strength.
In a second campaign conducted around the slogan “Organize the Unorganized,” the TUEL made rich contributions toward significant developments which were to come later on. The need for organization was obvious. Millions of workers smarted under the lash of open shop conditions in mass production industries. The open shop had gained ground, threatening the very existence of the organized trade union movement. A way out of this blind-alley could be found only in the organization of the unorganized. In this sense the TUEL blazed the trail. Out of the strikes in Passaic, N.J. and Gastonia, N.C., led by the left wing, grew the beginnings of a national textile workers union.
But the most dramatic experience and the greatest impact of this campaign came in connection with the Coal Miners Union. Nowhere had disorganization and retreat, combined with a ruthless bureaucratic rule, brought such disastrous results. To a large extent this stemmed from the efforts by the Lewis regime to consolidate its position against Lewis’ progressive opponents. And, needless to say, these efforts of Lewis were utterly reactionary.
One by one most of the important soft coal producing states were lost to the union. After the 1927-28 Pennsylvania and Ohio strike, little beyond a shell of organization remained in these states. West Virginia was in a similarly bad situation. Heroic efforts made by the “Save the Union Committee,” led by the left wing, were met with severe repressions, and finally by wholesale expulsions. Such were the circumstances which in the end compelled the left wing to attempt to organize the unorganized coal miners outside of the United Mine Workers. This, however, was merely a by-product of the fierce struggle. The split that ensued lasted only for a short while. The wounds were healed when the working class emerged from the depression.
Subsequent events show with singular clarity that the lessons of these experiences were not lost to the coal miners. Moreover, the struggles of this period made their full repercussions felt later. When the CIO drive actually began, it was the miners who spearheaded the movement.
On the labor movement as a whole, a young inexperienced Communist Party, and the left wing it created, had made a deep impression. By and large the impression was a good one. Later this became vitiated by the progressive Stalinization of the CP. Today the role within the unions of this party’s leadership is synonymous with duplicity, deception and treachery. But that is the contradiction in which these Stalinists find themselves. It does not change the CP’s early revolutionary record. Nor can its subsequent degeneration undo its progressive achievements of its early days. Without them the labor movement could not have been what it is today.
 
The Role of Minneapolis
It was left to Trotskyism to restore and further strengthen these early achievements. This is the real significance of events that took place in Minneapolis during 1934, which pointed the way in a still more positive sense for the American working class. The great Minneapolis strike became not only a forerunner but also a model for struggles to come. In the process, a drivers’ union embracing six to seven thousand members was built out of virtually nothing. It won recognition from the employers. That by itself was a considerable achievement at the time. Shortly thereafter these activities were expanded, and Minneapolis was established as the most thoroughly unionized city in the United States.
These events came as an exception to what had been taking place up till then. In Minneapolis there was a fusion, as it has been aptly called, of the native militancy of workers with an authentic leadership, which raised the conscious will to struggle to new heights. That leadership was the Trotskyist leadership. Policy and leadership played the decisive role. Elsewhere the militancy surging from below had been checked and curbed by the leaders. In Minneapolis it was organized and directed by leaders who “taught the workers to fight for their rights and fought with them.”
The Minneapolis events signalled a turning point. From then on, bureaucratic restraints, in posed from above, were battered down. The flood tide of organization, illuminated so brilliantly by the great sit-down strikes, washed away all barriers. Out of it emerged an entirely new industrial union movement.
Communist Party members by the thousands took their part and performed their duty in this drive. They had not yet been fully enmeshed in the poisonous web of the zigzag policies of Stalinism. Besides, they still retained a certain degree of working class solidarity and militancy from their “Third Period” days. Among the bureaucratic trade union top layers only John L. Lewis and his small group of lieutenants saw the progressive possibilities of the industrial union campaign, and gave it leadership. To that extent they deserve due credit. But a far greater share of credit for results actually attained goes to the workers in mass production industry.
Time tables and blueprints of organization were again and again rudely upset by workers who were hellbent for organization. Burning with resentment at the capitalist failure during the depression, they streamed into the CIO from every section of the country – steel workers as well as beauty parlor operators. Their own ingenuity produced classic improvizations in methods of struggle. In the sit-down strike they discovered a means of fully concentrating their power. It heightened their confidence. And they themselves perfected the technique, so inspired, so simple, and so effective.
Here we witnessed a modest rehearsal of the future taking-over of industry by the workers. And while we should not ascribe more to this period of development than it actually signifies, its general direction is assuredly, unmistakably clear. It brought incontestable evidence of the revolutionary potential that does exist within the working masses.
Its fruit in practice was – an entirely new union movement arising in a field which had heretofore represented the lowest economic working class levels. The entry of new millions resulted not alone in new industrial unions. It also meant that the American working class had progressed from its being as the most backward to its becoming the most advanced, up-to-date, most militant and most decisive working class force in the world. All this was accomplished virtually in a single leap, with typical American speed.
Could this giant leap have been the result merely of an economic or political conjuncture? Posing such a question has a certain validity, when we remember the mighty impulse to organization imparted by the bitter experiences of the depression. No doubt, this economic conjuncture played a significant role. One need not even deny the impetus added by Roosevelt’s New Deal collective bargaining program. But, after all these factors are noted, it is still necessary to take into account the far more conscious social forces. It cannot be repeated too often that the scope, sweep, swiftness and completeness of these developments could never have been possible, failing the previous preparation and conscious intervention by the revolutionary forces – first by the Communist Party during its healthiest period and secondly by the Trotskyist movement.
We thus see that this same main lesson applies to each of these two pages of American labor history. It stands out with exceptional clarity. And it may be predicted confidently with regard to future problems that this main lesson will yet receive singular emphasis.
But, on the whole, the problems revealed in each of the foregoing two pages still remained quite elementary in character. They concerned in the main the establishment of labor union organization and of infusing it with union consciousness. Today the problems of the movement are increasingly complex. American capitalism is racing at accelerated speed toward its irrepressible social crisis. And with it the labor movement also nears its hour of decision. Either it must make a new forward leap to the very highest social level, assuming its responsibility as labor’s mass organization and taking on the fight for a new social order; or it will splinter on the treacherous shoals and reefs of crisis.
 
The Period We Live in – Its Tasks and Problems
Which course the labor movement takes will depend once again, in a large measure, upon the conscious intervention of the revolutionary forces. Such intervention, to be successful, presupposes a clear understanding of the character of the labor movement today. And with that, an understanding of the crucial problems, arising out of the crisis of capitalism, with which this movement is now and will henceforth be more and more directly confronted.
Discussing these very questions Leon Trotsky made some profound contributions shortly before his untimely death. His observations on current trends, together with his conclusions drawn therefrom, touch the very heart of these problems.
In the first place, he pointed out the tendency of modern trade union organizations to draw closer to the state power. He went on to stress that since this tendency is a “common feature in the development, or more correctly the degeneration” of all unions, it is “intrinsic, not in this or that doctrine as such, but derives from social conditions common for all unions.”
Trotsky deduced this observation from the active interplay of economic and political relations. Monopoly capitalism is thoroughly centralized. It rests, as he correctly says, on “centralized command.” The capitalists at the head of monopoly concerns “view economic life from the very same heights as does state power; and they require at every step the collaboration of the latter.” The trade unions in the most important industries have to confront this “centralized capitalist adversary intimately bound up with state power.” From this flows their need, insofar as they remain on reformist positions, to vie for the “cooperation” of the state.
As concerns the tendency of unions to draw closer to the state power, England offers the classic example. The union bureaucracy there is an integral part of state power. But this tendency is noticeable aplenty here, too. And it is displayed just about equally by both AFL and CIO leaderships.
We need recall only the almost exclusive reliance, during the New Deal period, on Roosevelt’s collective bargaining program practiced first by AFL and later by CIO leaders as well. The war period brought a manifestation of this tendency in the “no strike pledge” to the government, kept inviolate in spite of the wage freeze. The Stalinist union bureaucrats led the pack, not shying away even from open strikebreaking. In return for their patriotic collaboration the bureaucrats hoped to be handed crumbs through the various governmental boards – naturally, within the framework of the wage freeze policy they supported.
Many other examples of this tendency to draw closer to the state power could be cited. Suffice it here to recall that it has not lessened at all in the postwar period. While John L. Lewis, backed by a militant miners’ organization, has betimes attempted to keep his hands free to fight, while retreating, at other times in face of state power, this tendency, on the whole still prevails. The leaders of both AFL and the CIO look increasingly toward governmentally elaborated wage patterns and toward governmental conciliation. An ever mounting share of their efforts is directed toward their now regularly established and rapidly growing labor lobby in Washington and at various state capitals. Examples multiply of their prostration before Congress, its committees, as well as before the White House occupant. Never to demand in the name of the mighty hosts of labor, but always to plead! This tendency is exemplified right now in the subservient execution by official union leaders of the red-baiting campaign initiated by the State Department. In the eyes of these union leaders, as Trotsky said, “the chief task lies in ‘freeing’ the state from the embrace of capitalism, in weakening its dependence on trusts, in pulling it over to their side.”
 
What Official Leaders Fear
These leaders are ready, of course, to offer a good deal in return. And from the point of view of their social position, this is understandable. Gone are the days when union leaders accepted sacrifices and suffered persecution to build a union. Now official union posts have become avenues to a mercenary career, and a very lucrative one, at that. In addition it brings rewards of power and influence.
Any threat to their career these leaders fear not so much from the government or the capitalist employers as from a militant or rebellious rank and file. The latter they fear more than anything else, particularly now that the unions have become so large and so broad in scope. Therefore, bound as they are economically and ideologically, to the capitalist system, in which they believe and which they defend, these leaders have chosen for themselves “the position of responsibility and restraint,” as they put it in their statesmanly terms. In plain words: Always hold the rank and file in check! They thereby demonstrate to the capitalist state, as Trotsky said, how indispensable and how reliable they are. In terms of class struggle, it means illegalizing strikes or other actions of protest against capitalist exploitation, on the pain of punitive measures. Sometimes taken in collusion with the employers, these penalties often go to the extent of union expulsion or firing from the job, or both. On the whole, this tendency to draw closer to the capitalist state brings with it corresponding restrictions of trade union democracy.
It is precisely on the political field, where the question of state power is directly involved, that the trade union leadership practices its appeasement policy most openly and blandly. Their insistence on upholding the present two party system; their stubborn rejection of independent labor politics and sabotage of a Labor Party – even of the PAC – has served these very ends. All of it springs from the same motivations: Fear lest any other steps tend to increase the possibilities for greater militancy and greater independence of the rank and file. And on the other hand – increasing dependence upon and support of the political state as now constituted.
Unquestionably these were the motivations which impelled the AFL hierarchy in its unity proposal to the CIO. Emanating entirely from above, this move was obviously designed by its bumbling architects exclusively as a means of establishing a greater, more complete, and decisively reactionary control of all of labor’s forces, in order to keep the ranks more effectively within checks and bounds. In other words, the AFL hierarchy served notice of its hopes and intentions to become more indispensable and more reliable to the capitalist state. To accomplish this, it was willing to offer a junior share to the CIO leaders. But no more than that. In the negotiations, the AFL representatives would not agree in advance to preserve the principle of industrial unionism inside the united organization. Was that due solely to their deep seated craft prejudices? There was more to it than that. The AFL leaders know from experience that the industrial mass unions served to raise the whole labor movement to higher levels of militancy. They know that in these unions rank and file aspirations and revolts find far more avenues of expression, whereas the means of control are far more limited. From these and similar considerations flow their additional hopes and intentions to slice up and partition the industrial unions in a process of unification. These are some of the very real dangers involved in the AFL proposal.
However, the perfidious hopes and aspirations of reactionary leaders are one thing. Reality is something else again.
The United States is heading toward another economic and social crisis; world capitalism is in its death agony. This prospect is not conducive to establishing a more complete reactionary control over labor’s force. These same conditions, together with increasing attacks upon the unions, may stimulate an urge and a need for genuine unity. In that case, it is entirely possible, yes even likely, that an actual unification – which may be expected eventually – would instead lift militancy to new heights of radicalization within the fused organization.
In this general context, a second important observation made by Trotsky deserves particular attention. “Monopoly capitalism,” he said, “is less and less willing to reconcile itself to the independence of trade unions.” This, he continued, results from “the intensification of class contradictions within each country” as well as of antagonisms between countries, which in turn, produces “a situation in which imperialist capitalism can tolerate [i.e. up to a certain tune] a reformist bureaucracy only if the latter serves directly as a petty but active stockholder of its imperialist enterprise, of its plans and programs within the country as well as on the world arena.”
This attitude is implicit in Wall Street’s imperialist drive to conquer the world. It will become explicit when this power makes the attempt to issue out of the crisis through atomic war on the Soviet Union.
Concretely, it is expressed right now in the assault on labor – a double-barrelled assault. A virulent barrage of red-baiting coupled with the most vicious anti-labor legislation. Both pursue the same general objective and both give rise to a symmetrical set of contradictions. While the red-baiting campaign is directed in an immediate sense against the Stalinists as agents of the Kremlin, its real goal is to snuff out labor militancy. To this extent it is designed as an aid to the official union leadership. Its contradiction lies in this, that it becomes openly and visibly a cover for the legislative drive against the whole labor movement. Under this cover the Taft-Hartley Law was entered in the statute books as an initial attempt to abridge, if not to throttle entirely, the independence of the trade unions. And while a good many official leaders have given ample evidence of welcoming a certain degree of governmental regulation and control of the unions (which would assist them in their endeavors to hold the rank and file in check), this act strikes also directly at their own positions, power, and aspirations.
Why, it may be asked, why such intransigence toward those whom monopoly capitalism wants to transform into “petty but active stockholders” of its imperialist enterprise?
The answer must be sought in the contradictions of this imperialist enterprise. Capitalism in Western Europe has been compelled, owing to the acuteness of its decay, to muddle along with concessions to and compromise with a labor bureaucracy, including, at times, the Stalinist variety. American capitalism, however, has assumed single-handed the role of restoring and rehabilitating capitalism on a world scale. It has assumed the task of damming up any extention of the October Revolution. Even its present implementation, the Truman Doctrine, brings American imperialism into collision with the working class everywhere. Its far flung frontiers makes it more vulnerable. And in this situation it particularly needs a strong base, for private enterprise, i.e., for unbridled capitalist exploitation, at home, free of any entanglements, free of any serious challenges or threats.
While American capitalism may not at present, in the face of its policy of world conquest, take on the additional task of attempting to destroy all labor organizations; while it may still offer certain concessions to the labor bureaucracy – or sections thereof – in order to assure its subservience, in the final analysis, American capitalism does not rely on this bureaucracy. It relies on its own state power. Ultimately it will attempt to destroy not only the independence of the unions but the unions themselves.
The logic of capitalist struggle for survival leads inescapably to its acceptance of this ultimate variant. Let us recall the example of German capitalism which elevated fascism to power in order to prolong its own existence.
Trotsky laid special emphasis on the fact that the bureaucracy on becoming transformed into servants of the imperialist enterprise cannot in the long run save it from destruction, and offers no way out in general. After all, the well-groomed fraternity that makes up the union leadership depends on the mass organizations for its own privileges. And to be effective servants means to accept and support the whole imperialist program. But the most essential, indivisible part of that program is maintenance of the base of private enterprise, of capitalist exploitation, at home. Support of this program can therefore serve only to paralyze the workers’ struggle to maintain their standard of living and their organizations. Ultimately, support of this program must lead to the destruction of labor organizations, and with them to the destruction of the privileges of the labor bureaucracy itself.
What assurance is there, under these conditions, that the official family of union leaders, an aggregation of many tens of thousands, would remain a monolithic bulwark of reaction? Hardly any. The logic of the class struggle makes itself felt also within the unions. It causes differentiations even among the official family. And under the pressure of crisis, as well as under the pressure of the mass movement, many among the lower layers especially will be compelled to turn leftward, Marxists will know well enough how to take advantage of such possibilities.
From his general observations, already mentioned, Trotsky drew his warning against any hasty conclusions that in the imperialist epoch independent trade unions could not survive. Impossible are the independent reformist unions.
“Wholly possible,” he insisted, “are revolutionary trade unions ... which set as their task the direct overthrow of the rule of capitalism. In the epoch of imperialist decay the trade unions can be really independent only to the extent that they are conscious of being, in action, the organs of proletarian revolution.”
This key conclusion offers also the key to the stupendous problems that will arise in the coming economic and social crisis.
The imperialist epoch produces ever sharper social contradictions. Objective conditions leave no room for any serious or lasting reforms; wage increases are wiped out by the rising cost of living. During crisis and unemployment working conditions once gained begin to crumble. The standard of living declines; economic security disappears.
However, this does not mean to say that the mass unions have no function or become inevitably paralyzed when the strike weapon is limited to closing down of factories. It means simply that in a crisis the character and methods of their struggle must of necessity change. The struggle itself enters a higher level; it enters a more distinctly political level. The traditional weapons must henceforward be supplemented by political means and methods. And the latter, in turn, will be directed toward more definitely political and social aims and objectives.
Precisely the highly advanced technology in the United States assigns a role of special importance to the trade union movement. Political development of the American working class has remained sadly delayed. In fact, workers’ political parties in this country never did become mass parties. Union organization has leaped far ahead to occupy a unique position of enormous social weight. An extraordinarily high degree of union consciousness has been attained. That leap has prepared the trade union movement for a far greater role in the future. It will not play that role, however, without the intervention, influence, and leadership of the revolutionary party. There will most likely be a synthesis of the development of both these forces.
 
Whither Labor in the US?
Under pressure of crisis the trade union movement will advance swiftly toward a new political stage. A mass labor party can be expected to become a reality, regardless of opposition from politically bankrupt bureaucrats. But because this stage is so long overdue, when it is actually realized, so much more dynamic and explosive will be its effects. So much more surely will the labor party reflect the revolutionary tendency of the working masses. It will be a leap forward like the emergence of the CIO, but on a qualitatively different and far higher level. It will provide an enlarged field for the struggle for the complete independence of trade unions vis à vis the capitalist state. And, incidentally, it will also offer a broader arena for operation to the revolutionary forces. Under such conditions a labor party will “not represent a detour into reformist stagnation ... it will rather represent a preliminary stage in the radicalization of the American workers.”
Under the pressure of social crisis the trade union movement will also become more conscious of the social implications of its powerful position. It will be compelled to struggle for more than merely maintaining wage scales or reducing the hours of work. It will do that, no doubt; but it will be compelled to do more. It must take on the fight for social and economic security for the working class. Obviously, this will not be attainable so long as the factories stand idle. What realistic alternative can then appear, in connection with the problem of setting the wheels of production in motion, other than production for use instead of for profit? How can this be achieved without the demand for workers’ control of production? In sum and substance, the trade union movement, for its own independent survival, must take on the fight for the socialist reorganization of society.
Both of these demands – the demand for a labor party and for workers’ control of production – are part of our Transitional Program. And in this sense, as Trotsky said, the program of transitional demands “is not only the program for the activity of the party but in its fundamental features it is the program for the activity of the trade unions.”
We can rest assured, that from now on questions of program and policy will play an increasingly decisive role in trade union struggles. So will the question of leadership. Crises submit leaderships to the supreme test. And as we witnessed in the revival of organization following the last depression, the main core of the AFL hierarchy failed miserably and utterly. Hence the CIO arose outside the AFL. The emergence of the CIO created a leadership which was adequate for the objective at that stage. But that is the most that can be said in its favor. Subsequent development revealed this leadership as not of a much higher caliber than the tops in the old Federation, either politically, or in any other sense. And this, despite the unprecedented qualitative change that took place in the organized labor movement as a whole.
Basically, it should be noted, it is the fearsome Stalinist degeneration of the CP, which in its early and healthy days had done so much to prepare the ground for the advent of the CIO, that now accounts why the leadership of the latter has remained so mediocre and so subservient to American imperialism as it is today.
Moreover, the trade union leadership as a whole, with only a few exceptions, has remained consistently in a conservative and reactionary groove. To the above-cited points of program – the labor party and workers’ control of production, along with the other demands flowing therefrom – this leadership is bitterly hostile. It is still unalterably committed to the “free enterprise” system of capitalist exploitation. The rank and file, on the other hand, have shown new manifestations in the postwar period of their leftward trend. They proved their readiness to assault the great corporations in order to wrest from them a greater share of the enormous profits of exploitation. Labor demonstrated then and there that it does not hold private property rights of exploitation as sacred or inviolate.
A struggle between the conservative leaders and the leftward-tending ranks is bound to intensify with the further sharpening of social contradictions. And it is right here that the conscious intervention of the revolutionary party counts the most. An enormous advantage has already been provided by our program of transitional demands. Broadly speaking, this is the starting point for the building of a left wing and for the creation of a new trade union leadership. For only under the political leadership of the revolutionary party will the trade unions be able to remain genuinely independent. Only in this way can they become conscious of being, in action, the organs of proletarian revolution.



The destructive fight now ravaging the United Mine Workers Union in the Illinois district between the John L. Lewis international administration and the Harry Fishwick district administration is proving to the hilt all the charges made by the Left wing and progressive forces during the years of struggle against these corrupt officials. One more serious blow is now being administered to the badly shattered remnants of this union, thus indicating a once glorious organization coming to an inglorious end. Now the question of building anew upon the ruins of the old becomes the real burning one.
What this fight really is about is rather difficult to ascertain. There certainly are no principles involved. But the Illinois section still has a dues paying membership bringing in a revenue for which both groups of per-capita absorbers are willing to go to bat. Both administrations have already mutually removed one another expecting the miners to pay the bills out of their starvation wages. Each administration has its paid scribes to edit its respective journal, hurling invectives at one another. In this respect, Oscar Ameringer of the Illinois section so far has the edge with such choice bits as referring to Lewis – “Deadest duck this side of the milky way; defender of the fat; marshal of the Meal Ticket Legion, sublime keeper of the swag; imitation Mussolini; the dud the carcass of Lewisism; union wrecker; traitor”.
 
Wrecking a Great Union
Nothing could speak more eloquently about the wreckage wrought by John L. Lewis in the U.M.W. of A. than the membership figures emanated from his own office. According to reports submitted by the Federal Bureau of Mines, 153,829 mine workers are employed in the soft coal fields of Pennsylvania (of course not working regularly). The U.M.W. of A. today has a dues paying membership of 1,374. In West Virginia 119,799 miners employed with 77 dues paying members. In Indiana 24,352 with 10,609 dues paying members.
In Ohio 35,543 with 1,061 dues paying members. In Kentucky 64,747 with 77 dues paying members. At the time when Lewis took office as president in 1921 there were a total dues paying membership in the soft coal fields, not including exonerated members nor the districts of Canada, of 365,740. In 1929 this membership in the same territory has dropped to 84,369 of which Illinois has 53,088.
The Fishwick administration in trying to outdo Lewis, now makes an open bid for the support of the operators by charging that Lewis did not have the courage to accept responsibility for an “orderly” retreat such as they claim the economic conditions demanded, but instead, they say, isued ihs slogan of “no backward step”. And yet there have been nothing but retreats and sell-outs, on both sides. In July 1928 Lewis made his infamous decision destroying the last vestige of a national union by ordering each district to obtain whatever terms on working conditions it pleased. In Illinois, Fishwick put through a substantial wage cut with a loss of practically all remaining union conditions and declared it carried in a referendum vote in which a later check-up showed that it was defeated at least three to one. The Fishwick administration is further taking steps toward a new national union of its own.
There could be nothing whatever ever inspiring to the miners no matter which side wins in this contest, which will be decided by the operators.
However, the pressure of economic conditions, of increased mechanicalization of the mines with increased speed-up, increased unemployment and deterioration of working conditions and the standard of living, is growing and driving them forward to seek their first solution in the building of a new union capable of fighting for their interests.
 
Possibilities of New Union
Thus the possibilities for building the National Miners Union are excellent. Yet, as reported in the last issue, the methods pursued by the Communist Party leadership threatens it with being still-born, almost creating a split situation before the union has taken on organized form. The delegates who walked out in disgust from the district convention held at Belleville, Oct. 27, were precisely the most substantial section of the delegates. They were non-Party members, representing mainly the Staunton sub-district which has been in the forefront during this long struggle against the corrupt old union leadership, the territory in which the most militant strike picketing was carried on last year and from which the most substantial locals joined the N.M.U. in a body. Fortunately, these delegates, although they left the convention, are still determined by all means to build the National Miners Union, a decision which members of the Communist Opposition were able to influence in a considerable measure.
What was the issue at the Belleville convention responsible for the delegates leaving. One of principle, program, form of organization, attitude toward the old union officialdom or the coal operators? No, the issue carried to the point of an incipient split was John J. Watt, the president of the N.M.U., known to the rank and file miners as one who earnestly endeavors to build the union and accepts its program.
 
An Issue Artificially Created
Whatever might be said about mistakes made by Watt, one thing is sure: His long time opposition to the entirely false methods pursued by the Party leadership in imposing a complete mechanical control upon this new union movement from its very inception has largely been both a very natural and correct one. It caused him to resign his Party membership about last summer (a reaction which Communists will not endorse). But the retaliation by the Party leadership to this step has become a far worse one; as a matter of fact, one which threatens the interests of the coal miners.
With a situation like the one now existing in the Illinois coal fields, when the main campaign should be the building of the new union on a mass basis, consolidation of its rank and file support, an energetic fight against the Lewis and Fishwick union wreckers, and against the coal operators to recapture lost conditions, the main campaign is made against Watt. To make a case, the Daily Worker is resorting to outright fabrications as, for example, that Watt is calling conferences in opposition to those called by the district organization, that the Staunton locals repudiated Watt, etc.
 
What Kind of a New Union
The question that must be answered by the Party leadership is – what sort of union is intended? A mass organization in which elements who are not Party members but willing earnestly to accept the militant union program, can participate and hold important positions, or a narrow union established only on the conditions of accepting a leadership holding Party membership cards, even if mechanically imposed? The former is the only possible form that can succeed, particularly at this juncture. This is proved by all working class history and by the very response of the miners, whereas the introduction of the latter narrow conception immediately led to a split situation only narrowly averted.
If these methods are persisted in by the Party leadership it can result in nothing but complete forfeiture of the present splendid possibilities; and, what is worse yet, the creation of a situation in which rank and file coal miners in large numbers, who are ready to give their utmost for the triumph of militant unionism will be driven to anti-Communism,
The National Miners Union has not yet reached a point of facing its greatest and most formidable enemy – the coal operators. It is perfectly well known that while the operators prefer their own trusted henchmen from the old union to the N.M.U., they many times more prefer no union at all. No moment should therefore be lost in taking up immediately the struggle for pressing everyday needs of the miners as a means of organizing and preparing them for the bigger fights to come. That will decide the leadership of the union. Only by applying a correct policy can the Communists prove the superiority of their conceptions and make themselves worthy of leadership.
 



In some respects the forty-ninth annual convention of the American Federation of Labor reflected the pressure of growing working class discontent and of developing economic conditions. But only to the extent of taking on a more pacifist face masking the same reactionary policies which become ever more hostile to working class militancy and progress. This is what the Socialist Party and the leading Musteites gloat over as the new born “progressivism” of the A.F. of L.
Characteristically, the convention sessions were held in the fashionable Royal York Hotel, non-union from top to bottom. (The rent of the convention hall alone cost $60,000.) There was less heresy-hunting than usual because the Communist “menace” always paraded in the past before a frightened audience, has become with the present growing working class discontent, something to be dealt with in a more serious manner. Not that the audience changed. No, it was the same old diamond-glistening fat boys playing the master’s game, even to the extent of heavy speculation on the stock market or on the curb. Perhaps many of them are now preoccupied in nursing burnt fingers received in the last stock crash.
 
Lewis and Woll to the Rear
The two usually most militant spokesmen for capitalist policies, conceded to be the real wire pullers behind the baptist Green, secretly and openly the most adored ones of the payroll brigade, Mathew Woll and John L. Lewis, did not assume the commanding position witnessed at former convention since the death of the “immortal” Gompers. Lewis, in the past always the bellowing star red-baiter, did not perform. The frightful destruction wrought by him in his own union evidently made it unwise to bring him too much to the fore. Woll spoke in somewhat softened tones of how he had been misunderstood in the past, particularly with regards to old age pensions. As a matter of fact he claimed to have always been in favor of it. His connections with the Civic Federation, the high tariff lobby, the employers campaign for compulsory arbitration, etc., were considered perhaps a little too open. Some of them had incurred the displeasure of “progressive” capitalist politicians, liberals, Professor Dewey, yes, and even the Socialist Party.
Anyway the convention showed a change of face and of public front as required by present policies of the big employers and the capitalist government at Washington, D.C. It gave more than usual attention to the south because of the general capitalist fear of the establishment of unions there under left wing leadership. It went on record for old age pension laws to be enacted by the various states. It particularly utilized the stereotyped phrases of the capitalist press of a high standard of living for labor, keeping up consumption, and co-operation in maintaining prosperity. This to soothe the growing dissatisfaction of the workers while tying them more effectively to the murderous speed-up, semi-company union system. Yet some of the convention actions also reflect the pressure of growing working class discontent and pressure from sharpening industrial conditions. The Executive Council report indicated the fear of growing technological unemployment as it calls it, meaning workers thrown upon the streets displaced by machines, and particularly the fear of rapid disappearance of trade skill in this machine age. Naturally, that would eliminate any last excuse for craft unionism and spells its final doom.
 
The Scripps Editorial
Nothing, however, excited the delegates as much as an editorial on the failure of the A.F. of L. published by the Scripps-Howard chain of newspapers on the second day of the convention. The weight of its criticism hung like a pall over the gathering. Bluntly it projected the miserable career of the federation stating in part that it will have to report failure to make any gains in membership, being now below 3,000,000 as compared to 5,000,000 and more in 1920; failure to be a factor in the labor awakening in the south; with increasing technological unemployment, failure to obtain a government unemployment or old age pension system; the basic industries entirely unorganized and failure to devise a constructive program to prevent suffering in other industries, growth of the anti labor injunction evil; handcuffing the unions and helplessness to protect the rights of the workers. Then after citing that these things are happening in the most “prosperous” country, the most “enlightened democracy” and blaming both the country and the A.F. of L. for the workers’ misery and the failure to get “justice”, the editorial queries:
“But after all what is the A.F. of L. for? ... The truth is the A.F. of L. is failing miserably in its stewardship. Every year its weakness is more apparent.
“The southern textile situation is a vivid example of that failure, but it is only one of many examples. For thirty years the A.F. of L. has ignored the field except for easy resolutions and a handful of organizers. The job has been left to the Communists. While the hungry southern mill hands are facing alone the organized employers and hostile authorities, beaten by mobs and shot down by sheriffs, the sleek A.F. of L. officials sit twiddling their thumbs at mahogany desks in Washington or are making patrioteering speeches to the National Security League or at West Point.
“The A.F. of L. is accurately described as the aristocracy of labor. All aristocracies are subject to dry rot.”
The Scripps Howard papers have a circulation of about fifteen million. The convention felt the lash and squirmed. An inquiry was made by Green whether this represents a set policy with an answer from the editor-in-chief that it was merely-friendly criticism. And so it was. It meant in plain words: – Get busy; stop the rebellion now in the offing; try to lead the workers, or the Communists will do the job.
Perhaps on account of this a few extra speeches were made on the problem of organization of the south. McMahon, president of the United Textile Workers, eloquently described the radiant beauty of the southern mill villages, extolled the “splendid efforts” of the A.F. of L., made a slight remark on the low wages prevalent, but said nothing about the struggle – and, of course, nothing about the treasonable record of the U.T.W. leadership.
 
The Convention and the South
The convention decision to map out plans to organize the South will not serve as an inspiration to the workers. Such convention braggadocio we have become used to. The results have done nothing but serve the employers to prevent organization. Yet today, the National Textile Workers Union has set an example of militant policies and organization in the South. Communist leadership, as far as the issues of the struggle are concerned, has found a response among the workers. The A.F. of L. leaders have been given a task by their masters, the employers, and they will undoubtedly endeavor to organize into “safe” channels to stem this developing tide of militancy.
The Executive Council report recommended the usual policy of “rewarding friends and punishing enemies” among capitalist politicians. As as “appropriate” answer to the appearance of Premier MacDonald, still in his role as a “missionary of peace” – by the way, he was greeted with tumultuous applause – it evidently considered its high strung claims of “labor” control of Congress, set forth in the report as follows:
“The election of members to the House in 1928 resulted in the success of 135 representatives with 100 percent legislative records on measures of interest to labor. There were also 110 members elected whose records were exceedingly fair. It is not generally known, but it is a fact that 39 members of the United States Senate also have 100 per cent labor records – Fifteen other Senators are considered most fair ... It will be seen that a majority of the members of the House and the United States Senate, irrespective of politics, are friendly to labor.”
But, adds the report so as prevent any too great expectations, some of the leaders are powerful enough to prevent remedial measures from enactment.
On the serious problem of anti-labor injunctions the council emerged with a draft for a socalled injunction limitation bill. It represented a stupid effort to accomplish the impossible, namely to devise a bill that could be acceptable to capitalist lawyers and capitalist courts. The debate on this draft revealed a number of long winded “barristers” clashing over the technical intricacies of capitalist laws, practically obliterating all traces of a labor gathering.
 
Furuseth Bursts Out
The chief performers were Andy Furuseth, Matthew Woll and Victor Olander. The head of the seamen’s union, Andy Furuseth, as reactionary in outlook as any of them, got somewhat animated by the debate and shot a few well-aimed darts into the armor of the hidebound standpatters. At one point, in answer to Woll he said: “Was it a pettyfogging lawyer taking the other side because his case was weak, who used just what he wanted and sopped the quotation where it would not do to continue, or was it possibly the president of the Civic Federation who was defending the equity power in injunctions and labor disputes?” At another point, referring to the convention held in Toronto twenty years ago with its lofty resolve pledging the delegates to go to jail in the fight against injunctions, he blazed forth: “But even the best of you will not You will not fight.” Then again, referring to the shame of Indianapolis – the submission of John L. Lewis to the Anderson injunction against the miners’ strike – he related how one judge had exclaimed: “Oh, that miserable coward, that miserable coward!”
However, this time it all happened to fit in well with the slight change of face of this coterie of “labor leaders”, who thus hope to serve their masters more effectively. Otherwise the high strung debate and the long, detailed draft of the “injunction limitation” bill amounted to exactly naught. Not the slightest leadership will be given by the A.F. of L. officials to fight the injunction system. For once Furuseth was right.
Naturally it would be entirely useless to expect any change in policies from this upper crust stifling the A.F. of L. This, however, does not in the least alter the fact that the Federation embraces masses of workers and represents today all there is of an organized character. Moreover, history has given ample proof that periods of depression with consequent increasing working class discontent and sharpening struggles will invariably witness substantial growth for unions, even under the most reactionary leadership. There are signs aplenty of such developments here. Yes, even in the South the A.F. of L. will undoubtedly yet become a factor. To the Left wing this should indicate clearly its tasks.
 



On the very first day of active strike of the Illinois coal miners, called by the National Miners Union, military forces were at hand to attempt to crush it. At Taylorville the strikers, men and women, led by Freeman Thompson, fought a splendid battle against a combination of the Peabody coal company and their flunkeys, the Fishwick-Farrington administration of the United Mine Workers, flanked by six hundred national guardsmen with fixed bayonets and machine guns mounted at the mine shaft. Before this battle was over the strikers received encouraging reinforcements from all the members of the U.M.W. of A., employed at four Peabody mines at Taylorville, Tovey, Kincaid and Langley, who refused to go to work while soldiers were on guard. The strike became 100 per cent effective in these mines.
 
Capitalist Solidarity
The soldiers were brought there from Decatur and Springfield, the latter section, traveling in buses furnished by the Illinois Power Company manned by their regular drivers, in this manner the company could show its solidarity with the hard-pressed operators.
At Pana, the two mines were closed down tight. The coal diggers had no patience with Frank Davis, whose efforts as the representative of the old union officialdom and the coal operators, went all in the direction of preventing a strike. He was kept out of the meeting where the strike vote was taken. At Auburn, at the Panther Creek mine, at Buckner and at one large mine in the Belleville sub district the miners responded and downed tools, with other points, at the time this is written, expected to follow.
At Auburn occurred the next example of the combination of forces against the strikers. Representatives of the Fishwick-Farrington administration called a meeting of the local U.M.W. of A., of which all the miners are still members. Only the members who were in opposition to the new union were admitted. The vote to return to work naturally carried. Immediately the state government came into action to play its part. Mobilization of two score highway patrolmen was ordered with instructions to clear the roads leading to the Panther Creek mine. The pickets were dispersed and those miners who did return to scab thus met no opposition.
Wholesale arrests is but another means used against the miners fighting a desperate battle against desperate conditions. It is not the leading elements alone who have landed in jail, charged with inciting to riot, disorderly conduct, unlawful asemblage, etc. to be let out only under exorbitant bail. No, those arrested have been carried off in truckloads, deportation proceedings to be instituted against all non-citizens.
Prior to the actual beginning of the strike the sheriff of Franklin county issued a proclamation of his intentions to use all the armed forces available against the strike. He recognized only the United Mine Workers Union and its contract with the operators. It chimed in well with the proclamations of the guardians of this notorious contract, signed by Harry Fishwick, assuring all and sundry that in any event the contract would be lived up to. The Illinois Coal Operators’ Association has filed affidavits in the courts pledging its readiness and forces to uphold the contract. All of them agree, to fight [for] this contract. No wonder that the [...] miners take the opposite view. Th[e] [words missing] this contract represents [words missing] of the sell-out career of the old union officialdom. It legalized the speed-up, wage-cut system and the complete loss of union conditions. The miners knew that before the contract went into effect and they voted against it. A canvass made of 177 locals of the U.M.W. of A. shortly after the referendum vote showed only 14,000 votes in favor with 39,000 against.
This Illinois miners’ strike once again demonstrates how quickly the governmental authorities will respond to the call of the employers and order out troops to smash the workers’ ranks when they dare to enter into open struggle for the needs of their daily life. Particularly is this the case when the workers’ militancy is feared. There is not the slightest lack of unity between those who have common interests: the coal operators, their fellow capitalists, their government, and their faithful lieutenants placed as officials in the union corrupted by them, the U.M.W. of A. But this time also the Taylorville struggle showed a remarkable display of working-class solidarity: the rank and file members of the U.M.W.A. refusing to work while troops were mounted against their brothers in the National Miners Union.
The response of the coal miners to this strike, known to advance to be against heavy odds, shows their temper, which has been steeled under conditions growing constantly worse. Mechanical mining has definitely established the worst features of the speed-up system and mass unemployment. Added to these features are reduced wages, all made possible for the benefit of the capitalists by a corrupt bureaucracy of the old union. The miners are beginning to see the only way out of this dilemma is through struggle. In growing numbers they welcome the new union. It has great possibilities.
 
Strike Shortcomings
With the heavy odds against the strike, in spite of which the conditions for further extension are favorable – because of the splendid fighting mood of the miners – the absolutely inadequate preparation prior to to the strike call falls back upon the leadership as a heavy responsibility. Lack of preparation in this instance is the greatest handicap. Calling of a general strike is a serious matter even under the most favorable conditions. It requires first of all a concentration on the issues of the strike in such a way that not only the most militant workers know what the fight is about but so that the broadest strata can be aroused to active participation. While all the demands made in this strike certainly represent the needs of the miners there can be no question that with a concentration on a couple of the most prominent points a broader basis would have been provided, making it much more possible that the workers employed in the heavy coal producing territory of Franklin, Williamson and Saline counties, could also have been brought out, thus creating a real basis for victory.
Ever since the present squabble for the division of the spoils between John L. Lewis and Fishwick began, the favorable possibilities for establishing militant unionism and building the National Miners Union have increased manifold. It presented the opportunity for organization and strike preparation. It required the establishment of of correct tactics and real solidarity. This opportunity was squandered by putting up straw men to be knocked down. All efforts were concentrated on fabrication of false issues against the national president of the N.M.U., John J. Watt. This brought about a practical split situation at the Belleville convention just when the building of solidarity should command all attention. For this the leadership of the Communist Party is fully responsible animated purely by its false theory of complete mechanical control of all organizations in which it wields an influence. The results so far have been failure to prepare as conditions demand, and if continued can be nothing but a disastrous narrowing, not only of the basis of the present struggle, but also of the organization itself.
 
Rally All Support!
However, despite all shortcomings the struggle is on and is not merely the concern of the miners but of the whole working class. It demands their support, and particularly does it demand the support of al class conscious workers. Relief for the strikers must be furnished. It will come only from the working class. To be effective, such relief action must be organized on a broad united front basis endeavoring in this manner to bring in large number of workers to understand the need of solidarity with the struggling coal miners.
The Illinois coal miners are struggling against the combined forces of the capitalist powers and corrupt traitorous union officials. They are struggling for the building of militant unionism. Real working class support will bring victory so much nearer.
 



Despite the splendid fighting ability displayed, the Illinois miners strike is practically over, broken up by the brute force of jailings, soldiers and machine guns mobilized by the bosses’ government on the command of the coal operators and their fellow capitalists. Acting in complete unison with them were their lickspittles who keep themselves in control of the United Mine Workers Union. The breakup was made so much easier because of the isolated basis of this strike, confined to a few localities, and by the utter lack of preparations.
 
Was Strike a Mistake?
To many workers the question will occur: “Was this strike a mistake?” To which we must say: No – a thousand times No. For the Illinois miners – which is also true for the working class in general – there is no other way out of the miserable conditions imposed upon them by the coal operators and the misleaders jointly, except through struggle. The miners struck for a chance to live. They fought courageously. Their leaders showed no fear in this fight. The experiences gained should mean one big step forward. They should be the basis to build on for the future. But it can become so only provided the many great lessons are taken advantage of.
First it showed clearer than ever before the readiness of the government with all its forces of coercion and suppression to come to the rescue of those who own and control the means of production and to be pitted against the workers when they fight for their vital needs. One more illuminating example of the fact that the government is owned and controlled by the capitalists and function in their interests only. The miners, even those who did not participate in this strike, are not the least in doubt that their conditions must be improved in order to make living possible. They have now seen once more, in the most glaring manner, that those officials of the old union, who by fair means or foul, constantly have themselves re-elected, act directly against any such possibility of improvements and do all in their power to defeat it.
The National Miners Union has proven itself as the only miners’ organization which will fight for their needs regardless of obstacles in the way. There will now be increased attacks upon it from the reactionaries. The operators will long remember the serious scare they received, and hasten more completely to affirm and uphold the wage cut, speed-up contract they have concluded with their faithful servants who keep themselves in office in the U.M.W.A. Blacklisting will likely be put into effect against the most active strikers in order to drive additional miners from the field and get rid of the militants. The miners will be told, often in terms of the right to a job, to return to the old union and its “leadership”. But it would be the greatest mistake to rely in the least upon them. They have proved themselves too definitely the tools of the operators and the defenders of the capitalist system to ever seriously contemplate any fights for the interests of the rank and file.
 
A Communist Scare Coming
There will be plenty of forces busy endeavoring to turn sentiment against the National Miners Union. But it should be remembered that it always takes a bitter struggle, and sometimes temporary defeats, to build a real working class organization. From the Lewis-Fishwick-Farrington machines, jointly with the coal operators, will be launched an increased campaign against Communism and against Communist leadership in the union. In any event for a worker to fall victim to such a campaign, to accept it, is to strengthen the hold that crooks and fakers gain upon the unions.
Communist leadership of the union means leadership by the most advanced working class section, the one which is most responsive to the true interests of the rank and file. That is always correct. But it must be established on the broadest possible basis with the constant active collaboration of all honest Left wing and progressive elements. Particularly must it be based on correct policies and that is not yet the case in the National Miners Union.
The strike, and what preceded it, is the best illustration of this contention. The lack of thorough strike preparations and concentration on outstanding strike issues failed to bring out the most decisive section in the southern part of the field. The campaign of artificial issues raised against Watt, the national president ending in his arbitrary removal, initiated by the Party leadership, almost split off and certainly discouraged the whole Staunton section. The representatives from that sub-district at the last N.M.U. Belleville district convention saw in that campaign only the worst features of machine rule. They objected, but to no avail, and thus it it became a campaign against them. Hence this section, which had been among the best supporters and the best fighters before, this time practically failed to respond.
 
Foster on Strike Strategy!
On the question of preparation for strikes of unorganized workers (which is the case in this instance) Wm.Z. Foster says in his pamphlet Strike Strategy:
”Less and less can the strike strategist depend upon the spontaneity of the masses to bring them into revolt against their exploiters, more and more he has to figure on substantial preliminary organization, conceived planfully and carried through almost like military strategy. Within the past fifteen years American employers have become, very able and skillful in checking spontaneous mass-revolts amongst their workers. To this end they have developed a whole arsenal of weapons which may be summed up under the general heads of concessions, of duplicity and terrorism”.
And further:
“In impending strikes of unorganized workers, conservative labor leaders habitually overestimate the importance of organization and underestimate the spontaneity of the workers. They smother the fighting spirit of the workers by a dry-as-dust campaign for excessive organization. On the other hand, a common tendency of left wing leaders is to underestimate the necessity for a certain degree of preliminary organization and to depend too much on the spontaneity of the workers. The result is abortive strikes. The history of the I.W.W. is full of such mistakes.” (My Emphasis. – AS)
This is as true now as when it was written, and it is precisely the policy which was not followed by the Communist Party leadership in the Illinois miners strike. For the miners it becomes essential to fight to correct such mistakes.
 
Fishwick’s “Progressivism”
The immediate result of the break-up of this strike will be a strengthening of the Lewis-Fishwick-Farrington control of the situation. That, however, can only be a temporary setback, because of the role played by this gentry itself. The Fishwick-Farrington combination in its present fight for the spoils with the Lewis machine is cunningly taking on a somewhat “progressive” veneer, hoping thereby to fool the miners into support for them. They have received favorable publicity by the Socialist Party, which since its New York election “victory” has become more ready to align itself with the capitalists and their hangers-on. The leading Musteites have already publicly cast their lot with this combination thereby showing that tho their coming into being was decidedly a reflection of growing working class dissatisfaction even within the conservative unions, these self-styled progressive leaders are already beginning to merge with the reactionary bureaucrats.
To the Left wing this can mean only one thing and that is, simultaneously with the building of the National Miners Union, to organize Left wing sentiment within the old union so much more energetically. Taking advantage of this latest exposure of the strike-breaking activities of the Fishwick-Farrington combination a genuine Left wing and progressive movement should be built of all favorable elements within the U.M.W. of A., where is still has a mass organization. All opportunities should be utilized to more effectively propagate united struggle of all rank and file miners for their interests, and thus help prepare for the next open battle.
Persistent organization work of building the National Miners Union and preparation for future strikes is now particularly necessary, not merely sporadically in certain sections but as far as available forces and conditions permit on a national scale. But above all correct policies are essential as a guide to correct action.
 



The most momentous struggle on a mass scale, of the recent period in American labor history, is undoubtedly the battle of the mine fields.
Here was a crucial situation with splendid possibilities demanding a clear policy and decisive action. Despite the formidable obstacles in the way and our limited forces, the opportunities have never been better for building a new union of a militant type, for developing a broad left wing movement and with it extend the mass influence and leadership of the Workers (Communist) Party. The leadership of the Party in this fight increased manifold its responsibility to the miners in particular and to the working class in general.
How has this responsibility been met?
The Party leadership, represented by the Pepper-Lovestone group, has failed criminally, and still is failing to respond to the imperative needs of the situation and to take advantage of the existing possibilities. The extent of the failures of the past are already brought out in bold relief by subsequent events. The whole course of the Party leadership has been sharply characterized by its general unscrupulous adventurist conception which looks upon workers in mass struggles only as objects of manoeuvre, not as class brothers in arms. Coupled with that went its conservative, opportunist outlook, – the greatest menace to the vigor and vitality of such movements.
The left wing had practically disappeared as an organized expression at the beginning of the national strike, April 1927. But the miners went out determined to beat back the attacks and the fields were seething with undercurrents of revolt against the whole treacherous policy of the Lewis machine. A clear duty faced the Party – to step forward and organize the left wing for a militant struggle against the operators and the Lewis machine. This policy was proposed by the opposition but shamefully rejected. In May 1927 the opposition brought to the Political Committee a series of motions outlining various steps to build the left wing, to sharpen the clash with the bureaucrats and to culminate in an open conference. Likened to the “horrors” of “dual unionism” and even “armed insurrection” it was rejected by the majority. The proposals for organization of relief activities, while accepted on paper, never became effective until many months after.
 
The Miners’ Fighting Spirit
The evidences of the fighting readiness of the miners piled up everywhere, but not until February 1928 did the Party leadership give up its resistance and accept the policy of organizing a broad left wing, and urge the calling of the April first conference to engage in an open clash with the treacherous union bureaucracy. It was compelled by the sheer force of events. Yet the District Organizers in the two most important coal fields of the Pittsburgh and Chicago districts ingrained in the Pepper-Lovestone right wing ideology, still resisted the measures for an open conference and an open clash, to the last. However, the correctness of the policy, for which the opposition had fought so long and bitterly against the resistance of the Party leadership, was proven by the subsequent events. Once the first steps were taken they immediately let loose the tremendous latent forces which became openly crystallized in the gigantic “Save the Union” movement.
The continued resistance to a correct policy had cost the movement dearly and the consequences were serious. Firstly in failure to give any leadership at the early stage of the struggle; in lack of necessary organizational preparations; in failure to render more decisive assistance to and more effectively participate in the Pennsylvania and Ohio strike; and finally in lack of a sufficiently early and clear perspective. The left wing therefore stumbled along with, in many respects, inadequate preparations for the tempo of the movement. It thus could not carry the fight effectively to the unorganized fields until the Pennsylvania and Ohio strike became almost exhausted. When forced to act quickly for the April 16 strike of the unorganized fields, the preparatory organizational measures were entirely lacking. To this must be added the ferocious persecution and terror against the movement by the Lewis machine, the operators and the state authorities.
The Party leadership did not seem able to grasp a full perspective of an open split with the bureaucrats and the building of a new union. While it acquiesced it never changed its conservative outlook. Even at the time of the convention call leading Pittsburgh comrades, steeped in this never changing outlook, opposed the calling for a new union.
The Pepper-Lovestone Party leadership gave its major attention to gaining factional positions in the new union to the detriment of its future success. Utterly unfit to lead a serious battle in the class struggle, incapable of grappling with its real problems, so often bound up in small sordid details, this group turned its attention to securing factional control which resulted in seriously narrowing the leadership of the new unions. Highly qualified and experienced comrades, already accepted as leaders by the miners’ movement, were deliberately isolated for no other reason than factional group interests.
 
Gambling with the Workers’ Interests
In this real test of mass struggle the Party leadership has shown its impotency and unscrupulous gambling with workers’ interests. Even toward the Party union fraction a factional policy was maintained throughout. Following a correct attitude the Party leadership would have, decided upon a general line of policy for the fraction to carry out in the convention. In addition it would have elected a qualified and experienced C.E.C. committee to constantly advise with the fraction. Such, however, was by no means the case. On the contrary, the Pepper-Lovestone leadership appointed a committee with a majority of its faction agents entirely devoid of experience and authority in trade union work. This committee assumed complete authority for all decisions, made all appointments for steering committee and candidates for office. Its decisions were binding, the members of the fraction merely taking orders and having no part whatever in making decisions.
The danger of such procedure can very well be visualized. First, it gives no opportunity to really develop the leadership of the fraction within the union. Secondly, it fails to fully utilize the experience of the comrades, the fraction members, who have been engaged in the actual battle. Thirdly, and most important of all, it destroys any basis for real Party democracy which can be founded only on the most intimate contact between higher bodies and the rank and file members, utilize the experiences and mass contact of the latter through joint deliberations and give them full opportunity for expression and criticism as the best guarantee for maintaining correct policies. This narrow factional line has not been relinquished to this date.
Such is the record of gambling with a mighty left wing struggle and a movement of splendid potentialities. The Party and the miners’ movement have paid dearly for it. The crest of the first mighty wave has passed. The battle is now less dramatic but demands tenacious, painstaking work in building of the new union, so it may begin to assume leadership in local struggles for better conditions for the miners. The present Party leadership evinces no interest whatever and gives no support at all. While looking for objects for manoeuvres it has no faith in the mass struggles of the workers. Its attitude is largely determined by its own petty-bourgeois social background and concept. It has been and still is on trial before the American proletariat, particularly as expressed in this struggle. Only a correct revolutionary policy can stand this judgment.
The National Miners Union is based squarely upon recognition of the principles of the class struggle, the only possible orientation for a militant union in the present imperialist era. The Party leadership in its present “self-criticism” is making much ado about the “failure” of some of the comrades, including the writer, to adopt the wording “class struggle” for the constitution preamble. But one of my proposals for constitution submitted to the committee in charge, and contained in Minutes of Aug. 28, reads: “The declaration of principle shall be unequivocally based upon recognition of the class struggle.”
The National Miners Union has been born out of the struggle in the coal fields. The operators are as determined as ever upon their strategy to smash all working class organization. In solid alliance with them are the fakers of the old union machine and the governmental institutions of court injunctions, jailings and police terror. Great are thus the forces opposing the new union. The last few years have been marked by the continuous surrender and betrayal policy of the old union bureaucracy. To effect the change from surrender to militant struggle and real organization is the great task of the National Miners Union. To accomplish this it must have the full support of the left wing everywhere and that support must be mobilized by the Party.
 
The New Union Must Lead Struggles
While a beginning has been made and a splendid record set by the left wing this union cannot grow in a vacuum of secret existence or semi-legality. It must step out and lead the struggles of the miners. With the proper Party support and active preparations conditions are favorable for a campaign of organization in the unorganized fields of West Virginia, Pennsylvania and Kentucky. Conditions are favorable for its leadership in re-establishing union activities and union conditions in the former strike area of Pennsylvania and Ohio. Further struggles are impending in the Anthracite. The rank and file of Illinois and Indiana have shown great discontent and rebellion against the company union conditions imposed by the fakers who still maintain job control. They are looking toward the National Miners Union to give leadership. It must and can become a real force in the struggle for emancipation of the workers from capitalist exploitation.
This is an imperative task of the Party for which the objective possibilities are favorable. The absolute prerequisites for success in this task are a decisive change in the attitude of the Party and a reorganization of its leadership which will ruthlessly throw aside the adventurist faction mongers.
Mistakes can be corrected only when properly recognized and fully understood. This becomes a much more important maxim when viewing the attitude of the Party leadership towards the orientation upon a general policy of building new unions of the unorganized working masses. An orientation demanding ever more concrete action with the further completion of the general rationalization process of American capitalism. One recalls the timely criticism of Comrade Lozovsky last Spring, castigating our failure to see these unorganized masses, a scathing indictment of the official Party policy of manoeuvring on top while ignoring the militant mass potentialities. This was met with stubborn resistance from the C.E.C. majority; also Comrade Foster made this mistake. But not content with this the C.E.C. majority by its vote at the May plenum actually rejected the thesis of the R.I.L.U. World Congress demanding an orientation by our Party toward building of new unions of the unorganized masses. In reply to this Comrade Cannon wrote in the July Communist on the Trade Union Question:
“The obstacles in the path of organizing the workers in the basic industries of America are truly enormous, and the present forces at our disposal are small. There is no need to minimize the difficulties, they will multiply and confront us at every turn. The state power of capitalism will obstruct the new union movement with the fiercest persecution; and the workers will soon find that they are not done with the treacheries of the labor fakers when they seek to form new unions.
“Between the decision to organize the unorganized masses and the actual formation and consolidation of new unions lies a long and stony road. But history has laid out that task for the Communist Party and the left wing, and we must begin the work in earnest.”
This line was correct then and remains correct today.
 



Once again the corrupt officials in control of the United Mine Workers of America, Illinois District, have succeeded, through a packed convention, to squelch the opposition and further secure their domination of affairs for the next immediate period. While this union, due to the terrific attacks by the coal operators and treasonable conduct of its policies, has been cracked wide open and in many districts completely destroyed, in Illinois it still remains in firm control of all jobs functioning on a semi-company union, basis.
 
The Weak Opposition
This convention (still in session at the time of this writing) showed the same manifestations as those of previous years. Despite the many expulsions of left wingers which have taken place and the outright packing with delegates representing nobody, there was considerable opposition to the bureaucrats, but it was entirely unorganized and even without a unified policy. So far its main fire has been directed against the corrupt practices of representation of blue sky locals, the election steals by the Fishwick machine last November, the union investment of $150,000 in a West Virginia “open shop” mine and the falsification of last year’s referendum vote on the wage cut agreement. On all of these issues the machine steam roller carried the day increasing its majority as it went along.
The Illinois agreement, signed by the officials last summer, is to remain in force until 1932. It contained a twenty per cent wage cut, practically abolished the tonnage basis on machine mining, and established what amounts to an arbitration commission to which the operators can appeal for further reduced day rates.
By a majority of 3 to 1 the rank and file defeated this agreement in referendum vote, but nevertheless it was declared carried. The result has been a further rapid mechanization of mining with a terrific speed-up system, a general reduction of the standard of living and increased unemployment. Although there are 12,000 less miners, production in 1928 increased by 340,000 tons over the previous year but with the average number of days worked by the miners reduced from 172 to 114.
 
The Status of the Left Wing
In return for this agreement the operators consented to retain the check-off system, the main instrument through which the control of employment is exercized. Thus the United Mine Workers and the Fishwick machine of officialdom, with all its filthy corruption, holds full sway in the Illinois coal fields. The National Miners Union, which today represents the left wing forces, has not yet been able to break or make an appreciable dent in this strangle hold. Nor has it by far shown sufficient energy in undertaking this task, despite the fact that conditions for growing revolt of the rank and file against the intolerable situation are not lessening but rather increasing,
While the whole leading and active stratum of the left wing has been expelled from the old union, new opposition has developed with great possibilities of growth, but it is as yet entirely unorganized and without a positive program.
Wherever isolated activities have been carried on for the organization of the National Miners Union the response by the rank and file has not been lacking, as evidenced by the recent activities in the South, in Franklin and Saline Counties. Naturally the function of locals organized is primarily the one of progressive groups within the old union fighting for the program of the new. It cannot be otherwise so long as the job control of the U.M.W. of A. has not been broken.
 
The Task at Present
Moreover it becomes necessary for the left wing coal miners, in view of the existing conditions – the absolute job control exercized by the Fishwick machine – to devise the most practical form of carrying on this parallel work of organizing the National Miners Union and simultaneously utilizing all these forces in an organized manner and with a unified policy to again take up and intensify the fight for the militant program within the old union. There is no other solution to the problem of replacing the old semi-company union filled with corruption to the point of saturation.
This will require that these locals of the new union, while compelled to a degree to hide their identity to avoid expulsion, must immediately take the leadership in the struggle to redress all the grievances of the miners growing out of the present conditions. These grievances are numerous. The pressure upon these workers is becoming ever more intense. Unemployment is growing, and the continual growth of opposition shows the readiness to fight. It is the duty of the left wing to put forward positive slogans for this struggle and build a solid organizational basis. In addition to the slogans already given of breaking the Lewis-Fishwick company union and building the National Miners Union, there should be such as fight against the speed-up system, division of work with abolition of the machine differentials, abolition of the check-off, cancelling of the company union agreement and the inauguration of the shorter work day (six hour day).
With the correct tactics and energetic organization work the possibilities for growing success in the Illinois coal fields are good.
 



Ever more the strike movements give evidence of working class exasperation from deep seated grievances, of rebellion against the increased class pressure in industry. They foreshadow the trend of the American workers toward a more definite class position and toward a class movement. They indicate the great possibilities becoming available for militant unionism.
 
The Textile Workers
Naturally the struggles of the workers in the Southern territory command the major attention. A newly developed industrial proletariat in rebellion against the rapidly established capitalist trustified industry, with its intense exploitation, is of the greatest significance. Not only are the unorganized textile workers, engaging in this revolt, but even members of such conservative craft unions as the streetcarmen of New Orleans go into action against the employers with organization sentiment ripening amongst the workers everywhere in these states.
The shameful sell-out by the officials of the United Textile Workers Union of the strikers of Elizabethton, Tenn., is not the end there. These workers will again take up the fight. In the other little Southern mill towns spontaneous strikes of the unorganized workers occur almost continually. The most militant fight has unquestionably been made by the Gastonia workers under the leadership of the National Textile Workers Union. But for the time being the mill barons have succeeded through the celebrated murder frame-up tactics of American capitalism in putting the movement on the defensive. But the misery of the workers increases their deep-rooted discontent grows and it will be a matter only of time when they will again be able to resume the offensive. With united support of the American working class that day will arrive so much sooner.
It is unquestionably due to this aggressive, militant struggle led by the Communists at Gastonia, combined with the ruthless pressure upon the workers by the mill bosses that the officials of the United Textile Workers have decided to exploit the growing union sentiment in its announced intention to carry on an organization campaign throughout the Southern states. But their actual efforts, as already demonstrated in the Elizabethton betrayal, will be to lead this sentiment into channels safe for capitalism.
 
On the Railroads
Among the railroad workers growing militancy has been demonstrated of recent date in determined rank and file votes for strike to adjust their grievances. Held back however, by conservative craft prejudices and class collaboration practices nothing has so far gone beyond the usual procedure of arbitration. Yet the demand made by the railroad brotherhoods for the six hour day can only be ascribed to the increasing pressure of the rank and file upon the officialdom. Reasons for this pressure can easily be found in the fact that during the last eight years the combined roads of the country have cut their working force by 180,000 men; that in 1928 the total payroll was 90 million dollars below that of 1927 with an increase in profits of 108 million dollars; in the further fact of the corresponding heavy increase of speed-up, loss of union conditions, governmental action to defeat the workers and the general failure of the union leadership.
In the general working class condition the picture is a similar one, however, with the exploitation of the large masses of unskilled workers being much more intense. The U.S. department of labor reports that in 1928 there were fewer factory jobs than in any previous year since 1921 while payroll totals reached the lowest level since 1924. The reduction in the employment average since 1923, shown by the department, represent loss of jobs to more than 1,000,000 workers.
 
Building and Automobiles
Building activities according to the Commercial and Financial Chronicle in a report, covering 354 of the largest cities shows a decline for 1928 compared to 1925 of $878,477,171 or about 20 percent. In addition the workers are faced with a rapid mechanization of the industry with machinery replacing labor and hand-tools, all of the material used being entirely finished in the factories mostly under non-union conditions. Thus even the privileged position of these skilled workers divided by craft prejudices, craft union barriers and reactionary corrupt leadership is being threatened, compelling an orientation towards new methods and forms of struggle.
It is understandable that the capitalist institutions view with considerable concern the “uncertain” situation in the automobile industry. In Detroit the per capita earnings of the auto workers decreased 8.5 per cent during 1928. Men over 45 years of age can find no jobs, unemployment is growing, layoffs and hiring at lower wages has become routine. Speedup is constantly increasing; among the workers discontent is spreading and is manifested in repeated strikes and growing sentiment for organization. In the latest report of the Student Industrial Commission we find a summary of these conditions as follows:
“With all these shop strikes before us; with all this boiling indignation bursting on our ears; with men in discontented mobs gathering before factory employment offices, we see no other alternative than unionism. Human nature will stand just so much, then it breaks over the dams and overflows. One day this is going to happen in Detroit.”
With the same tempo of these developments the trade union bureaucrats in general are moving constantly in the opposite direction, further to the right. They are proceeding to more bitter denunciations of militant tactics and of the Communists, increasing their betrayals and strengthening the fortifications of the capitalist system. Just now when the Gastonia strike leaders are facing framed up murder charges and execution the A.F. of L. Executive Council is again broadcasting its “warnings” to the affiliated unions not to give any money to “such Communistic organizations” as the I.L.D., the W.I.R. and the National Textile Workers Union, condemning with the Communists also the “Conference for Progressive Labor Action”. This becomes so much more brazenly reactionary in view of the fact that the Southern struggles involve not merely the right to strike under Communist leadership but the right of any and all strikes, of any and all workers organization.
But it is not merely the budding Southern industrial oligarchy which pursues such savage methods of repression against its unorganized workers. At the almost opposite end of the pole, among the craft conservative building trades workers, we saw this Spring the threat of a lockout by the employers against the whole of the building trades of New York, directed mainly against their struggle for the five day week, a threat which is sure to be renewed at a more “opportune” time.
 
The Ripening Movement
Thus the objective possibilities, the response to which can be noted both among the unorganized masses of workers as well as those within the trade unions, are slowly ripening for the building of a class movement of the American workers. The surest signs appear in the moves of the heavily exploited section of the workers in the basic industries. To unite these beginning struggles and give them organized expression is the particular task of the left wing. There is no other force able to lead and inaugurate the movement for building of new unions of the unorganized workers and to crash through the barriers of craft conservatism and capitalist ideology among the masses in the unions, winning them for class policies. To us this is axiomatic. To the working class, however, it must be proven and false steps will lead to isolation instead of broadening and increasing of the left influence.
The present policies pursued by the Party and the T.U.E.L. represent such false steps. The contradictions of these policies are already appearing. Thus the force of events has already compelled a certain modification of the original policy for the “Cleveland Unity Congress” away from the building of a center in the sense of a new trade union federation and more toward the correct attitude of building a left center as an organizing instrument. But they have not yet changed the “new line”.
 
The “New Line” and Leninism
This “new line”, non-Marxian and non-Leninist in conception, leads to splitting and the isolation of the small left wing and its followers as is now actually the result where the left wing appears today. Refusal to “draw these masses, now just awakening to the need for organization and struggle, into the A.F. of L.” Refusal to “try to affiliate them collectively through the new unions to the A.F. of L.”, separating the left wing from the now appearing progressive movement which, no matter how vacillating and spineless the leaders, nevertheless represents pressure from below as well as commands a following. In reality the “new line” means to withdraw entirely from the existing unions despite all protestations to the contrary.
With the masses awakening, the role of the existing unions having a mass basis will be of so much more importance no matter how reactionary their leadership. To direct this awakening toward the building of a class movement the left wing must work among the masses everywhere and closely co-ordinate its work within the old unions with that among the unorganized workers. Only when going hand in hand can it succeed.
Moreover, only through a broad united front organized with all forces ready to work toward a class movement – for militant unionism, exposing and fighting bitterly all self-seeking phrase-mongering aspirants to leadership, can the left wing become a real factor and prove its worth and capacity for leadership to the. masses. But this is the opposite of the present Stalinist “new line” – this is the Leninist line.
 



The Conference for Progressive Labor Action (Muste Group) has emerged as a definite trade union opposition with an elaborate program and a proposed membership basis of groups and individuals.
The program of the C.P.L.A. contains points worth noting, as for instance:


Demands for social insurance.
 
To assist in organization of industrial unions in basic industries with aggressive fight on the picket lie and against the power of the courts to issue injunctions and their attempts to cripple unionism.
 
To encourage working class education.
 
To help establish farmer and labor co-operatives.
 
To urge independent labor party action.
 
Support of the struggle for the six hour day.
 
Opposition to expulsions from trade unions for political beliefs.
 
To urge the workers to demand the wealth they create and to strike for their right as of old.


Unquestionably this program and its militant terminology to a large extent reflects the pressure of genuine left wing policies and activities of the past. It is a progressive program, most of its points being identical with those sponsored by the T.U.E.L. This new movement is a direct outgrowth of the increasing class pressure upon the workers in trustified industry and is one expression of working class radicalization. The almost complete disappearance of an organized left wing has facilitated the emergence of the C.P.L.A. at this time. These are facts of the greatest significance. They demand attention and a correct attitude from the Communists.
In industry everywhere the pressure upon the workers is increasing. More speed-up, more machinery, more uncertainty of employment. The present faint gropings of the workers for a way out will, in the course of its natural process, turn into more definite channels. The unorganized, unskilled and semi-skilled workers in the basic industries, who here and there begin to stir, are becoming ready material for organization. Those in the unions will be compelled to seek new policies, new methods, which will go beyond the obsolete craft barriers and challenge reaction.
 
New Spirit in Old Unions
Simultaneously the reactionary trade union leadership is marching ever more into the open as the agents of capitalism. In union administration and strategy the policy of the employers is becoming more dominant. Actually to prevent organization of the unorganized is now the main concern of these flunkeys. Yet to conclude that the A.F. of L. and kindred unions are passing out of existence would be entirely wrong; or even to deny the possibility of a certain growth. The lower functionaries who are closer to the rank and file and more subject to its pressure will feel themselves compelled to move for expansion. The Chicago Federation of Labor is a case in point.
Recently by resolution a committee was established to carry on organization to further increase the union ranks. While this committee is composed of paid officials from the affiliated local unions bringing with them all the conservative craft prejudices, the action itself, is nevertheless a response to pressure of conditions. Lately also on several occasions almost unanimous sentiment for the building of a labor party and discarding the A.F. of L. time worn political policy has been voiced at meetings in quite militant terms.
Our limited experiences have already quite clearly established the fact that the building of new unions in basic industries is conditioned upon the waging of the most militant struggle and facing the most ferocious persecutions. This is vividly brought out in the Southern textile mills. Would it then be reasonable to expect that the workers who become ready for organization will in mass numbers entirely discard the existing unions which have a tradition behind them? Hardly. On the Pennsylvania railroad, for instance, the unions are now – in agreement with the bosses – organizing the shop crafts.
Surely in the present objective conditions there are many favorable possibilities for the growth and development of a broad progressive movement. To deny this is tantamount to denying the present beginning of radicalization of the workers, which, although not yet of large ramifications, will ever more express itself both among the unorganized workers in basic industry and among those in the trade unions. On the whole, the ideology of the American workers is yet the one inculcated by capitalism. To expect that they should at once tear themselves loose from all capitalist influences and completely accept communist leadership will be a mere expectation having no foundation in facts. To pursue a policy based on the supposition that these working masses are waiting for the Communists to assume the direct lead – which the Party endeavors to establish by mechanical measures – without traveling the road of intermediary steps, can only lead to disaster and isolation.
 
Beginning of Revolt
The signs indicating the present trend of the workers, even including the formation of the C.P.L.A., show the beginning of revolt against the growing reaction of the officialdom. A definite class ideology by no means exists as yet. Our task is still the one of struggling for a class movement of the American workers. This of course presupposes the compact organization of a left wing capable of developing and broad[en]ing its influence in the course of struggle, exposing the reformists aspiring to leadership and prov[words missing] methods of the left wing.
The C.P.L.A. in its organizing conference, made an attack upon the Communists. This was done partly to preserve their own appearance of respectability, but mainly to solidify the influence of their own reformist position. To the workers, however, the one thing must remain decisive that any group proposing to organize a progressive movement to the exclusion of the Communists will neither be able nor have the slightest intention of actually leading the workers in revolt against the reactionary policies of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, much less against American imperialism. Their aim is, rather, to keep all such developing movements within “safe, legal” channels and prevent the actual and necessary revolt.
 
Left Wing Tactics
Yet it would be entirely to narrow and un-Marxian a view to identify the progressive movement which this period will develop merely by these aspiring leaders, even though they may be the very ones instrumental in unloosing the forces of great potentialities. Such is the destiny of the new progressive movement: it must either turn into more definite, more left, more revolutionary channels and discard its reformist leaders or become merely a shield for reaction and disappear in a merger with it.
The official attitude so far taken by the “new trade union line” of the Party in refusing to recognize the forces these elements represent and the coming movement they express in its first stage, in simply lumping them all with the A.F. of L. bureaucrats in one hodge podge, has nothing to do with Communist tactics. The present moment calls for the united front tactic with an independent policy and merciless exposure of the reformists, fakers and betrayers; a constant pressure to make the present grandiosely proclaimed program a program of realities, carried into life in the movement; constant pressure for more definite left wing and revolutionary policies. In this process the reformist leaders will be discarded and the left wing will prove its worth as the only force able to bring these policies to their correct conclusion.
 



Following closely upon the heels of the agreement reached by the imperialist powers on the reparations question the wily old diplomat Briand formally launched his slogan for the United States of Europe. Although presented only in a very general form at the last League of Nations sessions, as an indication of certain imperialist trends it is significant.
In the first place it is one expression of strivings toward an anti-American front of the European debtor nations. It is an endeavor to resist the efforts of the United States to put the European powers on an ever more limited ration, which forms one of the greatest sources for coming imperialist conflicts and proletarian revolutions. In another aspect the slogan represents the efforts for greater consolidation of the European bourgeoisie against its working class and against the Soviet Union. Hence the idea is hailed by the “socialist” Vorwaerts of Berlin as a “final and lasting peace guarantee”.
 
Briand’s Proposal
Preceding Briand’s utterances, European capitalists at the congress of the International Chamber of Commerce, held at Amsterdam this Summer, alarmed at the menacing growth of American imperialism as an exploiter of all countries, advanced the idea of a United States of Europe; advanced as an immediate retaliation against the new American high protective tariff policy. But even before the emergence of American imperialism as a world dominant power, politicians of the German empire, during the early period of the war, came forward with such a program, or at least a union of the central European powers to be accomplished by the victory of the German arms. What they had in mind then, and what is proposed now is. a capitalist United States of Europe—to better resist the competition from American imperialist penetration. Now as then each main national capitalist grouping is ready for any unscrupulous maneuver to gain hegemony for itself.
The advancing of this slogan is but one additional proof of the further accentuation the growing conflict between American and European capitalism and particularly British capitalism. MacDonald’s so-called peace visit to Hoover fits in well. His part at present is to delude the masses to the real nature of this growing conflict. He, the fabian socialist democrat, representative of the British imperialists, personifies their most effective selection to accomplish this aim, as well as to maneuver under the mask of “peace and good will”, for the most favorable position for his masters in this conflict.
European imperialist diplomats, including those bearing the name social democrats, will perhaps increasingly indulge in discussions of the problem United States of Europe—whether an economic or a political union. Tendencies toward formation of European industrial syndicates already appeared some time ago, notably in the steel and chemical industries, always meeting the difficulties of national capitalist group interests from which none of these groups can dissociate themselves.
 
Trotsky and the Slogan
Comrade Trotsky has long ago, in discussing this problem, clearly emphasized the impossibility of a European union being accomplished on a capitalist basis; this even aside from what efforts the United States may make in seeking allies within the European nations. But he has also particularly stressed the immense significance of the role of the growing American imperialist penetration of Europe since the capitulation of the German Communist Party and the defeat of the German proletariat in 1923. He says,
“... the period of ‘stabilization’, ‘normalization’, and ‘pacification’ of Europe including ‘regeneration’ of social democracy, has developed in close material and ideological connection with the first steps of American intervention in European affairs.”
The rationalization of industry process initiated in America, with its colossal mergers and technical improvements of machinery, but based primarily on increased intensity of speed up of the workers, has been transplanted to Europe. One of the big tasks of the MacDonald “labor” government is to complete this process in England, including the labor policy of American imperialism with its so-called high standard of living. In reality, as the American workers have bitterly experienced, it is the policy of class collaboration, exterminating labor unions where that is possible, transforming those that persist in. remaining into company unions existing under schemes of compulsory arbitration; to outlaw strikes and class organizations and thus secure an increased share of profit out of the intensified speed-up piece work system.
The enormously growing American investments in European industries, with which goes increased political dominance, are rapidly acquiring control for American imperialism of these industries and becoming the means whereby the kings of American finance can take their payments for European debts, all in all, war debts and industrial debts, estimated at the staggering figure of $20,000,000,000. The American new high protective tariff policy is part of this scheme.
Incidentally this refutes the reactionary silly nonsense peddled by such types as Matthew Woll in boosting the high tariff policy to prevent dumping of “cheap European goods” on the American market as repayment of European debts. The main repayments will be exacted by American imperialism acquiring increased control of European industries with the profits of increased exploitation of European workers flowing into the coffers of Wall Street.
Very concrete manifestations of the [words missing]ing role played by American financial interests and American imperialism in general in European affairs are the Dawes plan of the past and the present Young plan worked out under the tutelage of Wall Street’s most powerful magnates. Again in the Kellogg Pact, the hypocritical talks of diplomats about outlawing war found the representatives of American imperialism rushing to the fore maneuvering for first place for themselves. What is more, thereby making clear that in the line-up for the coming war the United States is going to have a decisive word to say. This pact the Soviet Union, under the leadership of Stalin, signed, thereby helping to maintain the illusion of it being a peace pact.
The international bank for reparations settlement, proposed by the Young plan and being organized under the immediate direction of Wall Street, American imperialism has undoubtedly conceived of mainly as an additional instrument to further the process of acquiring control of European industries and with it control of the intensified exploitation of the European workers. Not only will it then show its colossal power in the further enslavement of the workers there but it will become the most gigantic reactionary force against the revolutionary struggles of the European workers.
 
The Soviet U.S. of Europe
These conditions must recall pointedly to the world proletarian movement and, to the Comintern in particular, the growing vitality, importance and correctness of the revolutionary slogan of a Soviet United States of Europe. Comrade Trotsky has clearly proved that he and Lenin were of one opinion as to the vitality and principle correctness of this slogan. In 1923 it was officially adopted by the Comintern. Later, under the Stalin leadership, the deductions from the basic conditions from which it derived its contents were artificially made into a series of false, slanderous accusations against the Bolshevik Opposition. It was naturally conceived of as one to find its practical application on the eve of the revolution and by no means to infer that the workers of one country must wait for, the others before beginning the revolution. Since the victory of the Russian workers there could, of course, be less reason for overlooking this elementary ABC. Now this slogan has been deleted and seemingly forgotten as so many other correct teachings and formulations of Lenin and Trotsky.
The Tenth Plenum of the Comintern, meeting under the conditions of rapidly growing American imperialist penetration of Europe and growing control of exploitation of the European workers could find time only for prognostications of second rate importance. But it failed entirely to give any consideration whatever to this important slogan which today retains its validity as much as ever.
In the words of Comrade Trotsky:
“... it is precisely the international strength of the United States and its unbridled expansion resulting from it, that compels it to include powder magazines throughout the world among the foundations of its structure ...”
The slogan of a Soviet United States of Europe is a correct slogan, not only as counter to that of Briand and the other European imperialist diplomats but as concrete direction for unified revolutionary action of the proletariat towards the only possible working class solution.
 



American bourgeois economists tend to regard with contempt the Marxist analysis of the objective laws of capitalist production. They look upon it as antiquated, or, at any rate, as not applicable to economic developments in the United States. But an affirmation of the contrary is clearly indicated in such denials. And life itself furnishes us with a complete verification of Marxism. The unresolved and growing contradictions of American capitalism, above all, have impelled these sycophants of the ruling class to shy away from a scientific analysis of the present economic system of exploitation and to limit themselves to the mere presentation and classification of data, quite after the fashion of the Linnean botany.
With rare exceptions the method of thought in this field remains empirical and, at its worst, descends to downright deception and falsification. Bourgeois thinkers tend to obscure or deny the realities of class society in order to justify the established prerogatives of bourgeois private property and- to disguise its predatory character. As a result economics, especially in the United States, has remained strangely outside the current of modern scientific advance.
 
Essence of Marxist Analysis
Yet the actual process of our economic development, precisely because of the high technological level so amply illustrated by the empiric data submitted, offers the fullest confirmation of the analysis made by Marx. Nowhere else has this been so clearly demonstrated. Economic developments in the United States have become capitalism’s most perfect expression.
The very heart of the analysis made by Marx is the labor theory of value which Marx elevated from its crude beginnings under classical bourgeois political economy to the high plane of scientific precision. Wages, prices, rent, interest and profits center around this basic regulator of capitalist economy. Only the socially necessary labor-time can serve as the exact determinant of exchange values. All commodities produced by labor have one property in common: they are exchanged on the basis of the quantity of human labor expended upon them. Under capitalism, labor power itself becomes a commodity which is bought on the market by the owners of the means of production. Like all other commodities it is evaluated according to the quantity of labor invested in it, i.e., invested in the means of subsistence necessary to maintain the laborer and his family, and to reproduce his labor power.
But labor power, says Marx, is “a commodity whose use value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value.” In the process of production labor creates new values over and above what it receives for its own maintenance. This is the portion which Marx calls surplus value.
Capitalist profits are realized surplus value. Profits are at the disposal of capitalism, through its appropriation of the products of labor, for conversion into capital; and profits furnish the basis for the further accumulation of capital.
 
Rise of US Economy
Despite the interruptions of recurrent crises during past decades, the rapidly mounting capitalization of appropriated surplus values in the United States made possible an advance in a uniformly upward curve to constantly new and higher peaks of prosperity for the capitalists and there was even a limited trickling down of benefits to various strata of the general population. This process permitted the rapid mechanization of old industries, the tapping of new raw material sources, the building of new industries and the industrialization of new regions, providing employment for an ever-growing labor force. In addition, surplus capital became available for investments abroad at a higher rate of profit American capitalism found exceptional opportunities for its development on a virgin continent. A constantly growing and stable internal market favored the most colossal expansion of its productive apparatus. Dwarfish and circumscribed individual manufacture was transformed into the mighty social means of production so well illustrated by the modern assembly line.
However, while the means of production and production itself had in essence become social, they remained subject to the individual (capitalist) form of appropriation.
What is this development if not a graphic illustration of the process as it was analyzed by Marx? With the incentive of ever greater profits as its motivating force, capitalism strives incessantly to reduce the cost of labor by enlarging the scale of production. New and more modern factories appear equipped with the latest in labor-saving machinery. Constant capital (equipment, materials) grows at a more rapid rate than variable capital (labor, wages). The organic composition of capital becomes higher. This is what has secured for capitalism in the United States an exceptionally high labor productivity.
 
Labor Productivity and Surplus Value
Thus from 1850 to 1929 it is estimated that labor productivity rose nearly 300 percent. More recent data, however, illustrate this upward curve more concretely. “Over the twelve years, 1929 to 1941, the nation’s output per man-hour increased 34%,” reports the US Department of Commerce. This is an average annual increase of 3 percent. And, according to data of the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, during the succeeding nine years, 1941 to 1950, labor productivity mounted another 34 percent, or as much as in the previous twelve years. This represents an average annual increase of almost 4 percent.
This growing labor productivity has permitted a constantly greater realization of surplus value. But it is notorious that statistical data made public by the major industrial concerns are not submitted in order to present a true picture of the status of capitalist production. Elements of political expediency have entered the realm of statistics as well as the realm of economic theory. Figures submitted tend to conceal more than they reveal. An accurate account of surplus value appropriated by the monopoly corporations might stimulate demands for higher taxes, or worse yet, demands for higher wages. Nevertheless, by using the method established by Lewis Corey in his important work, The Decline of American Capitalism – accepting surplus value as being roughly equal to total value of output less wages paid production workers, cost of raw materials and fuels, and depreciation of fixed capital – we arrive, by using source material contained in the Statistical Abstract of the United States, at the following approximation of the magnitude of surplus value realized by the manufacturers:
For the year 1914 surplus value amounted to $5.4 billions; for the year 1929, the height of the pre-depression boom, $18.7 billions; for 1933, the low point of the great depression, $7.7 billions. For 1947 (the latest year for which complete figures are available, no record being available for the highest point in more recent “boom” years) realized surplus value reached the amount of $41.8 billions!
Even allowing for the monetary depreciation during the period covered, the growing magnitude of surplus value is apparent. But the rate of surplus value, i.e., the ratio of surplus value to wages paid, records a decline over the same period, as could be expected. In 1914, the rate of surplus value was 142, in 1929 it was 172, in 1933 it was 157, and in 1947 it was 138.
 
Basis of Ruling Class Policy
But the capitalist appropriation of surplus value is the root source of exploitation and inequality. It is the axis around which the class struggle unfolds. American history in this respect also brings verification of the analysis made by Marx. Every page of our history registers the impact of the antagonisms of class society and the dynamics of class conflicts. Nowhere else have the contradictions engendered by the socialization of the productive process and its bourgeois appropriation reached such titanic proportions. The explosions which are bound to ensue from this relationship were delayed by the exceptional opportunities available for American capitalism only to erupt later with so much greater volcanic force.
Rising labor productivity accounts for the wealth accumulated by past generations. While this wealth is being recklessly dissipated by its bourgeois custodians, the mounting labor productivity still remains a seemingly inexhaustible source to draw on. It is the prime factor which has up to now made it possible for American capitalism to maintain a relatively high standard of living at home and to embark on a “Welfare State” policy. In addition it provided an available surplus for the injection of a blood transfusion into the sclerotic veins of the decaying capitalist system in the rest of the world.
For the bourgeois demagogues the foreign “aid” program became a new weapon in their arsenal of deception to disguise the predatory character of American capitalism. “The United States has no imperialist designs anywhere in the world,” they proclaim on every occasion. They want to make it appear that the motivating force for the export of capital is no longer to seek returns at a higher rate of profit by exploitation of cheap labor. Aid is furnished generously to capitalist competitors in the world market. Manifestly this would rule out any struggle for the redivision of the world. The great resources and the great accomplishments of American “free enterprise,” reinforced by its magnanimity, would appear to supersede the fundamental ideas of both Marx and Lenin.
 
Real Aim of US Imperialism
But the real situation presents an entirely different picture. American imperialism arrived too late on the stage of world history to find ready-made markets for investment and exploitation. Colonial peoples were already making it clear through large scale revolts that they would no longer accept the status of colonial exploitation. In addition, the capitalist economy was already suffering from acute paralysis and disintegration. This general crisis of the world market, the very decline and decay of the world capitalist system as a whole, compelled its American sector to utilize its resources of accumulated surplus capital, in the first instance, in an attempt to arrest this disintegration and paralysis. American capitalism found itself compelled to attempt to restore the shattered equilibrium of world economy. But it did so only to secure a beachhead in preparation for a more gigantic onslaught for complete and undisputed domination and exploitation of the whole world market – including, of course, the areas behind the so-called Iron Curtain. These are the real objectives of the Marshall Plan and its supplementary world rearmament plan. And no efforts have been spared to attempt to make the beneficiary nations completely subservient to the overall needs of this strategic objective.
All the essential imperialist characteristics of the North American colossus not only remain, but become constantly reinforced. Monopoly capitalism, resting on centralized command, has advanced to full maturity and supremacy. At this very moment the directors of the great industrial and financial corporations are extending their sway and their control over all the economic, political and military organs of the imperialist enterprise. And these pirates are firmly convinced that the overwhelming economic preponderance concentrated in their hands can find its full realization only through war. A normal, stable peacetime economy is now only a memory of the past.
The epoch of capitalist decline and decay is also the epoch of wars and revolutions. In face of the gigantic revolutionary upheavals in Asia the whole capitalist world economy is now being geared for war under American supervision and command. Economic, political and military strategic aims are integrated and merged into one single pattern. The struggle for capitalist survival rises to a higher stage. And this struggle manifests itself most acutely in the United States precisely because of the enormity of the contradictions generated by its highly developed productive apparatus.
 
The Insoluble Problem
Constant expansion is a prime necessity for the continuation of capitalist survival. But the American bourgeoisie faces this dilemma: the constant rise in labor productivity takes place in the face of a declining rate of capitalist expansion.
Approximately at the time of the first world war this rate of expansion began its downward curve. It was worldwide in character and it accounted in no small measure for the severity of the great depression. That depression was never really liquidated. It was overcome, however, by the great spurt in production linked to the requirements of World War II. Total industrial capacity expanded almost fifty percent; and, as already noted, the growing productivity of labor was further accelerated. Productive capacity was estimated in a survey made by the Twentieth Century Fund, Inc., to be two-thirds above that of the banner year of 1929. But during the war period, production for war accounted for as much as about forty-five percent of total output. This did not serve as an element of capital expansion capable of absorbing, on a permanent basis, a new and growing labor force – as had been the case during the earlier decades of economic advance in the United States. Nor did it provide for new industrialization anywhere else in the capitalist world.
The problem of finding new, adequate and lasting markets for the gigantic productive capacity thus built up remained unresolved. Moreover, there has been no significant capital expansion since. Consequently, after the immediate post-war period of catching up with accumulated consumers’ shortages the latent elements of crisis assumed a more malignant form.
 
Government Intervention: the “Welfare State”
Government intervention had to come to the rescue of private capitalism to generate and set into motion the forces that overcame the great depression of the Thirties, at first in the form of the New Deal program and later through the war drive. Private capitalism had exhausted entirely its progressive qualities. Government intervention has remained a necessity ever since. Moreover, the basic contradiction of capitalism – between social production and private (bourgeois) appropriation – has become so deep as to alter the entire course of the American economy.
After the end of the second world war, government intervention appeared in a new garb – the policy of the “Welfare State.” Farm subsidies were upheld; insurance to mortgage brokers intended to stimulate construction was extended; “social security” was expanded and benefits increased. Imposing plans for large-scale public works expenditures such as national superhighway construction, flood controls, water works, schools and hospitals, in order to maintain production at full capacity, received considerable attention. The US News and World Report said at that time: “Official planners estimate that a shelf of needed public works at this time could total as much as 127 billion dollars.” Government intervention set patterns for wage increases and appeared to encourage social welfare and pension plans, ostensibly in an effort to. maintain the level of purchasing power of the masses.
Labor made some actual gains; but these gains appear in inverse ratio to the promises emanating from the “Welfare State” policy. The more paltry the present gains the more glittering the promises for the future. Thus, President Truman forecast, in his Message to Congress in 1950, a trillion dollar economy by the year 2000, out of which the average American family could expect an annual income of about $12,000. Of course, the President made a slight miscalculation in assuming that the fruits of a trillion dollar economy would be distributed equally. The President went on, apparently in all seriousness, to forecast a gain of about $1,000 in income per family by 1955 which “would go far,” he said, toward “the complete elimination of poverty.” It only remains for the President to explain how his wage freeze of 1951 will speed up this process ...
The “Welfare State” policy embodies the most sanguine dreams of bourgeois liberals, middle class intellectuals, Social Democrats and labor bureaucrats alike – at least to the extent that such people are capable of sanguine dreams. It embodies their hope of a more balanced distribution of national income and a consequent softening of class contradictions. But these hopes fly in the face of reality.
 
Declining Rate of Consumption
The analysis made by Marx, that capitalism develops the forces of production more rapidly than the forces of consumption, was long ago proved to be correct. The latter are subject to different laws of development. Surplus value created by labor in the process of production represents nothing else but unpaid labor. This surplus value is appropriated by the owners of the means of production in the form of profits, and largely converted into capital. Only actual wages received by the workers serve as purchasing power to satisfy their needs as consumers. This disproportionate growth of constant capital relative to variable capital imposes limitations on the purchasing power. Wages always lag behind profits and wages always fall relative to output and profits. Consumer income rises at a slower rate than investment income. This measurably restricts the growth of the market. Even under the most favorable circumstances consumption of necessity lags behind production. Concretely this is expressed in the fact that in 1929, personal consumption expenditures were 75.9 percent of the gross national product, against 69.8 percent in 1948.
Ominous portents for American economy are implicit in these figures. The internal market, the primary sustaining factor of capitalist expansion in the past, is now definitely declining. Consumers of houses, automobiles and the variety of necessities of life can buy only a constantly diminishing part of all that the huge industrial capacity is equipped to produce. A declining rate of consuming ability correspondingly reduces the need for output of capital goods. The tendency toward excess industrial capacity in relation to the declining market, so pronounced during the Twenties and Thirties and measurably increased by the huge addition of plant during World War II, now appears as the basic critical factor. These are the elements of crisis of overproduction of capital so thoroughly analyzed by Marx.
“The last cause of all crises,” he said, “always remains the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses as compared to the tendency of capitalist production to develop the productive forces in such a way that only the absolute power of consumption of the entire society would be their limit.”
 
“Welfare State” Becomes “War State”
However, to develop such a power of consumption was not at all the real objective of the “Welfare State” policy. As early as 1948-49 elements of a crisis of overproduction reappeared. Only a stepping up of armament outlays, stimulated by the demands of the cold war, postponed a confrontation of the problem. The American bourgeoisie had no intention of submitting to the slightest curtailment of its lion’s share of the fruits of the economic system. It remained hostile to all of the ideas of the “Welfare State” policy, particularly its social features. Spokesmen for the bourgeoisie denounced it as “creeping socialism.”
So when the political crisis arising from the military disaster in Korea began to unfold, monopoly capitalism forced a complete turn of the rudder.
This did not invalidate the essence of government intervention – the effort to maintain full production. Only the character of the intervention changed quickly in response to the new turn. The grandiose projects and plans of the “Welfare State” were superseded by the program of armaments production. What else does this prove but the fact that in the final analysis relations of production are summed up in class relations?
The materialization of plans for public works projects and all the features of “creeping socialism” would tend to strengthen the labor movement and correspondingly weaken monopoly capitalism. An armaments economy, on the other hand, strengthens capitalism at labor’s expense. Monopoly capitalism has no objection to government intervention. The only question of serious account in its calculations is: for the benefit of which class does this intervention occur? Aside from exceptionally lush profits, the armaments economy aids the further concentration of wealth in the hands of the monopoly capitalists. Above all, it is the one important prerequisite for the imperialist aim of world conquest which can find its full realization only through war.
Truly the only alternatives offered by the capitalist system of production are now clearly posed as depression or war. This is the supreme expression of its decadence.
 
Class Nature of War Program
The program of armaments production, rising to ever higher levels of expenditures in utter disregard of the burdens imposed on present and future generations, may tend to postpone the actual manifestations of the crisis of overproduction. But it cannot provide the qualitative expansion necessary to sustain the future economic equilibrium. It produces no use-values that contribute to the wealth of the nation. On the contrary, the measures required to carry through this program must of necessity impose further limitations on the internal market. The basis will be laid for a crisis of more devastating proportions.
What the above-mentioned measures are to be the predatory monopoly capitalists have already decided. They are determined to exert new and greater pressure to increase not only the magnitude but also the rate of surplus value extracted from labor. An important part of labor’s purchasing power is needed to finance the armaments program of the bourgeoisie. A drastic reduction in the standard of living of the working class flows inevitably from this premise.
President Truman’s emergency proclamation paved the way for the many direct and indirect measures projected to reduce the standard of living, such as the wage-freeze, extension of the work-week without overtime pay, job-freeze, higher taxes and the austerity of scarcities in consumer goods. The armaments program itself implies further credit expansion by bank loans that create money out of thin air which flows into the economic structure unmatched by the products of labor which are destined for armaments – in other words, mounting inflation. By the realization of these measures the trick will have been performed. Labor’s share of the productive process will experience a further drop in relation to its total output. Conversely, what labor produces over and above what it receives for its own maintenance, will have been increased. The proportion of unpaid labor rises, the proportion of paid labor falls. The rate of surplus value is increased.
For the development of the armaments program the tasks of government intervention are thus clearly defined. The Marxist evaluation of the role and function of the state in relation to conflicting class interests within bourgeois society is fully confirmed. “The modern state,” said Engels, “whatever its form, is an essentially capitalist machine, the ideal collective body of all capitalists.” If anything needs to be added today, it is only the fact that direct control of the state by monopoly capitalism is now more complete.
 
Perspective of Social Struggles
The directors of the monopoly concerns, in their desperate choice of a war program, leave nothing to chance. From Charles F. Wilson, the head of General Electric, and now Mobilization Director, all the way down the line, they have taken complete charge of the execution of the program. They have done so, conscious of the fact that the struggle for capitalist survival permits less and less concessions on the home front.
All of these factors will combine to exert a terrific pressure on the working class that must inevitably explode in widespread resistance. On the other hand, the acute character of the present economic, political and military conjuncture will thrust the American bourgeoisie into attempts to deprive the working class of all possibility of initiative and independence of action by limiting, if not destroying, its concrete democratic rights. Militarization of the economy and the Garrison State with forced labor drafts, are already clearly indicated. The serious reverses inflicted on its position of world dominance will impel the American bourgeoisie toward greater ruthlessness at home. Above all, the increasing pressure of its own contradictions leaves the capitalist class no other way out than to attempt to defeat working class resistance and make the workers submit to all the consequences of the war program.
We can remain confident that the American workers will fight; they will fight most fiercely to maintain conditions and rights gained as a result of long and severe struggles. It is precisely the attempt to lower their standard of living and to curtail their democratic rights which becomes the greatest spur to resistance.
 
Role of Labor Bureaucracy in Economy
The realities of this whole situation lead to the conclusion that developments are now definitely reaching a turning point which will be reflected, above all, in sharpened class relations at home carrying the impact of deep repercussions within the trade union movement. America is entering a stage of profound social crisis.
The more or less stable equilibrium of class relations, which American capitalism has been able to maintain up to now, was sustained by its ability to give concessions to labor. We leave aside here the question of major interruptions, such as the great upheaval out of which the CIO emerged. During these interruptions the equilibrium was shattered for a time, only to reappear on a new basis, the capitalists having to deal with large and powerful new mass organizations. Unquestionably the role of the labor leadership became an important factor in this long continued relative stability. The union leadership grew fat and capitalist-minded on concessions gained and became transformed into a bureaucracy concerned above all with its own vested interests in capitalist enterprise! Exceptions to this rule occurred on the part of certain leaders only in regard to the degree and tempo of this transformation. On the whole the labor bureaucracy, in the course of its sway and development, assumed the characteristics of an intermediary historic force serving to impede the progress of labor toward consciousness of its class position. Objectively and subjectively it became a force of retrogression. It became a great burden of overhead expenses upon the working class. In the final analysis the existence of a labor bureaucracy is therefore itself an outgrowth of capitalist relations of production.
Because of their vested interest in the capitalist enterprise, the labor bureaucrats are incapable of an independent militant policy of class action. They accept consciously in theory and practice the policy of class collaboration. Only on this basis is it possible to understand their dull-witted, craven and mediocre character. Currently the policy of class collaboration is expressed on the highest political level in more or less complete reliance on the capitalist state to set the patterns of strictly limited wage increases, social welfare and pension plans in return for the bureaucracy’s support of all major bourgeois world enterprises such as the Marshall Plan, Truman Doctrine, Atlantic Pact, and rearmament. And it is this policy of class collaboration which has up to now constituted one of the greatest deterrents to working class political development.
 
Labor Crisis Reflects Crisis of System
The conclusion is inescapable: the capitalist onslaught at home will unleash the forces of class struggle which will set this deterrent aside. The ensuing struggles will strike terrific blows against the class collaboration policy at its most vulnerable point. As the working class moves forward in resistance against the onslaught on its standard of living and its democratic rights, the labor bureaucracy faces the alternative: to break its reliance upon and support of the bourgeois state, or to rupture relations with its own rank and file membership.
Whatever its decision may be, one thing remains assured: the social impact of this bureaucracy on the further development of class relations will henceforth be greatly impaired. Up to now it had drawn whatever strength and power it possessed essentially from the conditions that made it possible for capitalism to give concessions to labor. The dilemma now confronting this bureaucracy is thus a reflection of the crisis of capitalism itself. However, a power and strength stemming essentially from capitalist concessions can by no means be maintained, let alone reinforced, when the decline and decay of capitalism compels the rulers to turn toward more ruthless exploitation of labor and toward the destruction of labor’s democratic rights.
The projected capitalist onslaught poses the task before the organized workers of replacing this leadership with one which is thoroughly conscious of the interests of the working class and thinks and acts accordingly. The perspective before the labor movement does not provide a substantial or lasting middle ground. Only a new, class conscious leadership will provide the necessary corollary to the turning point in American economic development. The great quantitative growth of the labor movement will really begin to take on new, qualitative characteristics. The labor movement will rise to a new and higher stage. Every action of the government to reduce the working class standard of living and to curtail its democratic rights will of necessity intensify already deep-seated dissatisfaction with the American imperialist adventure in Korea, and growing distrust of the present foreign policy. Every move of the ruling class will provide evidence of the fact that the capitalist system has failed to justify its further existence. The ground will thus be prepared for the coming working class battle for control of the political state. That battle will be the beginning of the fundamental, socialist transformation of society the world over.



Since it came into power the British Labor Government has faced a series of crises. Emergency measures followed in rapid succession and mounting severity. This series of crises coincides with the increasing dissolution of the empire of which it is a part. Yet, what we have witnessed so far are merely the early ripples of the coming storm. Before long Britain will enter its inexorable social crisis.
With a Labor Government in power this may sound paradoxical. But it is not. The contradiction here is merely an apparent one, which disappears once the actual situation is properly understood. The real contradiction, inherent in the class system that still prevails in the British Isles do not disappear, however. They are not even mitigated by the Government’s crisis measures. On the contrary, they intensify and multiply.
The British workers know that they made certain gains by the strict government control and rationing of most necessities of life. For them it meant a more equitable distribution of scarce goods. But these gains arc now being negated by the basic policy pursued by the Labor Government. The latter must therefore be the starting point for any serious analysis of present day developments in England. The key to this basic policy is the nationalization program.
Beginning with the House of Commons act of October 1945, the Bank of England became national property. Thereafter followed the acts to nationalize cable and wireless communications, gas and electric utilities, and certain, basic industries such as coal and transportation.
 
Pattern of Nationalizations
The pattern of these nationalization acts was uniform both in regards to transfer of ownership and control of operations. In each case the former owners were royally compensated. The transactions were consummated in a manner that befits His Majesty’s Government. The securities of the former owners were exchanged for government bonds at equal face value. For the coal mines the total compensation amounts to about 600 million dollars. In transporati9n the compensation runs, into about 4 billion dollars for the railroads alone. These government bonds carry interest of from 2½ to 3 percent. On the whole this will work, out to assure the bond-holders of the same returns on their investments as before. Henceforth, however, they will collect their dividends from the Royal Exchequer, and without any risks attached.
No change is contemplated in the operation and control of the nationalized industries except that of greater efficiency and a more complete integration with the prevailing economic system as a whole. And, as could be expected, this precludes any suggestion of workers’ control of production. In fact, the Boards and Commissions set up to run the nationalized industries are staffed by the former owners and their associates. While some trade union bureaucrats are added in an effort toward “partnership” of capital and labor, the business executives remain the decisive factor. Thus, even within the nationalized sector of industry, the power of the bourgeoisie remains virtually unimpaired
It should be noted that the industries embraced in the nationalization program are not only those most essential to the post-war economic recovery. They are also those which have suffered the greatest ruination from the protracted capitalist decline and decay. Their profits also declined. In fact, these arc the very industries in which the utter inability of private capitalist economic recovery, and the utter incapacity of private capitalist management, has been the most glaringly demonstrated. They represent the weak links in the ailing economic structure which can no longer be restored by private capital. Hence the state intervenes to make the necessary investments to sustain production and the accumulation of capital.
 
Reactionary Aims
Such intervention has for its aim the mitigation of the ever sharpening conflict between the already established newer collective forms of production and the older property relations of individual ownership and individual appropriation. In place of the personal owner there appears the impersonal state apparatus. It assumes the obligation of converting the profits of surplus value produced by the workers into compensation for the former owners. The latter have no social function other than that of pocketing dividends, clipping coupons, and gambling on the stock exchange.
The immediate objective of this state intervention is to rationalize these particular industries so that they may provide fuel, power, transportation, etc., more efficiently and more economically for the capitalist system as a whole. Thus, in its basic essential, the nationalization program represents an effort to streamline the British capitalist economic structure.
During the period of rising capitalism state intervention of this character, state ownership of industries or utilities had certain progressive features. Now, in its decay stage, such intervention has become wholly reactionary. It tends to aid monopoly capitalism; and it serves the purposes only of maintaining capitalist relations of production as a whole.
Whatever planning takes place under this set-up occurs solely in the sense of aiding capitalist industry. It proceeds exclusively within the limits and purposes of capitalism. Naturally this precludes unified planning. A genuine planned economy is possible only after the working class has taken power and replaced the old relations of production with new relations that permit the socialisation of all economic activity.
In other words, a genuine program of socialism would have to proceed from the nationalization of all property in the basic means of production. It would have to aim for the establishment of workers’ control of production. What is now being carried into life in England is not such a program. It is rather an experiment in stale capitalism. Viewed from its long range perspective the Labor Government’s nationalization policy represents an effort to arrest the process of crises and disintegration of the old order: an attempt to repair its decay and achieve a measure of stabilization in order to prevent the emergence of real socialism. It is the direct opposite of a program of transition to socialism. Moreover, in the present day relationship of class forces, it becomes a means whereby capitalism retains power.
 
Basic Class Relations Bolstered
Engels laid considerable emphasis on conclusions reached already in his time that conversion into state property does not do away with the capitalistic nature of the productive forces:
“The modern state,” he said, “no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more, does it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage workers – proletarians. The capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head.”
Relations of property and production are, of course, decisive in modern society. But they are decisive only within the totality of developments, and not merely insofar as concerns certain sectors of economy. Essentially, therefore, this very limited and partial nationalization does not represent a change in the social nature of the country. Social relations remain as they were. And, what is more important, the conditions out of which the class struggle arises remain basically unchanged.
Does the modern state, described by Engels, include the present British variant presided over by the Labor Government? It most certainly does.
In general the nature of the state derives from its structure, which is determined by the production relations on which it is based. A mere change of cabinet members does not change the nature of the state. Labor members have taken the places formerly occupied by Tories. But throughout the state apparatus, the governmental departments, the diplomatic corps, the judiciary, the police and military forces, the personnel has remained essentially as before. Nothing is altered qualitatively. Governmental policy is formulated, executed and motivated on the same basic considerations as before. Foreign policy remains imperialistic, in conformity with internal capitalist needs.
Verification comes from no less an authentic source than the Conservative Party. Its recently adopted Industrial Charter declares in favor of retaining practically all of the enacted nationalization measures. But these Tories emphatically reject any state intervention beyond this. They oppose nationalization of steel. That is still a very profitable industry. By the same token their reason for supporting the present status becomes obvious. The Tories have been assured that the nationalization measures, so far, imply no threat to the power of the bourgeoisie.
 
Increased Exploitation
Once the role and position of the Labor Government is clearly understood its attitude to the working class should not cause any surprise. That attitude flows entirely from the position it occupies and from the role it has accepted. The interests of the working class are being subordinated completely to the efforts for capitalist recovery. Not only that, but the burden of the whole economic breakdown and crisis is placed entirely on the shoulders of the workers. The government’s labor policy is keyed to its persistent demand for increased production. Wage policy is tied directly to labor productivity in callous disregard of the fact that the latter is determined primarily by technological development. Here the government’s maxim is as cruel as it is simple: wage increases only on the basis of a proportional increase in production. Working hours are similarly tied to the interest of capitalist production. Shortly after its inauguration the government resisted fiercely the strike of the London haulage workers for a reduction of the work week from 44 hours to 40 hours. From the Yorkshire miners it demanded last summer the performance of an extra “stint” – cutting two extra feet of coal daily. The government now demands an increase in working hours in order to step-up production. Similarly measures are being worked out to reimpose wartime controls over the engagement of labor.
Within the nationalized industries, saddled with a crippling burden of exorbitant compensation and expensive management set-ups, the revenues must come out of surplus value produced by the workers. There is no other source from which they can be obtained. To the workers this means more speed-up, greater intensity of exploitation under more severe austerity, and a generally reduced standard of living.
The crucial question of which class benefits from the nationalizations is here made singularly clear. It shows in whose interest the Labor Government rules. Yet insult is heaped upon injury. Cynically mocking its own class origin, the Labor Government advances its program in the name of socialism. That is perhaps the greatest of its crimes.
A yawning abyss remains between the needs of British economy and the policies pursued by the Labor Government. This abyss grows catastrophic in relation to the needs of the people.
The profit motive has become the greatest barrier to the further development of the material forces of production. Nationalization acts and emergency measures have not in reality eliminated or even reduced this barrier. Hence the constantly growing conflict between the material forces of production and the property relations within which they are at work. Neither the needs of the people, nor the needs of a stable economy, can be satisfied by production for profit.
 
How Government Policy Works
For example, when last August the Labor Government presented its new program of fresh austerities it faced a deficit in the balance of foreign payments at the rate of about two and a half billion dollars annually. The American loan was almost exhausted. Imperialist commitments still absorbed about 1,400,000 men tied up in the armed forces at an annual expense of over three billion dollars. Besides, more than a half million workers, sorely needed elsewhere, were wasted in armaments production. The government proposed, and carried through, drastic cuts in imports and in capital expansion. These affected the most essential mass needs – food, clothing and shelter. As a result the diminished food ration has dropped below an average of 2700 calories, admittedly insufficient for working people. The housing program, already far too skimpy for a bombed-out population, suffered a cut of $800,000,000. From the military burden, however, relief was offered only to the extent of a token cut of 80,000 men. Indirect taxes were increased, hitting the work-
ing class income heavily, while a capital levy was rejected. The government, on the other hand, made appeals for a 50 percent increase of exports without any provisions for its attainment, except to demand longer working hours from an already ill fed, ill clothed and ill housed working class. And, needless to say, it proposed to increase the sales of goods abroad at the prevailing handsome rate of profits to British capitalists. Those in control of industry and commerce were asked politely by His Majesty’s Prime Minister only to “refrain from declaring high dividends.”
 
The Export Drive Panacea
But the very problem of exports is the government’s Achilles’ heel. Export to whom? Empire nations hitherto used to send raw materials for processing to Britain. They are now themselves taking care of their own processing on an increasing scale. And, above all, in every corner of the world market there rises the terrifying specter of ever more aggressive American competition. In several instances already export production plans have had to be altered because of this growing competition. Commenting on this very problem of exports Sir Stafford Cripps recently conceded the danger of a “descent into a spiral of depression.”
The Labor Government is now looking hopefully to the Marshall Plan. An analysis of such prospects would go beyond the scope of this article. Suffice it to say that so far as the British Labor Government is concerned its contradictions are bound to increase rather than diminish when this plan actually gets into operation. Through former Under Secretary of State, William Clayton, Wall Street has already let it be known that relief from the United States would imply no further nationalization, longer working hours and reduced real wages. The implication here cannot be misunderstood.
At the same time there need be no doubt that the more the British bourgeoisie succumbs to the overwhelming American economic preponderance the greater will be its fury against its own working class. At the expense of the latter it will attempt to extract compensation for its diminishing ration of the world economy. And the target of that fury will include the Labor Party itself.
 
Precarious Position Of Attlee Government
The Labor Party was carried into power by a mighty working class surge stimulated and inspired by the demand for socialism “in our time.” Once the Labor leaders were in power they were faced with the implications of their victory. Either they had to draw revolutionary conclusions from their mandate – for there is no other road to socialism “in our time” – or else frankly serve the capitalist state in which they found themselves at the helm. Of course, they chose the latter. Now the Attlee Government is caught between this mass upsurge and the rising resistance and sabotage of the bourgeoisie, backed by Wall Street. At the outset the government pursued its nationalization program aggressively. It took some steps toward social reform. Soon it began to retreat. Under bourgeois pressure this retreat continues. Action toward nationalization of the steel industry has now been shelved. But this will not satisfy the bourgeoisie. Meanwhile, the fraudulent pretensions about socialism confuse and disorient the workers. Workers disappointments in the government’s program, their confusion and discontent begin to reflect themselves in apathy and diminishing support for Labor candidates.
Truly the contradiction between the working class demand for socialism and the deeply ingrained Fabian conservatism of the Labor Party tops has reached catastrophic proportions.
Growing nervousness among this top circle is becoming increasingly manifest. It arises out of this contradiction which has already resulted in a large scale-left wing formation. So far this left wing is confined primarily to the Labor Party parliamentary fraction. It is still rather amorphous, heterogeneous, and lacks the principled leadership necessary for an intransigent struggle against the betrayal of the old leaders. But the process is only beginning.
This nervousness is paralleled among Tory top circles. Churchill gave expression to it last August when the left wing revolt within the Labor Party parliamentary fraction reached a high point. Churchill praised the cabinet members as men of “experience and self-restraint.” But, he said, they might be overthrown in their own party. This is the spectre haunting the Tories, the fear of further leftward developments – developments toward revolutionary action.
 
Growth of Left Wing
This fear is felt most acutely by the leaders of the Labor Party, whose contact with elements of revolt is far more direct. And, it is well founded. It would be the greatest mistake to underestimate the real importance of this present left wing development. There is sufficient evidence of its spread among the lower units of the Labor Party. Its general programmatic level can perhaps be best judged by the composite resolutions submitted to the last annual Labor Party conference. One of these resolution deplored British support in the UN for the Truman Doctrine – which was viewed as a declaration of war on European socialism – and demanded the withdrawal of British troops from Greece. Another resolution voiced a critical attitude to British “subservience to capitalist America” and demanded closer cooperation with Soviet Russia. A third demanded reduction of the armed forces “considerably below” government proposals. A fourth demanded stronger representation of workers in controlling nationalized industries. A fifth demanded government resistance to capitalist pressure hindering the socialization of German industries in the British zone of occupation. A sixth demanded equal status for the colored and white races in colonies and the swift carrying out of socialist measures in these regions. A seventh demanded democratization of the educational system. An eighth demanded equal pay for women in government jobs. Lastly a resolution demanded democratization of the armed forces.
The Labor Party itself is the British working class in political action. Its emergence was described by Trotsky as “a priceless historical achievement, which even now can never be nullified.”. Relations between the Labor Party and the trade unions are thoroughly coordinated. Jointly the two form an almost ideal combination for political action, and economic organization. It is true that the Labor Party now operates on a purely parliamentary plane, it is equally true that the more decisive actions and struggles occur outside of parliament and ensue in the main from the economic conflict between capital and labor. Parliamentary activities, realistically conceived, should be supplementary to the latter. Yet the problems and actions of both organizations, regardless of the field in which these occur, become constantly more political in nature.
For the Labor Party is now the main focussing point. It is the governing party. Issues of the highest social and political order must be delineated and fought out within its ranks. And it is important not merely in relation to the present political actions, but even more so, in relation to the ideological development of the British working class. It is thus an ideal arena of struggle for conscious revolutionists.
Today the combination of the Labor Party and the trade unions appears in its most truncated form. It asserts itself primarily in bureaucratic collusion at top levels. The trade union lead-ship is integrated ever more with the political state. Its task is to hold the rank and file in check, to assure submission to the government program of loading the burden of the crisis onto the broad backs of the workers. Its task is to function as the political police depriving the unionr. of their independence for the benefit of the capitalist state. Hence, as already noted, worker resistance finds an outlet mostly through unauthorized strikes in defiance of the bureaucratic leadership. A certain parallel can be drawn between the revolts in the Labor Party and in the trade unions. These revolts can be expected to increase in both organizations as the left wing takes on more definite form and content. But possibilities for success depend upon a closer interrelation and coordination of these developments: All the more reason for conscious revolutionists to be active in both the Labor Party and the trade unions.
 
A New Coalition Government?
The Labor Party leaders’ fear of further leftward developments gives rise to rumors at each recurrent crisis of a possible return to a coalition government. This may seem paradoxical in view of the party’s great preponderance in the last elections. But it is precisely this preponderance which nourishes the fear for a working class conscious of its strength aims to utilize it.
In stemming mass action, the hopelessly conservative top leaders have displayed time and again their feeling of greater comfort by direct collaboration with the bourgeoisie. Thus parallel with the growth of their fears increase their retreats and capitulations to the bourgeoisie. Politics engender its own inescapable logic. Once these leaders have said A, they also must say B. One such retreat leads inexorably to another, and by its very logic to a return of coalition.
However, that means precipitating a split in the Labor Party: A prospect that is not too remote even without a return to coalition. In any event, they would not be capable of splitting the working class forces. They could only reenact the inglorious 1931 walkout of Ramsay MacDonald and h i s faithful ten, from which the Labor Party would draw new strength.
For the mighty working class up surge, which lifted the Labor Party to power, will hardly “recede respectfully.” The working class strove toward a definite objective; and it will eventually insist on reaching that objective. It will do that confident of its strength. The working class knows it created the Labor Party and carried it to its election victory on a program of “Socialism in our time.” The working class expects actions and results. If this cannot be attained under the present leadership the working class will throw it into discard and create a new one.
 
Toward a Showdown
As Engels predicted, conversion into state property only brings the capitalist production relations to a head:
“But brought to a head,” he added, “it topples over. State ownership of the productive forces is not the solution of the conflict, but concealed within it are the technical conditions that form the elements of that change ... And this can only come about by society openly and directly taking possession of the productive forces which have outgrown all control except that of society as a whole.”
It is in this sense that the present Labor Government represents the first stage. Now left wing developments are beginning to take form, to work out a program and policies of a more definite socialist content, for the next stage.
Trotsky once said that the British working class will “very probably be obliged to replace its leadership a number of times before a party will be born which truly corresponds to the historical situation and tasks of the British proletariat.” And he added: “It will take much less time to transform the Labor Party into a revolutionary party than was required for its creation.”
The first step in this transformation is to recognize that genuine socialism, the socialization of all economic activity, cannot be achieved without a revolution. No ruling class ever gave up its power without a struggle. Least of all can this be expected from the British bourgeoisie which has behind it centuries of universal banditry. Although forced to the wall by the decline of the empire, and by working class pressure, its position has not been weakened materially by the rule of the Labor Government.
But, as the failure of this Government’s attempt to find a solution to Britain’s difficulties on a capitalist basis become more clearly demonstrated, the working class will have gained a new and priceless experience. The impact of this experience, conditioned by accelerating capitalist crisis and decay, must produce within its ranks a further profound shift to the left. For what is now involved is the very existence of two classes whose interests are irreconcilably opposed and whose destiny can be settled only by a struggle to the bitter end.
Compared to the mighty host of the Labor Party the consciously revolutionary forces are still numerically small. This quantitative relationship reflects the illusions that still exist among the masses about the fraudulent pretensions of the Labor leaders. With a further shift to the left, this relationship will also change in favor of the revolutionists, when they draw for the masses the necessary conclusions of their common experience: irreconcilable opposition to the whole conservative bureaucracy, and for a new leadership committed to a genuinely socialist policy. Not only will the quantitative relationship then change, but the revolutionists will in the further process advance to stand at the head of the movement.
And what about American imperialist intervention? Will that change or reverse this process? Wall Street’s intervention may serve to retard the process, but not to alter its fundamental course.
Trotsky reminded us that:
“In the decisive struggle against the proletariat the English bourgeoisie will receive the most powerful support from the bourgeoisie of the United States, while the English proletariat will draw its strength in the first place from the working class in Europe and the subject nations in the British colonies.”
Today it is possible to add, that the British working class will draw further strength also from the American working class moving forward to a greater consciousness of its destiny.
February 1948



Due primarily to the successes of the Red Army the center of gravity in the Second World War shifted definitely some time ago in favor of the “United Nations.” But within this not-so-united combination the United States from the beginning moved forward to occupy the dominant position, militarily and politically as well as economically. The American ruling class is now preparing for aggression and conquests on a scale that will put all previous similar drives for expansion in the shade. From this point onward the spectre of American imperialism will haunt the entire planet.
The condition of world economy under capitalism with its furiously growing productive forces and its rapidly shrinking markets can no longer afford sufficient room for several major powers to exist in relative concord alongside one another. Henceforth there will be room for one only. Out of this bloody carnage a single power is seeking to emerge supreme and to defeat all challengers. How well this is understood in London is not entirely clear; but there is positive proof that it is perfectly well understood in Washington.
President Roosevelt and his collaborators have committed the United States definitely and unalterably to that one single objective. The vast economic preponderance of the US is to find its full and complete realization through this war.
The very nature of capitalist imperialist developments dictates such a course. Technological advance has reached its highest peak in the United States. Under the pressure of war economy it is making new and enormous strides each day. The strong internal market, sufficient for decades of capitalist expansion, is now entirely inadequate. On the one hand, the monstrous accumulation of capital, if it is to provide a continuous profit return, requires open fields of investment and exploitation embracing nothing less than the entire world. On the other hand, the vastly accelerated mass production presents here its most complex problems. All the vital natural resources of the earth, located in various parts of the globe, become essential raw materials needed to feed the huge assembly lines. Undisputed control of the source of these materials, and of the avenues of supply, together with the fields of investment and exploitation, has for American capitalism become an irreducible minimum of conquest. The Commander-in-chief does not hesitate. He aims to build the American armed forces to a point beyond challenge; their field of operation stretches across the seven seas.
Such unbridled expansion by one single power, however, can be accomplished only at the expense of all others. England in this case would be no exception. And so, while we have become accustomed to speak in terms of the United States putting Europe on reduced rations, as if it were already an accomplished fact, the policy that is now taking on definite shape in Washington would make this kind of ration system a monstrous world-wide reality.
We know well enough that economic preponderance is the decisive factor in present-day mechanized warfare. Not only that, but under conditions of capitalism this economic preponderance can find its full realization only through war. From this it follows quite logically that if the outcome of this war were to be finally decided solely by the military resources of the rival powers, American mastery of the world need not be questioned. But the war is by no means confined to the military questions involved. War itself is an integral part of the whole social structure; and as such it becomes a sociological problem of the highest order.
Our present epoch includes both wars and revolutions. And we, on our part, accept the unceremonious intervention of revolutionary upheavals as a foregone conclusion. But this is also quite well understood in Washington. To the President and his collaborators, victory of American imperialism presupposes not only the subjugation of the Axis partners, but also the strangling of any and all revolutionary interventions.
To illustrate this contention, let us cite the fact that the Washington government, immediately upon its entry into the war and in spite of the anger aroused in the country at the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, nevertheless declared Hitler to be Enemy No. 1 and concentrated its attention and the overwhelming part of the forces at its disposal to the European scene.
The greatest potential rivalry to world hegemony does, indeed, come from fascist Germany with its highly developed technology and its formidable military machine. It is equally true that the European battlefield is the most important because it embraces most of the major colony-possessing nations. Moreover, it also embraces the Soviet Union with its potentially superior nationalized economy. And, as is known to anyone but the Stalinist hatchetmen, the peaceful co-existence of the USSR alongside of capitalist economy is in the final analysis impossible. But there were other, perhaps weightier, and certainly more compelling immediate considerations motivating the specific course of America’s rulers. It is in Europe, above all, that capitalism faces the most serious and the most imminent dangers to its continued existence. The threat of the dreaded revolutionary intervention is the most acute, precisely in Europe. And, let there be no doubt about it, this very question will be the pivot of the war and all the imperialist machinations from this point onward.
 
US-British Partnership
Insofar as American world conquests are concerned the British empire is bound to suffer the most. The rich colonial possessions with their abundance of essential raw materials and cheap native labor are the prize objectives in the present struggle for the redivision of the earth. England holds most of these cherished possessions. Hitler has none. England has something worth taking. Hitler has nothing at all.
England apparently now enjoys a solid partnership with the United States. But, in regard to this, it is well to remember what Trotsky told us in his introduction to Whither England:
“The United States and Britain,” he said, “may be regarded as twin stars, one of which grows dim the more rapidly as the brilliance of the other increases.” And to make this even clearer, Trotsky added: “The powerful and constantly growing influence of the United States on world affairs is rendering more and more impossible and hopeless the situation of British industry, British trade, British finance and British diplomacy.”
This process is now being accelerated. England is today already reduced to the status of junior in the partnership. Tomorrow the senior will demand and collect payments from the junior partner by lopping off whole chunks of the empire. This is known of course to the sardonic Goebbels, who declared at the time of the first Hopkins visit to England that “the new heir to the estate had come to claim the property before the former owners were properly buried.”
The fall of Singapore marked the turning point in the history of the British empire, the beginning of the loss of its colonial possessions. This does not mean to say that this fortress will remain henceforth in Japanese hands. Far from it. It is much more likely that Singapore will be retaken – by American armed forces – not, however, to be returned to England, but to remain an American springboard to the fabulous riches of Asia. Washington’s policy leaves little doubt on that score.
While questions of proletarian revolutions in Europe and independence for Asia’s colonial and semi-colonial peoples still hang in the balance this policy envisages the total exploitation of these fabulous riches of Asia, which are the colossal stakes in the struggle for the redivision of the earth.
 
Tapping Asia’s Resources
It is not the oriental splendor of gold, precious stones, ornate palaces and exotic gardens – the mystic lure of the past – that is now attractive. Asia is a rich storehouse of raw materials. But, above all, in these parts of the globe, India, China, the Dutch East Indies, etc., lives half of mankind. The majority of this population, numbering hundreds of millions, still subsists on a primitive basis of natural economy. The extent to which this large segment of mankind can be turned into producers and consumers of capitalist goods holds out an enticing prospect indeed for capital investments at a higher rate of profit.
The all-important question, however, arises: Is capitalism in its present stage of decay capable of converting Asia’s teeming millions into producers and consumers of capitalist goods? In the final analysis such a transformation would actually mean the industrialization of these backward regions. But the fact is that industrialization in the sense of a corresponding progressively rising standard of living for the masses can be accomplished only on a socialist basis.
Capitalism is no longer progressive, and cannot function as a progressive force anywhere in the world, not even the American brand of capitalism, which is still the most vigorous. But the latter, owing to its industrial development, faces most acutely the dilemma of finding some avenue of expansion regardless of all rival powers, or else perish. Any attempt to extricate itself from this dilemma can very well presuppose a certain expansion of the feeble industrial bases of backward regions. Theoretically that cannot at all be ruled out. Moreover, such is the aim of American imperialism. Expressed in terms of dollar diplomacy this foreshadows new methods of imperialist exploitation.
India is the classic example of the golden era of crude colonial rule. Industrial and technological development was in the main retarded in favor of more immediate and more direct looting. In return for heavy levies, archaic systems of feudal landowners or princely domains were retained and hundreds of thousands of peasant communities kept deliberately within their century-old isolation. Social and economic backwardness has, of course, remained. Extreme poverty is its outstanding feature. During the year 1939 the per capita income for the country as a whole is reported to have been no more than $18.00. In contrast to this policy, the American imperialist exploiters aim to pour in funds from their superabundance of capital available for lucrative investments accompanied by exports of tools and implements of production. There are raw materials to be tapped, refined and manufactured at the source; plants, railways, highways, airways to be built. Of course, this will mean industrialization – at least to a certain extent. Dollar diplomacy, in its final analysis – that is, if it should really find an opportunity to unfold – cannot possibly mean anything else. But we can be sure that it will mean, above all, more intense exploitation of cheap native labor on a colossal scale.
We can speak today only of aims, of policy and of preparations that are in the course of development. Actual accomplishments are an entirely different matter. The extent and scope of this projected new and fiercer exploitation is directly and intimately connected with the sweep and power of the coming revolutions.
 
Plans for Latin America
A very good indication of such aims, put into concrete terms, was afforded by the program of economic development for the Americas presented by the US delegation to the Rio Conference about a year ago. A grandiose plan of exploitation weaved into the alluring pattern of the “Good Neighbor” policy.
Stated briefly, some of the main features were: The United States proposed the removal of all trade barriers, including tariff, import duties and other regulations or restrictions which impede the free flow of war or civilian supplies among the American nations. This to remain in effect for the duration of the war. Envisaged was the creation of a free international exchange currency, on a gold basis, and in accordance with which the countries of Central and South America would peg their respective national currencies. Great Britain, the Netherlands, China, India and all British dominions would also enter into this currency agreement. Further, the plan provided for the pooling of all Latin American resources, agricultural and mineral, for a common stockpile of war resources; the US would provide finances and exports necessary for conversion. Among other projects the United States would agree to finance and build free trade ports throughout the Americas, provide transportation for exports and imports, underwrite and build storage warehouses, processing and refining plants for special conversion industries, as, for example, the conversion of the banana fields of Central and South America to production of industrial alcohol. The United States would further agree to complete the Pan American highway, and dredge a 60-mile canal to connect the Rio Negro river, a tributary of the Amazon, with the Casiguiare river, an Orinoco feeder. It would agree to extend to the east both the Amazon river route and the trans-Andean highway from Peru, as well as underwrite the cost and maintenance of airlines within the signatory republics. The manpower problem in this plan was to be solved through the establishment of an emergency civilian workers corps for the manning of war industries throughout the continent.
In return for the “generous” financing of all of these huge projects by the United States, the signatory South American republics were to lease the land necessary for 99 years. Moreover, they also were required to agree to forego their property rights under private ownership laws. But such properties, proposed the big “good neighbor,” could again be acquired – by purchase – by the respective governments, or citizens, after a period of 10 years.
At the Rio Conference, Argentina and Chile were recalcitrant. They were not yet ready to submit to the “magnanimous” plans of the big “good neighbor.” In order to bring them into line it appears that the United States will first have to demonstrate that it is the one supreme power.
Unquestionably, American capitalism represents today the strongest link in the imperialist chain. But it faces on the morrow the most convulsive interplay of contradictions growing out of its world position. Unbridled US expansion will operate to turn the elements of its present strength into basic factors of weakness.
In the first place, American capitalism now seeks to extend its foundation at a time when the capitalist system as a whole has passed its peak and is in decline and decay. The spiral of the capitalist business cycle is now definitely and irrevocably on its downward course. The fact that the youngest of the imperialist powers has forged ahead to assume the dominant position is proof, not of this system’s rising to new and higher peaks, but rather of its approaching doom.
An extension of the American capitalist foundation can be accomplished only at the expense of rival powers – by further reducing their rations in world economy. The result is inevitable. Such limiting of rations will in each case impel the popular masses so much more surely into revolts and upheavals.
Yet while their system is plummeting in a downward spiral, all the major capitalist powers are engaged in a terrific expansion of technology for war purposes exclusively – for destruction. Truly, a completely chaotic world!
And so, while American imperialism is attempting to overcome its rivals it prepares simultaneously for the much more momentous task of “organizing” this chaotic world in order to assure a conqueror’s peace. It is preparing to police the entire world. Without that all its aspirations to hegemony would come to naught. Primarily and above all, however, it is preparing to assume wholly and completely the task of defending the capitalist system as a whole against the oncoming proletarian revolution.
This is the basic conflict. One or the other must triumph. And any such active police intervention against revolutionary upheavals can serve only to aggravate the conditions from which revolutions spring and prepare the conditions under which the revolutions succeed.
Trotsky put this whole question in a nutshell when he said back in 1928:
“... it is precisely the international strength of the United States and its unbridled expansion resulting from it, that compels it to include powder magazines throughout the world among the foundations of its structure.”
 
European Perspectives
But the fuses leading to these powder magazines are already lit everywhere. In Europe, in particular, the crucial stage is at hand both in regard to the military conflicts as well as to the imperialist political maneuverings. Moreover, the explosions have already begun.
Obviously the fall of Hitler’s regime is now only a matter of very limited time. His “New Order” never even got started. What then? Is a restoration of bourgeois democracy on the European continent – a “democratic” regime – possible? For a limited time, yes – as an interim regime, because of the absence of an experienced, decisive, proletarian, revolutionary leadership – as an attempt to dam up the floodgates of revolution. Such a restoration may be imposed and supported from abroad; but it can never be invested with any degree of stability. Even the connivance of the Stalin bureaucracy in such an attempt would be impotent, for Stalin would be faced, only more sharply, with the same class contradictions that haunt the world capitalist rulers at every step.
Will a conqueror’s “peace” mean a return to the old state system of Europe – with Germany dismembered and with the multitudes of small, seemingly independent but rival nations, all attempting to exist under the authority of a brand new police force from across the sea? This is as impossible as would be a stable bourgeois regime. Neither could offer a social or economic solution to the masses of Europe.
In the modern era of mass production small nations, hemmed in within narrow national borders, with extremely limited sources of raw materials and dwarfish tools and machinery of production, have no chance whatever of surviving against the mighty competitor, not to speak of prospering or progressing. This, when considered together with the hard reality of diminishing rations in world economy, poses more clearly, more sharply and more inescapably, the alternative – the only alternative – a Socialist United States of Europe.
Any advance in industrialization by a victorious American capitalism penetrating colonial or semi-colonial spheres in Asia or Africa would bring its own deep repercussions. Instead of allaying the once awakened nationalist independence aspirations of the native populations it would add new fuel to the smouldering fires. Instead of suspending their struggle against imperialist exploitation it would lead this struggle to new heights of intensity.
The newest and most advanced in technological developments implanted in a social framework of backwardness, poverty and degradation could result only in giving these aspirations more positive content and rendering the struggle more explosive in character. Increasing numbers of backward natives would be turned into industrial and agricultural proletarians. Uprooted from their peasant surroundings of natural economy, their wants as well as their demands would grow. This quantitative change, that is, the numerical increase in the number of proletarians in the colonies, would, especially in this case, produce a qualitative difference; a change toward greater cohesion, greater consciousness and greater strength. These growing ranks of native proletarians would constitute an ever more powerful force in the anti-imperialist crusade. And the latter would merge directly with the class struggle, and thereby add greatly to its explosive power.
At the same time, the increased capital investments in these colonial fields of exploitation would of necessity imply an expansion of imperialist ownership and control of the sources and the means of production. Thereby the national bourgeoisie would become, if anything, only further reduced in its importance. The conclusion is inescapable. The role of leadership in the struggle against the imperialist exploiters falls exclusively to the native proletariat.
But the internal dynamics generated by these colossal efforts of expansion and conquests, we may be sure, will be most sharply reflected in social relations at home. This country will not remain the tranquil sector from which mass forces can be drawn leisurely in any attempts to squelch disturbances or crush upheavals abroad. Of course, there will be internal repercussions in the US as well. While the world is heading toward social crisis its main sector must become more and more deeply involved in all the convulsions.
Naturally, a total war for imperialist ends cannot be conducted by any ruling class without totalitarian means. Here, many of the methods are borrowed from the arsenal of fascism.
Totalitarian means are applied to one degree or another in war economy, in politics, in the armed forces; yes, in all social relations. In their practical essence they are all directed against labor. And this is not at all strange because these very means provide added protective armor for the possessing class against the dispossessed.
Owing to this salient fact all efforts to freeze class relations, for the sake of preserving the much vaunted “national unity,” come to naught. The actually existing, and growing, monopoly control of economy allows less and less room for negotiation or conciliation between classes. Up to now this has led to a greater organization and greater solidarity on both sides. In the crucible of conflict this equilibrium falls asunder. Henceforth the fierce desperation with which the ruling class strives to save its system will, under the impact of the oncoming world social crisis, produce its opposite: confidence, boldness and consciousness of strength on the part of the working class, and an unswerving resolve to realize the socialist aims.
One of the outstanding expressions of American capitalist contradiction lies in the fact that the period of preparation for its greatest conquests also became the period of greatest expansion and advance of American labor organizations. Thus, what we have hitherto known as a form of combined development, that is, a highly advanced technology existing alongside of a socially and politically backward working class, promises to level out. Tomorrow this backwardness will be transformed into its opposite. The American working class will begin to prepare itself with truly American speed to fulfill its historic mission.



During the two years of conflict between the A.F. of L. and the C.I.O. enormous changes were wrought throughout the trade union field. The C.I.O. made phenomenal progress in organization, labor militancy rose to new and hitherto unsurpassed heights, the A.F. of L. made some gains; but the efforts – feeble efforts – made to end the conflict and to reach a basis for unification of the two organizations proved unavailing. Now, when considering the relationship between the two bodies, the decision made by the C.I.O. to set up a permanent organization is not at all surprising. It was inevitable.
Many genuine militants may take this whole question quite philosophically knowing that present-day economic and political developments have already set powerful forces in motion which will work their way toward unification. But time may soon become very pressing.
 
Conflict Overshadowed
During the recent period rapid organization developed so much momentum that the conflict of necessity receded into the background. At any rate it had little possibility of interfering with the progress made. Now, however, these conditions have been altered in a fundamental sense. The stormy offensive for union organization has passed its climax for the time being. The unions are becoming preoccupied with the consolidation of gains made. Above all they are compelled to prepare to meet new problems that are arising out of the changed economic and political conditions.
While the conflict between the two rival movements could not come so much to a head when new mass unions grew up almost over night in the most important basic industries, and while it was necessary for the C.I.O. to forge ahead independently and unhampered by any demands for capitulation – unity at that time could have been accomplished only by capitulation – it stands to reason that this question appears in an entirely different light now that the class enemy is preparing to assume the offensive all along the line.
When the whole of the trade union movement becomes compelled to engage in bitter defensive struggles against attacks on the wage standard, and against attacks on its very life, a continuation, or a further intensification of the conflict may have fatal consequences.
 
Independence a Fact
It is true that the C.I.O. decision represents a change only in the formal sense. In reality it has already for some time functioned as an independent and more or less permanent organization. The self-appointed Committee for Industrial Organization laid down general policy for its affiliated unions; it decided on strategy in strikes and in political life and took measures of organization as an independent federation would do. Only this status has been pretty well confined to the higher official circle without the benefit of a regular network of local central bodies and federation conventions through which the membership could exert its influence in determining policy and in selection of leadership.
The power and authority of the self constituted committee could well be envied by the most hardened A.F. of L. bureaucrat. It appointed and discharged organizers and regional directors at will and held several of the newly-organized unions in leading strings. Some of them are still under “provisional government,” as this method was once politely called in the miners’ union.
Yet, with all the power, authority and arbitrariness of the leading committee, nowhere has rank-and-file initiative found such a mighty outlet as in the new industrial unions. For a long time this has been a matter of serious concern to the leadership.
Once these new unions were established it frowned upon the sit-down strike – or, to be more correct, it frowned upon the idea of the workers’ taking possession of the plants and thus violating capitalist property rights. This is of particular importance now when strikes are again beginning to increase in frequency. And, let there be no mistake about it, the C.I.O. strategists have taken this step toward a permanent organization with an eye, not to loosening their grip on the apparatus, but rather in the hope of strengthening official channels for greater supervision and control. Obviously this particular aspect of the question does not bode well for an energetic attempt to solve correctly the many new serious problems now arising.
 
Those “Too Old”
To begin with, one may mention the very simple question of industry’s “old men.” Recently this has received more than usual public attention because of the increasing difficulty of workers holding on to their jobs when past the age of forty. Since this condition prevails more in mass production industry than in the sheltered trades, it becomes most pressing for the C.I.O. But even quite recently a number of A.F. of L. strikes have grown out of the issue of seniority rights. What is involved is one of the simple aspects of job security, and certainly this is the concern of the whole trade union movement.
Unemployment is of course a far greater and a far more acute question. According to the almost unanimous estimates of all reliable statistical authorities the unemployment figure had already in February risen above 13,000,000. This cancels out not less than 54 per cent of the decrease in unemployment which occurred from March 1933 to last September. This figure has increased further since February and indications are for an even greater scarcity of jobs. In regard to this question also, the C.I.O. is most acutely affected since the unemployment growth is mostly in mass production industry.
An over-supply of labor power on the market, and factory gates closing, weakens all union morale. A large army of unemployed is a threat to all unions. And, above all, the needs, of the unemployed cannot be met by pious resolutions which have even less effect where employers Can take advantage of disunity. Nothing less than united action of the whole trade union movement will suffice.
 
Bosses On Offensive
It is conditions such as these that facilitate the preparations being made by the class enemy to launch a mighty attack to beat down wages. With profits tobogganing to still lower levels, capitalism knows no other way than to seek compensation from the workers’ pay envelope. Even a boom in the war industries could only complicate and make union resistance more difficult without united action.
All of these problems, and many more that could be mentioned, almost fade into insignificance when considering the question of the approaching world war. Never does the ruling class need a submissive working class so much as during war times. In this the trade union movement becomes a key issue. By its greatly added numerical and organizational strength it is a much more potent factor than it was in 1917.
The rulers of America will be sure to spare no efforts, on the one hand to compel working class loyalty to the employers, and on the other hand to curb, if not to crush, its independence, for this is what war means in the first instance. But the workers who have much to lose and nothing to gain from a capitalist war need their forces united to fight against it. Their trade union movement, built up through many bitter struggles, is itself a product of capitalist contradictions and an expression of existing and growing class antagonism. Only on the field of the class struggle can these contradictions and antagonisms be solved. Objectively the unification of the trade union movement should be a beginning toward this final end and militants can do a good turn by pressing for a solution of this first problem now.
 



Significant world events occurring in any part of the globe can most often be listed under the caption of problems of American imperialism. Starvation and upheavals in Europe, rebellion in India, civil war in China, colonial butchery in the East Indies, curfew and arrests in Palestine or demonstrations in Buenos Aires and last, but not least, the gigantic strikes here at home, each may represent a different stage of intensity of capitalist contradictions; but all are part of the pattern of a thoroughly integrated and dialectically interrelated world.
Equally these events also become problems of the proletarian revolution, for the present epoch is revolutionary.
Imperialism became long ago a dominant and inseparable aspect of American economy. From competitive capitalism to monopoly capitalism to imperialism, in each case representing the transformation of quantity into quality. But in its social implication this transformation is of even greater significance. For,
“capitalism,” says Lenin, “became capitalistic imperialism only at a certain very high stage of its development, when some of the fundamental traits of capitalism began to transform into their own contradiction, when along the whole line there appeared and became apparent the outline of a transitory epoch from capitalism to a higher social economic order.”
Free competition has become transformed into monopoly capitalism. There is an immense socialization of the process of production; a complete organization on a social scale from the supply of basic raw materials through the process of manufacture and the distribution of products. The objective basis for a new social order is thus laid, however, with the old relations of production and distribution still prevailing. Control of this socialized organization is usurped by predatory finance capitalists who exploit it for their own purposes. While production has become social, appropriation remains in the hands of individual capitalists. Imperialism thus develops on the basis of a whole system of contradictions and it further vastly enlarges and intensifies these contradictions.
The rapid rise of the United States as an imperialist power was phenomenal. It has now reached full maturity. With its undisputed victory in World War II it aims to realize the fruits of this maturity. From this war it emerged as the one supremely dominant power, ready to exploit the entire world. At the same time, its preponderance renders American imperialism so much
more vulnerable to the decay and crises of the capitalist world system with which it has become completely integrated. This is what is new in our present epoch.
The interdependence of nations in the world economy is now a generally recognized fact. No national economy can extricate itself to any significant degree from world economy or from the world market. And, of course, the more developed its technology, the more extended its productive capacity and its capital assets, the more complete is the integration with the world market. In turn, the more directly does it also determine the course of world economy. Naturally, therefore, American economy, and its condition, has become the decisive factor in the further course of world economy and the world market. World economy stands or falls on this condition. Upon this condition all capitalist nations depend for their survival. This is how the interdependence of nations manifests itself today. American imperialist policy is only the political expression of this relationship.
Foreign policy, as we know, is an extension of internal policy. It springs from internal needs. And the outstanding factor in the American industrial and financial system today is an overproduction of capital which has assumed terrific proportions. It is now in possession of a vastly expanded industrial productive capacity. Gross production was running during the first half of 1945 at an annual rate of $206 billion. This is more than double the capacity of the peak year of the pre-depression boom. In 1929 total gross production amounted to only $94.4 billion. Estimates of productive capacity become even more concrete when expressed in terms of actual commodities. Thus, for example, the Auto Manufacturers Council has reported to the government that, when fully re-converted and all raw materials are available, it will be capable of an annual production of 7,600,000 cars and trucks; and it adds that it will be able to reach this output with 40 percent less labor than it employed during the war peak.
Additional illumination is afforded by facts concerning labor productivity, which is only another way of showing the increase in tools and machinery of production. Krug, the former Chairman of the War Production Board has estimated, on the basis of reports received from 42 industries, that post-war production can be 87 percent above the 1939-41 average with employment only 33 percent above that level. That would mean a gain of 40 percent in labor productivity. The CIO steel workers union estimates that during the six years of the war period labor productivity increased not less than 34 percent. [1]
This American industrial empire was built up on the existence, within the forty-eight states, of the most important industrial raw materials. Productive labor applied to these strategic raw materials has assured for the United States its overwhelming preponderance. Here coal seams are among the richest and the actual production during the last three years preceding the war amounted to 40 percent of the world s output. Oil production was 60 percent, and iron and steel reached more than one-third of the total world output. At the peak of war production the output of finished steel increased further from 74 million tons annually to 93 million tons. The United States produced in the same period about one half of the world’s electric power. The comparative figures of coal mining here and in England tell the story with regard to production efficiency, although in this industry the comparison becomes perhaps the most extreme. Coal mining in the United States requires 1.7 man hours of labor per ton whereas in England it requires 7.5 man hours per ton. While the British merchant marine, formerly the world’s largest, lost during the war 10 million out of its 21 million tonnage and only succeeded in replacing about 7 million tonnage, the United States merchant fleet gained during the same period from 11.6 million tonnage to an estimated 57.5 million tonnage. And, of course, what counts much more heavily in backing up aggressive imperialist plans is the fact that the United States navy has now reached an estimated 3,900,000 tonnage, which is almost equal to the total combined pre-war naval tonnage of all the great powers. Finally there lurks in the background the terrifying power of the atomic bomb.
Capital ready for investment is likewise available in the hands of the Wall Street corporations in prodigious amounts. National income during the war boom reached the stupendous sum of $160 billion. Capitalist corporations received, of course, their more than generous share. From 1939 to 1945 net profits after taxes of US corporations totalled $42.7 billion. Their net working capital increased from $24.6 billion in 1939 to $45.5 billion in 1945, a jump of 85 percent. Current assets rose from $54.6 billion to $98 billion in the same period. The CIO Steelworkers Union estimates that during the six war years, profits of corporations rose by not less than 70 percent. With the repeal of the excess profits tax these corporations will be even more generously endowed.
It is estimated that savings for capital investment amount to about 20 percent of the annual national income. In other words, out of an annual national income of $160 billion not less than $32 billion would be available annually for capital investment. What this means over a period of time may be gathered from the fact that savings accumulated since 1940 reached a total of more than $121 billion at the end of 1945. We can be sure that only a very small fraction of this sum constitutes workers’ savings. In fact the overwhelming portion must be counted on as capital pressing for opportunities of profitable investments.
Among other factors that could be mentioned which exert a definite pressure on internal economic stability is an item of such importance as the huge national debt approaching the astronomical figure of $300 billion – a sum in excess of the total assessed valuation of the 48 states and the District of Columbia. Closely related to this is the enormous cost of the projected militarist program. The one item is the obverse of the other and the cost of carrying both will be saddled upon the masses, thus lowering further their living standard. The bulk of the national debt represents American capitalism’s investment in the war just concluded; loans made to the government at a fixed rate of interest. Victory means that the monopoly concerns begin to collect. At the same time the “carrying charges” operate to aggravate existing contradictions in two ways: Firstly, this greater mulcting of the masses can only render the boom period still more speculative and conversely deepen the effects of the unavoidable crisis. Secondly, the bulk of the “carrying charges” on the national indebtedness, amounting to about six billion dollars, which flow into the coffers of the monopoly concerns, represents an annual accretion of capital clamoring for profitable outlet.
On the whole these factors – the vastly expanded capacity of production and the huge volume of capital available – should be an expression of potential plenty, economic progress and prosperity for the nation.
Under capitalist relations of production, however, this turns out to mean the exact opposite. Capitalism always develops the forces of production more than it develops the forces of consumption. Because production is carried on by labor in return for wages which represent only a part of the actual wealth produced. The surplus values produced go to the capitalist entrepreneur in the form of profits. Wages always lag behind profits and wages always fall relative to output and profits. Monopoly capitalism only aggravates this process. It extorts higher profits thereby increasing the disparity between production and consumption, which further aggravates economic instability.
 
Monopoly Capitalism
Monopoly capitalism constantly increases labor productivity by its ever increasing investment in more efficient machinery. This results in a reduction of labor power needed, thus placing further restrictions upon consumption. Although the mass of profits increases due to the greater rationalization, the rate of profit realized in proportion to the total capital invested tends to fall. Capitalism struggles incessantly to overcome this tendency and to increase the rate of profit. Profits always tend, nevertheless, to increase at a more rapid rate than do the opportunities for profitable investments. And this excess capital piling up over and above the available investment opportunities becomes surplus capital. It represents capital which industry does not need and cannot use without disturbing results.
The internal market in the United States became insufficient long ago, both for absorbing the annual excess produced over and above the limits of home consumption and for absorbing the ever increasing amounts of surplus capital. This explains the inexorable drive for new and vastly larger markets and fields of investments which will yield a higher rate of profit. American imperialism is therefore impelled to assert its enormous economic preponderance more fully on a world scale.
But world economy is in a state of stagnation and paralysis due to war destruction, impoverishment and inflation. In fact in most parts of the capitalist world, outside of the Western Hemisphere, there exists practically total bankruptcy. It is clear, therefore, that before American imperialism can exploit the colossal financial and industrial potential it has accumulated it must first assume – alone – the leadership in rehabilitating in a measure this virtually bankrupt world economy. Such measures of rehabilitation require first of all in the United States a continued high level of production and income which, in turn, necessitate a high level of purchasing power by the masses – a constantly rising standard of living. This is only one aspect, but it is an important aspect of the problem of interdependence of nations today.
Loans and capital investments for the exploitation of labor of other nations and colonies undoubtedly do hold out glittering prospects of abundant returns for the Wall Street bankers. But world trade, based on commodity production, does not have the slightest chance of revival unless the United States is likewise in a position to absorb in ever increasing quantities the products, and especially the raw materials, of other parts of the globe. Obviously this could be accomplished only on the basis of high levels at home. Besides, only economic stability and political equilibrium in the United States could make such exploitation possible abroad. For any rehabilitation of world economy these would be the minimum prerequisites.
What are the perspectives for such high levels in the United States? We will most likely experience a relative boom, highly speculative and of short duration before we enter into the next depression. The fundamental laws of capitalist economy remain, however, in effect and continue to subject the whole system to the action of these laws. Number one amongst these laws reads that capitalist production is carried on solely for profits and that the capitalist system, moreover, depends for its very survival upon ever increasing profits. Actually to enlarge, or even to maintain the wartime scale of production for civilian needs would mean, in the first instance, to increase national consumption by increasing the purchasing power of the people.
 
The Corporations and Wages
But the policy pursued by the dominant corporations, motivated only by their lust for ever increasing profits, is the exact opposite. They fight with all the forces at their disposal against maintaining even the wartime wage levels. They seek to undermine and destroy the unions – the protective organizations of labor. Instead of raising they seek to lower the standard of living. This policy stimulates further the growing disproportion between the expanded productive forces and the increasing limitations upon consumption.
Already the result is an intensification of the class struggle in the home fortress of American imperialism. Gigantic strikes are the expression today. Turbulent political conflicts will follow on the morrow. What else does this prove but that neither internal economic stability nor political equilibrium is attainable in capitalist United States?
Granting a relative and short-lived boom, as soon as the limited capacities of the market are saturated, the economic crisis is inevitable. For the further course of capitalist world economy this perspective is as decisive as it is devastating.
American imperialism seeks to solve these internal contradictions on a world scale. However, as it advances in the world economic and political arena, it reproduces and extends these same contradictions, only in a much more intensified form and on an infinitely enlarged scale. Every imperialist advance means the international extension of its own inner antagonisms.
It is tacitly recognized everywhere that world economy is virtually bankrupt. This was formally recognized in the proposals growing out of Bretton Woods for the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Ostensibly the former is intended as a means of fixing the post-war structure of monetary exchange rates and promoting exchange stability. The latter is presumed to aid in the reconstruction of war devastated nations as well as to promote economic development in backward countries. But these very proposals also acknowledged publicly the world hegemony of American imperialism.
In reality the Bretton Woods proposals are designed as instruments whereby the Wall Street bankers intend to wield financial control of the world market. And Wall Street’s ally and “friend” – Great Britain – is the first to feel the sting of this hegemony. For, while American imperialism proceeds with the complete elimination of its former enemy rivals it is at the same time reducing the ration of the British empire in the world market to meet its own increased productive capacity and appetite. That is the significance of the terms of the loan to England.
On its positive side the loan offers some relief for the hard pressed British imperialists. It affords them an opportunity to buy much needed goods in the United States and a means of staving off an immediate social crisis in England with its potential serious repercussions elsewhere. It represents also an attempt on their part to have the United States underwrite the security of the empire which is now facing volcanic eruptions.
 
The Loan to Britain
Of course, the Wall Street bankers know very well that imperial Britain has lost its comfortable economic margin which contributed so much to its glory, power and privileges of the past. They are aware of its proclaimed effort to increase its production for export by more than 50 percent above the prewar volume. Hence the harsh terms of the loan designed to curtail Britain’s competitive powers in the world market. Within one year, according to the loan “agreements,” Britain must break up her “sterling bloc” and abolish her “empire preference system” of trade and “remove all restrictions” on American imports to the homeland, dominions, colonies, mandated areas, etc. Thus, despite the vehement protestations once made by Churchill against any attempt to liquidate the empire, its doors have now certainly been thrown wide open.
The British imperialists have made another retreat. At the conclusion of the war they projected the “Western European Bloc,” a closed economic sphere under British tutelage, to be based on the resources and machinery of the triangle stretching from Birmingham through the Seine estuary, the Briey basin and including the Ruhr valley. This they had conceived as a counterweight to the colossus across the Atlantic and a bulwark against the dreaded Soviet power. However, their own position in relation to the United States forced the British to retreat. So far as the European continent is concerned, the Washington policy of occupation prevailed. And American “aid in reconstruction” of the war-devastated continent reached the heights of brutal savagery.
European economy has remained in a state of paralysis ever since “liberation.” For Germany it is perhaps more exact to say that her economy is pulverized. It lies prostrate under military occupation. Throughout Europe the capitalist social equilibrium is destroyed. While there can be no doubt that the objective conditions remain revolutionary, it is clear that the re-orientation and regroupment of the proletarian forces – the building of the revolutionary mass parties – will take some time.
By itself the European bourgeoisie is utterly helpless. Today it constitutes the weakest link in the capitalist chain. This accounts for the American imperialist military occupation policy. While this policy pursues the destruction of competition from the German, or from any other European industry and finance, it also includes certain relief measures, paupers’ concessions, loans hedged by definite restrictions, etc. For the United States must now attempt to restore some sort of class equilibrium in Europe. It is the sole reactionary power in a position to assume the role of defending the decaying capitalist system on a world scale against the coming proletarian revolution. Its military occupation in Europe also forms one claw of a gigantic pincer against the Soviet Union.
Political implications flowing from this intervention develop their own logic. Nevertheless the economic basis remains decisive. After World War I the United States intervened in Europe to restore partially its economic equilibrium. Such restoration is not now on the Wall Street agenda. On the contrary. Caught in the vortex of decline and decay of capitalism Wall Street is neither willing nor able to do so. That is why it must undertake to destroy even the possibility of future economic rivalry from Europe.
 
Allied Policy in Germany
Let us illustrate this in concrete terms. The Allied Control Council has decided to allow Germany to retain an annual steel producing capacity of 7,500,000 tons. Maximum annual production, however, is not to exceed 5,800,000 tons. This compares with a war-time capacity of 23 million tons and it approximates Germany’s output at the trough of the depression in 1932 when its totally unemployed workers numbered 6 million. Steel, as we know, is basic to all modern industry. These figures therefore become symptomatic. They illustrate in concrete terms the effort to maintain that permanent depression level for Germany. Her people now face starvation and her industrial workers are condemned to become pariahs.
But Germany is Europe’s workshop, supplying especially heavy tools, instruments and machinery of production. Production of this tool industry, according to the Allied Control Council’s decision, is to be reduced to less than 12 percent of prewar output. What will be the consequence? Further crippling of German industry, which in the wake of war destruction, will inevitably result in a lowered standard of living in all Western Europe. The occupation policy spells Europe’s Balkanization – in the political sense of having to depend on a “protector” (the United States) as well as in the economic sense of low living conditions.
Although the military occupation has served to postpone the inevitable reckoning in Europe, the general conditions created by American intervention render all the more certain the final proletarian victory. For every step taken toward reducing Europe to a still lower economic level must of necessity strengthen the revolutionary forces. The peoples are left no alternative but revolution.
Contradictions such as these, with their explosive possibilities, are not peculiar to Europe alone. They are bound to arise and multiply wherever American imperialism advances. And advances are being furiously prepared. Wall Street’s most enthusiastic spokesmen propose to start out with an immediate tripling of American pre-war exports. But even if quickly attained, such a figure, in view of the productive capacity available, would not be very high. It would reach only half of the war-time level. During the period of 1930-39, for example, American exports averaged just slightly over three billion dollars annually, whereas the war period, due to Lend-Lease, brought this figure up to an annual rate of eighteen billion dollars. And right here an important consideration must not be overlooked. Under monopoly capitalism the export of commodities tends to become subordinated to the export of capital. This again acts to bring down home production, placing limitations upon employment, wages and restricting the consuming ability of the masses.
Foreign capital investments have always returned a golden harvest to the investors. The classic example in this respect is the lucrative field possessed by the British imperialists. However, their American cousins did not lag far behind. Now they are the chief exporters of capital, the world’s bankers. From a mere $2,625 million in 1914 their foreign investments, exclusive of government loans, rose to $17,967 million in 1932. Returns on these investments from 1920 to 1929 brought the magnificent sum of $7,896 million.
Latin America furnished a heavy share of these returns. Since the completion of the Panama Canal Wall Street has considered these republics to the south as its private preserve and made rapid strides toward the elimination of all other imperialist competition. These supposedly sovereign nations furnish an object lesson of the purely imperialist purposes of the export of capital, shown in Yankee financial and political overlordship almost throughout the Central and Southern Hemisphere with its support of corrupt, reactionary, totalitarian regimes and bitter exploitation of the native population. The countries receiving these investments remain impoverished.
Wall Street may not yet be too greatly worried about the increasing appetite of the Latin American bourgeoisie and their increasing apprehension concerning the encroachments of the Yankee dollar. It may not yet feel too greatly alarmed about the workers in the republics to the south becoming more articulate and militant. The fact that 66 per cent of Latin American bonds issued in the United States were in total or partial default by 1938 can probably still be remedied. There remains the important consideration that the economies of the two parts of the Hemisphere are in many respects competitive rather than complementary: especially in regard to agricultural products and raw materials. Again and again this poses the problem before the American monopolists of capital investments and subsequent expansion to the south versus their own home market.
Moreover, the combined annual national income of the 20 Latin American republics, comprising a total population of 120 million, is estimated to be no more than $15 billion. More than half of the population subsists on an annual family income of about $100. Only a small percentage reach $1,000 and upward. These are the serious limitations upon large scale expansion of the Latin American market. After all, such an expansion, under modern economy of commodity production, requires, as its essential prerequisite, a rising level of purchasing power. Neither the Latin American bourgeoisie nor the Yankee imperialists have any intention of bringing this about.
Monopoly capitalism and imperialism sets in motion and constantly strengthens a tendency toward economic stagnation both at home and abroad. England and India furnish the best examples. Another example is Latin America which has served up to now as the main laboratory for the rise of American imperialism. As imperialism develops it puts limitations even upon the export of new capital and goods because of the increasing export of interest on existing investments. This does not bring about any activity within the home economy, neither of added employment, wages, nor of added mass consumption.
With the huge reserve of surplus capital pressing inexorably for profitable fields of investment, Wall Street is turning its attention chiefly to the fabulous riches of Asia, in the first instance, to China. The United States remains in occupation of Japan and half of Korea. American diplomats are well entrenched in Chungking and thousands of marines stand armed on the Chinese mainland. As a result the Wall Street bankers have shut out virtually all imperialist competition from China. By the terms of the British loan they aim to surround Singapore and Hong Kong via London.
Although China is not more than one-third explored geologically, it is known to possess immense coal reserves and large iron ore reserves (estimated at 2 billion tons). It is the world’s leading producer of tungsten and antimony, a considerable supplier of tin (the latter two being strategic war materials not available in the United States), in addition to copper, magnesite, molybdenum, mercury, etc. But these assets, are, no doubt, viewed by the imperialist bandits as merely supplementary to the huge reservoir of exceptionally cheap labor power.
 
Imperialism and the Colonies
China is for Wall Street the first ripe fruit of the war victory, an unlimited source of raw materials, an outlet for the superabundant American products, and a field for investment of new capital. And therefore, throwing their full support to the reactionary Kuomintang regime, the American imperialists are preparing the ground to harvest the anticipated returns. Their first concern was to end the civil war and to “stabilize” and “normalize” the existing turbulent class relations. The independent existence of the Yenan Stalinist forces constituted a threat to their imperialist plans of exploitation and a potential source of new mass rebellion. And so, under the usual “democratic” cover of peace, the Wall Street Ambassadors were successful in obtaining a temporary pacification. This was facilitated by the Stalinists who were only too eager to prevent further mass rebellion.
Already in 1937 they had issued a manifesto setting forth their policy of liquidation and subservience to the reactionary Kuomintang regime. Point five of this manifesto declared:
“The policy of insurrection which aims at the overthrow of the Kuomintang political power, the policy of land confiscation, and the policy of Communist propaganda shall all be disowned and discontinued.”
The possibility of “unification” was facilitated also by the Sino-Russo treaty, signed at the height of the civil war, in which the Kremlin pledged Soviet moral and material aid exclusively to the National Government (of Chungking). Viewed in retrospect, all this conniving stands out clearly as a united conspiracy to crush the revolutionary movement of the Chinese masses. This is about the only real unity attained in China so far.
The American imperialists visualize China as a strategic base to establish their control of the Far East. But China is primarily a backward peasant country. Almost four-fifths of her population subsists on a meager peasants’ lot; 65 percent of these are entirely landless. It is estimated that 81 percent of her cultivable land is owned by only 13 percent of the rural population. Among the latter is the powerful landed gentry. The peasants are landlord-ridden. As a result the Chinese internal market has become increasingly impoverished. The poverty-stricken peasants have no purchasing power. The landed gentry have always been hostile to industrial expansion, fearing that this would attract the landless pariahs away from the land. This gentry form the primary base of the reactionary Kuomintang regime.
Moreover, large scale capital expansion, in the sense of industrialization of China, is impossible unless the peasant is freed from the crushing burden of the medieval economy. But this would carry all the implications of a revolution. Neither the
Chinese urban bourgeoisie nor the Wall Street agents will encourage such a step.
What I said in a previous article on the World Role of US Capitalism will bear repetition here:
Any advance in industrialization by a victorious American capitalism penetrating colonial or semi-colonial spheres in Asia or Africa would bring its own deep repercussions. Instead of allaying the once awakened nationalist independence aspirations of the native populations it would add new fuel to the smouldering fires. Instead of suspending their struggle against imperialist exploitation it would lead this struggle to new heights of intensity.
Capitalism came into being as a progressive force to develop the productive powers of society. Based on its inherent necessity of constant expansion and exploitation its whole system is in decline and decay long before it succeeded in actually developing the productive forces of the largest and economically most backward areas of the world. Although the United States is the latest and the most powerful among great nations aspiring to a redivision of the world, its aspirations are no less unrealizable. It cannot reverse the process of capitalist decay. By its very powers it further aggravates this process and speeds along the revolutionary epoch toward its culmination.
This is how the problem of imperialist expansion in Asia presents itself from the long term perspective. It also produces more immediate repercussions. Already the potentialities of serious revolutionary upheavals exist in Asia no less than they do in Europe. And this, to be sure, is one of the important reasons for the American occupation of two continents. Yet the military occupation holds out an even more terrifying perspective, fraught with deadly consequences for the whole of mankind. Wars and colonial exploitation are equally inseparable aspects of imperialism. And without a doubt, the imperialist penetration of China constitutes the second arm of a gigantic pincer thrown around the Soviet Union. This penetration includes the American training and rearming of the Chinese nationalist army. In other words, American imperialism is attempting to consolidate its power in preparation for World War III.
Such are the major considerations determining the policy of occupation. Economics, politics and military force are here completely integrated. Democratic shields, charters intended to be forgotten and deceptive proclamations of freedom and self-determination receive their real meaning only in terms of this imperialist integration.
 
Footnote
1. Statistical data often differ somewhat depending on the scope and the method of compilation. Since, however, all statistics appearing here are mainly used for the purpose of indicating the general trend, I have dispensed in most cases with citing the source.



CHICAGO – With the beginning of 1940 the Thurman Arnold “anti-trust” crusade got off to a flying start in Chicago. A whole series of indictments were returned against unions in the building trades after preliminary grand jury investigations. Now these “wheels of justice” have slowed down somewhat, but they keep on grinding, with court trial of the first case, that of the tile trade, set for June 3.
Involved in indictments so far are the tile setters, stone cutters, carpenters, electricians and glaziers, in each case some contracting firms and the unions together with some, if not all, of the officials of the unions as individuals. Named in indictments also are the AFL Chicago Building Trades Council and its officials.
As the grand jury investigation continued to grind along, its real objective became increasingly clear. No one is particularly impressed with protestations accompanying the indictments to the effect that the prosecution is not at all intended to interfere with what is classified as legitimate union activities. One look at the actual indictments shows what is happening.
For example, the electrical workers union is indicted for having combined with contracting firms in keeping out material not bearing the union label. The carpenters union is under fire because of its refusal to handle plywood manufactured by non-union labor in unorganized sawmills; a refusal also including some mills organized by the CIO. And to top the whole thing off in proper crusading style, the Building Trades Council was dragged into the net because of the adoption of a motion to support the indicted unions; one of its delegates for having made the motion, another for having given his second, the secretary for having entered it into the record and the president for having put the motion to a vote.
 
Attack Not Aimed at Bosses
It is perfectly true that contracting firms are formally also under fire in this crusade, but that is merely incidental to its real aim. Union members here have very little doubt left that this aim is to bust up the unions. One needs only to remember the fact that in all of these cases, not the contracting firms, but the unions are the ones who take final action and enforce the refusal to handle non-union made material. And it is the unions that are already at this stage of the government’s crusade presented as the real culprits.
That cases of collusion between union officials and contracting firms, and for that matter also of the kind that violates trade union ethics, have existed almost everywhere no one needs to doubt. But it is equally clear that if the Thurman Arnold crusade really intended to get at the bottom of collusion in restraint of trade in the building industry, a really fertile field could be found among the material manufacturers and their monopoly price-fixing, as well as among the banks and insurance companies fixing arbitrarily exorbitant finance charges.
Refusal by union members to handle non-union material, however, is a matter of the very life of organized labor, and its right to press ahead for organization. It is this right that constitutes the greatest thorn in the side of the real monopoly concerns and their governmental hirelings, and it is a right that labor can never afford to give up. For the bosses and their government to be permitted to strike a serious blow against this right would mean a serious blow struck at the very vitals of organized labor.
 
Wage-Cut Drive Follows Indictments
Now that these cases appear in court the union busting aim of the crusade is further clarified. Court cases are costly and cut into union treasuries. The usual newspaper build-up follows in an effort to discredit union practice in the eyes of what is called the public. In reality it means an effort to sow distrust and throw fear into the minds of union members and wage workers in general; on the whole a grandiose scheme of disorganization and weakening of these unions. And let it be noted that a campaign for wage reductions follows right on the heels of the government union-busting crusade.
Even in respect to wage cutting the governmental agencies are also taking the initiative. It began with the WPA. In Chicago, the same as in so many other cities, lack of co-operation and unity of action among the building trades unions made it a relatively easy matter for the government to enforce the 130-hour month and put an end to the prevailing wage principle. By this lengthening of hours, building trades mechanics on the WPA have had their wages cut down to about 65c per hour. But this was only a beginning. A recent announcement by the federal housing authorities has arbitrarily reduced the wage scale for building trades maintenance workers employed on these projects to $1.00 an hour.
The first result is that Chicago building trades workers are asking ever more persistently: whose government is this anyway? Nearly all of them were in the past staunch supporters of the New Deal administration. Now many of them are becoming disillusioned and beginning to learn a fundamental lesson in the role and function of government in a capitalist democracy. That alone is progress. Maybe before these cases are over further steps will follow toward getting the building trades unions out of the conservative backwardness of the past.
 



Editor:
Treason in Norway became the current topic of newspaper columns and conversation following the Hitler invasion of that little country. It seems strange: the German fleet had penetrated up through the Oslo Fjord, through its narrows, past fortifications such as Horten and Droebak which, while not impregnable, still were sufficiently strong, due to their strategic location on the mountain sides, to challenge effectively any battleship. But these fortresses remained silent.
No doubt the workers of Norway were stunned by what appeared to be a double blow – invasion and treason. Even workers of Norwegian origin in this country felt stunned and expressed bitterness mixed with a sense of shame. How could it be? Treason in military circles in a land of peaceful pursuits such as Norway, which was not otherwise given to ordinary corruption so often witnessed in other and more powerful nations. The explanation, however, is not so difficult to find.
First of all it should be remembered that the militarist officers’ caste is pretty much the same everywhere, whether of Prussian or of Napoleonic tradition, whether in a Fascist nation or in a democratic capitalist nation. The officers’ caste of necessity identifies. its interests as bound up with those of the capitalist system.
 
Officers Pro-Capitalist
It is true that Norway had only a small army with a small officers’ caste, not harboring so many of the remnants of feudal nobility. But Norway has also had a labor government for a number of years, supported by the majority of the population. It is in this contradiction presented by a labor government existing alongside of a conscript army officered by militarists who were ardent supporters of the capitalist system, that the explanation for what is called treason must be found.
 
Impossible Straddle
This labor government was of the Social Democratic type and in some respects, at times, a little to the left. It had during its tenure reconciled itself to the continued existence of capitalist exploitation of labor. It governed within the framework of this system. But as a labor government it had to be concerned also about labor reforms. Thus the Norwegian workers enjoyed certain privileges, among which were old age pensions, insurance for unemployment and sickness, vacations with pay, extensive cooperative enterprises and a relatively good standard of wages. To make up for these reforms taxes were relatively heavy in the higher income brackets and supported by measures cutting a bit into profits. In other words the labor government tried to tread the narrow path of the “golden middle way”, balancing itself between labor reforms and certain restrictions upon capitalism.
 
Bided Their Time
This the officers corps could never forgive. It remained the enemy of the labor government, only biding its time. What better time could be afforded than the protection of Hitler’s bayonets to settle accounts with the hated labor government and drive it into exile? Some of these army officers immediately translated their sentiments into action and made common cause with the Fascist dictator. After all, had Hitler not reinforced his guarantee to German capitalism of no strikes, by destroying the trade unions and driving their leaders into exile?
Thus we have here once again a stern lesson in the realities of the class struggle. These army officers threw their hypocritical patriotism to the winds; it was now useless to them, only their allegiance to the exploiters of labor remained decisive. Fair means or foul, anything would do to strike a blow at labor – even at the price of subservience to a greater imperialist power.
 
The Only Alternatives
A labor government cannot for long maintain itself on the extremely narrow margin between the classes in conflict. It must eventually decide entirely for the one or the other class. To put it more accurately: This is but one more lesson showing the workers the alternatives: defeat and destruction by their “own” or foreign capitalists, or a government which is genuinely labor, which is based on the destruction of capitalism – a revolutionary government.



Chicago, Ill.


Wm. Simmons






 



IN THE NAME OF the ancient slogan of “states’ rights” the US Supreme Court by unanimous decision in the Schechter Poultry Case declared the NRA unconstitutional. The reasons set forth in the ruling are not of great significance. The Supreme Court said that “the attempt through the provisions of the code to fix hours and wages of employees of defendents in their intrastate business was not a valid exercize of federal power”. This is merely the legal way of justifying a decision to suit the requirements of the dominant sector of monopoly capital. It screened the judicial execution of a much ballyhooed measure of governmental regulation and restraint once accepted even by the large corporations as a necessary evil but now considered obnoxious by them. The general effect of this ruling, however, is bound to have far-reaching consequences. It is not at all unlikely that the collapse of the NRA will open the gates to much more terrific class conflicts over a vast area and thus help to speed the American workers in a revolutionary direction.
In essence the NRA functioned as a bridge from the lowest point of the crisis toward the upturn of the economic cycle. As the cornerstone of the New Deal structure, it represented an unusual and a daring form of interrelation between the political state and the economic organs of capitalism. A system of legislation that went beyond the traditional concepts of free and untrammeled competition existing from the time of unprecedented expansion of productive forces and accumulation of capital, it also departed widely from the traditional constitutional forms. At its inception the NRA found a general popular acclaim from the broad layers of the American population. But, once the lowest point of the crisis had been safely passed, it was subjected to an intense controversy. Hard-boiled employers and financiers denounced what they looked upon as its socialistic features which stifled free initiative. Among its most ardent champions were the leaders of the American Federation of Labor who, because of their own reactionary political concepts and their impotence in face of the task of labor organization, leaned upon the NRA as their only reed of salvation. While the Socialists were more moderate in their praise and very gentle in their criticism, the Stalinist leaders, on the other hand, incapable of a revolutionary and realistic estimate of the forces at work within class society, simply denounced it as the “Roosevelt Slave Act”. From the outset it became synonymous with the Roosevelt administration and was considered the greatest achievement of the New Deal policies. Today, its collapse is hailed by Wall Street, it is bewailed by the AF of L hierarchy and it has left the petty bourgeois liberals dazed.
An Understanding of these manifestations of contrary views in the face of such recent acclaim is necessary in order to comprehend the significance of the Supreme Court action. A series of other questions arise out of the obituary. Firstly, it would seem reasonable to expect that the collapse of the NRA, which had become synonymous with the Roosevelt regime, would also indicate that the latter has passed its peak of popular acclaim and is on the way to final eclipse. In any event, whatever measures are proposed still to maintain some of the Blue Eagle principle even if only in skeleton form, cannot have very great significance. But inherent in this whole situation is also an element of crisis in the capitalist regime, of conflicts and clashes within its dominant strata. Serious political regroupments of forces can be looked for as well as new attempts to create a third party. At this particular moment the question may not yet arise as to whether the third party attempts will follow the plane of previous populist attempts or whether the entrenched oligarchy in heavy industry and in the large financial institutions will find it necessary to seek new and stronger political weapons in the creation of a militant Fascist party. To a large extent that depends upon the development of the working class forces and the maturing of their revolutionary consciousness. The crisis has left its serious impact on these developments. But the first steps toward the revolutionary radicalization of the American workers, who were stunned by the catastrophic force of the widespread unemployment during its downward curve, could be expected to reveal itself only in the turn toward revival and upswing.
In the United States the tremendous economic crisis struck with a terrific force and with all the characteristics of a social crisis. Due to the high development of its national economy, the contradictions involved in the accumulation of capital and the falling rate of profit had reached ever more acute forms. Out of the total capital which was set into motion in the process of capitalist production there was a relatively much more rapid growth of the proportion of constant capital when compared to variable capital. In other language, with the increased mechanization of industry the relative proportion of labor employed diminished. And since labor power is the source of all surplus value it follows that with its relative decrease there was a fall in the rate of profit on the total capital invested. At the moment when the overproduction of capital in the means of production – to the extent that it served as capital, or served for the exploitation of labor – and when the rate of profit fell below the point at which accumulation of capital was advantageous to the capitalist class as a whole, the crisis occurred. This presented the problem for American capitalism of finding compensation for the falling rate of profit by increasing the total mass of capital upon which profit is made. It had to be accomplished at the expense of the workers’ wages since that was the only way in which profits could be restored. Concretely it was carried out by the so-called measures of crisis readjustment. They proceeded from the already drastically reduced general wage level to a raising of the intensity of exploitation of labor. Then followed the measures to expand credits and to provide liquid capital by heavy governmental expenditures together with efforts to raise the commodity price level. Inflation resulted. Primarily these measures served the purpose of restoring confidence within capitalism in the continuity of the process of reproduction. On the whole, however, the NRA scheme fitted admirably into this process of capitalist restoration. It became a strong-arm method to save the tottering banking system, forestall bankruptcies of the large corporations and to set capitalism going once more on the road forward to new profits. Roosevelt asserted very clearly from the outset that his aim was to restore the profitability of industry. This sums up the significance of the NRA in its general economic aspect.
But the political implications of the NRA were no less important. Essentially it consisted of two distinct parts: Firstly, its code regulation features to secure what was called “fair competition”, by the elimination of “destructive price cutting”, the regulation of trade practises, etc. Secondly, its social relations feature of labor provisions with its regulation of minimum wages and maximum hours, and above all the famous Section 7a covering the “rights of collective bargaining”. Each of these parts operated under close governmental supervision. While both were economic in their nature they had far-reaching political implications. In every respect the code regulations favored the larger corporations which were also the dominant force in the code authority bodies. They operated in the direction of a greater concentration of industry, a greater centralization of finance together with a strengthening of monopoly capital against the weaker competitors. In its real essence this served as a preparation of the internal market to stand the strain of new imperialist expansion. The NRA social relations feature, however, was yet more fundamental in character. For the authors of the New Deal policies it meant the establishment of a new social equation in which capital and labor were to cooperate under governmental regulation and supervision. The reasons for this conception were obvious and clear. Capitalism had plunged into its crises. A large unemployed army had shown its temper in restlessness, creating possibilities of greater convulsions ensuing from its desperate position. A resurgence of labor militancy could certainly be expected with a turn in the business cycle. The conservative unions had disintegrated and had become reduced to a narrow shell. Would they be sufficient in that form for capitalism to rely upon to stem a possible tide toward more militant organization and action? This was the crucial problem and the aim of this social relations feature was therefore pictured as an aid to labor organization. Recognition of the “right to collective bargaining” held the center of the stage in all the general ballyhoo for the “forgotten man”. In reality it meant very little, except in the sense that it did become a stimulus to the powerful stream of proletarians, which at the turn of the business cycle, gravitated to the trade unions. Workers joined the conservative unions in large numbers. The AF of L experienced a revival and growth fully in accord with the NRA. scheme of preventing more militant organization and action. The AF of L officials in turn accepted the mission laid out for them as salesmen of the New Deal, encouraging labor to look to Roosevelt to usher in the new age of “fullness of life” for all, and to enable the salesmen to call upon him or the established labor boards to put the governmental stamp of approval alongside of the union label of their betrayals in strike settlements.
Thus the actual chief purposes of the NRA labor provisions were clearly established. The recovery efforts in their early stages needed the unified support of all classes of the population. In harmony therewith, the labor provisions were designed to prevent independent class activities, to prevent militant action by the workers and to turn their struggles away from the basic reliance on their own organized power and into governmental channels where they could be tied up in the complicated system of labor boards. But the large masses, who began action on their own account, streamed into the conservative trade unions for entirely different purposes. They proceeded in efforts to turn these unions into weapons of battle against the employers for the right of organization, to make collective bargaining real and in order to regain a higher standard of living. Militant struggle by the workers could not be prevented altogether – far from it – as the history of this period shows.
The most powerful corporations which, pressed by necessity at the time and due to their fear of independent class activity by the workers, had accepted the NRA, once its machinery was in operation, drove headlong for company unionism and resisted actual union organization with the most violent means. Aided by the otherwise incompetent trade union bureaucrats, whom they themselves held in contempt, and aided by the cunning devices of the labor provisions, further by the sheer force of the political state, they managed to check two strike waves and to keep these developing struggles from reaching maturity. Whatever concessions were gained by the workers in these strikes, accrued to them, with but few exceptions, by virtue of their militancy in organization and militant fighting for their demands. With particular clarity this period demonstrated the contrast of gains made by turning the unions into actual instruments of struggle and the futility or defeat in relying solely on the governmental agencies of the NRA. The latter course, if not enforcing an outright sell-out, usually wound up in the courts to meet defeat for the workers or to remain on the calendar indefinitely. Not less than 411 such labor cases were pending in the courts when the code regulations were found to be unconstitutional. This lesson will not have been in vain so far as the workers are concerned. They learn essentially by their own experiences. And no doubt, these bitter experiences did more than any other factor to discredit the NRA in their estimation even before it actually went out of existence.
Aided by a partial “natural” upswing, the NRA had done its work, and a division of opinion regarding its future set in among the various sections of the ruling class. In the upper circles of the trade union bureaucracy this has been interpreted as a division between the exploiters who were motivated by particular greed and avarice and those harboring views friendly to labor. That is not at all the case. The real situation stands quite differently. Capitalism had been relieved, during the course of the NRA, of its main worry in two directions. Profits began to return and the initiative for independent class activity was checked for the time being. These tasks accomplished, the big bankers and the owners of the large industrial corporations became more violently articulate in their protests against “governmental interference in business”. Some of the employers, notably the retail traders, favored the continuation of the code regulations, but their opinions weighed less in the scale. The NRA was no longer necessary to the real plutocrats. Their smaller competitors had been weakened and they felt confident again of their power to deal new and smashing blows to the workers in the field of the class struggle. American capitalism does not yet need the regimentation or the governmental supervision typified by the NRA as a “permanent” system. It has obtained the breathing space that it sought and which Roosevelt so accomodatingly helped to provide. Hence, there should be no illusions of any serious differentiation between Roosevelt and the dominant capitalist forces. It is true that he had to speak harsh words to them and chide them as money-changers motivated by selfish interests at the time when they were stranded on the dangerous reefs of the crisis; but that was done essentially in order to lend to it the coloring of an all-American team pulling together for the NRA. Now its mission has been performed and some of the vital pillars supporting the capitalist economic structure that were at the point of crumbling have been reenforced. The structure emerges stronger than before. The rule of the entrenched oligarchy continues through the traditional, even if stiffened forms of bourgeois democracy. In the breathing space it has obtained it can be counted upon to proceed with absolute unrestraint, wielding fire and sword against the working class. But in this breathing space the historical contradictions will ripen further.
Has the profitability of industry been restored? Here are some indications. As a matter of fact, profits have boomed amazingly. For instance, a report of the National Emergency Council, which was the coordinating body of all the administration’s recovery agencies, cites figures of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to show that 290 companies which made a profit of $100,000 during the first nine months of 1932 increased this to $430,600,000 during the same period in 1934. And what happened to wages during that period is shown by figures from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. The average per capita weekly wage in all manufacturing industries was $18.50 during the first nine months of 1932. It was $19.11 during the same period in 1934. In other words, while the firms listed above boosted their profits more than 4,300%, labor’s wage was raised 61 cents a week. In view of the rise in the commodity price level, this latter figure tells its own authentic story from real life in contrast to the pretended aim of the NRA. of restoring the purchasing power to the masses of the people. A similar story can be related by facts and figures also from real life, concerning its second pretended aim of spreading employment through the limitation of working hours. In most cases, the code regulations provided for a maximum work week of 40 hours, though in some cases a much higher maximum was permitted. If compared to the 1929 average work week of 48 hours these regulations would be of some significance; but when compared to the crisis period, very little indeed. Thus during the first five months of 1933, just prior to the time the code regulations went into effect, the average work week in manufacturing industry for full time and part time workers put together were 34.7 hours.
However, with th’e upward change of the business cycle the accumulation of capital proceeds apace. Its organic composition has risen to higher levels. The relative growth of the proportion of constant capital as compared to variable capital continues to increase. A concrete example in this respect also will prove illuminating. This is taken from the steel industry, the giant amongst the basic industries. The several large corporations have recently installed in several of the important plants high speed modern steel mills costing upward of twelve million dollars and capable, through continuous operation, of producing 2,240 tons of 75-inch sheet steel in 24 hours, or 680,000 tons a year. What an industrial advance is here presented over the ordinary hot sheet mills of eight plants rated at 60,000 tons a year capacity! In effect this means greater mechanization of industry with a diminishing proportion of labor employed. Surplus capital will again exist in greater abundance alongside of a surplus population, and the existence of the one will be the condition of the other. The very same law which drove the fall of the rate of profit down to the point of crisis, operates again, laying the basis for new and enlarged contradictions in American national economy and heralding deeper plunges into more turbulent crises. In the light of the experience of the NRA. what will then follow? Certainly then, if not sooner, we will be face to face with a capitalist regime seeking a stronger political weapon and carrying the coat of arms of Fascism.
The business cycles which in former decades reflected the fluctuations of a process of capitalist growth have now become a mechanism of its general decay. As the United States in the postwar period firmly established its dominant position in world economy, the changes in the cycle began to have a much more profound effect on the consciousness of its working masses. The misery and destitution of the crisis engendered a seething discontent; but it was held in check largely by the frightful scourge of unemployment or the fear of unemployment. However, with the first signs of an upswing the enormous mass vitality, formerly held back, found an outlet in powerful strikes, practically engulfing the whole country during the life of the NRA. The economic changes gave this vitality redoubled force. Union consciousness was displayed in instance after instance, in general strikes or threats of general strikes in protest against police or military intervention. Because of the general situation of American capitalism it is not now in a position to give the concessions it could give during past decades. Even the concessions implied in the NRA. were considered too great. In the course of further developments the violent resistance to the most elementary rights of working class organization and to its most elementary demands is due to reach monstrous proportions. But this will find its counterpart in a stormy revival penetrating much deeper into every fibre of the trade union movement. No doubt the despicable bureaucracy of Green and Co. will endeavor to tighten its claws but only to find itself confronted with a greater explosive force. This does not mean that these struggles can be confined within the framework of the trade unions. On the contrary, they will be only the beginnings of the political consciousness of the working class.
Alongside of these developments, American capitalism is driven inexorably to greater world conquests. A real economic upswing cannot be based merely on the internal market. It will have for its objective the most aggressive intervention in the present chaos of world economy. Uninterrupted growth of armaments and military conflicts stand already on the agenda, to be followed by the final capitalist “solution” – Fascism. It knows no other solution and it will in the final analysis stop at nothing short of that if it has its way. Such are the perspectives after the end of the NRA.
Henceforth all depends on the conscious role that the working class will play. Its crucial force was held in check during the crisis. It is now entering upon a new road. Released from the entanglements of the complicated NRA provisions, its own independent class activity becomes so much more decisive. That alone will avail. Defense of its rights in militant struggles is now imperative. The change in the business cycle affords grandiose possibilities. But the fundamental lesson to be learned from the events so far is: Against the proposed capitalist solution it is necessary to develop these struggles toward the working class solution – socialism.
Arne SWABECK



The complete stenographic report, printed in the Daily Worker for Dec. 14, fully confirms the unusual character of the Browder-Thomas debate, held In the New York Madison Square Garden on November 27. It reveals in some respects a historical reversal of roles of the two parties: The Communist Party now standing on the platform of social-patriotism while the Socialist Party, endeavoring to rid itself of its right wing ballast, is moving in a leftward direction and its representative presenting the important arguments in the debate.
Norman Thomas defended militantly the position of the Socialist Party. It was, of course, not the position of the Social Democracy of 1914 nor the position of the Old Guard. Thomas spoke from the point of view of the Socialist workers who have moved leftward and attacked the perfidious social-patriotism of Stalinism. Undoubtedly he was more to the left than usual, blithely accused by Browder of using phrases in the style of Trotsky. “It is certainly something new in the world when Socialists find obstacles to the united front in a supposed move to the right by the Communists,” said Browder. He was bewildered and unable to understand that Socialists could actually have learned from the disastrous international working class defeats and draw certain conclusions tending in a revolutionary direction.
 
The Lines Cross
Apparently Thomas feels the sharp rightward turn of the Stalinists equally bewildering. “Here we are confused,” he said, “we are confused by the nature and the magnitude of the change, by the far point in the arch to which the pendulum has swung.” As for Browder, the only thing that can be said in this respect, is that he adhered to the present “line.” In a bureaucratic system where leaders appear, not in their own rights or by virtue of their own political abilities but simply because they are the most consummate and most servile type of mediocrities, sufficiently flexible, however, to fit into this system, nothing else could be expected.
So Thomas argued for the Socialist road, in reality building up a case, not against Communism, but against its Stalinist emasculation. He quoted profusely from the “third period” position of the Stalinists. Their official declarations aimed to “break-up the reformist unions,” and to “destroy the American Federation of Labor.” They “rejected any alliance with Social Democracy.” One quotation read: “Therefore, to beat the enemy, the bourgeoisie, we must direct the main blow against its chief social bulwark, against the chief enemy of Communism, in the working class, against Social Democracy, against Social Fascism.” To this there was no answer from Browder. An honest leader, when departing from such a position and going over to the exact opposite, would, in any case, be obligated to admit the falsity of the past and explain to his following the reason for the change. But Browder made no such attempt. He made no attempt to defend the Communist road and he could not do so since the ideological baggage of Stalinism is now entirely devoid of any ideas of Communism.
 
“Come to Jesus”
Browder had thoughts only for an escape from the pointed charges made by Thomas. Throughout the debate he reiterated continuously in the most garrulous, cringing and grovelling fashion his plea for unity:
“Why can’t we unite on a wide campaign? ... Why can’t we work jointly in these mass organizations? ... Why can’t we unite forces to begin building? ... Why don’t we do it?”
Why, oh why – in the style of the evangelist – why don’t you come to Jesus tonight? Only the deepest feeling of revulsion could arise from the cringing tone of this supposed spokesman for communism, repugnant and distasteful to upright, conscious workers.
Browder pleaded for a united front not only for the everyday struggles of the workers, but also for the defeat of the class enemy:
“Comrades,” he said, “let me put the question sharply: Between today and a future victory of Fascism in the United States there stands historically only one thing – a powerful people’s anti-Fascist front, a Farmer-Labor Party.”
No, this is false to the core: Between today and a future victory of Fascism there stands first of all the historic necessity of a revolutionary party and a revolutionary policy. Only with this essential prerequisite can a united front defeat Fascism. And whatever may be said in favor of one side, it is certain that neither of the parties whose representatives met in this debate present such a policy or constitute such a party.
 
People’s Front
To Norman Thomas this new “line” of the C.P. appeared bewildering and unreal. He undoubtedly had in mind the frantic pleas for unity. Otherwise the new “line” stood out in a very real sense in every issue touched upon in the debate. The most important of these issues deserve special comment here.
Some caustic criticism of the people’s front was offered by Thomas, motivated in the main by his doubts of the “sincerity” of his opponents. The People’s Front in France he considered, however, to be a great achievement. In view of this it seems strange that he should find faults with the New York C.P. election platform from which he quoted the demands for, “a people’s front, uniting workers, farmers, unemployed, professionals, small business men, Protestants, Catholics, Jews, Socialists, Democrats, Republicans.” On a small scale, and adapted to the American scene, this platform merely proposed what the people’s front in France actually is. The difference is only in magnitude; the policy, with its confusion and deception, is the same. In France the Radical Socialist Party, whose leader is Herriot, one of the senior partners in the Laval government, gives its own peculiar political nuance to the people’s front. This party still represents today that political instrument of the big bourgeoisie which is best adapted to the traditions and the prejudices of the petty-bourgeoisie. Its program is the national defense of imperialist France.
 
The Franco-Soviet Pact
Thomas did assert that it troubled him a little to see his “Communist friends make more love to Herriot than to Leon Blum.” This love-making, however, flows from definite political considerations and from the kind of political considerations which have now become the guiding line for Soviet foreign policy under the Stalin regime. In this instance, most particularly, the considerations of the Franco-Soviet pact. Its contradiction with the class interests of the proletariat should be apparent, for Thomas was absolutely correct when he complained about the love making to Herriot. To the extent he did, his criticism of the Franco-Soviet pact he was also correct. But he did not nearly say all that should have been said. He reminded the audience of the Stalin-Laval communique to the effect that:
“M. Stalin understands and fully approves the national defense policy of France in keeping her armed forces on a level required for security.”
Thomas called the Franco-Soviet pact a “military pact with that dishonest broker, Laval of France ... an endorsement of an army which in bourgeois France is still a probable source of Fascist trouble, an endorsement of an army under a Premier who even now is probably double-crossing Russia!” In his rebuttal he exclaimed “a very terrible responsibility was taken by Stalin when he specifically told Communists to stop their agitation within the French army, for that, and only that, was the meaning of his endorsement of French military preparations.”
And what did Browder have to say on this question? He brushed it aside in a very simple bureaucratic fashion. To him this criticism had no significance whatever, for had not “the Socialists and Communists registered a tremendously big increase in votes” in the municipal elections? But this, Mr. Browder, entirely begs the question. Big election gains, yes even tremendously big election gains, might very well have been scored without the existence of the Franco-Soviet pact. Moreover, in the final analysis, these election gains can prove only pyrrhic victories because they rest upon a foundation of political solidarization between Stalin and the brigands of French, imperialism. This strike-breaking act of Stalin, who “fully approves the national defense policy of France,” Browder was unable to explain away or even to cover up.
 
The Smell of Oil
Turning to the question of the League of Nations and sanctions, Thomas remained aggressively critical. When seeking to dramatize his point by saying be wished he could address himself to the dead amongst the Ethiopian and Italian soldiers who had “fallen because of Italy’s use of tanks driven by oil sold by the Soviet Republic,” he was greeted with boos and hisses from the largest section of the audience which was made up of Stalinist sympathizers. On the question of an oil embargo he accused the Soviet Union of class-collaboration. Together with this he stressed the necessity of organizing the strength of the workers to impose their own sanctions, which he did not believe could be done by “trailing along with the League of Nations, with British imperialism, with Britain’s navy in the Mediterranean and with the sale of oil to Mussolini ait the same time.”
Unquestionably the Soviet Union could have set a magnificent example and inspired the workers everywhere to struggle against war, if it had refused demonstratively to sell oil to Mussolini. But to Browder this meant nothing. In his opinion such a refusal would mean merely face-saving device for the Soviet Union because Italy could get plenty of oil elsewhere. He insisted the Soviet Union was doing something more practical for Ethiopia, “through its growing international power in diplomacy,” to work for a real world-wide embargo, as he called it, against Italy. So far, however, the road of diplomacy has produced nothing tan gible outside of the dastardly Hoare-Laval “peace” plan for the dismemberment of Ethiopia. Sanctions, in the thieves jargon of diplomacy, means war. And the League of Nations, to which the Soviet Union is affiliated, is beginning to assume its proper function as the general staff of world imperialism.
 
Jingo Browder
What were the positions presented on the question of the defense of the Soviet Union? On this point Browder spoke without equivocation. Picturing an attack by Germany and Japan upon the Soviet Union, he asked: “Will the militant Socialists adopt a position of neutrality? Will they advocate the slogan ‘Keep America Out of War?’ Impossible!” What jingoism! In this exclamation Browder nominated himself as recruiting-sergeant for “Uncle Sam”; and it did not make matters any better that he misnamed this as “patriotism to the cause of the working class, patriotism to the only country of Socialism today.”
This only gave Thomas an opportunity to ask:
“Since when have Marxists learned the doctrine of the state so as to believe that workers in minority parties can turn capitalistic armies into red armies before those armies have been defeated as in Czarist Russia? ... The chief consideration is to organize the workers against capitalism, against fascism, against war, for world-wide socialism ”
Yes, this is the chief consideration.
We may ask further, would the United States under any condition enter into a war for the defense of the Soviet Union, for the defense of the country of Socialism? Obviously not. It would enter a war only for its own imperialist purposes, and to take the position, taken by Browder, could mean nothing else but to throw the working class support behind the government controlled by the Morgans and the Rockefellers for the furtherance of these imperialist purposes. These people have entirely forgotten that the enemy is at home. And besides, the only way really to defend the Soviet Union is to fight against one’s own bourgeoisie and to organize in the process of this fight the world revolutionary party that will be capable of making an end to capitalism.
On the final question of importance in this debate, namely the proletarian dictatorship, it might be said that Thomas had a certain justification for asking Browder, in view of the latters boast of “the final and irrevocable victory of socialism on one sixth of the earth,” if Russia is still so weak that she cannot extend civil liberties now within her own borders. But Thomas displayed equally the falsity of his own position in regards to this cardinal question of Marxism in arguing against a “party dictatorship.” A revolutionary party can have no interests* separate and apart from those of the working class and consequently it can have no interests opposed to those of the working class. Nor is this what has taken place in the Soviet Union. On the contrary. The party is strangled by a bureaucracy that has usurped all power to itself. Hence the struggle of the revolutionists is. for the rebuilding of the party of Lenin and Trotsky.
The Madison Square Garden debate saw Norman Thomas as presenting the important arguments on every fundamental point, militantly, critical and arguing from the left against the reactionary position of Browder. As said in the beginning of this article, this indicates in some respects a historical reversal of roles of the two parties. But the Socialist Party has so far taken only one step leftward.



Labor widens rift with Roosevelt, announce recent capitalist: newspaper headlines. This, of course, refers to the official American Federation of Labor family. It appears that William Green – usually so soft spoken – together with the more belligerent John L. Lewis has made some strong remarks on the action taken by the President in extending the automobile code. Advertised by the Federation officials as “Labor’s hope and strength”, Roosevelt now turns around and kicks these labor officials in the pants. He feels he can afford to do so. The automobile agreement of March 25 last year put the manufacturers on the offensive while the automobile unions still suffer from the demoralization of the policy pursued by the A.F. of L. Executive Council.
 
A Dilemma
The Executive Council faces a dilemma. Organization of the unorganized under its leadership has come to a stop. The “perfect” equilibrium of cooperation or labor, industry and government is coming tumbling down over the beads of these labor officials like a house of cards. Instead of striking out boldly like real leaders and utilizing the favorable mass sympathy for organization they stall and sabotage in fear of the consequences of the struggle. Now these craven souls feel that they have been let down. Dangers threaten their position from two directions.
Obviously the government is moving toward some form of compulsory arbitration in labor disputes while the rank and file union membership is showing increasing signs of discontent and restlessness. A most damning indictment of the A.F. of L. officials is contained in the rather frank statements publicly made, that in the inner circles of the administration it is felt that the A.F. of L. cannot organize the basic industries – steel, rubber and automobiles.
 
Militant Bureaucrats
Despairing of obtaining a benevolent hearing for union recognition from the powerfully entrenched monopoly capitalists the Federation officials are turning their attention in the other direction. And these despairing officials are becoming aggressively militant when they face the large scale rank and file rebellion they see brewing on every hand. It is no secret that they are still, despite their announced rift, toying with the idea of coming to an agreement with Roosevelt’s proposed industrial truce of no strikes. Only the open shop and company union employers demand too much. They demand a complete surrender and the Federation officials cannot remain unmindful of the pressure from the ranks, so they move into action, not in reality against the employers but against the rebellion in order to head it off.
At this moment the otherwise soft spoken officials are preparing to reinforce their blast against all opposition and against all progressives, whom they label “reds”, with a campaign of expulsions, beginning in the very fortress of the basic industries, in steel. All local lodges of the steel workers union that sent delegates to the recent Pittsburgh progressive conference they threaten with outright expulsion. Make no mistake about it; their next step will be outlawing of strikes. This is the most serious feature of the present situation.
 
The Auto Agreement
In several respects the automobile agreement of last year entered into by the Federation officials became a turning point. It was a blow to the whole trade union movement. It advanced the automobile manufacturers into a position of being the spearheads in the struggle against organization of the unorganized in the basic industries. This agreement provided that any group of workers may be represented in conferences for collective bargaining with the employers. In other words, it legalized the company union and put the trade unions on the defensive. The trade unions, of course, had rich possibilities of embracing the great majority of the workers and becoming the recognized spokesmen of all the workers in the industry. Due, however, to this treacherous agreement these possibilities were frittered away, as the recent elections in the Detroit automobile plants, conducted by the despised Wolman Board, show.
 
The Result
In these elections conducted in twelve different plants, 60,000 workers were eligible to vote. A total of 53,771 ballots were cast and the voting gave the following results: Voting for unaffiliated representatives. 40,143; for employers’ associations (company unions), 5,440; for the Associated Automobile Workers of America, 3,124; for the A.F. of L, 2,280; and for the Mechanics Education Society, 314. These two last mentioned organizations opposed the elections and advised the workers not to participate.
There is, however, a vast difference in voting in plant, elections for a union and in fighting for a union, By the methods of the former it is safe to say that a union would never be established. It is true that the pressure of capitalist exploitation and the intense speed-up system remains in either case; but the workers bending their backs over the assembly lines under surveillance of foremen and superintendents are not at all free to vote according to their desires. Their job is at slake, and they have no guarantee against a loss.
Striking for union recognition is an entirely different matter. It brings out the lighting qualities that the workers possess and it instills into them a fighting spirit. The feeling of strength by solidarity of mass numbers becomes a powerful factor and obviates the fear of the job that is at stake. Workers move forward by action and in the struggle they will feel that they act directly for their union. Even the fierce onslaughts they meet from the employers when on strike tend to stiffen their resistance.
But this is all assuming that the unions give actual leadership in the struggle for recognition. This is an imperative prerequisite. Precisely this is what has been lacking in the automobile industry as in other basic industries and this is what, has enabled the directors of monopoly capital together with their executives in Washington to kick the A.F. of L. leaders in the pants. For this situation the Federation officials themselves bear the whole responsibility.
They had nothing more to offer the masses seeking organization than the elusive and deceptive section 7a. They staked their all on the benevolence of Roosevelt. To adopt an aggressive policy of organization was the farthest from their minds and to engage in a serious struggle for organization entirely to be avoided. Failing to secure the benefits of Section 7a they referred in appeals to the various branches of the Labor Relations Board machinery. If it was not clear then, it should at least be clear now, that these boards function for the purpose of covering up the cunning measures put over on the unions.
Under these conditions it was very natural that the capitalist interests successfully assumed the offensive. To prevent demoralization has become a life and death matter insofar as their heavy profits are concerned because they quickly learned by experience that when the workers from the basic industries enter the union they seek to turn them into instruments of struggle against the intense exploitation. The directors of the big corporations therefore set all forces they could command into motion in the light. Accordingly the government, which during the early NRA period appeared in the role of benevolent neutrality to union organization, of necessity shifts its emphasis more in the direction of its real role of serving monopoly capital. Policemen’s clubs, court injunctions, fear gas and steel helmeted soldiers are ready to back it up.
More than ever an aggressive policy of organization and struggle is necessary if the trade unions are to meet this offensive successfully. But that is not the policy of Green and Company. There should not be any illusions that the announced rift will mean a change of policy on their part or a change of their relations with capitalism. It is true that they cannot remain unmindful of the rank and file pressure for action and the rebellion that is brewing behind this pressure, but the orientation is to crush the rebellion. Attempts to outlaw strikes will follow in an effort to throw demoralization into the ranks.
It is not decided in advance that this will succeed. The American workers are getting into a lighting mood and learning how to deal with those who betray them. The policy of Green and Company foreshadows deep going splits and break-ups in the A.F. of L. A warning now is timely so that these break-ups may become only a separation of the officialdom from the rank and file. In any event the preparation for the struggle with the trade union bureaucracy is now a duty of all real progressive elements. The sooner it is prepared for in an effective manner the more assurance there will be that the ranks of the trade unions will remain united and that the separation or the splits will be only from the reactionary officialdom.
 



Not to be outdone by the Kingfish, Father Coughlin has taken a step ahead in the formation of a national political organization. This while Huey Long went to Iowa to receive the acclaim extended to him and his third party project by the convention of the Farmers Holiday Association. But it is really not to be understood as a matter of competition between the two; just listen to what Father Coughlin has to say: “I was married to my competitor by the press. Well, I haven’t asked for divorce papers. He has never said anything about me to which I could take exception, and I don’t propose to say anything about him to which he could take exception.”
Says It Is Not a Third Party
Of course, the radio priest insists that his organization is not a political party; it is not a third party, he says. According to his plans it is to take shape through a number of so-called state conventions similar to the one held in Michigan last week, and Coughlin maintains that it is to be only an instrument to provide a little more articulate expression so that the representatives in Congress may know what the people back home want.
This sounds modest enough and it lends to the whole scheme an outward appearance of righteousness The democratic rights of the people back home are to be reinforced. But in the shaping of his party the Machiavellian shepherd made no provisions whatever for democratic rights. All supporters are to accept in full the sixteen points of Coughlin’s program, or, as he says, “they can’t belong.” His organization scheme calls for the appointment by him of a national council of twelve persons. Further appointments to be made by this national council will create state committees, ranging from seven to fourteen, which again will appoint their own aides. Nowhere are elections provided for, and “der Fuehrer” Coughlin will soon announce his selections for the national council. A hierarchy much more complete than that of the Catholic church and ominously reminiscent of the fascist structure of organization is here in preparation.
 
Makes Bid For Farmers, Workers
Both Coughlin and Long are now making special efforts to obtain farmer and labor support for their movements. William Collins came to Coughlin’s Michigan state convention, officially delegated by the A.F. of L. Executive Council together with Edward Kennedy, Secretary of the National Farmers Union from Chicago. Among the members of Congress attending were William Lemke of North Dakota, co-author of the Lemke-Frazier farm mortgage bill and William P. Connery Jr. of Massachusetts who is co-author of the Connery-Black 30-hour week bill and the Wagner-Connery trades disputes bill in addition to being Chairman of the House Committee of Labor.
This set-up fits in well with the Coughlin scheme of labor organization. In his program the right of labor to organize in unions is proclaimed and it is insisted that it is the duty of the government to protect these organizations against the vested interests of wealth. But when broadcasting, Coughlin adds that strikes and lockouts are absolutely unnecessary, indicating that the “protection” he demands means a form of actual state control, including compulsory arbitration Since his Michigan state convention, Coughlin has promised that his next step will be the organization of the automobile workers of the state. Will they respond to his efforts? No doubt many of them are taken in by his high-pressure demagogy; but it is not likely that they should desire any more government “protection” for their unions after last year’s sell-out experience. If the present strike action of the Toledo Chevrolet workers is an indication of the mood of the other automobile workers they can be expected to decline that kind of unionism.
 
Real Appeal Is to Petty Bourgeoisie
Otherwise the appeal of Father Coughlin, the same as the appeal o Huey Long, is addressed essentially to the lower middle class, to the small businessmen, the farmers and the petty bosses. A good many of those among them who in former times managed to save up for a rainy day and since saw the bank crash, those who were hit by bank foreclosures and live in the shadows of economic insecurity but know that wealth is available in abundance, turn once again to the political demagogue and harken to the glamour of a middle class panacea. And in Father Coughlin’s political organization many of them undoubtedly expect to find a haven. To make it attractive for them he announces that its national council and its state committees will be composed of appointed representatives of what he calls various groups, such as labor, farmers, veterans, small manufacturers, youth and possibly certain specialized industries. Of course, this is the characteristic middle class approach of defining interests by business groups and avoiding any open acknowledgement of class lines.
Among other outstanding points in the Coughlin program it is worth noting that while national ownership – that is government ownership – is demanded for banking, credit and currency; power, light, oil and natural gas, together with the “God given” natural resources, emphasis is placed on his belief in private ownership of all other property and of upholding the right to private property; yet it is to be controlled for the public good. What he is speaking of in this connection is not just personal property such as homes, radios, cars or toothbrushes, but private property in the means of production. But it is this form of private property that Coughlin believes in that secures for the owners thereof the right to exploitation of labor. It secures for them the right of acquiring profits which also carries with it the power of the suppression of the laboring masses. In the same program Coughlin declares for the abolition of tax exempt bonds and for the broadening of the basis of taxation founded upon the ownership of wealth and the capacity to pay and together with that it declares for an alleviation of taxation. His program is quite vague and contradictory hut this is precisely what allows him to play on the feelings and the emotions of all classes.
 
Coughlin Explains His System
The political padre explains the system that he is aiming for as follows:
“I believe that the economic system of tomorrow will not be that type of socialism which desires to nationalize not only natural resources, but also all productive industry. Nor will it be capitalism wedded to the theory of private financialism and production for a profit. It will be a new system based on the belief that wealth is not money, but that wealth is created by the union of capital and labor; and that this wealth must be distributed, even through the intervention of the government, in such a way that every laborer who cooperates in producing this wealth shall have that share of it which will enable him to enjoy, according to his merits, the things which we are capable of growing and of manufacturing as a nation.”
 
Classes and Production
Yes, only when labor power is applied to capital can the process of production take place; but this is not the union that Coughlin presents it to be and cannot he such a union unless the social relations of capitalism are abolished and productive industry socialized. The sum total of relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society. These relations are today capitalist relations, based on production for profit and exploitation of labor. This is the real foundation on which rises the legal and political superstructure – the foundation of the government. Consequently all government intervention for the distribution of wealth under capitalism has served only to strengthen the system of exploitation and to protect the owners of wealth against those who have none. The system of tomorrow, Coughlin says, will not be socialism, the government which he proposes shall intervene will therefore not be a Soviet government and to make his stand more clear he adds: “I eschew all radicalism.” Would a distribution of wealth enabling the laborer to enjoy the things which we produce as a nation be thinkable on any other basis? That is excluded and this exposes the fraudulent position from which the Machiavellian shepherd appeals for the support of the working class.
It is well to remember the fact that just as this resent stage of development when the American working class is displaying in brilliant fashion its rebellious nature and militant qualities in powerful strikes, Coughlin steps to the fore proclaiming that strikes are absolutely unnecessary and that the system to aim for is not socialism The direction of his national political organization will be the opposite. Its actual role can therefore be none other than, under the cover of the panaceas offered, to sidetrack the working class from its path to revolution which alone can guarantee a distribution of wealth that will enable the laborer to enjoy the things which we produce as a nation.
 



THE RECENT battle of vituperation between General Hugh S. Johnson, Senator Huey P. Long and Father Coughlin brought the latter two into particular public prominence. Apparently the choice gibes flung across the field attracted the most immediate attention and aroused the celebrated sporting instinct of the average American citizen. Johnson pictured the two reading a lurid story of an American Hitler riding into Washington at the head of troops and exclaimed: “That would be definite enough for Huey because he knows what part of the horse he can be.” Long came back pronouncing his contempt for the “lately lamented, pampered ex-Crown Prince, General Hugh S. Johnson, one of those satellites loaned by Wall Street to run the Government”. “What do you call it [the New Deal] ?” he demanded. “Is it government? It looks more like the St. Vitus dance to me.” The political padre rolled up the sleeves on his priestly robe and called the General the “New Deal’s greatest casualty, who never faced an enemy nor successfully faced an issue.”
In official bourgeois political circles the Kingfish had previously been looked upon as a bumptious clown, seeking mainly personal attention. Apparently he had not made up his mind whether to confine himself in politics to his personal domain, the State of Louisiana, where he rules supreme in the style of the late Tammany boss Tweed over what he calls “the finest collection of lawmakers money can buy,” or to aim for a broader national career. Little attention was paid in these official circles to Father Coughlin or to the pompous messages issuing from the Shrine of the Little Flower in the Detroit suburb of Royal Oak. Now they are taken seriously. It should not surprise anybody if the politicians of the New Deal already anticipate the cold shivers when contemplating the next presidential elections. Huey Long has announced that there will be a third party candidate in the field. While Father Coughlin still insists it is “Roosevelt or ruin”, there are certain signs of a political affinity between these two master demagogues.
Revolutionists also face the necessity of turning their attention in all seriousness to Long and Coughlin. We cannot be concerned merely with their personal attributes and their demagoguery. More than that is needed, for they represent a specific phenomenon of the epoch of capitalist decline and decay. They have become originators of movements of a specific kind, corresponding tothe conditions created by the appearance of certain elements of capitalist decay in the United States. What is the role of these movements represented by Long and Coughlin? What constitutes their class basis? In which direction are they headed? Do they represent Leftward movements – that is, Leftward of the traditional capitalist parties – or are they Fascist movements, actual or potential? These are some of the most important questions that will have to be answered. It is quite possible to speak of both the Share-the-Wealth Clubs of Huey Long and the National Union for Social Justice of Father Coughlin in similar terms because in so far as their role, their class basis and their general direction are concerned, they have much in common. However, both are today still in the making and it is hardly possible to make a final analysis regarding their prospects and perspectives. It is therefore necessary at the present time to limit ourselves to a preliminary examination of their general background, their main trend and more particularly of the historical setting out of which they have emerged.
It would be false to set out with a preconceived notion that for reasons of certain similarity in demagoguery with the early Nazi movement, or for reasons of the distinct pro-capitalist and anti-revolutionary utterances of both Long and Coughlin, or because of their large middle class following, that they are Fascists or their organizations the beginnings of a Fascist movement in the United States. To the ruling bourgeoisie they unquestionably appear as dangerous radicals. It may be assumed with equal certainty that their present large radio following sees in them a hope of a radical remedying of what they call the social injustices and the economic maladjustments. And it is well to remember that the class struggle does create “circumstances and relationships that enable a grotesque mediocrity to strut about in a hero’s garb”. Under special distress the quack appears as the healer for the; despairing. Economic distress helps to provide an audience also for the political quack.
The small business man has watched his shrinking volume of business with dreadful forbodings and he has seen many of his fellow victims swallowed up by the chain stores or squeezed out by the advancing monopoly concerns. The once better situated white collared worker has witnessed his life savings swept away by bank failures or has lost his home by bank foreclosures. Those still among the fortunate are fearful of the job which exists today and may be gone tomorrow. Of the general working class conditions during the crisis, it is needless to remind ourselves. Living in the shadows of economic insecurity it was easy to lose faith in the promises of a chicken in every pot and the great mass of the middle class and the workers plumped for Roosevelt in 1932. Now they are not so sure that Roosevelt remembers the forgotten man; nor are they so sure of his promises of a “more equitable opportunity to share in the distribution, of national wealth”. That wealth is available in abundance, they know. That the country can pro-
[there appears to be a passage missing here – ETOL]
do. Their appeal is addressed essentially to the middle class, to the battered, smarting small business men, farmers and petty bosses; but their appeal is also designed to rope in the working class. And despite all that can very correctly be said about their directly anti-labor and anti-trade union record – which, by the way, in times of economic distress is easily overshadowwed by the glamor of a panacea – there need be no doubt that at this particular stage they rally considerable support from working class layers. The Chicago Federation of Labor has indorsed the Huey Long program. Wm. Green gives his legislative labor record a clean bill of health. Coughlin claims a membership for his National Union of Social Justice of upward of 7,000,000. Huey Long claims a total of 27,431 Share-the-Wealth Clubs organized with a membership of 4,684,000.
Huey Long’s program can be summed up in his proclamations for the redistribution of wealth. He proposes to reduce the big fortunes by a capital levy tax to a point where no one person may own more than from three to four million dollars and have a yearly income of not more than one million dollars. The surplus is to be distributed so that every family may have at least $5,000. From his paper calculations he already sees $165,000,000,000 available to be thus distributed with something to spare for a college education for all youth, for old age pensions, for reduction of the hours of labor to do away with unemployment and to guarantee a minimum yearly earning of $5,000 per family. The agricultural problem he proposes to take care of in the manner specified by the Bible. It is all very grandiose.
Father Coughlin is more careful in his paper calculations of wealth. He distinguishes between money in its accepted currency form and pen-and-ink-plus-check-book money. Among the planks in his platform he emphasizes: Liberty of conscience and liberty of education; a just and living wage for all citizens willing and able to work – whatever that means. He proposes nationalization – that is, government ownership – of banking, credit and currency, power, light, oil and natural gas and the “God-given” natural resources. He stands for: Private ownership of all other property, in the sense of “upholding the right to private property, yet controlling it for the public good”. Abolition of tax-exempt bonds, broadening of the base of taxation founded upon the ownership of wealth and the capacity to pay, together with alleviation of taxation. He asserts the rights of labor to organize in unions and insists it is the duty of the government to protect these organizations against the vested interests of wealth. In his radio addresses he adds that strikes and lockouts are absolutely unnecessary, which would strongly suggest that by his demand for government “protection” of unions, he means an actual form of state control, including compulsory arbitration. His program is quite vague and contradictory but this allows him to play on feelings and emotions and to appeal to all classes. It is particularly noteworthy that this self-styled champion of the common people maintains intimate contacts with Wall Street bankers in the promotion of inflationary schemes under the innocuous title of monetary reforms which have already netted him handsome profits in margin speculations in silver. But his bourgeois patriotism cannot be questioned. He broadcasts: “Let us build ten thousand airplanes to guard our coasts ... to keep America safe for Americans.”
“I believe in capitalism,” exclaims Huey Long, “but you cannot stimulate it unless there is buying power. You’ve got to have a foundation under the house and that is a more even distribution of wealth.” Yes, there could hardly be any doubt as to where the Louisiana Kingfish stands politically. He knows the power of the catch-phrase: “Share-the-Wealth”; but when he began in his own state and imposed a five cent a gallon tax on gasoline, there followed some conferences between Long and President Hilton of Louisiana Standard Oil and after that the Legislature was summoned in a special session and rebated four to the five cents. On the other hand, in his own state, where he rules supreme, he has made no move to ratify the child labor amendment, or to enact old age pensions, or minimum wages, or unemployment insurance. Thus the demand to “Share-the-Wealth” is not meant to include everybody. Moreover, from his labor record the following facts stand out. The courts and the civil authorities of his state were used to break the strike of the longshoremen and to defeat the efforts of the textile workers’ union to end conditions of virtual peonage in the Lane Cotton Mills. Huey Long is a staunch supporter of Governor Talmadge of Georgia who declared martial law during the national textile strike and put the strikers wholesale into concentration camps.
In this respect Father Coughlin’s position is equally clear. He declares: “While I am most interested in the recovery of our nation, I eschew all radicalism, and desire only one thing – that we will restore the principles of Jesus Christ into practise.” For years he thundered against the “red serpent” and later proceeded to build his church of the Little Flower with non-union labor, paying wages 20 to 40 percent below the union scale and flatly refused to deal with the unions. The San Francisco AF of L convention unanimously adopted a resolution condemning Father Coughlin for his anti-labor stand.
The Long-Coughlin programs propose to redistribute wealth, to increase earnings so that higher prices can be paid, so that interests can be paid on inflated bond issues, so that dividends can be paid on watered stocks and the flow of profits continue, which is the same thing as to stabilize exploitation. But their programs also assume the continuation of capitalism, the continuation of large unearned incomes and of corporate profits taken out of the exploitation of labor, as there is no other source from which it can be taken. The profit system presupposes a return for the laborer in form of wages merely sufficient to reproduce his labor power and it would make the boasted of $2,500 yearly income per family impossible. Their programs further assume the continuation of the bourgeois ownership of the means of production, i.e., the means of exploitation of labor. And it is this economic relationship that governs political action, which is another way of saying that those who own and control the means of production are those who rule. By virtue of their economic power they decide the elections in their bourgeois democracy. They furnish the campaign contributions and use their ownership of the means of production to control the machinery of the political state and to dictate the programs for those who are placed in its executive positions, thereby clearly determining whose government it is. Their power rests on their legal right to exploitation and their legal right to appropriate the surplus value produced by labor. These rulers are to be counted upon, according to the Louisiana Kingfish, to reduce and split up the large holdings of accumulated capital and to redistribute the wealth acquired by the exploitation of labor; in other words, they are to be counted upon to give up the basis upon which their economic power rests! They will not yield this power or yield any part of their privilege without a fierce struggle. However, to take up such a struggle is furthest from the intentions of the Long and Coughlin demagogues. It could not be expected of them. They have cast their lot with the system of privilege to exploit labor and they are a part of it. For themselves they have accepted a task which they proclaim to be the restoration of certain liberties and conditions existing before monopoly capital was known but which means in reality the perpetration of a huge fraud. Their self-accepted task is to buttress and fortify American capitalism for continuation of its ruthless exploitation while swerving the working class off from its path to revolution which alone can guarantee a redistribution of wealth and social security.
With the world war American capitalism extended its economic structure to a world-wide base and became an integral part of the system of world capitalism. But its highly advanced technological development and the enormous overproduction of capital in the means of production serving for the exploitation of labor, subordinated it more directly to the destructive influence of the decay of the world capitalist system. The crisis struck here with greater swiftness and force and became more deep-going than elsewhere And yet, while European countries have experienced revolutionary situations and Fascism, in the United States we have moved on a “normal” plane toward greater state intervention to strengthen monopoly capital. In the make-up of the large mass of the population there is no lack of ready material for explosive actions or dynamic mass movements. We need remind ourselves in this respect on the one hand only of the various essentially middle class and reactionary lynch mobs and vigilante bands. On the other hand we have seen the American working class, not yet conscious of its class role, but displaying in brilliant fashion its rebellious calibre and militant qualities in powerful strikes. But the actually revolutionary forces still lack development. We do not even have a mass social reform movement of the kind known in Europe for decades. Is it likely that such a movement in its specific social democratic form will become a decisive factor in the United States ? Hardly. The accelerated contradictions of capitalism and the swiftly developing class antagonisms unfolding in a condition of retarded consciousness are much more likely to produce a special American phenomena of hybrid social reform movements. In the United States the capitalist equilibrium is not upset but it has been shaken by the crisis and the contradictions of the present economic reorganization. Elements of capitalist decay have produced their special American conditions and the movements holding out various illusory panaceas are thrust forward and thrive on the existing uncertainty and social insecurity. It seems that the Huey Long and Father Coughlin movements are destined to become the most important phenomena of this kind. Both of these representatives are playing with the idea of a third party formation – a third capitalist party with a perverted social reform program. Both appear to be its loudest and most spectacular spokesmen.
Other forces are heading in a third party direction. The alleged Roosevelt betrayal of his promises to the people may serve as their battlecry. In Wisconsin the La Follette Progressive Party is endeavoring to establish an independent state-wide base. The Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party leaders, who are concerned about the farmer and labor substance only in so far as it means support on election day, appear to lend a sympathetic ear to the third party idea. It is quite possible that some such manifestations may also come from the farmer movements in the various middle western states and from the EPICs in California. Even the navericks in Congress are straws in the wind. Of course, it is to be expected that there will be more mutual dislikes than unity of purpose in such a motley combination. Most certainly that is today the attitude to the blatant showman style of both Long and Coughlin. But Huey Long, especially, is edging into a leading position and will surely be willing to trim down on the most jarring notes in his program to suit the more cautious among the petty bourgeois champions.
In this whole trend of development there is to be found in its outward appearance much in common with the old Populist movement and with later Populist revivals such as the La Follette trust-busting and government ownership movement of 1924. Although it calls upon the shades of this dead past to embellish the present endeavors we have here in the main an up-to-date edition of an essentially petty bourgeois movement of the lower middle classes for the separation of the liberal from the Tory. However, in the process of historical development the progressive features of such a movement under conditions of capitalist growth and expansion turn into their opposite under conditions of capitalist decline and decay.
In a society where capitalist relations predominate there are only two decisive forces – the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Politically the petty bourgeoisie vacillates between these two forces and is unable to play an independent role. So long as the bourgeoisie, under its “normal” and stable “equilibrium” and its uncontested leadership, can guarantee the limited economic rations and the limited privileges to the petty bourgeois forces these will support the traditional capitalist political parties. They will defend the capitalist regime and the conditions it imposes and often be ready to take part in vigilante expeditions against the workers in strikes. But at the time when this equilibrium is shaken, when their economic ration as a result diminishes and when a working class movement, able to give firm revolutionary leadership, has not yet developed, the petty bourgeois classes dream of turning the march of society backward to the orbit of small scale production. They will then listen most readily to the demagogue and rally to the movement that promises to reduce the big fortunes, to split up the big holdings, to bust the trusts and promise panaceas of social security that are unrealizable while the conditions of capitalism remain. Hopes arise that out of this they may restore their economic base. Futile hopes, empty dreams! In a society built around the axis of mass production, the only progressive feature of capitalism, there is no possibility of turning the clock of history backward and dismantling the technological advance. At best the petty bourgeoisie will in this manner find itself led by these demagogues through new and devious ways into a greater subordination to capitalism as its more pliant tool. If this lower middle class movement for a third party, if this American phenomenon of a hybrid social reform movement crystallizes and succeeds for a time in elevating itself into a commanding political position, it will be because the big bourgeoisie feels itself forced to utilize it as its Left wing to pacify, to deceive and to disintegrate the advancing working class movement before this movement can seriously threaten its power – before a civil war. This would not necessarily mean the strengthening of the bourgeoisie. Nor would it justify an estimate that would make the third party movement, or its specific Huey Long or Coughlin brand, identical with Fascism.
Actual Fascism signifies a condition of civil war on the part of the capitalist society facing the rebelling proletariat. However, out of the conditions of anarchy and subsequent decay of the capitalist system of mass production the working class revolutionary movement grows with greater speed and it is precisely in the dialectic relationship to this development that the formerly progressive features of a third party hybrid reformist movement becomes today a reactionary fetter. It will attempt to march ahead on the backs of the workers, attempt to corral them to its support by means of deception and thus function as a brake to arrest the revolutionary growth and advance of the working class movement. In this there need be no doubt that it will also furnish a breeding ground for Fascism. By its deceptive aims it will appeal mainly to the politically most unconscious, most backward, most indifferent and to the layers among the masses of the population that are most demoralized by the weight of capitalist corruption. In this sense its direction can be only anti-proletarian and anti-revolutionary and a preparation of the road for Fascism.
But, from this point on, it is necessary to make a clear and definite distinction. Actual Fascism will be clearly recognizable from its inception, if and when it does emerge. It was so in Italy and Germany. In each instance the Fascist movement was violent from the start and intensely nationalist; it militarized its followers and aimed openly at a national dictatorship. Terrorization of the workers’ political parties, socialist and communist alike, as well as the trade unions, break-up of their meetings and destruction of their headquarters with fire and sword, together with assassination of their leaders, marked the bloody trail of these Fascist hordes from the beginning. While the German Nazis campaigned violently against usurers and profiteers they shouted with equal ferocity for “the heads of the November criminals”. Of course, they conducted skillful propaganda in the working class ranks against the Wealthy, the usurers and the profiteers, built around demagogic promises of sharing the wealth, but there could be no mistake about their clear and outspoken Fascist character and aims. If and when it emerges in the United States we shall not need be mistaken either about an actual and serious Fascist movement. For, owing to our truly American tempo and proportions it will stand out here as a terrific monster compared to which its kind in Italy and Germany will appear tame and dwarfish.
It would be premature to attempt to make any estimates about the success a third party movement may have. Suffice to say that it appears at this moment more definitely on the horizon than the labor party movement that the Stalinists are trying to create out of nothing except their own tricky reformist, concoctions to serve the foreign policy of the Soviet bureaucracy. Should certain successes of localized labor parties follow from these endeavors, could it not be expected that we would witness a repetition of the 1924 experience when the farmer-labor party forces went to the LaFollette third party movement? What the Stalinists would have aroused today in favor of a labor party would then be swallowed up by the Huey Long third party movement. But what would happen to the honest revolutionists who are clubbed into acceptance of the idea of creating a reformist labor party; moreover, what would happen to the Stalinist party itself ? However, this question is beyond the scope of this article as is any estimate of what effect an actual war situation may have on all of these prospective developments.
One thing, nevertheless, we can affirm as an absolute certainty. The American working class will meet with new disillusionments through an actual third party experience and will have learned one more valuable lesson. Today the American worker still lacks political consciousness and he still moves in an ideologically backward atmosphere – an atmosphere of middle class ideology. But he is trying to extricate himself through militant struggle from his politically illiterate past and is learning to stand erect as a class fighter. Should we then try to outdo Long and Coughlin, and appeal to him in middle class terms ? No, he will learn to turn with fury against those who try to hold him to his past hangovers. That can not be our method. Marxism must remain our weapon and our task must be to translate it into the everyday American language and root it in the American soil. Our task is to build the revolutionary movement.
Arne SWABECK



Fifty-two nations, including the Soviet Union, have voted to enforce sanctions, under the League of Nations covenant, against Fascist Italy. Liberals, pacifists and labor organizations, with but few exceptions throughout the world, support sanctions. A similar position is taken by the Second and the Third Internationals. In unison, both of these Internationals have become aggressive supporters of Sanctions ever since this ingenious device was invented by the capitalist statesmen at Geneva.
The fateful days of 1914 had for their rallying cry the “defense of the fatherland.” Is history now repeating itself Are not issues of similarly fateful consequences to the future of the whole of humanity joined-up in this rallying cry of 1935 – the cry of sanctions?
What will sanctions mean when actually enforced? Are they to be purely financial and economic or are they to be military? Is it true that the sanctions to be invoked by the League of Nations represent the collective efforts of these nations to punish an aggressor and to stop war, or do they mean the extension of the war in Ethiopia on a far more colossal scale. This is the first and most essential question that confronts the working class.
For an answer it is necessary to examine at least the most outstanding factors involved.
 
The Causes of War
It has been said – and correctly so – that war is the continuation of politics by military means. Imperialist wars arise from the constant struggle between the powers for increased rations in world economy. All imperialist powers today feel the consequences of the economic crisis. The vast expansion of their productive forces presses them onward inexorably and irresistibly in the struggle for new markets and new colonial fields where they can tap the sources of raw materials, invest surplus capital and extract new and greater profits. On every continent they are openly advancing for new conquests. Owing to the severe defeats which the workers have suffered under Fascist onslaughts, the imperialist gamblers feel free to engage in a continuation of the conflict for increased economic rations by military means.
It is, of course, not the particular aggressor attitude of one or the other of these powers that produces war. This merely expresses a readiness to strike out for new territories. Fascist Italy has embarked on its course of expansion at the expense of the last of the independent African states. But in a world already divided into colonies and spheres of influence such a course must inevitably become a struggle for redivision of markets, involving in the first instance those powers having the greatest possessions. And so, in this case, Fascist Italy came into direct conflict with the British Empire.
 
Britain and Italy
These two imperialist powers, Britain and Italy, are the major adversaries in the present war situation and in no case can the clash be considered a conflict of democracy versus dictatorship, as it is presented today. They are typical of a power pressing forward in the struggle for expansion and a power seeking to maintain its present possessions. On the one side is Fascist Italy, caught in its inability to stem the tide of its own internal economic and political contradictions, desperately seeking an outlet through the restoration of Caesar’s empire. On the other side is the existing British Empire on which the sun never sets.
Britain had centuries to consolidate her position. Tapping vast resources all over the world, deriving countless profits from the sweat and blood of millions of subjected peoples, she enjoyed a privileged imperialist position and could not tolerate any rivals. Her diplomats scored easy victories – with the British navy standing by. Now she is hard pressed throughout the world; the diplomatic victories have become questionable; elements of decay are apparent and expressed even in the reactionary attitude of the bureaucratic leaders of her official labor movement in support of sanctions, not merely out of pacifist motivations, but in solidarity with the continued oppression of the millions of colonial peoples by the imperialist masters. 7,287,937 square miles containing a population of 446,191,000 is the extent of these possessions, dominion and colonial, that touch every continent. What is popularly called the imperial life line, begins at Gibraltar and extends through the Mediterranean, through the Suez Canal, the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden to the Indian Ocean. All along this line the British navy must remain supreme if the imperial possessions are to be retained unchallenged.
 
Not Ethiopia – the British Empire
The British rulers are not concerned with the independence of Ethiopia. Only too often have they proceeded with fire and sword to crush the independence of other native peoples. No, their sole concern is the preservation of their own far flung colonial empire. That Ethiopia’s independence could be sacrificed easily enough was shown by the action of the League of Nations Council last summer. By a unanimous vote of all of its members, including the Soviet Union, a resolution was adopted to dismember Ethiopia on the basis of the robber treaty of 1906 between Italy, Britain and France. But Mussolini truculently rejected this offer inasmuch as he wanted possession of Ethiopia for Fascist Italy alone.
Indirectly this spells danger to the British Empire through the prospects of uprisings by the millions of peoples it now holds in subjection. But much more directly, this threatens to cut the imperial life line. Fascist Italy is building fortifications in Eritrea, on the coast of the Red Sea, and it is aiming for naval and aerial supremacy in the Mediterranean. This is the most immediate issue around which the war clouds are thickening today and the main motivating force behind the swift action of Britain for sanctions at Geneva.
 
The Many-Sided Danger of War
Obviously the League of Nations has not in the least, and could not in the least, serve to remove, or even to diminish, the causes of imperialist war. Organized as an instrument to ensure the spoils of the victors in the last war, and to maintain their hegemony, its numerous disarmament conferences served as a screen behind which all the capitalist powers, without exception, managed to perfect their armaments. New issues of conflict between these victors were, of course, inevitable. Japan some time ago embarked on its conquest of Manchuria, to extend its domination over China, and is now a constant threat to the borders of the Soviet Union. Fascist Germany is rearming feverishly in preparation for the time when its cruel regime can no longer bridge the gap of its internal contradictions; it will endeavor to find an outlet by means of new conquests. The imperialists of the United States have proclaimed neutrality while engaging in ever more extensive naval maneuvers in the Pacific with an eye to a future establishment of a base in China, in order to raise the question of possession of India at the next historical stage.
On the battlefields of Ethiopia war has become a reality. The guns of the highly mechanized Fascist armies are spitting fire in the campaign to ravage and subjugate the native population. The capitalist powers in the League of. Nations proclaim their peaceful intentions while all of them are arming to the teeth; some of them in order to use the first opportunity to spring to like conquests and others in order to defend their present possessions to the end. There may yet be an intermission before the general conflagration; but in any event the war that has already started in Ethiopia is only a prelude to the much greater catastrophe now in preparation under the rallying cry of sanctions.
 
“Good-Intentioned” Treachery
Only on this background can the question of sanctions be properly understood. And yet in this situation the Stalinist party, through the Daily Worker, informs us that; “The next step must be punishment of the guilty – sanctions.” It exhorts; “All opponents of war and Fascism should support this policy and demand that the League of Nations bar all trade with Italy and close the Suez Canal.”
In the thieves jargon of diplomacy, sanctions, in their ultimate implication, mean war. Mussolini said so. Stanley Baldwin repeats it, although much less boldly, and with many disguising hypocritical trimmings. Nevertheless the leaders of the British Labor Party demand sanctions. And Harry Polliitt, the leader of the British Stalinist party, in a recent address before a London district conference of the party, formulated his demands upon the British government as follows:
“But we also demand the closing of the Suez Canal, and the carrying out of the Covenant of the League of Nations, because we believe that all these measures can prevent Mussolini going to war, and we must utilize the present contradictions in the capitalist world, and force economic and military sanctions, if necessary.”
We may grant that Pollitt has other intentions than Stanley Baldwin, but the way to hell is paved with good intentions. Pollitt together with the leaders of the British Labor Party may criticize the National government; each in his own way, but this can only be incidental to the decisive issue of sanctions. And let it be noted, it is the League of Nations, and with it the British government, that are in this case called upon to close the Suez Canal and to enforce sanctions, “economic and military.” Consequently the government is to be supported on this decisive issue. Behind this rallying cry of sanctions the British worker is being led into united support of the Tory government – the real enemy of the workers. To this enemy is to be entrusted the guarantee of peace.
 
Democracy versus Dictatorship?
While at this time particularly the League of Nations should be exposed for what it is and the mask of hypocrisy torn oft from the face of the imperialists, old illusions in the League are being strengthened and a new confidence of the workers in the Tory government is being built up. A new national union is being created with the connivance of Labor Party and Stalinist leaders which, regardless of intentions, can lead only to war for the maintenance of the British imperial possessions.
Britain is today in the center of the war developments but it is not alone; nor is the position taken by the British Stalinists an exception. We are informed by the Daily Worker, for instance, that the C.P. of Czechoslovakia on October 7 cabled the League of Nations demanding “the immediate application of effective economic and military sanctions against Italy.” Here is a voice from another “democratic” country which the Comintern has declared as its policy to defend against Fascism. But it is not the voice of the revolutionary workers. Can anyone conceive of Czechoslovakia, or Britain, or the United States, or any other capitalist democratic country, really going to war to defend the democratic rights of the people against Fascism? Need there be any doubt that the war they will wage will be for imperialist issues? And we might add, is it not more likely that when the war actually breaks out that serious efforts will be made by the capitalist rulers of these countries to transform them into Fascist states?
For the Stalinist parties the support of sanctions is not an accident; nor can it be regarded as just another mistake. It is a part of a whole system of policies which, once such a course is embarked upon, could lead to no other results. This system of policies proceeds consistently from reliance on pacts and treaties between the Soviet Union and the capitalist powers, instead of reliance on the proletarian revolution, to support of the League of Nations and to support of the capitalist governments in carrying out sanctions. In turn sanctions becomes the deceptive device for the mobilization of the masses for imperialist war.
 
Shall It Be 1914 Again?
What we have before us in this question is imperialist sanctions, for imperialist ends, and not working class action to prevent war. The two are not complementary, as the new-baked defenders of the remnants of bourgeois democracy would have us believe. These two are opposite poles. It is therefore necessary to emphasize that not only are issues, as fateful in their consequences to the future of the whole of humanity, joined up in this question of sanctions as was the case of the rallying cry of the “defense of the fatherland”; but also to add, that another historic betrayal is in preparation, and this time on a far more colossal scale. In 1914, national unity within the imperialist powers and the plunging of millions into the bloody battlefield was preceded by the treason of social democracy. Today the demand for sanctions can lead only to restoration of national unity behind the capitalist governments to plunge the masses into another and far more terrible conflagration – a repetition of the betrayal of 1914 – this time, however, participated in by the social democrats and the Stalinists jointly.
Still it remains as true as ever that only working class action can prevent war. Liebknecht warned that the enemy is at home; and, in this respect nothing has changed since. Therefore the duty of the revolutionists is clear. It is the irreconcilable struggle to overthrow capitalism as the only way to do away with imperialist war.



With his usual flair for punctuating a specific issue by a dramatic act, John L. Lewis has created a stir throughout the trade union movement in submitting his resignation from the A.F. of L. Executive Council.
Unusual importance is attached to this act. This is natural for more than one reason. John L. Lewis is identified as the leader of the new “progressive” bloc formed within the A.F. of L. upper crust and his resignation certainly tends to emphasize the hopeless division within the leadership. Much more important, however, is the additional and keen attention this act will focus upon the industrial union issue.
His resignation, to be correctly understood, must be viewed on the background of the recent A.F. of L. convention fight in which John L. Lewis, supported by Charles P. Howard, of the typographical union, together with Sidney Hillman and David Dubinsky of the needle trades and others, argued on the progressive side of some important questions. This fight in the main centered around the issues of the organization of the unorganized workers in the basic and mass production industries and their organization into industrial unions. The most hidebound craft unionists, led by William Green, Matthew Woll, Dan Tobin and John P. Frey, made up in voting strength what they lacked in convincing arguments and were thus able to carry the day, with the opposition, however, mustering imposing forces. Of course, this vote did not settle the issue. No sooner had the delegates left the gorgeous hotels and the beautiful shores of Atlantic City than the industrial union defenders realized that if there is to be any force at all behind this Idea it is necessary to organize. They formed the “Committee for Industrial Organization.” Does the resignation of John L. Lewis indicate that this group intends to take up in earnest the fight for organization of the unorganized and for industrial union organization?
 
Framed Way into Presidency
In the leadership that John L. Lewis can give to this group is expressed both its strength and its weaknesses. He is both resourceful and cunning. His fixed objectives he pursues relentlessly. One need only remember how he came into the leadership of the U.M.W.A. by the back-door route. Functioning as a technical worker for the weak Frank J. Hayes, he was appointed vice-president to fill the vacancy left open when Hayes took White’s place as president. Lewis was quick to utilize the opportunity to frame up Hayes, keeping him drunk most of the time and involving him in compromising situations which finally forced his resignation and thus automatically elevated Lewis to the presidency.
John L. Lewis has proved himself equally relentless in pursuing his opponents and tracking down those who fell victims to his despotic rule, always striking at the time when the opponents one way or another were in a weakened position. To this he adds the flair for the dramatic staging of his battles against his opponents in order the more surely and the more effectively to gain his ends. Often these methods have helped him enormously to consolidate his own position and strengthen his prestige among leading trade union officials. Hardly one instance in his long career can be found, however, where these special abilities were put to use in conflicts with the coal operators, except in an adverse sense insofar as the interests of the rank and file workers are concerned. One such example dates back to 1920, when he sold out the great national strike and yielded weakly in the face of the Daugherty Injunction, declaring: “We cannot fight the government”
 
Turns Heat on Farrington
Toward the operators Lewis proved soft and exceedingly flexible; toward the opponents in the organization, uncompromising. For years he fought bitterly the equally ambitious president of the Illinois district Frank Farrington, keeping almost constantly at least five dozen organizers in the district not to organize what was then already a completely organized district, but to watch Farrington and get the goods on him. In this they succeeded and Lewis made good use of the evidence, and as usual in the most dramatic fashion. When Farrington was about to address the British Trade Union Congress as an official A.F. of L. delegate, Lewis denounced him as an agent on the payroll of the largest Illinois coal company, the Peabody Coal Co., at a salary of $25,000 a year.
Most recently John L. Lewis again made use of his great dramatic talents in appearing suddenly on the Atlantic City A.F. of L. convention floor, asking that the rules be set aside to give consideration to a special resolution directed against Matthew Woll. He demanded the latter’s resignation from the reactionary Civic Federation and won his point while the august assembly was thrown into an uproar.
 
Wrecking the U.M.W.A.
John L. Lewis is at the helm of the strongest and undoubtedly the most militant organization in the country. But his record, to put it mildly, is an odious one, and even though he now takes his stand on the progressive side of the argument in what has become the most important dispute in the A.F. of L. – which deserves due recognition – this record should not be overlooked. In the course of further events it is quite likely that he will be compelled to become one of the outstanding champions of trade union democracy. If so, and this is to be expected, it will arise out of the logic of his present position and not because of any principled adherence to the idea of trade union democracy. His whole past record is that of ruthless wielding of bureaucratic powers, expelling progressive and left wing opponents, beginning with Alex Howatt, packing conventions and stealing votes in union elections, not shrinking from the most vicious and arbitrary measures.
On times, almost without number, the rank and file members have been in revolt against his sell-outs to the operators. Notable is the instance of 1922, when 50,000 unorganized miners of western Pennsylvania, the home of the steel trust, saved the national strike by making common cause, only to find themselves left out in the cold in the settlement, abandoned, beaten and to be starved into submission. Similarly in 1928, the striking miners of Pennsylvania and Ohio were finally left by the national union officialdom to shift for themselves, beaten, disorganized, and the national organization in the soft coal territories reduced to about 70,000 members.
 
The Revival
Many severe blows were thus dealt to the glorious U.M.W. which reached almost the depths of despair when John L. Lewis, who is now the champion of industrial unionism, inaugurated the disastrous policy of separate state and individual agreements with the operators. However, with the turn of the business cycle and the recent revival of trade union organization, the U.M.W.A. came back strongly to occupy its rightful place. The changing economic conditions ‘ and the change ‘ in the moods of the masses produced its inevitable pressure also upon the union officials. The coal miners gained new experiences battling the steel trust for organization of the captive mines. It is only natural that this should find its reflection even in the upper strata of the union officialdom.
Trade union organization, now so bitterly fought by the gigantic corporations, has really become a matter of a life and death battle. No trade union leader, no matter how reactionary and bureaucratic, can remain blind to the fact that in the issues of the class struggle – which are here, whether or no the bureaucrats attempt to deny them – only organizations of mass numbers can assure the power necessary in facing these battles. The small beginnings made toward union organization in the basic and mass production industries such as steel, automobiles and rubber, only lends further emphasis to this situation of reality. And the first real distinction that appears between the old bureaucracy left over from the days of Sam Gompers and the bloc of “progressives,” headed by John L. Lewis, is the fact that the latter has much more readily responded to the pressure of new objective conditions and much more accurately gauged the actual moods of the masses.
 
Failure of Leadership
The Executive Council reported to the Atlantic City convention a gain for the year of another half million workers over that of the previous twelve months, bringing the total membership up to 3,045,347. This is the highest membership reported since 1922, though it is still more than a million below the 4,078,740 of 1920. Paltry figures indeed when compared to the rich opportunities for organization that were available. A mighty stream of workers was set into motion for union organization, coinciding with the revival of industrial production and stimulated by the NRA. Almost without exception this stream gravitated toward the A.F. of L. Again and again, however, these workers were repelled by the dismal failure of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy and its reactionary collusion with the employers. Therefore the matter first to be recognized is the fact that the craft union structure Is no weapon for the struggle against the large corporations that union organization entails. These bureaucrats lacked both vision and will to even attempt to adjust the organizational structure to the new needs. They leaned almost exclusively upon the government for their support, entering into a partnership in which their position as agents of capitalism meant that they were to prevent the workers from engaging in independent class activity. Consequently they did their best, with the support of the government, to strangle every strike. This could not at all inspire confidence among the workers in union organization.
 
Lewis Gives the Record
It was thus easy for John L. Lewis to put his finger on the weak spots at the A.F. of L. convention:
“For twenty-five years or more,” he said, “the American Federation of Labor has been following this precise policy (he meant the policy of doing nothing – A.S.) and surely in the absence of any other understanding of the question, a record of twenty-five years of constant, unbroken failure should be convincing to those who actually have a desire to increase the prestige of our great labor movement by expanding its membership to permit it to occupy its natural place in the sun.”
“What is the record?” he went on. “Delegate Howard expressed it when he said that we laid claim to a membership of approximately three and a half million, out of an organizable number of approximately thirty-nine million. There is the answer.”
The Executive Council had claimed a total of 1,804 Federal labor unions organized during the year. Lewis proceeded to show, from the report itself that this number included a period of two years, and then, reading from other pages of the report about the locals that had been suspended or disbanded and thus permanently gone out of existence drew a negative balance of 314 federal labor unions. From this Lewis concluded: “So the 1,650 organizers of the American Federation of Labor in all classifications during that year lacked 314 unions of holding their own.”
“On that basis I submit it to be a reasonable statement,” continued Lewis, “that it will be a long time before the American Federation of Labor organizes those 25,000,000 workers that we are all so anxious to organize. There are others among us who believe that the record indicates a need for a change in policy. This convention floor is teeming with delegates from those industries where those local unions have been established and where they are now dying like the grass withering before the autumn sun, who are ready to tell this convention of the need for that change of policy.”
 
Green’s Church Philosophy
William Green attempted to make a reply to this charge of dismal failure, saying: “One might as well ask why the church has not saved all the sinners.” In this answer Green revealed his true self. As a good churchman, still a deacon in his home town, Conchockton, Ohio, he would never infer that the church is no good. His conclusion is that the wicked sinners do not repent and do not want salvation: We said we would organize 25,000,000 workers in the great American Federation of Labor, but darn it, these workers did not want to get organized. The truth is that the workers did desire organization but the gentlemen of Green’s church repelled them by woeful incompetence and deceit.
Since the Atlantic City convention the cleavage in the Executive Council has deepened. The resignation of Lewis should not be looked upon as a split but rather as a determination on his part to wash his hands of responsibility for failure and, undoubtedly also, as a means of getting his hands free in case he should decide on a serious campaign for a new and a more aggressive policy of organization. William Green has made further feeble attempts to take up the challenge, but despite his exalted position he is a poor match for the much more resourceful Lewis. This will become much more apparent when it is clearly understood that there are much more fundamental issues involved than a mere tilt between the two.
On how Green came into his high position there also hangs a tale. Old Sam Gompers had ruled the affairs of the Federation for so many years and in such an undisputed fashion that his sudden death and the problem of finding a “worthy” successor presented great difficulties. There was Matthew Woll, commonly looked upon as the Crown Prince, but his not very large stature sheltered an even smaller mind, and he nursed great personal ambitions. The writer recalls having a debate some years ago with Matthew Woll when he appeared before the Chicago Federation of Labor to which I was a delegate at the time. The debate commenced around Woll’s ardent presentation of his own special labor insurance scheme and expanded into the main issues of the A.F. of L. policy of organization. I received the distinct feeling that he was much more concerned about himself appearing in an impressive light than with the issues in question. The old Gompers crowd at the time of the departure of their helmsman feared the too great ambitions of Matthew Woll, and so William Green fell into his present position.
The real battle for the life of craft unionism versus industrial unionism can hardly be avoided. This is keenly sensed In all leading A.F. of L. circles and those who are the real theoreticians of the stark reactionary policies, like John F. Frey, are coming more to the fore, defending the shaky structure of craft unionism. There need be no doubt, however, that the future lies on the progressive side of this fight. And, aside from such considerations as the personal abilities of those who now stand out in the forefront on either side, the “progressives” have the real issues. On that side the real now beginning. In such a perspective lies also the confident hope forces are sure to come from the new unions that are bound to grow in the mass production industries, encouraged by the struggle that is that precisely from these unions, new and genuinely progressive forces will emerge.
Next to John L. Lewis and his powerful organization in back of him, as it surely will be, and should be, on the progressive issues now in dispute, the representatives of the textile workers’ union stand out in the bloc that was recently formed. In this sense we have in mind first of all the organizations that are involved. Together with these two there are the needle trades unions. On the whole these represent a line-up of unions with a militant fighting tradition. Moreover, the leaderships in these unions cannot help but feel in a very marked degree the pressure from below, from a membership trained in the fire of the class struggle, and striving to make their unions effective instruments of this struggle. This should prove an important and a wholesome factor in the future orientation of this “progressive” movement of today. However, the personal integrity of their representatives, who are now in the spotlight in the “progressive” bloc, is perhaps equally important.
In this respect very little of a favorable nature can be said for McMahon, the President of the United Textile Workers. During past years his feeble abilities served to keep the textile workers divided into a multitude of ineffective quarreling unions, and he was most often ready to sabotage any single one of them which did carry on a militant struggle. The “progressive” bloc is hardly advanced by his presence. The Vice-President of the U.T.W., Francis J. Gorman, plays a somewhat different role. No doubt his dynamic qualities have had a great deal to do with the growth of this union during the last few years. It Is understood that all the more militant delegates to the U.T.W. convention, held prior to the national textile workers’ strike of last year, specifically demanded that Gorman be placed in charge of the strike. He has since made many attempts to cover up and make his own weakness appear in the most favorable light, ‘’accepting a strike settlement that gave the rank and file workers nothing in return for their valiant fight. Still, at the A.F. of L. convention Gorman went further than any other prominent delegate in taking issue with the whole concept of the organizational as well as political orientation of the entrenched bureaucracy. In defending his labor party resolution he made it clear that in his opinion the labor party was to be a distinct opponent, antagonistic to the vested interests represented by the two old capitalist parties.
The Stalinists, seeing in these utterances of Gorman the living incarnation of their own “principle of the People’s Front for the United States,” were positively eloquent in reporting this speech at length in their “theoretical” organ. Said the Stalinist scribe:
“That a labor leader of the type of Gorman comes to the identical conclusions as those formulated by the General Secretary of our party, Comrade Browder, shows both the knowledge of the conditions and needs of the masses that Comrade Browder has mastered, and that Gorman has made great advances on the basis of his recent experiences.”
So, Gorman elevated himself to the position at least of becoming the unconscious medium for Browder. This ought to mean a lot to him. A true description, however, of the intervention of the Stalinists in present trade union developments would of necessity be much more prosaic in tone as it would show an absolutely pernicious influence.
 
The Needle Trades
The full effect of this influence has been felt in the needle trades unions, whose two most outstanding representatives, Hillman and Dubinsky, are prominent members of the “progressive” bloc. Some years ago the left wing showed its greatest resourcefulness in these unions. But this was a good deal before the Stalinist “third period.” Traditionally these unions are looked upon as Socialist unions, yet almost consistently having had their definite right and left tendencies and movements. The leading officials usually laid claim to the title “Constructive Radicalism.”
From the days of Schlesinger and Siegman the leaders of the I.L.G.W. were amongst the main props of the S. P. Old Guard and receiving their main support from the decrepit Jewish Daily Forward. Usually this I.L.G.W. bureaucracy was bitterly opposed by their own rank and file Socialist union members. So disreputable had this administration become that Dubinsky, a lesser evil, fell heir to it. Sidney Hillman, the President of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, on the other hand, politically unattached, understood how to gather around himself radicals and ex-radicals of various descriptions, mostly ex’s, and make them subservient to his administration.
 
Sydney Hillman
Whereas, in the I.L.G.W., the “Socialist” officials nearly always fought the left wing head-on, Hillman endeavored to make the left wing feel at home in the union in order to quietly muzzle it or to painlessly kick out the more determined ones. Somehow he always managed to have a “right” wing target, as for example the former New York Beckerman gang, and thereby kept the left wing busy supporting the administration measures against the gang. Hillman could always manage skillfully to make it appear that he met the left wing half way, but always in such a manner that the decision would remain on paper and cost him nothing. So, for example, he did not oppose amalgamation of the needle trades unions, so long that he felt sure others would oppose it sufficiently as a practically reality. He could display what looked very much like a real and practicable form of sympathy for the Soviet Union and even accept the shop delegate system – in principle – and in such a way that it would not interfere in the least with the domination of his official machine. Hillman began his career as a progressive leader fighting the incredibly reactionary United Garment Workers bureaucracy, and fighting against the sweatshop. With the A.C.W. growth of membership and power, he adjusted himself handsomely to all the celebrated forms of bosses’ “impartial” machinery, based on the “Rule of Reason” and wound up in the cunning speed-up system called standard of production, which is the curse of the union membership. Hillman is now completing the cycle, back again in a “progressive” movement, though he himself, at least, completes this cycle on a much lower plane.
Chas. P. Howard’s position in the “progressive” bloc to promote industrial unionism is somewhat unique. His organization, the typographical union, is distinctly craft conscious. But Howard does understand the importance of organized groups functioning inside the unions. He was elected President of the union on the slate of a faction calling itself the Progressive Party, which for years fought the more reactionary “Wahnitas.” Strangely enough, Frank Morrison, the eternal Secretary of the A. F. of L. and ardent supporter of Green, comes from this same typographical union faction. Or maybe this is not so strange after all.
Howard genuinely fears that if the A.F. of L. becomes immune to necessary progress, somebody else will take over the job of organizing the workers. This was the tenor of his support of industrial unionism at the San Francisco convention last year, and he made no bones about whom he feared. At the Atlantic City convention he repeated almost word for word his previous speech on this particular point, saying;
“Now, let me say to you that the workers of this country are going to organize, and if they are not permitted to organize under the banner of the American Federation of labor they are going to organize under some other leadership or they are going to organize without leadership. And if either of those conditions should extenuate, I submit to you that it would be a far more serious problem for our government, for the people of this country and for the American Federation of Labor itself than if our organization policies should be so molded that we can organize them and bring them under the leadership of this organization.”
On this particular point Lewis was even more outspoken, yet utterly reactionary in presenting Communism and Fascism in the same category, when he declared:
 
Lewis on Communism and Fascism
“What of the future of our country? Who among us does not know the hazards of the present moment? The teachings of false prophets falling upon the ears of a population that is frightened and disturbed and depressed and discouraged, the nocturnal and surreptitious attempts of interests to form a philosophy, the philosophy of the Communists on,the one hand and the philosophy of the Nazis on the other hand, equally repugnant and distasteful to the men of labor. And yet it is constituting a serious, deadly menace for the future.”
It would thus be absurd to assume that there is a real distinction between the Lewis forces and the Green forces in questions of basic class ideology. Nevertheless, the present situation is clear to militant and to revolutionary workers in the trade unions. Around the issues that stand out today – an aggressive policy of organization and industrial unionism – they must make common cause and a common struggle with the Lewis’ “progressive” bloc. This struggle, once it takes real hold, will rage primarily in the mass production industries. And this is also where the real future lies for unionism in America. From these industries the basic cadre of the movement must be recruited.
To the revolutionary workers the movement and its objectives are the fundamental question. They must draw a clear line between this movement and individuals who may be there by chance. Basically the rank and file will unquestionably gravitate more and more toward the support of the “progressive” bloc on this issues it has raised. Such support, however, this bloc will receive as an opponent of the bosses and as an opponent of reaction. The center of gravity of the masses is now shifting in a leftward direction and the logic of the position of the “progressives” will make it difficult for them to draw back. Even the issues of trade union democracy as a prerequisite to the accomplishing of any change of policy of organization will tend to drive them toward a defense of this principle. Other progressive issues will emerge. They will also tend to coalesce, into a serious movement in which the genuine progressives will take their rightful place. The fundamental question will then also arise more clearly as to where the various elements stand on issues of the class struggle.
A beginning toward a movement is made, and with all the qualifications necessary in estimating the personnel now in the lead, a real opportunity is presented for militant workers. Pursuing the tactic of common struggle around the progressive issues of today, critical of all attempts of deception, compromise and capitulation to reaction, courageous and audacious, the militant workers can become the leaven for a strong and genuine progressive movement of tomorrow.



From the state of Louisiana, where he boldly boasts of holding in the hollow of his hands “the finest collection of law-makers money can buy,” Huey P. Long has now definitely entered the scene of national politics. He has the old line capitalist politicians worried. They stand aghast, watching with anticipation and fear the prospects of traditional party lines again being broken down and this time by a high pressure demagogue.
But – and this is important – Huey’s grandiose promises to “Share our Wealth” and his demagogic appeals addressed to the common people have made deep inroads also in the politically unconscious working class layers.
Out for Bigger Things
Undoubtedly Huey Long’s hat will be in the ring for next year’s presidential elections. He is a candidate for leadership in the formation of a new third party. It is reported that he has already, together with Father Coughliu and Governor Olson of Minnesota, accepted an invitation issued by Milo Reno, tor the Farm Holiday Association, to attend a conference, to be hem in Des Moines, Iowa, May 7, to consider the formation of such a party.
Huey Long is the most spectacular and probably also the strongest of the candidates for leadership of such a party. Fortified already by his undisputed control of the state of Louisiana, he is reaching out for immediate political control of other southern states and apparently enjoying the undivided support of such a staunch defender of the “rights of the people” as Governor Talmadge of Georgia, who declared martial law in his state during the national textile strike and put the strikers wholesale into concentration camps.
This example is typical of the make-up and political coloring of the Huey Long forces. They are taking on the form of a movement. 27,431 Share Our Wealth Clubs with a membership of 4,684,000 have been organized, he claims.
 
Long as Roosevelt Supporter
Huey Long began his national political career as a Roosevelt supporter. To the Chicago convention that nominated him for President in 1932, Roosevelt spoke, declaring; “Throughout the nation men and women ... look to us for guidance and for more equitable opportunity to share in the distribution of national wealth.” To the delegates these words were just empty rhetoric, noble sounding sentiments that did not at all have to be taken. seriously, least of all literally. But Huey Long noted the power of the phrase, snapped it up as his own and is now making this the central point of his program while campaigning against the government of “alphabet wreckers and spoilers.”
He proposes to cut down all large fortunes by a capital levy tax to a point where no one person may own more than from three to four million dollars and have a yearly income of not more than one million dollars. The surplus of all these big fortunes is to go into the United States Treasury. This is to be done by the simple process of issuing a questionnaire for all the plutocrats to list their fortunes at their own appraisal and to state in what sort of holdings they wish to retain their three to four millions.
By his calculation he has arrived at a surplus already available on paper of $165,000,000,000 to $175,000,000,000. This surplus he will distribute to all families owning less than $5,000, free of debt, so that each family may have at least that amount. This he says will take no more than $100,000,000,000, leaving a handsome balance to spare. By means of the balance he proposes to provide for the reduction of the hours of labor so that all may be employed and have a yearly income for each family of not less than $2,500. In addition he will also provide for a college education for all youth, for old age pensions and he proposes to care for agricultural production in the manner specified in the bible.
Huey Long himself claims that his proposals originate from the unfulfilled Roosevelt program. Similar to the Roosevelt New Deal program, the Long proposals have as their base the maintenance and strengthening of the system of capitalism but with a supposed increase of the purchasing power of the masses of the people. However, the Huey Long edition appears in a much more radical dress. “I believe in capitalism,” exclaims Long, “but you cannot stimulate it unless there is buying power. You’ve got to have a foundation under the house, and that is a more even distribution of wealth.”
 
Huey’s Discovery
Oh yes, capitalism is again to have its “abuses” corrected. To substantiate his claims, the Kingfish refers very profusely to what he sees as the present social injustices and economic maladjustments. And surely, there is in the present situation of mass misery, deprivation and despair on the one hand together with the enormous concentration of wealth on the other hand, sufficient material for the unscrupulous demagogue to appear as the Saviour Angel. But it did not require a Huey Long to make this discovery. Nor is he the first demagogue that has appeared on the political scene.
The Roosevelt program for increasing the purchasing power of the masses has so far brought us to the promised magnificent social security for some of the unemployed at $50.00 a mouth maximum which in turn allows all present wage standards to be torn down to that level. Where would the Huey Long program lead to? Needless to say, in this proposed redistribution of wealth we have a repetition of petty bourgeois utopias advanced elsewhere and at other times.
 
Ownership Determines Distribution
That wealth exists in this country in abundance is well known and was known before Huey Long said so. But the distribution of this wealth proceeds according to the social relations of society. These are capitalist relations, resting upon the capitalist ownership and control of the means of production. In the Kingfish’s plan these relations would remain, only the wealth would be redistributed by cutting down on the big fortunes and adding to the small ones or giving to those that have none. But this is impossible under capitalism since the ownership and control of the means of production determines the form of distribution of all wealth. So far this has meant and can only mean ever greater riches for the parasites and ever greater impoverishment for those who toil, who have nothing but their labor power to sell – and to sell only when the bosses see fit to buy.
What is the cause of this condition; what is the cause of this unequal distribution of wealth? The cause is to be found in the ownership and control of the means of production. This system secures the right to exploit labor by leaving in the hands of the capitalist class also the ownership of the surplus value produced by the laborer over and above what he receives as wages. This is how profits are acquired. Moreover, under the conditions of mass production, and in order to continue the process of production. In other words, sufficient only for their bare upkeep when they have jobs. Of course, the abundance of wealth available could easily guarantee to each family, as Huey Long proposes, a yearly income of $2,500. But this is equally impossible under the profit system and it can be obtained only when the profit system is abolished.
 
For Maintenance of System
Huey Long proclaims in grandiose style for the redistribution of wealth; but he is equally vociferous in his proclamations for the maintenance of the present social relationship. His program assumes the continuation of the right to exploitation, however, with an increase of the purchasing power of the masses so that returns to bondholders in the form of unearned incomes may continue; so that dividends on watered stocks may be paid and the now of profits taken out of the exploitation of labor may proceed uninterrupted. There are no other sources for profits to come from.
What is this but the stabilization of the system of exploitation? To stabilize the system of exploitation means to stabilize the economic power of the class that owns and controls the means of production. Furthermore, it is well to remember that political relations are governed by this economic power which is another way of saying that those who own are also those who rule. They use their economic power to build up their political state, to build up their government and to reinforce it by courts, by police and by military forces, always ready to be used against the workers when on strike or in other forms of struggle and on a whole serving for the purpose of keeping the masses in subjection. This government, Huey Long proposes to entrust with the redistribution of wealth.
They will not consent to any redistribution of their wealth acquired by exploitation without a fierce struggle. They will not even permit the workers to organize into unions so as to obtain a living wage without the most stubborn resistance. They will not yield their economic power, as represented by their accumulated wealth, or give up their privilege to exploit labor without a life and death struggle. Nay more, they use this economic power to determine who can be elected to the public offices and to dictate the program of those BO elected aud its execution as well.
A real redistribution of wealth and a real program of social security can be carried out in no other way than by the overthrow of the system of capitalism. That is not at all the purpose of the Huey Long third party movement. Only the working class revolution can accomplish that.
 



Definite trends in a progressive direction are apparent in a number of trade unions, and especially in the unions in the basic and in the mass production industries. In practically every instance determined support from the rank and file membership has followed spontaneously. But so far it is possible to speak only of trends, here and there taking on an organized form. The specific features that will give to these trends the character of a movement are still lacking. Unified plans and clear perspectives have not yet been brought forward. It is in view of these conditions that the Workers Party convention in its Program of Action laid special emphasis on the creation of a national progressive movement in the trade unions.
 
Progressives to Steel
In the steel workers union the progressive group which came forward last summer is now renewing its activities and it is now also enriched by one more valuable experience. The group is demanding that the union president, Mike Tighe, reconvene the convention adjourned last summer to force action on a number of grievances dating back to the Weirton case. Of course, the essential issue is still union recognition; but the prospects that Tighe will agree to reconvene the convention are exceedingly slim. Apparently the progressive group understands this and it has therefore called its own progressive conference to be held during the first week of February. Reports indicate that the progressives feel that now is the time for action in view of the present upturn in the industry due largely to the heavy orders from the automobile manufacturers.
 
Auto Workers
From the automobile workers’ federal unions, which have suffered a serious setback since the sell-out agreement was concluded last summer, comes word also of incipient revolts. Recently a number of Detroit federal locals decided, in face of an edict by William Green to the contrary, to get together in a conference and discuss their problems of organization. In other cities federal local unions have begun to make demands for the creation of city central councils of federal unions. Thus the direction of these trends is unmistakable. They tend in a progressive direction although still on a very elementary level. Clarity of perspectives has not yet been arrived at. But this is usually the way that progressive movements begin, centering at their inception around the most elementary issues of organization. With the pressure of economic necessity these trends are bound to advance toward a greater clarity of objectives and take on organized form. They are bound to spread because of the fact that everywhere the problem exists of finding a way out of the conditions of stagnation imposed by the trade union bureaucrats.
 
Period of Calm
At present the whole trade union movement is in a state of calm before the storm of new strikes and new struggles. Last year in some of the local strike situations, not only did the progressive tendencies become pronounced, but in Minneapolis, as one example, the truck drivers strike saw a conscious left wing in the leadership. Toledo followed this example and on the Pacific Coast the left wing forces had a powerful influence in the harbor workers unions prior to the San Francisco general strike.
Yet the reactionary trade union officials appear on a whole as strongly entrenched as ever. That is what appears on the surface. When looking beneath the surface to the undercurrents of rank and file discontent that breaks through from time to time it will become noticeable very quickly that the entrenchment is not so secure. This fact will undoubtedly become much clearer in the coming contests between progressives and reactionaries over the immediate and pressing issues of extension of union organization and of union recognition to be attained through the organized mass power of the workers – the only way it can be attained.
 
Fears of the Officialdom
Under the conditions of monopoly capitalism organization of the unorganized in the basic industries is possible only through fierce struggle against the owners of the powerful corporations and their government servants. In some instances the workers in these industries have already proven that they will respond most readily and that they do not at all fear the struggle. At the same time the trade union officialdom has demonstrated just as clearly its fear of any heavy influx into the unions of the healthy proletarian elements much more than it fears the aggressive onslaughts of the employers. It shrinks from organization of the unorganized in fear of the consequences of the struggle. The trade union officialdom knows that rapid growth and expansion of the unions also means a fundamental change in their composition and character, leaving room for demands for action and demands for leadership; leaving room for rank and file rebellions.
Counting on this officialdom to give leadership in the organization of the unorganized would be hopeless. Nay more, it would be inconceivable that the trade union organization of the basic industries can be undertaken seriously with this gentry in a position to block every move and to enter into treacherous agreements with the owners of monopoly capital of the kind that makes an aggressive policy of organization impossible. Certainly, unless there is an effective counterbalance created, an effective progressive movement, real prospects of success would be very slim.
 
The Job Before the Progressives
This is the job for the progressive and left wing elements to tackle. It is a job of large dimensions and requires a fight on two fronts. It requires an intransigent fight against the reactionary officials who block the road and a determined fight against all the obstacles to organization laid down by the well-fortified employers. But it is necessary to repeat: The left wing and progressive forces will not get very far without a clear understanding that they are called upon to lead and that conditions are ripe for such a leadership. Now is the time for action. The progressive forces owe to the trade union movement that they organize themselves and work out their plans in common. Their movement may start on a local or otherwise circumscribed scale, but to be really effective it must be national in scope and unified in character, interlocking from industry to industry and from union to union.
The problem before them is first of all to chart a new course for the trade union movement and to gird up their loins for a serious struggle. A militant class struggle policy and leadership in the trade union movement is the objective. This the Workers Party will aim to sponsor. The party will endeavor to reach an agreement with the progressive elements to attain the elementary objectives, agreements honestly arrived at and with the pledge to carry them out in common action. Some of the progressives may falter and weaken in fear of reprisals by the hostile trade union officials, but this fear will be far outweighed by the needs for the building of the progressive movement and the pressing needs for action. Today there is not such a national movement in existence and its actual creation represents for us an unpostponable task.
 



The National Steel Labor Relations Board has ordered – “reluctantly and after long hesitation” – that an election be held in the plants of the Carnegie Steel Company, subsidiary of the United States Steel Corporation. Almost a year ago such an election was ordered by the National Labor Board in the Weirton steel mills, but the Weirton magnates snapped their fingers at this decision. They had previously held an election – in their own way – making sure in advance that the returns would show an overwhelming indorsement for the company union.
Of course, the Weirton steel workers, who had amply proven by their strike in September 1933 that they were in favor of a union of their own and ready to fight for it, got nothing out of the sham maneuvers between the labor boards and the owners of the industry. It is reported that the workers in the Carnegie mills had asked the Wagner National Labor Board last February for an election and on May 2 it was ruled that such an election should be held. Nothing happened.
It is reported also that the Carnegie Corporation had expressed a willingness to bargain with the steel workers union as a concession to them but remained adamant in its demand to negotiate similarly with other groups, meaning the company union through which it feels sure of its powers of coercion and intimidation to control the men in the mills.
It has already been strongly intimated that the corporation will refuse to furnish its payroll for the elections ordered and carry the case up to the United States Supreme Court. A fight in this manner is a fight on the corporation’s own front. It knows how to deal with the courts and how to make the influence of its money powers bear fruit. The steel corporation does not mind spending a little time with the courts for it knows it can rely on any branch of the capitalist government to carry out its wishes. In this sense it relies on its own powers, a lesson that the steel workers union has not yet learned.
These are so far the results of the demoralizing practices instituted by the proposals of William Green and Mike Tighe at the steel workers union convention in Pittsburgh last June when it faced the momentous question of striking the mills to compel recognition of the union.
Green asked for the creation of the National Steel Labor Relations Board and got it. The workers paid the price of the resulting disintegrating influence just at a time when an aggressive policy of organization and action was required. Green and Tighe on the other hand are pursuing their victory and forging ahead for an industrial truce of no strikes with monopoly capital.
To challenge the steel corporation to a plant election to determine the sentiment of the workers may have had its time. Now that is not the issue and in view of the special powers of coercion in the hands of the corporation in such a procedure it will result only in disorganization of the workers’ ranks. Actual union organization means to fight it out.
Prospects for organization were excellent last summer. The Amalgamated Association of Iron Steel and Tin Workers had gained a new Impulse and experienced a splendid revival despite the sabotage of its reactionary officials. The steel workers genuinely hated the company union and they still do. New progressive elements came forward in the union but they could not stand up against the reactionary barrage. However, an opportunity does not wait forever.
It is reported that the progressives are planning a rank and file convention to be held in Pittsburgh the first week of February to consider “ways and means of forcing union recognition from the steel companies”. The call was issued at a meeting of 500 representatives from ten districts of the union at which speakers said that “strike is our only weapon left now”. Of course, this convention has already been declared outlawed by the Tighe administration.
Unquestionably the rank and file discontent with the reactionary union administration is deep seated and its demand for action widespread. Its real need is progressive leadership that will stand up and make the fight; but to provide that the progressives themselves need organization and a clear cut policy of action. In this respect the steel workers union is no exception from many others and this is only one more reason for the necessity and speedy realization of a new national progressive movement in the trade unions.
 



The rift between the Roosevelt administration and the A.F. of L. leadership has widened, all indications to the contrary notwithstanding. First President Roosevelt, despite the vehement objections from the A.F. of L. officialdom, extended the automobile agreement of last year, which legalized the company union, and extended the life of the [line of text missing here] Sloan of General Motors and Walter Chrysler together with Leo Woolman had been consulted prior to the extension of the agreement, but the opinions of Bill Green were not solicited. And except for the subsequent “gracious” reception given at the White House, permitting Bill Green to introduce by name to the President each one of the members of the Executive Council, nothing was done to mend the rift, not to speak of dealing with the real grievances of the automobile workers.
President Roosevelt next announced the tobacco code with its 40-hour week regulation and the 25 to 40 cents an hour minimum wage, and again over the objections of the A.F. of L. official leadership. To the impassioned criticism made by the latter of S. Clay Williams as chairman of the National Industrial Recovery Board President Roosevelt answered in his “Dear Bill” letter to Green informing him that the former chairman of the notorious open shop R.J. Reynolds tobacco company was a devoted public servant. However soothing this may have appeared to Bill Green, it could mean only another kick in the fade in so far as the administration’s attitude to the issue of union organization is concerned.
Finally, the insistence of the Roosevelt administration upon a $50 per month maximum wage for workers on relief projects will unquestionably receive the unstinted support of all the magnates of finance and industry. With that will go an effort to squelch the so-called labor lobby in Congress.
A number of other measures are pending before Congress which will, if anything, tend to widen further the present open rift. There is, for example, the 30-hour week bill. On numerous occasions the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the Manufacturers Association have voiced their determined opposition to this bill. It is a well-known fact that the Roosevelt administration sees eye to eye with them and the hopes pinned by these labor leaders upon the government for support in return for their miserable failure of union organization are due for another blast. Thus, there need be no doubt that the rift is brought about by the initiative of President Roosevelt. That is why there is something real about it.
 
Serious Problems Ahead
These issues which stand out in the recent events in Washington foreshadow the serious problems that the trade union movement will henceforth have to face. In fact, the breach between Roosevelt and the labor leaders is merely the prelude to a wage-cutting campaign on a large scale that is now in preparation. It is signalized by the proposed $50 monthly maximum wage for workers on relief projects. But the issues go even deeper. They will raise the very question of life or death to the trade union movement.
Of course, the labor leaders are correct when they insist that two wage levels, a higher for private industry and a lower for government relief work, cannot be maintained. The higher rate will be forced down to the lower rate. At first the unemployed workers who are dependent upon relief will be compelled to work for the low rate. Economic experts will next get busy and manipulate statistics to show that workers on relief projects get by on the $50 monthly maximum wage, that they can keep on producing on that wage rate, that the family budget can be shaved down to that level and that there is, therefore, no valid reason for paying more in private industry. Wage reductions will be on the order of the day in every industry and it stands to reason that one of its inescapable accompaniments will be in the first instance well-prepared and deliberate efforts to chain the trade union movement to a system of compulsory arbitration in which strikes are outlawed. Failing in that, there will be sure to follow the most fierce campaign yet witnessed to exterminate the trade union movement.
 
What Is Being Done?
The most serious questions now arise before every active trade unionist. What is the leadership of the movement doing to defend and to maintain its right of existence? What are the organizations doing to prepare for a serious battle?
To the A.F. of L. Executive Council is credited a powerful lobby in Congress. Its success to date cannot be said to have been very startling and certainly it holds out much less prospects for the future. So long that it serves merely as a shield for the actual failure of organization and struggle it can only have fatal consequences to the movement. In reality that is all this lobby is today.
The Executive Council has decided that it will not now undertake to organize the steel industry. It is too busy with the automobile industry. William Green has even made a tour of the automobile centers and in his public addresses assured the manufacturers that the A.F. of L. does not intend to strike the plants. All it asks is a fair deal. Such a message does not sound very inspiring to the automobile workers. After all, they have also had their experiences and very likely learned by this time that nothing can be gained unless they fight for it. Consequently the meetings of Bill Green were not very enthusiastically attended. In Detroit less than two thousand workers showed up, which compares very poorly with the great overflow meetings held by A.F. of L. leaders last year. But that was before the sell-out agreement had been signed by them. Now the automobile workers’ unions show a serious drop in membership despite the fact that there have been many indications of a sentiment for organization amongst the workers provided they are shown how to organize and how to get somewhere. The A.F. of L. campaign of organization does not meet with great response. The automobile manufacturers are, of course, opposed to it. The Wollman Board tells the workers that if they join the A. F. of L. it cannot help them. The A.F. of L. leaders offer nothing except its replacement by the National Industrial Relations Board. [1] The inducements for joining the union under these conditions are slim indeed.
A serious response by the automobile workers to a campaign of organization cannot be expected until the unions break off completely from the sell-out tradition established by the reactionary leadership. It may take a few more kicks in the face from the Roosevelt administration to do it, but we may rest assured that such kicks will not be lacking. What must follow next must be an aggressive policy of organization. The very life and existence of the trade-union movement depends upon that.
* * *
Note
1. The Executive Council has decided that the automobile workers are to have a separate charter for an international union, but it is not to include the tool and die makers or the maintenance men, nor is it to take effect until June, that is, not until after this season is over. This alone should verify that the strike vote now conducted by the automobile workers federal unions, with the actual call for a atrike, however, left to Wm. Green, can have no serious meaning. But it is only one of the straws in the wind indicating that the Executive Council is determined to resist any move for industrial unionism. At its recent meeting the Mill, Mine and Smelter Workers Union appealed against a decision to split up the workers in the Butte copper mines among craft unions, leaving in the main only semi-skilled and unskilled workers to the mine union, John Frey of the Metal Trades Department, supported by Arthur Wharton of the machinists and by other craft union chiefs, succeeded in thwarting any attempt of industrial union jurisdiction.
 



Bill Green and the whole A.F. of L. leadership was challenged at the rubber workers’ convention. It suffered another heavy blow, directed simultaneously at its methods of bureaucratic domination and its reactionary “red baiting” campaign. Coming, as it did, right upon the heels of the defeat administered to this leadership by the teachers’ convention, the rebuke by the automobile workers’ convention and the manifestations of certain progressives elsewhere, the issues involved are sure to loom large as a prelude to the fifty-fifth annual A.F. of L. convention.
The new-born rubber workers’ international union refused, by a vote of 44 to 9, to accept certain A.F. of L. charter provisions, presented to the convention by Green, which would confer upon him the right of appointment of officers for a probationary period to be left at his discretion. With that vote the convention also rejected his choice of hand-picked officers.
Overwhelmed by this decisive vote, Green had to beat a hasty retreat. He accepted it, packed up his belongings and left for the more tranquil atmosphere of his home town Conshocton, Ohio, where he still remains a deacon of the Baptist church.
 
Problem of New Unions
These recent experiences cannot be easily ignored by the A.F. of L. officials. No doubt they are beginning to ask themselves some serious questions and preparing to straighten their own fences. But there are many difficulties to overcome, particularly in regard to the new unions.
It was with the greatest reluctance that they had agreed in the first place to grant international union charters to these unions. They fought to the last against the idea of granting industrial union charters and accepted it in principle only to sabotage it in actual practice, as they have done so far. But they are still faced with the dilemma of pressure from present economic conditions out of which grow the demands of the rank and file workers. These demands begin to crystallize into distinctly progressive tendencies. Naturally this is much more marked in the basic and the mass production industries where exploitation is most ruthless. And here the A.F. of L. officials will be much more closely bound-up with the development and growth of these unions than has been the case in the past.
 
Old Basis Undermined
So long as the hidebound craft unions of the skilled trades formed the backbone of the movement matters were comparatively simple. These workers enjoyed certain privileges and questioned much less the doings of their union officials. The unions could be managed fairly easily and the bureaucratic regime solidified. It was not so difficult for the latter to make all kinds of shady deals with the bosses. Much has now changed. Many of the privileges formerly enjoyed in the skilled trades have disappeared. Mass production has advanced and the unions of the skilled trades play a far less important role. For the future the very existence of an effective trade union movement depends upon its ability to build up a solid backbone of unions organized in the mass production industries. Despite the official reluctance that must be the orientation.
 
Trade Union Democracy
It is very interesting to note that the change toward the new conditions places as the first point on the agenda the question of trade union democracy. This was inevitable. Only by means of its bureaucratic control were the reactionary officials able to function effectively as the agents of capitalism and prevent the unions from engaging in serious struggles for their rightful demands. As a result the unions were stunted in their growth and their power of organization remained largely ineffective.
The free and unhampered development of the trade union movement therefore demands democratic union control as a first prerequisite. It becomes a first class progressive issue and it will play an important role in the crystallization of a progressive movement in the trade unions. The attitude to this issue will be of a determining character in the test for leadership.
In these recent experiences the fact that the progressive tendencies reflect the needs of the movement and represent its vital interests is verified once again. On the opposite side, the retarding reactionary influence of the A.F. of L. top officials is just as clearly revealed. Not only did the latter attempt to maintain its control by the celebrated steam-roller method, but they did actually succeed in preventing the. new-born international unions in automobile and rubber from taking on their necessary industrial form. According to the charters, the shop crafts are to be organized as heretofore in their old craft unions, separate and apart from the production workers.
 
Industrial Unionism
In the light of recent economic changes, the question of the industrial form of organization is only reinforced as a progressive issue. It is likewise connected up intimately with the future life and growth of the trade union movement. If the unions in the mass production industries are to meet the ruthless onslaughts of the gigantic corporations effectively, this form of organization is imperative.
At the time of receiving their charters, both the automobile workers .and the rubber workers’ unions appeared with greatly reduced ranks. The reason for this is not difficult to find. It was due essentially to the sheer incompetence and downright treason of the A.F. of L. officials who had been in charge of affairs up to now. Still, with an aggressive policy of organization, there are undoubtedly good prospects for the building up of strong unions in these industries. For the life of the movement as a whole this is necessary; but this has very much to do with the kind of leadership.
 
Progressives Grow in Struggle
It is no accident that more voices are heard every day in the trade unions demanding an aggressive policy of organization. In many instances on a local scale the demand has been carried out in practice, and thereby the progressive tendencies gained. Wherever unions have set to work, organizing aggressively without fear of the bitter struggle that it involves and ready to meet the sacrifices that it imposes, progress has been made. A good timber for a new and progressive leadership is being seasoned in such struggles.
The coming A.F. of L. convention cannot escape facing these issues in one way or another. Of course, they will not be reflected at this gathering in the same direct and decisive manner as in the general field of the class struggle. The labor party issue will most likely appear. There is little chance that very many distinctly progressive spokesmen will slip into the convention hall. But it is to be expected that perhaps several of the well-paid officials already now in or near to the higher councils, out of fear of the potential progressive movement for one reason, or due to pressure from below for another, will take up some of these issues in order to appear as spokesmen and head off the actual crystallization of a genuine progressive movement. When that occurs it is well for real progressives to be on guard.
 
Political Tendencies
It is yet too early to speak of a progressive movement already in existence. Only tendencies in that direction are manifested so far; and much confusion still prevails among these tendencies. Where they appear they represent, generally speaking, a combination of elements of various degrees of political consciousness. But in most cases they are not yet strongly influenced by the workers’ political parties.
Without at this moment going into the positions that these parties hold in regard to the problems of the trade unions and the issues and struggles within them, it is necessary to remember that the building up of a progressive movement is a first class political job. But it will also be a test of these parties, not only of their ability to organize the movement, but above all of their ability to influence it in the direction of political consciousness. There will be a struggle of political tendencies in this movement.
It should not be difficult for the revolutionary party to meet this test. But there is more required than merely to counterpose its program to those of the other political tendencies and parties. It will be necessary also to take over the responsibility for active, persistent and devoted work right on the firing line of the movement.



Problems of unusual importance face the fifty-fifth annual A.F. of L. convention, scheduled for October 7, at Atlantic City. Some of them cause new conflicts in the movement. Bill Green and his cronies at Washington may watch with dismay the several indications of a rank and file challenge to their present position and policy. They do not yet anticipate a direct threat to their leadership; but the fear of progressive tendencies is beginning to haunt them like a nightmare.
Fundamentally this is the outstanding issue before the coming convention. A living movement is compelled to respond to the pressure of conditions under which it exists; and the lower strata of the officialdom as well as the state federations and city central bodies, that are closer to the rank and file membership, begin to reflect this pressure. In several respects they come into conflict with the top bureaucracy and so, while the progressive tendencies are still very much undeveloped and confused, their existence begins to worry the leadership.
This official hierarchy has received some serious blows to its bureaucratic method of domination and control of the movement. Its “red scare” campaign has been given a setback. Its policy of organization is being challenged and its time-honored political policy, is subjected to a severe scrutiny.
In turn this despicable officialdom becomes more perfidious and moves closer toward a more outspoken reactionary position. This is the inevitable logic of antagonistic tendencies and it can only become more pronounced the more the conflict intensifies. Finally the struggle must result in the victory of the one or the other. The question of leadership and policy is completely interlocked with the very life of the movement. With the increasing pressure exerted upon the workers by the weight of capitalist exploitation progressive tendencies are bound to make their way in the trade union movement no matter how much the top leaders fulminate against them. But the latter know no other recourse than to lean more directly on their alliance with the enemies of the movement, by more complete collaboration with the bosses and in more outspoken support of the capitalist parties.
 
Some Blows to Reaction
Both the growth of progressive tendencies in the movement and the increased reaction of its leadership are apparent as the A.F. of L. faces its fifty-fifth annual convention.
The heaviest blows to the bureaucratic domination and control of the movement have come from two widely different directions: from the teachers union and from the newly constituted international union of automobile workers. The first was, by far the most decisive.
At its recent national convention the teachers union administered a serious rebuke to the “red scare” campaign of Bill Green and Co. and rejected by a firm majority vote his arrogant demand for expulsion of its New York local which he charged to be under Communist influence. Not content merely with this rebuke the convention elected the entire progressive slate for officers and executive board. When this happened Bill Green had not yet finished his personal supervision of the convention of the newly constituted automobile workers’ union. There also he suffered a reverse. The assembed delegates refused to give a vote of confidence to his handpicked crew of officials. Green had his way by use of sheer autocratic measures, but the attitude of the delegates constituted a challenge to bis leadership and gave him an indication of what he may expect in the future from the workers in the mass production industries.
 
Political Policy Challenged
These, however, are not the only manifestations disturbing the tranquility of Green and company.
Their policy is challenged or at least subjected to serious questioning, elsewhere. The Oregon State Federation is going leftward. Its recent convention came out in condemnation of the profit system and voted to establish a new political party. No doubt there was as yet little clarity on what kind of a party is needed, but the outworn policy of rewarding friends and punishing enemies amongst the agents of privilege does not at all find the same favor as before in trade union ranks. That holds true also for the Connecticut State Federation of Labor. It has decided to conduct a referendum vote of all local A.F. of L. unions in the state on the question of creating a labor party. Likewise the New Jersey State Federation of Labor, now in convention, is giving serious consideration to the labor party question.
These latter manifestations become doubly significant in view of Green’s constant reiteration of fictitious labor gains achieved by legislation in the capitalist Congress and presented by him as real. These he hails as new progress in relations between capital and labor. Undoubtedly the Executive Council report to the convention will attempt to bolster up its record with these fictitious gains. The trade unionists may not understand so well the lawyers language of the laws that have been entered on the statute books. Their attitude is much more likely motivated by a realization of the effects of these laws on their organizations and on their attempts to struggle for better conditions. It is hardly necessary to assume that they have a conscious aim of creating a large reformist party or that they envisage great parliamentary victories. Rather the manifestations in the direction of new parties and labor parties represent a desire to break with the policies of the past and to get a square deal by their own efforts. This aspect invests these manifestations with their greatest significance.
 
Retreat in Face of Bosses Assault
They are closely tied-up with the whole question of working class economic standards. And it is precisely in this respect that the incompetence of the A.F. of L. leadership is the most glaring and where its turn to greater perfidy and a more reactionary position is the most outstanding. The logic of the opposition encountered in the living movement drives it inexorably in this direction because, like the capitalists, this leadership has vested interests to protect.
Many grandiose proclamations were issued from A.F. of L. headquarters against the coolie wage level set by the Roosevelt administration on the WPA relief projects. Much active lobbying was conducted in Congress and at its committee hearings. The scale of $19 to $94 repeated Green, and all his cronies after him, – and they were correct – will tear down the whole American standard of wages. But the coolie scale went into effect. And, out of sheer incompetence to ward it off and downright sabotage of the struggle against it by the A.F. of L. officialdom, the American workers now face this scale as their basic standard. In this field things are much more real than are the so-called favorable labor laws on the statute books. And in this field the miserable capitulation to the coolie wage scale sacrificed important trade union principles and squandered many real gains attained in hard-fought struggles.
 
Faith in System of Exploitation
But the A.F. of L. Executive Council does not intend to tolerate any of the new manifestations in the trade union movement. It rallies to the support of the capitalist system and its present spokesman who so shrewdly put over again the old capital and labor relations in a brand new clothing. It backs up Roosevelt’s declaration that the economic emergency is passed and supports his promise of a “breathing spell” for business. It is preparing to strengthen his political fences for 1936. In the most contemptible fashion it hails the present upswing as the “healthiest thus far,” for it is “due chiefly to inherent economic strength ... Dividend payments in August exceeded last year by $11,000,000,” says the Executive Council report preparing to whoop it up at the coming convention; for are not these higher officials all interested in dividend payments? What other feature is “healthy” about this upswing? It cannot be the employment feature, for in regard to this the Executive Council states: “Employment this Spring has been below last year’s level although production was higher.” In other words: with the upswing, proclaimed as healthy by Green and company, unemployment is growing and the speed-up system is growing with it. And the Council statement further makes clear that while the cost of living continues to rise, recording in July this year 62 percent above last year, the share of the workers in the total national income had dropped from its 21.9 percent in 1929 to 18.1 per cent in 1934. A “healthy upswing” indeed.
 
Crucial Issues Still Remain
In face of these facts the decrepit A.F. of L. leadership, proclaims as healthy an upswing accomplished entirely at the expense of the workers, through increased exploitation, and it reiterates its faith in this system of exploitation. This, let us not forget, comes also as a prelude to the coming convention. It makes only so much more clear that this leadership remains wedded to capitalism in theory and practice and depends upon the active forces of capitalism, to sharpen its own class in order to deal the more effectively with any opposition to its reactionary policies and bureaucratic domination.
But the crucial issues still remain to be decided in the future. The coming A.F. of L. convention may proceed in comparative calm and without the serious conflicts yet coming to the fore. Nevertheless the reactionary course of its corrupt regime lays the trade union movement ever more open to new capitalist assaults. What direction the workers will take when facing these assaults should not be in doubt. That can be clearly ascertained from their attitude and their actions up to now.
In the coming battles both ideas and leadership will be put to the test.



CHANGES OF A profound nature are taking place in American political life. Superficially these may appear as the ordinary upsets and realignments of forces that usually follow a change in the business cycle; but their real significance in an historic sense are of a much more fundamental character.
For three-quarters of a century the broad political trend has followed the traditional two-party system, in which the Republican party was naively reputed to be the true harbinger of prosperity. Its preponderance was undebatable, except for the interruptions of the Democratic administrations of Grover Cleveland, Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt. Today this question hangs in the balance. The Democratic party has perhaps already passed its pinnacle of the popular, panegyric acclaims accorded to it as recently as the 1934 elections. The Roosevelt administration finds ever greater difficulty in managing its overwhelming Congress majority. Some Senators and Representatives become recalcitrant and turn “progressive” or “conservative” as they interpret their own fears of a swing of the political pendulum. Political free-lancers, spellbinders and quacks, democratic windbags and plain charlatans are out to reap the harvest. Republicans are kindling fond hopes of regeneration and revival from the grass roots. And most important of all, third party developments are actually appearing on the horizon. But in their deeper significance all these manifestations denote a beginning toward divisions along class lines of American politics – still clothed, however, in its unique American form.
Here we have a new phenomenon. Although it must be admitted at the outset that these third party attempts are by and large repetitions of earlier forerunners, now they appear at a time when the United States is entering a new epoch. This is important for our analysis. In view of the beginnings of class divisions in polite ical life the emergence of a third party or parties has become historically inevitable in the sense of the inadequacy of the traditional two-party system. Of course, such a statement can apply only when speaking broadly and without making any commitments to any specific kind of third parties. Whether the attempts now being made will result in a third party acquiring serious proportions and serious influence at this particular stage, to be exact, at the 1936 elections, is of importance only for those who stake their political fortune on such a development. To us the question presents itself in a different form. In the first place, it is reasonable to assume that the system of two capitalist parties, representing essentially the same interests and holding sole sway, will soon be a thing of the past. Another party, or other parties, will be due to contend with them for popular mass support. Which party? Historical experience on a world scale has shown us the various forms that such parties assume. Liberal parties of a middle class ideology, labor or farmer-labor parties and the classical social democratic parties – the revolutionary parties are, of course, in a separate category. Theoretically, the rapid large-scale development of either type is possible in the United States. But here we have become accustomed to consider only the third party type of Populist days or the labor or farmer-labor party and therefore more exact definitions and more exact evaluations are now necessary.
There is today a veritable conglomeration of variegated groups and elements from the blustering demagogue and old and new-baked “progressives” in Congress through the lopsided idealists, social uplifters and naive self-deluders, to the Old Guard in the Socialist party and the Centrists of the “Militant” and Stalinist brands declaiming with ardor, some noisily, others softly, in favor of one or another type of third party. In its historic essence, the difference between their claims is not so very great.
The presumptuous demagogue or plain charlatan of the Long and Coughlin calibre have no particular allegiances. While they do not favor the martyr’s garb of lost elections, they will easily stake their chances on swaying masses to their own political fortunes. At times they may run short of sensational material but in the critical moments of mass despair they are the more dangerous because they are the least principled and the most unscrupulous. For the cautious “progressives” in Congress matters stand somewhat differently, for they are the much more practical kind of office-holding politicians. The younger LaFollettes captured the state of Wisconsin for a brand new Progressive party, but in national politics the Senator considers it much safer to attempt to tag on “radical” amendments to the various Roosevelt measures. Obviously his aim is to build up a certain record and await the propitious moment when he may make the jump into the older LaFollette’s shoes. Senator Gerald P. Nye, another “progressive”, complains that “capitalists have bought their way into both of the old parties”, but he warns his more impatient friends: “Don’t make the mistake of trying to cover too much territory and try to change the structure of the nation overnight.” Fearful of the “calamity” that any division, that is, division in the capitalist parties, “would throw the government back into the hands of the reactionaries [!?]”, these cautious “progressives” become suspicious of their own shadow. Governor Olson of Minnesota is perhaps a little more daring, but he is too occupied now with local matters to give much attention to national affairs. Still he says that he is ready to “follow any movement which is designed to bring about a change from the present system to a production-for-use system”. A year ago, during the Minneapolis truck drivers’ strike, he called out the troops, declared martial law and had his soldiers raid the union headquarters in the name of the Minnesota Farmer-Labor party. Upton Sinclair, of Epic fame, proposes to capture both the Republican and the Democratic parties for a “production-for-use” program and he believes that Roosevelt can still be induced to accept this program as the leading feature of the New Deal. The pacifist petty bourgeois liberals, always ready to champion the “producing interest” in society against the “speculating interest” and who plumped for Roosevelt in order to aid the “forgotten man”, now begin to find the New Deal as disappointing as the war to make the world safe for democracy. Full of lovely vagaries and longings they espouse the cause of righteousness against social and economic injustices whose effects make them so indignant. On such grounds they would daringly support a third party. But the system that engenders these injustices is considered by all of these elements as divinely ordained, not to be abolished, only to be tinkered with – to be “regulated in the public interest”. Was not this what they expected from the New Deal? And now it disappoints them, but they still find it so terribly difficult to make the choice between Roosevelt and a new party. Pious protestations against fate plus the capitalist invasion of the Democratic party, which has put them into this cruel position, will scarcely help.
The socialists, Old Guard, “Militants” and RPPA alike favor a Labor party. The position of the right wing is understandable. Long ago it lost sight of the theoretical socialist premises. Its social reformist position became almost indistinguishable from the New Deal and Abe Cahan could justly proclaim that Roosevelt lacked only the little red Socialist party membership card. Today it accepts warmly all ideas suggesting a broader party that promises greater positions and promises to be a better barrier to Leftward tendencies which it views with such horror and dismay. The Right wing pleads with the high trade union officials to give leadership to such a party. But these officials, who have personal interests to consider, are too busy fighting the militant and the revolutionary workers in the unions. They are too busy putting the union label on strike betrayals and besides, like the capitalists themselves they have vested interests to protect. So far they have not stirred to these pleas and at the present juncture it is most unlikely that they will. Some of them took chances with LaFollette in 1924, but on the whole, the AF of L officials usually tie up the career of their leadership as well as their personal interests in a system of collaboration with the capitalist party in control of the administration. Their title: labor lieutenants of capitalism, is most appropriate indeed. It would be far from the minds of the Right wing socialists to say anything that is unkind about this despicable and treacherous political relationship. Some irritating demands to this effect were made by the “Militants”. But that was only for a time, only until the erstwhile “militant” leaders could divert the rank and file pressure for a revolutionary policy into the safer channels of “harmony”, and find sufficient comfort for themselves in the formula: What we lose on the Left we shall gain on the Right. Their spineless opposition succumbed to the onslaughts of the Old Guard, whom they hated for one reason and another, but with whom they had no difference in principle. The newly constituted Thomas-Hoan-Oneal NEC majority, born out of capitulation, may continue the efforts to save the SP from the danger of the Left and work for a Labor party that will embrace the class collaboration policy of the AF of L leaders. The difference in principle between this new majority and the latter is too fictitious really to stand in the way. But on the Left, the RPPA, fully aware of the perfidious reformism that pervades the SP, also takes up the cudgels for a Labor party within which they say that “the Socialist party must act as a Marxist force ... and seek to direct the workers into channels of socialist thought”. The net effect of a mass Labor party, they hold, will be the “emancipation of the workers from the thralldom of capitalist politics”. No more and no less. But still more than is accomplished by the social democratic parties whose leaders occupy ministerial posts by the grace of their majesties, the tall kings of the Scandinavian countries and Belgium.
The Stalinists present in their latest political turn the most curious and the most fantastic ideas of a Labor party melange. They do not want a Labor party, they say, that is merely a third party. Nor do they want an ordinary Labor party that accepts the leadership of the AF of L bureaucracy or the SP Right wing. Their aims are far more grandiose and, incidentally, much more ridiculous. They champion the idea of a Labor party that will wage “revolutionary mass struggle for the immediate demands of the workers which go beyond the interests of capital”. It is to be a “genuine Labor party,” they say, that will “really carry on a struggle against the growing menace of war and Fascism”. What pompous nonsense! What marvelous rhetoric designed to shield an opportunist orientation and clothe it in revolutionary phrases! It is entirely devoid of Marxian content for, as all history proves, a Labor party, even when it has a genuine trade union base, is a reformist party and nothing else can be expected from it. But the Stalinists are not to be deterred by such arguments or such proofs from history. They have started a veritable crusade to bring their idea of a Labor party into life. Not because a widespread sentiment for its creation already exists; on the contrary, that is not the case and the crusade is undertaken purely because it is prescribed by their latest turn of policy, the American adaptation of the Stalinist opportunist degeneration.
At the present junction of political developments greater advances are scored by the purely third party proponents. Of course, there is no certainty at all that the accelerated tempo of capitalist contradictions will permit either type to unfold on a large scale and play a serious historic role or attain a serious political influence in the United States. But it is very natural that the petty bourgeois demagogues of third partyism should be a few steps ahead. Politically the middle class, which is now so hard pressed by brutally and irresistibly advancing monopoly capital, is more articulate, more uprooted from traditional adherence to old shibboleths, and give vent quicker to its feelings of discontent in a clamor for political expression.
Surely the workers are under no less pressure and they have resisted militantly in strike struggles, but their political consciousness still remains on a low level. Definite Labor party sentiments, in the strict sense of the term, are much less manifest. The trade union movement adheres, at least formally, to the political policy of its bureaucratic top leaders. However, with the rumblings of new class conflicts distinctly audible and with fuel piled up for a general conflagration, an urge for independent labor political action is bound to develop. A response in some measure to the pressure that will be put upon them, cannot be altogether avoided by the trade union officials. Naturally, the collaboration that they have hitherto maintained with the political parties of the master class can in no sense be considered as a permanent condition. The dialectics of the class struggle would not permit any such permanency. Already today some changes are noticable in the fact that they lay less stress on the hoary old political slogan of rewarding friends and punishing enemies. In its place they have adopted an attitude of aggressive support for the specific Rooseveltian program of perverted reformism which was supposed to grant collective bargaining rights, assure expansion of the purchasing power of the masses, unemployment relief and social security. The paradox of this perverted reform program with its measures intended to go no further than to help restore the internal equilibrium in order to lay the groundwork for a stronger, a more aggressive and a more monstrous imperialism – on this fact the labor leaders are diplomatically silent. They will be prepared to break their alliance with the parties of the master class only when they sense that the urge for independent labor political action is beginning to take on revolutionary qualities. Their breach would be dictated by efforts to stem such a tide by means of new illusions in place of the old ones and by transferring the policy of class collaboration to an organized political party in order to thwart the progress of the working class.
History may then repeat the role of the agents of opportunism, the bearers of social reformist illusions, in a special American version. Not, to be sure, as was the case in Great Britain where the Labour party, despite all its defects nevertheless became a factor of historically progressive importance during the period of capitalist growth as a result of its contribution to the advancement of the proletariat as a class. In this country, when given such developments as indicated above, which are far more likely than the fantastic concoction presented by the Stalinists, it would start as a retrogressive force. Its main function would be to canalize the discontent of the working class into more or less futile reformist endeavors and to swerve the movement from the revolutionary path. It is far more likely also, and this is already indicated by present trends, that this party would be a hybrid combination of third party and Farmer-Labor party forces under the leadership of the petty bourgeoisie rather than a distinct or a genuine party of labor. This can be deduced not because of any socalled American exceptionalism, but because of the dialectic relationship between capitalist disintegration and reformism in the present epoch. On the one hand, we have in the United States a highly developed technology existing on a background of a retarded political ideology of the masses. On the other hand, we have the tendencies of disintegration of American capitalist society and the titanic dimensions of its contradictions that may create the possibility of a stormy forward march of the American working class, in which it may advance by leaps and skip stages. To be sure, it will have to learn anew many experiences that were acquired by the European proletariat over a long period of time, to be consumated here, however, in far shorter periods of time. Forces for the revolutionary movement will develop alongside of the hybrid combination of Farmer-Labor and third party and in direct antagonism to it. Who will gain the hegemony of the masses, the latter or the revolutionary Marxists? That is the decisive question.
The Stalinists are in this respect in a twofold contradiction. In the first place, the forces which they may succeed in arousing by their deceptive Labor party slogan may just as likely become the captives of a retrogressive third party combination functioning as a brake upon the proletarian revolutionary movement. In the second place, their ardent espousal of the Labor party cause, requiring for its realization the trade union movement, which cannot be considered separate and apart from its bureaucratic top leaders, will in the decisive moment render them politically prostrate, servilely kissing the hem of the class collaboration garment.
Ample evidence to back up this statement will be produced in abundance in the course of the developments on the new party arena. Suffice it at the moment to look a little closer at the first of the present third party experiments made at the Chicago conference July 5–6. Except for the great ardor of the delegates present and the hopes of its naive well-wishers who remained at home, the party for which a basis was tentatively laid is still an unknown quantity. Importance can be ascribed to the Chicago conference only in the sese that it was indicative of the new trend. Great care had been taken in advance to stress what its initiators described, in the common diplomatic parlance, as its purely exploratory character. Sponsored officially by five Congressmen, Amlie, the real father of the Wisconsin Progressive party, Marcantonio, Schneider, Scott and Lundeen, the gathering drew its representation from a fair cross-section of the variegated groups and elements who today form the vanguard of the third party movement. There were present amateur politicians of the Common Sense school, intellectuals without any particular allegiance and with as yet unknown principles and, more important, members and officials of trade unions like the railroad unions, the mine workers, the clothing workers, the stone masons, the electrical workers, the Chicago Federation of Labor and the Wisconsin Federation of Labor, together with representatives of farmers’ organizations and of diverse political groupings, including the socialists and Stalinists. Socialist representatives attended mainly as observers, amongst them Nathan Fine, who came straight from the Right wing headquarters in the Rand School. As a spokesman of conciliation, replying to the opponents of participation by the Communist party, appeared Alfred Wagenknecht, who entered the conference by way of Missouri and wore a delegate’s badge. Fine succeeded in demonstrating his usefulness as a member of the platform committee and there need be little doubt that Wagenknecht proved a certain usefulness in clarifying Marcantonio and his New York contingent of Knickerbocker Democrats. Or – God forbid – did this pair perhaps attend in order to bore from within this mass movement? Be that as it may, even boring from within depends on the direction that is laid out by the borers. And Fine, it appears, started out with his gear in reverse, for when he returned enthusiastically and reported his noble intentions to his NEC (to become an organizer for the new party while retaining his membership in the SP) that went even a little further than Thomas, Hoan and Oneal were prepared to go at this moment. The point not to be missed, however, is that both socialists and Stalinists found it possible to attend this conference and partake in its decisions, including the preparations to call a “more authentic” conference in the Fall to be held for the purpose of putting the stamp of legitimacy on the embryo third party as it is called by one of its well-wishers. Here we have an indication, in embryo form but a distinct indication nevertheless, that the new party trend is assuming the form of the hybrid Farmer-Labor and third party combination covering all the ground from Democratic and Republican “progressives” to the socialists and Stalinists. This is not at all strange in view of the spectacle in France of the CP, the SP and the petty bourgeois Radical-Socialist party uniting to preserve the imperialist republic with the slogan of national defense.
This brief description indicates the make-up of this first gathering ; its true political complexion found more adequate expression in the platform adopted. Dedicated to the principle of “production for use and not for profit”, its preamble proclaims that “a new economic order is necessary”, and that “until it is established industrial stagnation will persist”. No more lucid, precise and unassailable statements could be asked from this motley gathering. Is it conceivable that the petty bourgeois third party proponents, who may in moments of despair seek recourse to the strongest language of condemnation to express their moral indignation, have now accepted the revolutionary way out of their dilemma? No, these native radicals, as they call themselves apparently to be absolved from any revolutionary implications, naively pursue the illusory phantom of “a new economic order” to be established without the revolutionists, without the Marxists. Roosevelt and Tugwell remain in their views far greater authorities than Marx and Lenin, and on this basis the struggle will ensue for hegemony of the masses between the third partyites and the proletarian revolutionists.
A demand for production for use and not for profit has, as is well known, distinctly revolutionary implications and presupposes revolutionary action for its realization. Today capitalist ownership of the means of production and its legal right to exploitation of labor stands in the final analysis determines all political relations; which is another way of saying that those who own and control the means of production are those who rule. The mere change to government ownership or public ownership, so long as these capitalist relations remain in effect, would therefore not suffice. It is nonsense to assume that production for use, which pre-supposes the expropriation of the means of production and the transfer of the ownership thereof to the producers, can find its realization without the overthrow of capitalist rule. In other words it can find its realization only through the proletarian revolution. To Marxists this is elementary.
Of course, these are not at all the aims and objectives of the third party movement and the proclamations of its preamble are obviously intended only as an empty adornment. Paragraph 8 of its platform makes this perfectly clear in declaring: “We affirm our faith in our democratic form of government.” Let us remember that this is not speaking of some future government but of the present capitalist democratic form of government. And should any doubt still remain as to the intentions of the authors of the platform they will quickly be dispelled by its opening paragraph.
The magnificent slogan of the third party gathering is there presented in its real essence, viz.: “As a means of transition to an economy of abundance we favor unlimited production for use by and for the unemployed:” Is this anything but a glorified barter program? Objectively, and when considering its appearance at a specific historic stage when the marvelous structure of American national economy can find its full and complete usefulness to humanity only through socialization, the third party can become nothing else but a distinctly anti-progressive force. The mere fact, however, that the slogan “production for use and not for profit”, aside from its complete perversion, could find its way into this movement gives eloquent testimony to the deep-seated mass discontent with a system of robbery and spoils that is devastating in its consequence – a discontent not yet given articulate political mass expression.
The United States is at the turn of a cycle, but it is not the ordinary business cycle experienced before. The US has now become inescapably and irrevocably embroiled in the maelstrom of world capitalist disintegration. It is entering a new epoch. The reorganization of its national economy and the ensuing ideological regroupments cut across old political lines. The politics of pork barrel spoils is nearing its end. American political life is beginning to divide along class lines, and the new epoch will put the political parties to new tests in which the petty bourgeois third party, or Farmer-Labor third party combination, will have no real progressive role to play. The future belongs to the revolutionary party.
Arne SWABECK



Several thousand skilled workers struck on New York City Works Project Administration jobs this week demanding the prevailing union rate of wages. Flying squadrons which hare proved such a popular and effective weapon in recent labor struggles set to work immediately to spread the strike throughout the city, and indications are at the time of this writing, that it will become general, affecting all of the WPA jobs.
This is not the first example of a strike on relief project works; but it is the first real sign of the determination of the workers to maintain the union standard of wages gained after decades of bitter struggle. This is the issue involved, and the trade unionists made no mistake in putting it bluntly. Long ago it became clear to the trade union movement that the efforts to establish the Roosevelt relief wage ranging from $19.00 to $93.00 per month on relief projects could mean nothing else but a signal to employers everywhere to force down the existing union scale. The workers who are involved in the New York strike understand the issue this way. Strike Seen Spreading New York is virtually the first city to get WPA projects actually under way; but the trade union movement throughout the country is on record for a fight to maintain the prevailing union rate of wages. And no sooner had the walk-out started in New York than the example was followed by the workers employed on the WPA project at the League Island Navy Yard in Philadelphia. The possibilities are, therefore, that this strike will extend to a large number of cities and become widespread.
“Who’s the employer here,” was the question before a New York meeting of about 200 trade union officials by General Johnson, the hot air artist, who proposes to run the WPA jobs in the city after the fashion of a Prussian drill sergeant. And he answered the question. “The government is the employer. This is a strike against the government, an attack against the government and people of the United States.” According to the further statements made by the General the strike is nothing but a “red” conspiracy, a plot by these “reds” to use the strikers as suckers to pull their chestnuts out of the fire. But all this “heroic” bombast had merely the effect on the meeting of a reaffirmation of the strike vote previously taken. The ultimatum, issued later by the brave general ordering all strikers to return to work by the following Monday or lose their jobs, resulting in the flying squadrons setting to work in earnest.
 
Union Officials Put on Spot
Of course, the trade union officials are on the spot. They know who’s the employer and all of their past actions have shown a hundred times over that their sympathies are pretty close to the sentiment expressed by the General. But in this instance there is something more at stake than just an ordinary
strike. And today these officials fear that permitting the Roosevelt coolie wage to stand would not only tear down the wage standard but also seriously undermine the existence of the trade union movement itself. Yet there are up to the moment of this writing only scant indications of serious efforts on their part to coordinate the strike and connect it up effectively not only with the many building trades workers who are today not in the unions and who work on the relief projects side by side with the union men. So far it is mainly the building workers who are involved; but the signs of solidarity in action already displayed by the white collar groups certainly emphasizes the necessity of the coordination extending to this group as well.
Moreover, in the threat made by by General Relief Administrator Hopkins is a further warning of the need of this most complete coordination of the project strike already demanded by several New York local building trades unions, amongst them the electrical workers local 3, the carpenters local 2090, the painters local 905 and the bricklayers local 37. “No one has to work who does not want to,” declared Mr. Hopkins, “and if they don’t want to do it, other people on relief rolls will take their places and receive the security wage.” Here is a clear statement of organized strike breaking and for the trade union movement there can hardly be any other recourse but to accept the challenge and fight it out.
Wm. Green in his editorial in the American Federationist, August issue, takes cognizance of the threat in asserting that when relief wages are set in competition with normal wages, work and living standards for all will be dragged down. But what does he propose? “State and local labor organizations should organize for effective participation in state relief plans and policies.” And after the local and state organizations have participated to the fullest extent in these plans, then what, it may be pertinent to ask? There can be only one answer: The way out is already shown in New York. Strike the project jobs.



DIMITROFF’S declaration to the Seventh Congress of the CI in support of “united front governments”, we are informed, was greeted by a stormy ovation from the assembled delegates. Speaking for a “bold and determined course toward a united front of the working class”, the “helmsman of the Comintern” gave an unequivocal answer to the question he posed in his report:
“If we Communists are asked,” he said, “whether we advocate the united front only in the struggle for partial demands, or whether we are prepared to share the responsibility even when it will be a question of forming a government on the basis of the united front, then we say with a full sense of our responsibility: yes, we recognize that a situation may arise in which the formation of a government of the proletarian united front, or of the anti-Fascist People’s Front, will become not only possible but necessary in the interest of the proletariat. And in that case we shall declare for the formation of such a government without the slightest hesitation.”
Dimitroff laid down one condition, which he considered essential for the support of such a “united front government” posed by him concretely for France: namely, that it will “carry on a real struggle against French. Fascism – not in word but in deed – will carry out the program of demands of the anti-Fascist People’s Front.” (Emphasis mine – A.S.)
What we have presented here is not the slogan of the workers’ government as a consequence of the united front policy in a revolutionary situation. It is not the idea of Soviets as the highest form of the united front under the conditions in which the proletariat enters the stage of struggle for power. No! What we have presented here is the idea of support of coalition governments. Dimitroff understood it in that sense; all the delegates to the Seventh Congress understood it in that sense, and support of coalition government has now become the declared policy of the Comintern. Wherein does this differ in content from the social democratic concept of coalition governments, aside from its form of presentation? Now it is called a “bold and determined course toward the united front of the working class”.
What could then be more natural than for Dimitroff to declare also that “the interests of the class struggle of the proletariat and the success of the proletarian revolution make it imperative that there be a single party of the proletariat in each country”? Only yesterday we were told by the same authors that social democracy is the main enemy, in fact it is social-Fascism; today, the success of the proletarian revolution depends on the extension of the united front into organic unity between the two Centrist parties of Stalinism and of social democracy.
Taking his cue from the report of the “helmsman”, and carrying the treacherous opportunism of the Seventh Congress to its extreme absurdity, Earl Browder found an answer to the question of welding together a “broad people’s movement” in the United States. It is to extend far indeed. His only fear was that “the bourgeoisie, the top AF of L bureaucracy, the Right wing socialists, many liberal bourgeois politicians, not to speak of the Hearsts, Coughlins and Longs, will do everything possible to exclude the communists from such a movement”. But casting all caution aside, Browder went on to explain this new line for the United States.
“We must say clearly,” he exclaimed in a vigorous outburst of his own inner conviction and enthusiasm, “yes, we will fight together with all those in the united front, for a majority in all elec-ive bodies, local, state and national. We will support such a party whenever and wherever it wins a majority, in taking over administrative powers, so long as it really uses these powers to protect and extend democratic liberties and advance the demands of the masses. But the masses will ask us : What will be your role ? Will you stand aside as critics, preaching merely for a Soviet power, for which we are not ready to fight ? We answer: The communists are even prepared to participate in such a government.” (Emphasis mine – A.S.)
All that now remains to be done by Browder’s chimerical “American People’s Front” is to furnish the mandate.
And what sort of a “broad people’s party” does Browder propose to create? Dimitroff assures us that it will be “neither socialist nor communist”. Of that we never had any doubt. But then, what will it be? Browder gives us his definition as a “lasting coalition of workers, farmers, and city middle classes, to fight against threatening economic catastrophe, against political reaction and Fascism, and against the threatening war”. To be sure, this is expecting a lot from a “people’s party”.
Such are the estimates of the tasks of the communists, outlined by both the “helmsmen”, for the present conditions of threatening economic catastrophe, political reaction. Fascism and war: Support of coalition governments and the welding together in the United States of a “broad people’s party ... a lasting coalition of workers, fanners and city middle classes”. Dimitroff described these to the Seventh Congress as “cardinal questions of the united front”. Cardinal questions indeed, not, however, of the united front but of the opportunist degeneracy and decomposition of the Comintern.
From its original concept, the united front as a means of proletarian unity at any given moment in the struggle against capitalism, has been perverted by the present Comintern leadership into a means of an opportunist coalition with the bourgeoisie. This is the cardinal difference between the united front policy as formulated by the Bolsheviks during the period covered by the first four Congresses and the interpretation given to it at the Seventh Congress. Fundamentally it represents a cardinal difference between the Comintern of Lenin and the Comintern of Stalin.
Not the communist parties but social democracy will be the real beneficiaries of this 180 degree turn. An enormous contribution has been made toward its further rehabilitation. What stands now in the way of the justification of all its policies and all its betrayals? Nothing so far as the Comintern is concerned. Drawing their comfort from the slogan of organic unity the leaders of the socialist parties may now appear before their own working class following as fully vindicated in all their charges against the “communist splitters”. For Bolsheviks, however, the question of unity or splits is subordinated to political policy. Bolsheviks do not fight only for ideas and programs. They also draw organizational conclusions from their policy. Had not the communist party under the leadership of Lenin broken definitely and irrevocably with social democracy it could never have become the party of proletarian revolution. This was the cardinal difference with social democracy. For the revolutionary party this difference remains in full force today, only it is necessary to add, that it applies with equal potency to the Comintern of Stalin.
Nevertheless the united front policy remains as valid today as when first formulated. It takes as its point of departure the fact that in the every-day struggle against capitalism, and in so far as the vital interests of the working class are concerned, the masses realize the need for united action. If their political consciousness would develop on an even and uniform scale there would be far less difficulty in solving the problem of unity. Unfortunately that is not the case. The class itself is not homogeneous. In the course of the class struggle, political consciousness develops unevenly; large working class sections support the bourgeois political parties, support the social democracy, or remain politically indifferent. While the revolutionary party has no interests separate and apart from the class as a whole, it can fulfill its tasks only by maintaining correct relations within the class. From this flows its duty to provide the means whereby, at each given moment, joint action against the common enemy may be made possible.
These simple objective facts present the premise for the united front policy. In no sense can it be considered a mere manoeuvre that is not meant seriously or honestly, or that is to serve as a cloak under which the party snatches leadership over masses not otherwise merited by its accomplishments. .Reprehensible as this would appear, it has nevertheless been the practise of the little American Stalinists. Creation, artificially, of “rank and file committees” to give the appearance of speaking officially for the trade unions in support of the party’s aims was not at all beneath them. But even more despicable and more futile – if it is possible – were their many attempts to palm off as a genuine united front a mere combination of the communist party and its auxiliary organizations, most of which represented absolutely nobody not already directly under its influence. Such practises could never win over the majority of the working class; they did not win anybody at all.
So long as the revolutionary party and its direct supporters remain a minority force within the class, even if a substantial one, the party faces the problem of connecting itself with the masses. It must turn not only to the masses but also to their organizations – especially the trade unions. Any attempts to ignore the mass organizations are ludicrous. The united front, if it is to have real meaning, must extend from organization to organization. Only agreements, mutually arrived at between the organizations, can guarantee the necessary organizational points of support and make united action possible at any given moment. Mutual agreements in struggle for specific aims presuppose also equal rights and common duties. By their very nature these aims are of a limited character for the reasons that the various organizations involved have different political programs. But they must, of course, be in accord with the historical development of the proletariat. With a correct tactic the revolutionary party has everything to gain from the united front policy. Its possibilities to win over to its side the majority of the working class become greater.
From the Stalinist zig-zags on the united front we have witnessed the exact opposite both in theory and practise, and with disastrous consequences to the working class. Most outstanding are the lessons of the terrible German debacle, that is, for those who have the capacity to learn. As lessons they are equally devastating to the impotent theoreticians who were then, and still are today, the real “helmsmen” of the Comintern, regardless of which one of the henchmen holds the official title. In its deadly crisis the working class was told that the united front, although permissible before, had now become counter-revolutionary. “A bloc, or even an alliance, or even a temporary joint operation in individual actions between the communist party and the social democratic party in Germany against National-Socialism”, the CP leaders declared to be impermissible, for had not the social democrats been pronounced to be “social-Fascists”? Stalin’s definition of social democracy they held to be “unexcelled in its exactness and incisiveness”. Stalin had declared to the Comintern:
“The social democracy is objectively the moderate wing of Fascism. These organizations do not negate one another, but rather supplement each other. They are not antipodes but twins.”
The fate of the German working class, however, depended at that crucial hour on the ability of the workers’ organizations to hammer together a united front of defense against Fascism. Social democracy was still the largest working class party; it also exerted the decisive influence in the trade unions. Of course, its leadership had betrayed the workers. But to the workers, who followed them, this had not yet been made sufficiently clear, nor were they ready to entrust their fate to the communist party leadership. With its criminal attitude and viciously false policies, how could this be expected? The ultimatistic demands by the latter, that the workers desert their organizations and accept in advance the communist party leadership, which was put forward as a substitute for the united front by mutual agreement, only made matters worse. It had in no way demonstrated its right to leadership. And thus, to the betrayals of the social democratic leaders, it could only add its own criminal capitulation to Fascism – an equally dastardly betrayal.
The role of social democracy and of its leadership was perfectly well known when the united front policy was formulated. It was taken into account in a very direct sense. But the accredited officials of the various workers’ organizations, whether reformist or outright reactionaries, cannot be ignored or excluded at will so long that they are recognized by the masses as their leaders. Were it possible simply to unite the masses around the banner of the revolutionary party, regardless of their organizations and without their leaders, there would be no need of presenting the united front in this form. But that is not possible; and the revolutionary party must therefore turn also to the leaders in order to confront them with the real issues of the class struggle. Even negotiations with them become obligatory. To bring them out into the open and oppose them under equal conditions of the struggle before the eyes of the masses is one important purpose of the united front. Given a correct tactic, all the advantages belong to the revolutionary party. A movement in action affords the best possibilities to reveal to the masses, by their own experience, the real character and the downright sabotage of the struggle by the reactionary leaders.
Such an attitude was called counter-revolutionary during the crucial hours in Germany. A few years before, the Stalinist bureaucrats had burned their fingers on the Anglo-Russian Committee, which they palmed off as a united front. Secretly it was conceived as a lasting coalition, which would guarantee peaceful relations with British imperialism while building socialism in the Soviet Union. Thus falsely motivated, on purely pacifist grounds, it could not serve as means to confront the leaders of the British Trade Union Congress with the real problems of imperialist aggression. It turned out to be a bloc pure and simple with the top leaders and not with the mass organizations, the trade unions, for they were engaged in a general strike and betrayed by their leaders. The mutual agreement in the bloc served to bolster up these leaders acting as agents of the British government against the masses. The British Trade Union Congress could turn its weapons with redoubled force against the general strike. But the discipline and “unity” of the bloc remained after the betrayal. Therein lay its real crime.
The united front, when correctly carried out, imposes, of course, a certain discipline of action on the revolutionists. But woe to them if this discipline takes on an absolute character. It is always essential for the revolutionary party to maintain its political and organizational independence. It must reserve for itself the right of criticism and freedom of action which must be mutually guaranteed for all participants in the united front.
For social democrats this problem resolves itself into non-aggression pacts, that is when they cannot escape the pressure for united action. Otherwise they have consistently rejected the idea of fighting alongside of revolutionary workers, for the sake of maintaining their coalition with the bourgeoisie. Non-aggression pacts they construe to mean cessation of all attacks upon their position and actions. In reality such a concept flies in the face of the very principle of mutual rights of criticism and freedom of action. It becomes a cheap subterfuge for the united front under cover of which they aim to keep the revolutionists within certain bounds while they may continue unhampered their deception of the masses. Revolutionists cannot bind themselves to such agreements. Moreover, once the united front is established and any of its participants, especially the reactionary leaders, take a position detrimental to the movement or its objectives and contrary to the desires of the masses, the revolutionary party can no longer consider itself bound by its discipline. In that event it reserves for itself the right to break off all relations and carry the struggle to its conclusion regardless of these participants. The failure to break off relations with the British trade union leaders in the Anglo-Russian Committee, after the general strike betrayal, was the cardinal mistake of the Stalinists in this episode.
The Seventh Congress policy, submitted in the name of the united front, is similar in its pacifist motivation to that of the Anglo-Russian Committee, but much more full blown in its social democratic objective consequences. Let us consider the proposals for a “lasting coalition of workers, farmers and city middle classes” in a “People’s Front” party, and of one single proletarian party for each country. Assuming that the one single party of the proletariat is established, what will be the need of the “broad people’s party”? What duty is it to perform? We are not informed at all by the authors of the proposals. For revolutionists these two kinds of parties would be mutually exclusive. Granting the possibility of the former, there would be no need of the latter. But to the authors of the proposals they evidently mean the same thing; not a united front, not a revolutionary party at all, but a complete dissolution into one “broad people’s party”. Social democracy, even in its palmiest days, could go no further along the road of opportunism.
A united front of correct relations with the middle class for specific and limited aims can, of course, not be ruled out in advance. It is possible and necessary under certain conditions; but it can advance the interests of the working class, and the interests of humanity, only when the proletarian foundation is guaranteed and its leadership made possible. Between the two decisive classes in bourgeois society the petty bourgeoisie vacillates and is unable to play an independent role. At best it swings, according to its own economic fortunes, to the support of the one or the other. Naturally it constitutes a reservoir of potential proletarian allies, especially as its economic rations, due to the decline of capitalism, get reduced to the proletarian level. But this also presupposes the condition of a firm leadership given by the proletariat in showing the petty bourgeoisie the socialist way out of its dilemma.
A united front with the petty bourgeoisie on any other basis would be a grotesque absurdity, if not actually disastrous in objective consequence.
Is this absurdity to be repeated on a grander scale in the projected “broad people’s movement” in the United States – a purely Third party movement? If so, and no other construction can be put upon it, we repeat it will have far more disastrous consequences to the American working class. In its further advance to revolutionary consciousness, aided by the maturing of capitalist contradictions, it will face the Third party as an obstacle, whose historic role can be none other than to pacify, to deceive and to disintegrate the advancing working class movement.
Nothing need now stand in the way of organic unity between the two Centrist parties of Stalinism and social democracy. Fundamentally their position is the same. But what new possibilities would this offer to the working class, if any ? This is the essential question. Of course, a revolutionary basis of unification between two Centrist parties is precluded in advance. The mere unification solves nothing and carries rather the danger of stifling and crushing a very promising Leftward development under the juggernaut of the combined bureaucracies.
At the present moment this question is presented concretely in France where it runs through the “People’s Front” to the proposed coalition government so vociferously acclaimed in Moscow. Essentially all rests on the same foundation. Its foundation is not distinguishable by a hair’s-breadth from that of social democracy on its fatal August 4, 1914. That day is marked in the pages of working class history in bold letters – betrayal. With the crucial hour nearing, the hour of Fascism and war, which puts all political groups and parties to their supreme test, the question of policy pursued becomes the basic consideration. And while Fascism is marshalling its forces, the Stalinists, in harmony with the social democratic leaders, are preparing to cement a united front, not of the working class, but with the bourgeois political state in the form of a coalition government. The position of both parties is “civil peace”; not “battles between Frenchmen”, but the “union of France”; not the struggle for the death against Fascism, which means the struggle for power, but “national recovery”. This, in essence, is already the program of the “People’s Front”, which the Seventh Congress insisted be the condition for support of a coalition government in France. Such are the fruits of Stalinism today: misleading, disorienting, disarming and paralyzing the working masses.
Neither party finds the enemy in its own country. Both are committed to the policy of national defense, the defense of French imperialism, as summed up in the Franco-Soviet pact. On the occasion of affixing the signatures to the pact, l’Humanité wrote: “What could be more natural than the fact that our comrade Stalin, upon the request of Laval, should have declared his approval of France’s military measures?” This is Stalin’s political solidarization with the brigands of imperialism. And upon this basis organic unity is to be consummated and is to find its synthesis in the projected coalition government.
From its original concept, the united front, as a means of proletarian unity at any given moment in its struggle against capitalism, has been perverted by the degenerate policy of Stalinism into a coalition with the bourgeoisie.
Arne SWABECK



From the Northcap to the Dardanelles, Hitler’s “new order” now embraces most of continental Europe. His furious sweep of conquest obliterated national boundaries and sent governments into exile. The greater part of the continent, exclusive of the USSR is “united” into one economic bloc under the domination of German capitalism to serve the requirements of German imperialism and, above all, to serve its permanent war needs.
But this is the least stable of all social orders. The changes wrought in Europe produce their own internal dynamics. The much vaunted stability of Hitler’s order will become transformed into its opposite of social crisis and convulsions right in the heart of the vastly expanded Nazi domain. Hitler’s negation of the European state system leads directly to his own negation.
This may seem contradictory in view of the terrifying power now in the hands of the Nazi regime. However, the implications of this “new order” are contradictory in the extreme. In some ways, no doubt, it serves for the moment to bolster and strengthen the decaying capitalist system by giving it a much more rational form of organization. But the very rationalization of both the economic foundation and the political superstructure of the “new order” lays the basis for and forces the tempo of advance toward a Socialist United States of Europe. Soon it will be demonstrated in real life that there is no other way out.
On this point, however, there should be no mistake. Hitler’s aims and the objective consequences of his murderous advance are two entirely different things. Hitler’s aims have, of course, nothing in common with socialism. On the contrary, the actually motivating force in all of his conquests is the dire need of German capitalism, today in mortal combat with its British cousin and tomorrow facing the far more serious struggle with the American empire.
The reorganization of continental Europe serves strategical considerations of importance to the German army general staff, and it also aims to solve the problem that is called “lebensraum” for Germany’s teeming population. But the real purpose, summing up all other considerations, is the one of buttressing and rejuvenating, under German hegemony, the decaying capitalist system of which fascism is the most extreme and the most violent expression. Accordingly, the reorganization first eliminates the weaker sections in the structure: small nations are wiped out. Their possibility of continued independent existence, squeezed in as they were, in the fierce competition between giants, was questionable anyhow. A conquered Britain – if and when – may serve as a buffer against the American empire; but the ruthless reorganization cannot tolerate any buffer states on the continent. In Hitler’s modernized scheme of capitalism the division into small nations is only an obstacle to be eliminated. His stubborn views on the question of race will also be subject to modifications whenever required by further imperial necessities.
German capitalism has learned from the Soviet planned economy and attempts to utilize the lesson for its own purposes. “Der Staat greift zu!” Hitler is gearing European industry to serve the Nazi permanent war needs. With each advance into new territories efforts are made to harness material resources. Unemployed manpower is put to work. Formerly independent countries are turned into spheres of regulated production, operating to an extent in harmony with their means and resources, but mainly in accordance with the requirements of the Nazi domination. Hence agriculture in certain specific regions is to be industrialized. Plans are even advanced for the modernization of French peasant economy. Backward regions such as the Balkans – those parts so far included in the “new order” – are drawn into greater Germany’s production orbit. Everywhere, and particularly in the last named regions, technological advance begins to make new strides. Restrictions are imposed on the capitalist proprietors for the good of greater Germany, while prices and wages are regulated.
It goes without saying that for the German capitalist structure all these factors further accelerate concentration and centralization of industry and finance; but they also call forth a constantly increasing state supervision. Behind it all the permanent war needs exert ever greater pressure. There need be no doubt that this mighty whiplash of rationalization raises the level of labor productivity despite the suppressed, and therefore inarticulate, hostility of labor. More profits accrue to the masters. Moreover, we should never fight the fact that only a vastly increased labor productivity could have made possible the rapid rejuvenation of German capitalism under Hitler.
 
The Seeds of Decay Within
Here we have certain elements of capitalist expansion presented in a new form but resting on the same old foundation of private property: the system has not devised any other. Viewed against the background of the uneven development of capitalism, such expansion for one particular section of the general system is, of course, possible. The war itself, however, is the proof that it is not possible for the system as a whole. The exact possible limits of this expansion we do not know. But we do know that it takes place in the period of general capitalist decline and decay. The historical spiral of capitalist development is now definitely on its downward course. The “new order” is the most desperate effort yet witnessed of keeping this system alive against its own elements of destruction. And, as will soon be verified in the process of real life, each of the steps taken in this expansion carries its own deadly contradictions, vastly intensified by the imperialist war. [1]
Throughout the “unified” continent the formerly existing mutual and reciprocal relations have now changed. There is a change of quantity into a vastly expanded German empire for, in reality, this is what Hitler’s “unification” means. With this there appears also a difference in quality. Formerly the mass of the people in each separate nation were held in leash by their ruling national capitalist groups who were engaged in a constant struggle of competition for markets, resources or territory, one nation against another. It is true that the smaller nations could reach out only for the smaller crumbs; but that made the competition no less fierce. Mutual hostilities became the rule rather than mutual friendships. Thus this multiple state system served as a buffer against international working class solidarity. It facilitated the sway and domination of each national capitalist group over its objects of exploitation and made it easier for unscruplous bureaucratic labor leaders to function in each national arena as agents of their bourgeois masters.
Now most of the national boundaries are wiped out, most likely never to be restored – at least not in their old meaning. Intent on not repeating the mistake of the Allies in 1918 of imposing severe outright indemnities upon the vanquished, the Nazis are proceeding instead to exploit the labor forces of the defeated and occupied countries. The capitalist proprietors become Nazi satraps, compelled to relinquish a good deal of their power to the masters of the new empire. These masters rule supreme throughout the “new order.” As a result the mass of the people are thrown together on common ground. They all face the one common oppressor. This is a quantitative change producing an enormous qualitative difference.
Social conflicts, to be sure, are harnessed in a more severe straitjacket. They may not break through this harness immediately; but social contradictions remain, new ones are added, and they intensify within this new framework.
At first these contradictions are manifested in the very much distorted form of an increased, if not an entirely new feeling of national patriotism. In Denmark, for example, where the population has so far been the least rebellious, it has shown a rising affection for the king who was left intact even though his throne was knocked out from under. He became a national symbol and the center of this new feeling. The new and greater affection bestowed upon him is in reality the confused expression of reaction against imperialist oppression. But a king is, of course, the weakest of reeds to lean upon and, besides, Hitler cannot afford for very long to let even such feeble symbols remain. In an effort to squelch all manifestation of opposition he will soon replace them with his own henchmen. Replacements of this kind have taken place in a number of instances already and they were not confined merely to political posts. Hitler’s henchmen are taking over the direction also of productive enterprises. They have to drive all productive efforts ahead ruthlessly and relentlessly to satisfy the ever growing war needs of the expanded empire. They will stand out the more clearly as collectors of capitalist profits, guardians of a frightfully decayed system, the very embodiment of the most intense exploitation, mass misery and mass slaughter: A bonapartist police regime which loses all remaining semblance of a people’s movement. These slave-drivers will become the immediate center of all hatred of exploitation.
Under these conditions the genuine people’s movement develops from below, and in opposition to the Nazi regime and all that it stands for. The distorted form of this opposition expressed in deeper nationalist feeling has little or no possibility of realizing any aspiration of return to old national boundaries in the sense of restoration of the many small independent states. This nationalist feeling can neither obscure nor serve as a substitute for the far more fundamental urge of actual European – and wider – unity against the common oppressor. That urge for unity will follow inevitably in the next stage. Thus the basic Nazi tenet of more intense nationalism produces its opposite reaction – internationalism.
Hitler’s “new order” faces the dilemma: its permanent war needs grow more rapidly than its acquisitions. There could be no more telling proof of this than the constant expansion of the Nazi orbit, both the conquests and the penetrations. And Hitler cannot stop even with a possible victory over Great Britain. Being the most desperate representative of the hardest pressed capitalist sector in a world of uneven capitalist development, in which imperialist competition grows ever keener, he must go on. Now he attempts to harness the resources of the European continent. But this harnessing follows the pattern of “autarchy,” a reactionary measure which is in direct conflict with the essentially progressive implications flowing from the obliteration of national boundaries and the “unification” of Europe. The interdependence of nations, or of national economies, is by no means lessening. On the contrary, it is increasing. Any attempt at “autarchy” brings out immediately, and more sharply, the growing need for the world market.
Besides, in the scheme of intensified capitalist exploitation, Europe cannot substitute for colonies. The greater the industrialization of war the more urgent is the question of raw materials. Not merely raw materials in general, but certain specific and essential kinds that most often are available in sufficient quantities only in certain parts of the globe. And the problem presented is not only the one of buying these raw materials for cash or barter, it is primarily the problem of securing control over the sources of supply as well as of the avenues of transportation. In other words, the “new order,” even though it may embrace the whole of continental Europe exclusive of the USSR, intensifies and enlarges all the needs of national capitalism. Above all it will require for its survival new fields of capital investment and exploitation of cheap colonial labor. However, the orbit of the world market is narrowing, not for any rational reason, but because of the lack of buying power of the masses. So, while Hitler may now be reaching out for the Mosul oil fields, tomorrow he faces the American empire in a far more deadly struggle for control of the world market and for redivision of the world. The permanency of war is inescapable – except for the proletarian revolution.
 
The Workers in the “New Order”
What, then, is the position of the proletariat in Hitler’s “new order”? Specific information is scant. Some of its general features, however, we do know. It would be preposterous to attempt to describe here the strain of war upon the mass of the population, the frightful devastation from which no geographical sphere is totally exempt, the life in constant fear of bombings, the actual destruction of homes with its attendant misery, or the killing and maiming of both young and old, that could be described adequately only by those who have experienced its tragic realities. It is important to remember that all these terrible consequences of war always bear down the heaviest upon the proletariat. The effect that these must produce we can also understand. They constitute some of the bitter lessons out of which our class will mature.
This is the class that carries the actual burden in the reorganized Europe. In the first place, the reorganization is a gigantic levelling process. It is a levelling downward. For the mass of the people it means, above all, a terribly reduced standard of living. From now on they will subsist on permanent ration cards. Obviously the lack of consumers’ goods, if not actual starvation, will pinch ever harder. On top of this is the forced tempo in the factories. Labor in this new scheme of exploitation is forced labor. In the occupied countries new antagonisms and eventual conflicts in industry are added to the hatred of the oppressors.
Knowing in general the conditions in what was pre-war Germany, it is clear to us that the German workers themselves can in no way be exempt from this enormous strain. The common notion that the German nation as a whole would draw benefits from the conquests is simply preposterous. The class lines are much more sharply drawn there. Nor could Hitler just simply take measures to feed the German masses at the price of starvation in the occupied countries. In the first place that would be too risky, and in the second place, while the Nazis take loot from these countries, nevertheless each one of them, for one reason or another, is considered important in the whole scheme of the “new order,” and is not altogether stripped. We may be sure that the German masses suffer the economic privations no less than the others, and in addition they bear the brunt of the battlefield. While these privations grow at home the German soldiers find themselves “defending” the fatherland far from the soil of their ancestors and most often in hostile territory. The effect on the soldiers of being surrounded by universal hostility is inescapable.
Moreover, the Nazi advance in the Balkans, for example, immediately brings the agricultural products of such granaries into competition with the German farmers, undermining if not destroying the last of the limited privileges which they had enjoyed ever since the days of the Hohenzollerns in order to play the assigned role of a social counterweight to the industrial proletariat. The industrialization of agriculture which follows in such territories must necessarily mean a growing proletarianization of the native populations. But this process is not confined to such territories. Throughout the spheres of the “new order,” the economic reorganization, its greater concentration and centralization of industry together with the growing state supervision, leads to a constant elimination of the middle class and an ever greater proletarianization of the population. At the same time the industrialization of war – or to put the matter in other words: the fortunes of mechanized warfare depending so completely and exclusively on the production in huge quantities of all its intricate implements, raw materials and fuels – elevates the industrial proletariat to a position of new and greater importance. Not one battle could be won; nay not even started, without its productive labor. The factories, the mills and the mines become the most decisive part of the battlefront. All the Nazi glitter smeared on to the “new order” would fade and decompose and the hideous structure itself would collapse if the industrial proletariat should fail to furnish these all important sinews. In the hands of the proletariat lies a power far greater and far more magnificent than all the imposing Nazi conquests could ever convey.
We do not forget the devastating blows suffered by these working masses during the last two decades, failures and betrayals by their parties, both socialist and communist, the terrible defeats and the destruction of their organizations. In fact the monstrosity of the present mechanized mass slaughter could become possible only on the background of such disasters. The workers were once again reduced to the lowest depths of wage slavery, long exacting hours of toil, a miserable wage level, and all their rights wiped out. For a long time reaction to any stimulus on their part seemed less than normal.
Now, however, new political conjunctures are appearing in rapid succession and are striking sledge hammer blows at the decrepit capitalist structure. Simultaneously the war-revived gigantic industrial machinery, while grinding profits out of the toil of the workers, is also inevitably pounding a new consciousness into their minds. They will begin to wield their new power and put it to the test, at first to realize their most elementary demands; but rising also to greater heights. Out of their experience a new leadership will be forged. There will be proof aplenty that the crushing of labor organizations by no means eliminated the class struggle. On the contrary; new fuel is being added to fire the smouldering flames of revolt. The proletarian hatred of the fascist regime must of necessity become universal regarless of former national boundaries. And the workers alone, finding their new place in the “new order,” can lead to a better road in the coming upheavals. Their aim will eventually become crystallized into the exact opposite of the Hitlerian “unification” of Europe, the complete synthesis – the free people in a Socialist United States of Europe. Undoubtedly there will be stimulus aplenty leading in this direction. It does not matter whether it finds its initial impulse in Berlin, Prague, Oslo or Paris.
 
Footnote
1. This article was written two months or more ago. Since then, the verification predicted by Comrade Simmons has begun: Hitler’s plan to rule through a wide stratum in the occupied lands that would come to amicable terms with Germany and govern as “independent” nations, has broken down completely in Holland and Norway, great strike straggles in Holland were halted only by death penalties and naked bayonets, there have been serious physical clashes between the Nazis and Norwegian workers, etc. Hitler knew how the universal hostility of the conquered populations had destroyed the morale of the German troops during the last war in Belgium, France, the Ukraine, and sought in this war to avoid direct military rule of the occupied countries. In that he has already failed. – EDITORS



CHICAGO, Ill. – In spite of the most adverse high-pressure publicity the CIO packinghouse workers union won an election for collective bargaining last week at the Chicago Armour plants, by about two to one.
It just so happened that the Dies Committee reopened its hearings in Chicago a couple of days prior to these elections. And by a mere coincidence it chanced to pick on this particular union as the first victim to be investigated in the search for “un-American” tendencies. Naturally the daily papers made the most of this, never forgetting to mention the scheduled elections jointly with the hearings.
Both Herbert Marsh of the packinghouse workers union and his assistant director, Johnson, were cited to appear before the Dies Committee. Both denied membership in the Communist Party. Yet the predominant Stalinist influence in the leadership of this union is no secret. If nothing else the miserable record of belly-crawling and kowtowing to Armour and Co. by practically all of the higher officials would be a sufficient indication.
Also cited to appear was the former president of the Chicago Armour local, who complained that several times the heat had been put on him when he resisted joining the C.P., and that finally, when he persisted in his refusal, found another occupant at the president’s desk.
Protest was made to Dies of his arbitrary manner of picking on only one union while there was another in the field contending for the favor of the packinghouse workers. So as a matter of form he subsequently invited a couple of officials from the Amalgamated Meat Cutters and Butcher Workmen (the AFL affiliate) to appear and have their say. What they said could not have been much; nobody payed any attention. But now the sum total of these valiant efforts by Mr. Dies is a resounding victory for the CIO.
 
Win Resounding Victory
There were 7,253 workers eligible to vote in the Chicago Armour plants elections – those in the production and maintenance departments who were on the payroll Oct. 28, excepting certain supervisory employees. Of the total 785 did not vote, and 161 of the ballots cast were disqualified or challenged. The tabulation showed 4,006 votes cast for the CIO union, 1,047 for the AFL union, and 1,254 workers voting for neither union. Obviously a large majority of the packinghouse workers in Chicago, Dies Committee or no Dies Committee, are perfectly conscious of the fact that they want a union right in the yards, an industrial union, which they know to have been associated with militant activities. Hence they voted for the CIO. They have done so once before. To disappoint these workers would be criminal.
 



CHICAGO – Ever since the Packinghouse Workers Organizing Committee delegation, headed by Van Bittner, presented its appeal to the Secretary of Labor in Washington, it has been clear that further moves in negotiations with the packers would be more closely related to the clean atmosphere of the national administration buildings than to the ill-smelling recesses of the stockyards.
Unfortunately for the young union, it has thereby also permitted itself to be maneuvered onto weaker ground. Its strength lies in the yards. There the workers feel the pinch of their mounting grievances, and they have shown on more than one occasion that one ounce of action brings quicker results than a whole carload of beautifully adorned appeals.
 
Action Got Results
Here are some of the most outstanding examples from various parts of the country:
A few weeks ago the Armour superintendent fired 13 shop stewards from the Chicago main plant because they had left the assembly line to demand a grievance hearing on wage adjustments. The same evening a meeting of 650 shop stewards elected a strike strategy committee and ordered it – not merely authorized – to call a strike immediately unless the 13 were reinstated. Results followed quickly. The company yielded. While Armour officials were permitted to indulge in a little empty face saving by declaring that the punishment – firing – had been too severe, the thirteen were reinstated.
At the Denver Armour plant workers similarly made demands for grievance adjustments during working hours. The plant manager fired the protesters. But he quickly agreed to complete reinstatement when confronted with the threat of an immediate strike.
 
Chicago Tie-Up
And now just a few days ago 2,700 workers in the killing department at the main Armour plant of the Chicago stockyards tied up the production line for a hour in protest against the increased speed-up. (Elimination of the speed-up is now the major demand of workers in every yard in the country.) Yet, startling as it may seem a statement issued by the plant superintendent said that: “union leaders disclaimed having planned the stoppage and termed them runaways.”
The same day 2,400 men in the John Morrill and Co. plant at Ottumwa, Iowa, went on strike in protest against the firing of four workers prominent in the organizing activities of the PWOC. This is the largest individual packing plant in the country.
 
Leaders Back Down
In Washington, however, the union delegation started out by making an important concession to Armour and Co. It withdrew its previous demand for a single nation-wide wage agreement covering all of the company’s plants. It declared the union was willing to negotiate with the packing firm on a plant by plant basis, provided that contracts made are put in writing. Van Bittner, in making the announcement from the Secretary of Labor’s office said: “The modification of our demands was made as a concession to prevent a strike.”
That concession falls right into the lap of the meat packers, for it should be remembered that they have from the outset flatly refused to even consider a nation-wide wage agreement and simply referred the union leadership to their local plant managers. On the other hand the union officials have themselves pointed repeatedly to the futility of trying to buttonhole local plant managers who do not formulate or control policy for the corporation.
One very striking instance of this fact was afforded at the Fargo, N.D., plant when two workers were fired on similar grounds and at about the same time as the 13 Chicago shop stewards. The heads of Armour and Co. simply refused to discuss the matter and told the union officials that they could go to Fargo and see the local plant manager if they so desired. The Fargo workers, however, struck the plant demanding immediate reinstatement.
Incidentally the union leaders had already previously weakened the union position when in the midst of its demands for a nation-wide signed contract it agreed to hold elections for determination of collective bargaining rights in additional Armour plants. With such an agreement any lost election in any one plant, regardless of company coercion, would automatically eliminate that plant from a national agreement. It would no longer be nation-wide, and the company would seem quite justified and have new arguments to back up its refusal.
Two plant elections were held subsequently. The one in the Chicago by-products plants the union carried by a large majority. The other in Oklahoma City, Okla., the union lost by a narrow margin. Elections are still pending in the plants at Fort Worth, Tex., and Albert Lea, Minn. Armour has twenty-nine plants in the country. Elections have been held to date in eighteen plants and thirteen of these were won by the PWOC.
 
Workers Have Set Example
The PWOC now claims to have enrolled under its banner a total of 84,000 out of the 129,000 organizable workers in the packing industry. It is true that these figures are being disputed by the meat packers; that is to be expected. But there need be ho doubt that union organization is making gains in the stockyards right along.
Time and again the workers have taken action at the drop of a hat, using the strike weapon as a means of redressing their grievances. On the other hand, as Van Bittner announced, the leadership seeks to prevent a strike. It attempts to start the battle by giving heavy concessions to make a plea for negotiations become more palatable. Continuing this, what will happen to the demands of the workers? Are not labor organizations built for the fight to defend the workers’ interests? An organization drive which does not voice clearly and precisely the demands of the workers is foredoomed to failure; and a leadership which does not prepare for struggle in defense of these demands is not worthy of a militant union. The workers have already set the example for union policy.
 



With the partial settlement of the miners strike, an important chapter, picturing one of the greatest struggles in the American labor history, has come to a close. This strike marked the beginning of the turning point in the class struggle in the United States. It entered upon a new stage. The method of passive submission to the arrogant dictatorship of the employers and of humble acceptance of one wage reduction after another, of longer working hours and general deterioration of working conditions, was discarded by the miners. They put the whole strength of their organized forces into active resistance. Their lead has since been followed by other organizations.
For two years the employers have been engaged in a deadly war of destruction of labor unions. Wages were greatly reduced both for organized and unorganized workers, and despite the high international exchange rate of the American dollar, they reached the starvation point. All important gains in working conditions won during the war, when there was a labor shortage, were ruthlessly abolished. Many unions were broken up. The American Federation of Labor in that period, lost over 900,000 members. In 1920 it reported a membership of 4,078,740, and at its last convention in 1922, only 3,165,635. The post-war depression offered an opportunity to the employers to put their union-smashing drive into effect. The workers, haunted by the spectre of unemployment had become submissive.
On April 1, 1922, with the expiration of, the prevailing agreement between the miners’ union and the coal operators, the latter refused to even consider a new national agreement. It soon became evident that the employers were determined to carry their war of extermination into the ranks of the miners. They insisted upon a 40 per cent wage reduction, and offered to enter into negotiations with the miners on a regional basis, each district by itself. They proposed important changes in working conditions, all in an effort to divide the miners into a number of small tractions. To this the miners’ organization, pursuant to the decision of their last convention, replied with a general suspension of work, both in the bituminous and anthracite fields. For twenty weeks the miners stood solid, bringing along with them out of the mines and simultaneously organizing nearly 100,000 miners from formerly unorganized fields, with little or no financial means at their disposal, daily facing starvation, the rank and file have withstood the vicious attacks of the operators, despite court injunctions and industrial court laws forbidding strikes, as well as ruthless treatment at the hands of gunmen, police and soldiers. Many attempts by the operators to reopen the mines on an “ open shop ” basis were frustrated by the miners. Herrin, Illinois, where all strike breakers and gunmen paid with their lives, served as a severe lesson that such tactics would not do. The miners throughout the struggle displayed a solidarity never before equalled in the American labor movement, and compelled the bosses to slow down on their vicious onslaught.
Since the beginning of the railroad shopmen’s strike, on July 1, the average weekly output of non-union coal dropped from 5,500,000 tons to 4,000,000 tons, which is less than half the amount being consumed, so it may be seen that railroads, public utilities and industrial plants were eating into their stock supply at an enormous rate. The government became apprehensive and offered several schemes for a settlement of the miners’ strike. On August 1, a survey revealed that 400 of the biggest industrial plants from which returns were received, had an average of only 20 days supply of coal. Some of them were only a few days from the bottom of their supply, facing a complete shutdown. The steel mills reported shutdown ot blast furnaces at the rate of a dozen a week, while some mills were facing a complete suspension of activities for lack of fuel. Even the great Ford plants reported a supply for only two weeks. Meanwhile the government’s apprehension had grown to alarm, further augmented by the increasing proportions of the railroad strike and the encouragement thereby afforded the miners. After its various arbitration schemes had failed, it threw off the mask of being a neutral observer. The strikers were roughly handled in the name of “law and order”, while all the weapons at the command of the capitalist state were used in an effort to break the strikes. This compelled the miners, the railroad workers and thousands of other workers, to realize the necessity of fighting the government as the tool of capitalist oppression.
The anxiety for a settlement of the coal strike was evidenced not only by the government but by the officials of the miners’ union, beaded by president Lewis, as well. He hastened for a settlement, evidently fearing the realities of the titanic struggle, which had now become more definite in character, and perhaps also moved by the heart-rending cries of the industrial captains for more coal. Now the miners in the bituminous fields are returning to work, retaining their old scale of wages, while the anthracite miners, composing about 120,000 men, continue the fight for their specific demands. President Harding will shortly appoint a commission of nine to inquire into wages and working conditions in the mines. This commission will most probably return a report justifying the claims of the operators for a reduction in wages, relying upon the miners being too tired for any further fighting.
The employers’ organizations throughout the country are demanding new, and for them, more suitable labor legislation. President Harding has asked Congress to remain in session to deal with this problem,, and it is considered possible that at least new teeth will be put into the Transportation Act.
It must be said for the miners’ strike that it represents a great and wholesome contrast to the shameful retreat in November 1919, when the president of the miners’ union, Lewis, was able to defeat the aspirations of the rank and file on the plea that “we cannot fight our government”, because of an injunction issued against the proposed strike, and on the further plea of solidarity with those who had accepted his orders and remained at work bringing those back who had actually gone on strike. Not that Lewis and his lieutenants have become more radical, but that the rank and file have become more determined to fight in face of all obstacles, to secure human living conditions and recognition for their organization.
The railroad shopmen’s strike is the climax of many insults heaped upon the workers, and also bears out the contention that a turning point has been reached in the class struggle in America, with the workers resisting actively the onslaughts of the capitalists. The government Railroad Labor Board put into effect several wage reductions, cutting one group of workers at a time. The companies practically abolished the eight-hour day, set up company unions, re-established piece work, and the practice of farming out work to other concerns in order to escape certain provisions in the Transportation Act. On July 1, another wage cut was to take effect, reducing the average weekly pay for skilled and unskilled shop workers by 12 per cent. This cut is not to effect the train service organizations until a more opportune time should present itself. 400,000 shop workers laid down their tools. Their ranks were rapidly increased with workers from other railroad crafts who joined the walkout in spite of the strenuous efforts of their officials to hold them in check. Their numbers soon grew to about 700,000, and the effect is now being strongly felt in rolling material needing repair and accumulating at an enormous rate. This strike has been marked with perhaps greater ferocity than the miners’ strike. Military forces with armed gunmen were placed at all shops to protect strikebreakers, many clashes occurred, and many workers belonging to the unions not on strike walked out in protest, in some cases even leaving the trains standing on the line, and in many instances forcing a withdrawal of the military protection. The rank and file of the non-striking railroad unions are making an ever stronger demand for a strike in sympathy with the shop workers, and the chiefs of the five train service brotherhoods are now busy in the attempt to mediate in this gigantic conflict.
It was of course not according to the desires of the railroad union officials that this strike came into being. In conventions previously held, they pleaded with the rank and file not to oppose the “open shop” drive of the companies or at least to localize the strike to roads that had shown especial aggressiveness. But it could not be stopped. The strike vote was unanimous and the officials dared not retreat.
Coming simultaneously with the miners’ strike, it led, in many instances, to joint action by the workers of both organizations, and the effect became so much stronger throughout the country. But at no time was any unity of leadership effected or even attempted. Several conferences were held between officials of the miners’ union and the shop crafts organization. It produced only “friendly understandings” which are of little use when brought up against the realities of the class struggle. The 16 standard railroad organizations failed as miserably as in the past to effect a united front within their own ranks. While the six shop crafts and the stationary firemen are now bearing the brunt of the attacks of the solidly united railroad companies, the remaining unions are standing around, or held in line by their officials, waiting for their turn to be trimmed.
Yet these two strikes, perhaps the greatest ever witnessed on the American continent, have served to definitely establish the left wing movement, not only within these two organizations, but throughout the American labor movement. It is now growing by leaps and bounds. The many wounds of past dual and secession movements are rapidly being healed, and the progressive, thinking workers have completely discarded such fallacies. They are becoming class conscious, their whole conception has been revolutionized. These great conflicts have served to show to large numbers of the American workers that the bitter struggle against the exploiters cannot be fought with the antiquated weapons of craft unionism, but that a constant remoulding of their weapons is necessary. They have formulated a definite and concrete program of amalgamation of craft unions into industrial units, which is now being propagated by the left wing organized movement from coast to coast, and has made big inroads, especially among the railroad workers, where despite the present disunity of leadership, the trend towards closer affiliation has become visible and several organizations have already taken the first steps towards amalgamation.
Thee great conflicts mark a definite turning point and the beginning of a conscious struggle for power by the workers in the United States.
 



Until very recently the American labor unions have not produced an opposition left wing movement in the sense in which this is known to the European countries, i.e., of two or more organized camps with definite programs struggling for supremacy within the unions. Many attempts to give expression to certain ideas or methods of struggle against the powerfully organized exploiters, through the establishment of such movements, more, or less definite and conscious, as well as progressive or revolutionary in character, have been made in the past. However, due to inefficient leadership, wrong methods, or lack of a fundamental understanding of the natural evolution of labor Unions, they have all failed to accomplish their progressive tendencies which have not as yet become crystalized into a definite movement, they have been localized to certain trades or trade groups. All have lacked the necessary unifying force, and the only ones of any consequence, manifesting a revolutionary tendency, have led outside of the unions. Thus the best elements were withdrawn from their active work in the unions, and the organized masses left completely in the hands of the reactionaries; the result being stagnation and utter backwardness – numerically, structurally, and politically.
With the advent of the Trade Union Educational League, a comprehensive, concrete, revolutionary program with a definite goal, embracing the whole labor movement, has for the first time been furnished the left wing militant elements within the American labor unions. This movement, being in its first formative stage, has not as vet reached the point of a definite opposition. It is rather the beginning of a crystalization of all the scattered militants into an organized movement based upon the program of the Red International of Labor Unions applied to American conditions. Analyzing all the weaknesses of the present organizations, tracing their origin and cause, and offering concrete solutions by way of better forms of organization and better methods of struggle, the Trade Union Educational League is leading the unions directly toward their historical goal, the establishment of working class power. It has already, to a certain extent, succeeded in invigorating the old stagnant unions, in inspiring their members with a new hope, and in giving conscious leadership to the militant, latent forces among the American workers. It commands today a considerable following and has greatly alarmed the reactionary labor union bureaucracy which regards all new progressive movements with fear of losing its job.
 
Various Opposition Movements
However, it would not be amiss at this point to first briefly mention the various opposition tendencies within the American labor unions. Beginning with the most conservative, the American Federation of Labor, it sometimes occurs, that at its regular conventions, an opposition candidate for the presidency is put forward, as for instance in 1921, when John L. Lewis, president of the Miners’ Union, opposed Gompers, and polled nearly 40 per cent of the total vote cast. A victory for Lewis would not have meant a change in policy; the one being as reactionary as the other. It was merely a case of an official crew belonging to the Knights of Columbus, picking an opposition candidate to Gompers, the Jew.
Government ownership movements of various shades have appeared within the American labor unions and gained a considerable following, especially among the railroad workers. At the Montreal convention of the A.F. of L., in 1920, the Plumb Plan, some sort of a combined government ownership and guild system, with joint control of industries, but providing for the division of the population into so many categories that the workers would always remain in a safe minority, was indorsed, much to the disgust of Sam. Gompers, without any definite plan being proposed for its being carried into effect however. Now this movement has been replaced by a movement for political action by the workers. Although it would be preposterous to say that the official families of any of the American labor unions clearly recognize that the class struggle rages on the political field as well as on the industrial field, a tendency is noticeable which recognizes the necessity of the organized workers to get away from the position of having their cause become a football for every political crook. This tendency, of course clashes with the Gompers policy of “punishing your enemies and rewarding your friends” among the capitalist parties. This policy of independent political action by the organized workers has been indorsed by most of the important railroad unions and others. But so far none of them have shown enough backbone to stand up and work for its actual materialization. The much heralded political Progressive Conference, held in Chicago, in February 1922, at which the leaders of many large unions took part unofficially, produced little outside of a nice declaration and the acceptance of a general “hands off” policy which was readily indorsed by the A.F. of L. Executive Council.
The Howat opposition within the Miners’ Union, which gained considerable momentum at the last convention of this organization, came as a result of Howat’s valiant fight against the loathsome Industrial Court Law, in the state of Kansas, and the consequent clash with the tendency represented by Lewis, to respect the sacred contract, no matter what misery it brings upon the workers, even to submit to this infamous law. Although it was no conscious opposition with a definite program, Howat gained the support of the overwhelming majority of the rank and file, as he represented their rebellious spirit, and Lewis was compelled to resort to the lowest kind of machine manipulation to defeat him at that convention. However, Howat went to jail and Lewis remained in control.
Two opposition movements which have been confined to their particular trade groups are the progressive opposition within the typographical unions which has now gained control of the largest organization within that industry, and the Shop Delegates League within the needle trade unions, mostly organized in the East and active in the International Ladies Garment Workers. At the last convention of this union the opposition was represented by about one third of the delegates but they were led by anarchists who followed the usual policy of hitting blindly at the opponents. They failed to produce any unifying program or concrete progressive measures that could have enlisted a following, and were caught by the official steam roller. Now the Shop Delegate League is being absorbed by the Trade Union Educational League.
 
Dual Union Movements
Of the opposition movements, which were really inspired by a conscious rebellion against the dominant reaction, but led to the sadly mistaken policy of seceding from the existing unions and the forming of new dual unions, must be mentioned the I.W.W. with a present membership of about 35,000, scattered throughout the country in various industries; the W.I.L.U. which has now dwindled to a few hundred members. The O.B.U., with a few scattered members in various parts of the country; the Amalgamated Metal Workers, with a few thousand members only, in the Eastern part of the country; the Amalgamated Food Workers, with about 15,000 members in the East and Middle West. The Rank and File movement, composed mainly of building trades workers in San Francisco, California, led to the formation of a dual organization which is now rapidly being dissolved and reaffiliated with the old unions.
In a second category should perhaps be put the shoe and textile workers; the former industry having 4 organizations, of which the oldest, the Boot and Shoe Worker’s Union is affiliated with the A.F. of L. and claims a membership of 40,000; the United Shoe Workers, claiming 30,000; the Protective Shoe Workers, 25,000, and the Allied Shoe Workers, 20,000. Between the latter three, unity conferences have been held which at that time showed a fair prospect of success. In the textile industry there are at present at least 15 different organisations, with a total membership of about 125,000.
The Amalgamated Clothing Workers, although it originated as a secession movement from the United Garment Workers, due to the fact that the great majority of the members were denied a voice in the affairs of the union, has now, through the aggressive, militant spirit of its membership, succeeded in organizing practically the whole of the men’s clothing industry, and counts today a membership of about 175,000.
At its last convention, the Amalgamated Clothing Workers took a very progressive stand in favoring amalgamation of all needle trades into one organization, favoring the shop delegate system of organization, starting a million dollar corporation for a reconstruction project in Soviet Russia, and adopting a resolution indorsing the United Front of labor as proposed by the R.I.L.U.
With the organization of the United Labor Council in New York City, composed of independent dual unions from various industries, with a total membership of 25,000, another bad repetition has been recorded of many like attempts in the past history of the American labor union movement, while several organizations, claiming jurisdiction over the whole industrial field, amalgamated, either for the purpose of creating a brand new labor union movement, or at least an opposition to the existing one. Although the membership generally accepts the leadership of the R.I.L.U., the United Labor Council can exist only by expanding at the expense of the existing unions and therefore it is doomed to failure.
 
Dual Unionism Being Discarded
The influence of all the present dual unions and their importance in the class struggle is waning, and their membership is dwindling rapidly. Although they have all preached the principle of solidarity, in actual practice they have demonstrated the contrary and have definitely proven the failure of such tactics. Their dual position forced them into a constant fight with the already established unions, not with the reactionary leaders who held these unions in stagnation and whom they had originally opposed, but with the organizations as a whole. The militants are rapidly being cured of this disease, and getting down to the hard and earnest work of building a force capable of leading the unions out of their present mire.
 
The Dominant Reaction
Samuel Gompers has not remained idle during his long incumbency in the presidential office of the A.F. of L. He has used his great organization talents to build up a formidable machine control, which is copied by all the international union district, city and state bodies, and reflected in the local unions. His power is greater than his popularity among the organized workers, and his lieutenants are loyal and highly skilled in the art of defeating the aspirations of the rank and file. Antiquated constitutional clauses were some of the great hindrances of the past, which the militants are now beginning to learn how io overcome. At conventions where such clauses are changed, a well-oiled machine is at work.
At the annual A.F. of L. conventions, delegates often remain in that position for a number of years due to the fact that their particular organizations seldom hold conventions to elect new delegates, and all vote by plurality of their organizations.
While stagnation and reaction hold sway in the American labor union movement, many of the greatest industries remain practically unorganized, as for instance the agricultural, steel, automobile, lumber, big business houses, department stores, the southern plantations, many manufacturing plants and the packing house industry where the organizations are shot to pieces. The main reasons for this are the incompetence of the leadership of the present unions, and their antiquated form of organization based upon craft monopoly among the aristocracy of labor and having little interest in the unorganized fields. The tremendous and aggressive opposition of the well-organized capitalist class, meets labor organization attempts with court injunctions, gunmen, police and military force.
The A.F. of L. has suffered a great loss of membership during the past year. At the 1921 convention it reported a membership of 3,906,528, and in 1922, 3,165,635. The reason must largely be sought in the aggressive and comparatively successful “open shop” drive carried on by the employers, and in the general retreat of the unions, with heavy wage cuts and lengthening of working-hours. The A.F. of L. is composed of a11 autonomous trade unions and a large number of federal unions, including its Canadian affiliations. In addition to the independent unions already mentioned, there are the four independent railway brotherhoods with a total membership of about 400,000.
 
A New Vigorous Movement
Into this chaos of labor unionism steps the Trade Union Educational League with a program of unification and consolidation of the badly scattered and badly beaten forces of the working class. into a compact mass, capable of coping with the forces of capitalism. Comparatively young, the first unit being organized in 1920, but the real activities not begun before March 1922, when the first issue of the Labor Herald was published, it has established a history which brings the hearts of the militants to beat with enthusiasm, and has forced Gompers to go out of his way to make alliances with the politicians of the decrepit Socialist Party which he formerly held in contempt. The Labor Herald had reached, in August, a circulation of 12,000, and the active membership of the League the same figure. It has established units in 120 different cities throughout the country; the method being, first to establish general groups and then to make the industrial subdivisions.
The Trade Union Educational League has become an active and much adored as well as much feared factor within the American trade union movement. Its program of amalgamation of the present trade unions into industrial unions is being generally accepted by a very large percentage of the rank and file members of these unions, and it has formulated definite, detailed, plans of amalgamation for the various industries.
The trend toward a better form of organization and better methods of struggle is permeating the whole labor movement. Some of the most important city central bodies have gone on record for the amalgamation plans advanced by the League. Four important railroad workers’ organizations have decided to amalgamate into two, and within the needle trades an especially strong amalgamation movement has been set on foot. At the last presidential election in the machinists’ organization, which is conducted by referendum vote, the candidate standing sparely upon the program advanced by the Trade Union Educational League polled more than one third of the total votes cast.
The time of submissive retreat has come to a close in The United States; the organized workers are now offering active insistence to the vicious attacks of capitalism. This the recent great struggles prove. Following the lead of this new left wing movement, the organized masses are beginning to discard all useless weapons, and seek new and better ones – weapons that will bring victory.
 



Vehement strikes are sweeping the United States, constantly gaining in scope and intensity. The military forces are mobilized throughout the country, and the “democratic” government has been compelled to remove its mask of hypocrisy and come out openly in its true light, as an instrument of coercion in the hands of the dominant capitalist class. It now stands exposed as the chief organ of strikebreaking.
Coal miners numbering 665,000 have been out since April 1st, with no desertions from their ranks. 100,000 textile workers have been out since May, and on July 1st, 400,000 railroad shop workers laid down their tools, since followed by. large numbers coming from other railroad crafts in various parts of the country. Every local union of the Maintenance of Way Mens’ organization, comprising 400,000 members, demand that their officials act in accordance with the vote taken, of which about 95% were for the strike. Many thousands have left work, while the rest are preparing to walk out, action or no action by those officials.
Railway clerks and freight handlers, comprising about 150,000 members, as well as signalmen and dispatchers, two smaller unions, have voted to strike. Before this appears in print the total of striking railroad workers may have reached 1,200,000. In Chicago, street car men and elevated trainmen have voted unanimously to strike against a 25 percent wage reduction and changes in working conditions. In another large city, street cars are being run by soldiers. Sailors on the Great Lakes have taken a referendum vote on strike against a proposed 14 hour work day and a reduction in wages from $100 to $80 a month.
 
The Government as Strike Breaker
Following the sound policy of one war at a time, and incidentally moved by the looming coal shortage, the government has shown great anxiety for a settlement of the coal strike before the railroad strike assumes too large proportions. It presented a plan for arbitration, providing for the miners going back to work at the scale of wages obtained previous to April 1st, and a board of arbitration composed of three from the union, three from the operators and five to be chosen by the government, to make a final decision before August 10th. This scheme was quickly rejected by the miners’ policy committee, which is composed of delegates from all mine districts. The miners were not willing to resume work and leave the fate of their union in the hands of this tribunal. The trap failed. Many attempts have been made to induce the miners to accept separate settlements by districts and thus split their solid ranks. They were browbeaten by hired gunmen and state cossacks, harassed by injunctions and industrial court laws. Some of their leaders were arrested, while all the implements of modern warfare were held in readiness; but it produced no coal.
In several places the coal operators succeeded in bringing in strikebreakers to work the mines, and armed gunmen for their protection. Bloody clashes occurred with the striking miners, and many strikebreakers have paid with their lives, while others learned a valuable lesson.
 
Mine Owners Provoke Open War
At Herrin, a little mine village in Southern Illinois, the United States Steel Corporation attempted to operate one of its subsidiaries, a strip mine, on its notorious “open shop” basis. All union miners who had worked by persuasion of the union, to strip coal on condition that nothing be shipped, were discharged, and strikebreakers brought in, guarded by heavily armed men and equipped with machine guns. A strikebreaker veteran was placed in charge and they began shipping coal. On Wednesday, June 21st the striking miners sent a deputation to the mine to appeal to the men employed to join the strike. The guards, opened fire; the union men who were unarmed, fled; but not before two of their number were killed.
The news of the murder quickly spread through the county and added fuel to the smouldering fire of suppressed rage. The miners armed themselves and went for the scabs; a battle ensued, and when the smoke clouds cleared away, the imported strikebreakers and gunmen were either killed, wounded or missing, and steam shovels and railway cars were one mighty heap of ruins. The whole community stood solidly with the miners. To the American mine workers there is nothing new in such a bloody dash. They are trained from childhood in handling arms to defend themselves against company gunmen and stool pigeons; but it is the first time that they nave won such a sweeping victory and effectively served notice on the mine operators that any attempt to open the mines with non-union labor will be stopped.
Now the United States government has invited the mine operators to reopen their mines under federal protection. Of course, it cannot be expected that these gentlemen themselves wifi go down into the bowels of the earth and dig coal, but their first aim has been attained. The armed forces of the political state have become definitely committed to their union-smashing program, and the class struggle will be intensified on the American continent.
 
The Railroad Strike
The railroad workers are facing their supreme test. The forces new allied against them are so powerful that it will command every ounce of their energy and solidarity to bring this titanic battle to a successful conclusion. Last year, the Five Train Service Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, Firemen, Conductors, Trainmen and Telegraphers had their wages cut 12½ percent, and the national agreement of working conditions for all railroad workers was abrogated. The rank and file voted to strike, the leaders prevented it on the plea that they could not fight the government, and they failed to establish any solidarity among the railroad crafts or a closer amalgamation of their forces. On July 1st, the U.S. Railroad Labor Board which was created by the government and has remained in authority ever since the railroads were returned to private ownership at the close of the war, ordered another wage cut averaging 10 percent, affecting 1,200,000 of the remaining 11 craft unions on the road, thus topping off $136,000,000 of their annual pay. The 8-hour workday and overtime rates have been taken away and piece work re-established in the shops. The government Labor Board stands exposed as a tool in the hands of the capitalist class to enslave and impoverish the workers.
One group of Maintenance of Way workers were cut as much as 23 cents an hour. It is significant to note in this connection that one railroad reports, for the first four months of 1922, a net operating income of $158,709,784 which is $10,000,000 in excess of their net income for the corresponding period of last year.
The government has issued a proclamation threatening prosecution to the full extent of the law for any interference with interstate transportation and the carrying of United States mail. The eastern section of the shopmen organization replied that the strike would go on until a settlement satisfactory to the men could be reached, even if every mail train had to stop running. Every railroad company maintains a large force of armed guards at the strike shop. Soldiers with machine guns and light artillery have been dispatched to the various strike points and placed at the gales of the shops. Several dashes have occurred between the workers and the military. The striking workers are determined not to give in to this kind of intimidation and the rank and file of the railroad organization, not yet effected by the wage slashes, are demanding strike in sympathy with the shopmen. The officials of the Maintenance of Waymen’s organization, afraid of entering the struggle, are pursuing the policy that led to nothing but defeat in the past, – that of attempting to gain favors by negotiating separately with the individual companies, while their membership are leaving the jobs by the thousands in spite of instructions to the contrary. The struggle is becoming ever more militant. The workers are rapidly becoming disillusioned as to the pretended American democracy. The impotence of the present leaders of the American labor unions stands out in bold relief. The A.F. of L. official family has nothing to offer but empty pledges of moral support and while it dare not line up openly with the ruthless master class, it fights tooth and nail against any closer amalgamation of labor forces.
However, the sentiment for amalgamation and the spirit of rebellion, in spite of a recent expulsion of a local union in New York City by the Gompers machine for alleged Communism, is increasing with such tremendous speed that leaders who attempt to resist this natural development will be crushed by the progressive wave in the American labor movement.
 

