

The Fourth International, Stalinism and the Origins of the International Socialism Group – Some Documents
Pluto Press, £1.00



Reviewed by KEN TARBUCK, who was during the period covered by these documents the Secretary of the Socialist Review Group. 


WHAT, ONE MAY ASK, is the purpose this small selection of Some Documents relating to the history of IS?
To the uninformed it may appear to be an exercise in educating the present membership, to help round out their picture of how the organisation came into being.
Unfortunately Pluto Press have engaged the services of a person to introduce the documents whose only gifts seem to be an ability to falsify and to develop a defective memory when convenient.
All the tortuous political arguments on Trotsky’s views on the nature of the Soviet Union – as seen by Hallas – are, in fact, merely a preamble to some rather clumsy falsifications.
 
East Europe
In the late 1940s a vital discussion took place in the Fourth International on the class nature of the East European states.
Hallas attempts to distort the developing position of the F.I. in order to claim that there had been a somersault from regarding the East European states as capitalist, to regarding them as workers’ states. Thus he alleges that as well as the FI characterising the state capitalist analysis of these states as revisionism, it also characterised as revisionist the view that they were workers’ states.
The document to which Hallas refers, using a single phrase torn out of context, is a lengthy resolution passed by the 2nd World Congress in 1948. As to the actual position taken in this document, we find the following:
“The peculiarity of the buffer-zone countries consists in this, that the Soviet bureaucracy has succeeded, for the time being, in orienting the capitalist economy in a sense corresponding, in the first instance, to its own interests. This situation can only be transitional. It must end either in the bureaucracy’s withdrawal from its position, under the pressure of imperialism, or in the real destruction of capitalism ... The Stalinist state apparatus has acquired a great deal of independence in relation to the bourgeoisie and proletariat, not alone owing to the balance between and the growing prostration of both these classes; but above all to its intimate ties with the Soviet state apparatus and the overwhelming weight of the latter in Eastern Europe, amid the existing world relations.” (p. 119, Fourth International, June 1948)
It is certainly true that there was some initial confusion, and the resolution quoted above reflected this ambiguity. But what does this prove? Merely, that when faced with an unprecedented situation the F.I. refused to rush in with ready made answers.
In this connection it is pertinent to point out that Cliff did rush in, as his document on the Class Nature of the Peoples Democracies (included in this selection) shows.
Any examination of this and the current reality in Eastern Europe will show that what Cliff described (largely correct factually at the time) no longer obtains. All of the special companies and other economic forms which he attributes to “Soviet Imperialism” have long since disappeared.
The 1948 resolution of the Fourth International has been vindicated in this respect, since it emphasised the transitional nature of the regimes at the time.
Finally, what of the “workers’ statist Revisionism”? A reading of the actual resolution makes clear that it refers to ... pro-Stalinists outside the Fourth International!
 
Korea
Given that it was the issue of the Korean war that was the catalyst which broke a number of members away from the Healy group (the forerunner of the present Socialist Labour League), the bulk of whom went on to form the SOCIALIST REVIEW GROUP – parent of today’s I.S. – it strikes one as odd, to say the least, that the article chosen to represent this group’s point of view on the war is one taken from the second issue of the journal, one, moreover, which originated in India.
(Incidentally Hallas’ claim that it was Cliff’s document on the”Peoples Democracies” that rallied people is just not true – see Some Notes on the History of British Trotskyism, in Marxist Studies, Vol. 2 no. 1, Winter 1969–70.)
Didn’t the group have anything to say on such an important issue in the first number of Socialist Review? After all any journal worth its salt must say something on such a burning current issue in its first number.
In fact TWO articles appeared on this question in the first issue of Socialist Review. The very first article in the journal was The Struggle of the Powers by R. Tennant (Tony Cliff). This devoted two pages to criticising American imperialism – and nearly five pages to attacking “Russian imperialism”.
The other article on this question was entitled Whither Socialist Outlook? (the Healy group’s paper in the Labour Party). This is a scathing attack on the “pro-Stalinist” policy being pursued by Socialist Outlook (which supported North Korea against US imperialism). It very clearly parted Socialist Review from such policies, and took an uncompromising ‘third camp’ position.
Why then select an article written in India to represent the Socialist Review group policy on this key issue?
Quite correctly Hallas repudiates the slander that the SR group in any way supported American imperialism. Yet there is no doubt that, given the support for the Vietnamese revolution by IS today, Hallas and the other leaders of today’s IS feel very uncomfortable about the Korean war and the stand taken on it. Yet they dared not leave it out of this collection.
Therefore the choice was made to republish an article that is short and comparatively mild in tone compared with the articles in the first issue of Socialist Review, which were a real reflection of the feelings on the Group.
And of course so anxious are the present leaders of IS to put distance between themselves and Shachtman – given his present support for US imperialism in Vietnam – that they fail to mention that Labor Action (the paper which the article came from) was Shachtman’s paper!
 
China & Yugoslavia
A claim is made that “Cliff’s forecast of the political development of the FI was rapidly confirmed. The majority adopted Michael Pablo’s notorious (sic) document The Rise and Decline of Stalinism ... which represented a return to the reformist Trotskyism of the twenties with respect to Stalinist states where these happened to be in actual or potential conflict with Russia”.
We are served up a short paragraph which does NOT talk about reforming the Chinese and Yugoslav parties or states, but says Trotskyists should strive to create revolutionary currents within these parties.
However, this point of view was not predicated upon the view that these states were in conflict with Russia, but on the fact that they were the two Communist Parties that had carried through an overturn in property relations within their respective countries, independent of, and against the advice of, Stalin.
It was precisely because these two parties had had to mobilise the masses in their struggles that led the FI to argue at that time that these parties were still capable of responding to mass pressure and actions. It was this aspect that led to the particular judgment being made at the time. One, incidentally, that I now feel was wrong, but has been corrected by the test of events.
But, on the main issue of the Stalinist states, the document in question is clear and unequivocal –
“Our sections ought to resolutely combat any tendency towards apology or justification for the present regime in the Soviet Union ... The smashing of the dictatorship and the privileges of the bureaucracy, the task of a new political revolution IN THE SOVIET UNION remains more burning than ever.” (p. 43, Fourth International (Paris), Winter 1958, emphasis in original, passed at World Congress, 1954.)
The so-called ‘notorious’ document of Pablo, if read as a whole, has in fact stood the test of time far better than Cliff’s liberal use of statistics as a substitute for analysis.
 
Western Europe
But where is the relapse into ‘reformist Trotskyism’ that Hallas writes about? It is another figment of his imagination.
He alleges that the Fourth International indulged in some “fantasy” of a perspective of reforming the mass Stalinist parties in Western Europe, and like the proverbial children’s party conjuror he pulls a quotation out of the hat.
“These organisations cannot be smashed and replaced by others in the relatively short time between now and the decisive conflict. All the more so since these organisations will be obliged, whether they wish it or not, to give a leftward turn to the whole or at least part of the leadership.”
The reference Hallas gives for this quotation is The Decline and Fall of Stalinism, a document adopted in 1954 by the world congress of the International Secretariat of the Fourth International and reproduced in 1970 by the Socialist Workers Party (USA).
Unfortunately for anyone wishing to check the validity of this quotation they will not find it anywhere in the 1970 edition, nor in the 1958 edition; the reason is quite simple. The quotation does not come from this document at all.
It seems to be one of the laws of politics that the worse the mistake or falsification the more likely it is to be repeated.
Hallas is no exception.
He had previously used exactly the same quote in his article Building the Leadership in I.S. journal No. 40, Unfortunately it is taken, at second hand, from a source other than that which he cites. [1]
If all that was at stake was some confusion over the correct source of a quotation, it would not merit such a lengthy explanation. But a proper reading of A Recall to Order (Hallas’ actual source) makes it quite clear that the quotation is not talking about the Communist Parties at all! The reference was in fact to the mass social democratic parties.
It must be recalled that at the time in question, i.e. 1952, nearly every tendency on the left thought that a third world war was not only possible but imminent.
If one reads the above In this contest one can see that the report was based upon the assumption of a quicker tempo of development than subsequently occurred and that it posed a very real and legitimate possibility of some social democratic leaderships or sections of them being forced in a revolutionary direction by the pressure and activity of the masses.
The report in fact says –
“In all these countries it is extremely probable, except for some new and at the moment unforeseeable developments, that the radicalisation of the masses and the first stages of the revolution, of the objective revolutionary situation, will manifest themselves within these organisations, The main forces of the revolutionary party of these countries will spring up by differentiation or disintegration of these organisations.”
Does Hallas actually think (even in these brave new days of the 12-page Socialist Worker ...) that there can be a complete by-passing of the existing organisations of the working class in the building of a revolutionary party, or that it is not reasonable to suppose that ferment within them and splits and disintegration will be a part of the process?
Finally, lest Hallas and his ilk think that only the “Pabloites” thought a third world war was imminent, let me quote from a Socialist Review Youth Supplement of the same period:  
“The world today is divided by and large into two vast imperialist Power blocs, both striving for world supremacy. You may be quite ignorant of the coal and steel production figures of these countries but of one thing you can be certain. Both power blocs threaten world peace, and war between them is inevitable.”
How, then, does this fit in now with the picture of IS being right all the time and everyone else wrong? Perhaps readers will now understand why only “some documents” were republished, and others left to moulder in the archives.
 
Smokescreen
The question that has to be asked now is why these particular documents were reproduced at this time, and why Hallas has to write such a falsified Introduction to them?
Certainly new members of IS will want to know about the origins of IS and its present leaders. In this respect both the selection and introduction serve as a smoke screen to cover up far more than was intended to reveal.
That Cliff was the main driving force of the organisation’s ideas and has remained with it all along cannot be doubted.
But the inclusion of Hallas’ document from 1951 (dressed up as the Group’s main policy document but in fact only a rehash – “for use on contacts” – of a Secretariat resolution endorsed two months previously) along with his introduction serve as camouflage to prevent new comrades wondering where Hallas was during the intervening years.
Certainly he cannot claim a continuous membership of the organisation since its inception. (Indeed even in the first two years of its existence his membership was put in question. There is a note in the Nov. 1952 minutes of the NC where it was moved that Hallas be dropped to the rank of sympathiser for non-payment of dues.)
It would be instructive for new members of IS to look through the issues of Socialist Review during the 1950s. They will be hard put to it to find any contribution by Hallas. The book A Socialist Review published in 1965, which was a selection from articles over the years from the paper, contains not one contribution from Hallas.
The whole of the present exercise is like someone trying to answer the question “what did you do in the war Daddy?”
In fact during those long hard cold years during the 1950s and early 1960s Hallas seemed to have dropped from sight. It must all be a bit embarrassing for someone who now has the temerity to describe Trotsky as a bigger revisionist than Bernstein.
If such antics were not despicable they would be funny. There are always those with a glib tongue and pen who come flocking into the revolutionary movement when it is expanding and winning some victories. Then the movement is a relatively warm and cheerful place to be.
Hallas is one of the clowns who has come from out of the cold.
* * *
Footnote
1. The original being a report of the Xth plenum of the International Executive Committee of the FI, published in the Feb./April 1952 issue of Quatrième Internationale.
 

 Tarbuck: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory (III: Bonapartism and the Nature of the State)



Ken Tarbuck   |   ETOL Main Page

Ethiopia & Socialist Theory

Ken Tarbuck
Ethiopia and Socialist Theory

III: Bonapartism and the Nature of the State

Some Preliminary Remarks
Richard Sheppard has written two articles in Red Banner on the question of Marxism and the USSR, both of which dealt with the topic of Bonapartism. Touching upon some fundamental aspects of class relationships, class struggles and Marxist theory, this question is of considerable relevance. It is a cliché of popular Marxism that ‘the state is the executive organ of the ruling class’, and comrade Sheppard initially seems to be content with this rendering. The question for me is: ‘Is this sufficient?’ It may be that in the promised articles that were to follow on from those already published there would have been an elaboration, a refinement of this basic proposition. Indeed, even in the two published articles there are elements which hint at such a refinement, and therefore I hope that in what follows I do no injustice to comrade Sheppard’s intentions. However, for me, what has been published does not seem adequate in terms of the problems presented by the reality of the ex-USSR nor by Trotsky’s position, which comrade Sheppard seems to endorse. I would go further and suggest that the problems raised by comrade Sheppard are not only germane to the ex-USSR, but to all state forms, ancient or modern. This being the case, I would want to question some of the assumptions, implicit as well as explicit, in comrade Sheppard’s contributions.
But, before going on to examine the articles in detail, I would like to make a few comments on the following: ‘... revolutionaries today are split on this question mainly between those who support Trotsky’s analysis and the “state capitalists”. For Marxists to benefit from this debate it is important that both sides understand the other’s position.’ [1] The question under review was ‘the class nature of what was the first workers’ state’. [2]
Comrade Sheppard has touched upon an extremely important issue here. And I do not mean the nature of the ex-USSR. The issue is that it is important for all sides in a discussion to understand the other points of view. Understanding another point of view does not mean, of course, an acceptance of that view. The sad fact is that I have rarely heard such discussions in the Trotskyist movement. What I have usually witnessed or read have been polemics carried out with the purpose of suppressing the opposite point of view.
Such encounters have usually been engineered by one side or the other to strengthen their particular point of view, not to learn by an exchange of ideas, and I do not suggest thereby that this is always a conscious process. I will not dwell upon this topic, since it would require a full-length essay to trace the roots of this tradition, sufficient to say that it goes back to the Bolshevik tradition, possibly even earlier. Whatever its origins, and that in itself may be a question for discussion, it is necessary to overcome it and root it out wherever it shows itself. If we do not overcome this pernicious tradition we shall fail to learn.
Comrade Sheppard has recognised the necessity for this need by the remarks he made. For me, what may appear to be almost an aside becomes significant, because it means that there is the possibility of an exchange of views. One final comment on this topic, none of us should be afraid to make comments, suggestions, contributions because we are not 100 per cent sure of some aspects of what we say. Let us admit that we are not sure about some things, that we are tentative, that we are floating ideas for discussion, and let us not be afraid to admit that we may have been wrong on some points.
 
Marx and Engels: The Theory of the State
Before we can adequately discuss Bonapartism we should clarify a Marxist theory of the state.
As I mentioned above, there is a vulgar view of the state that subsumes all aspects of the state under the heading of ‘the state is the executive of the ruling class’, and as a corollary reduces this to undue emphasis on ‘armed bodies of men’. I believe that this view arises from an over-reliance upon Lenin’s small pamphlet The State and Revolution. Lenin wrote this during his struggle to turn the Bolshevik Party towards the seizure of power in 1917, and because of this he focused upon certain aspects of the state to sharpen up his immediate political aims. This was perhaps legitimate within the context of what he was attempting to do, but the pamphlet cannot serve as a rounded Marxist theory of the state. Unfortunately, like so much of what Lenin wrote, this pamphlet was turned into canonical dogma as being the last and final word on the problem of the state.
It is necessary therefore to re-state, as simply as possible, some quite fundamental propositions on the nature of the state.
Historically the state arose from a number of crucial developments within the evolution of human beings as social beings. With the development of the social division of labour there arose the need for a coordination and administration of activities that affected the whole community. Initially this administration was carried out by the whole community, but gradually there arose a further division of labour in which such tasks of administration devolved upon certain individuals but still under the overall control of the community.
What are the specific problems facing such communities? Firstly, there is the need for a decision-making process, what food is to be grown, who should do what, etc. Secondly, there arises the need for protection from other communities, both to conserve any surplus and to protect crops, land, etc. Thirdly, there is needed a means of regulating conflicts within the community in such a manner as the community is maintained.
The crystallisation of a separate layer of people who carried out this administration was the first step towards the creation of a state. But the creation of such a layer does not in itself mean that a state is in being, what we have is what Hal Draper called a ‘proto-state’, that is, a transitional form. The state proper emerges with the arrival of social differentiation within the community and the concentration of the means of coercion within the hands of one section of the community.
Each of these steps was gradual and took long historical epochs to become fully developed. However, the salient point here is that even when the state has become fully developed and does indeed protect the interests of an exploiting class, it can only do so on the basis of continuing to administer the most basic and enduring needs of the whole community. In other words, whilst the state is the executive organ of the economically dominant and exploitative class, it is also always more than that. The ability to maintain even the most repressive state is based upon its ability to maintain the community and administer the basic needs of that community. It is true that the state, precisely because of its nature, always does this work in such a manner as to protect the interests of the exploiters. And, we should note, that even when the state is abolished, or withers away, these community-wide functions will still remain to administered. However, if these most basic functions are not maintained then the state and the community that supports it will disintegrate. It is this failure to maintain the most basic equilibrium of the community which results in a descent into chaos or revolution.
When we look at the state in this light we can see that the problems presented by this social formation are much more complex than the simplistic versions of Marxism which reduce it to solely a class phenomenon and force. Richard Sheppard seems to be aware of this when he pointed out certain problems related to Lenin’s The State and Revolution, but he only does so by way of pointing to intra-class conflicts within the ‘ruling class’. It seems to me that one cannot adequately discuss Bonapartism unless one starts from a wider perspective, since Bonapartism is inherent in every modern state. Let me now turn to that question.
 
Bonapartism and the Independence of the State
Richard Sheppard says: ‘The state machine led by Louis Napoleon had political control yet nowhere do Marx and Engels define the enormous state machine as a separate class.’ This is true, but is it sufficient? If we accept that the state is the product of the historical development of classes, to argue that – as Richard Sheppard does – ‘in writing about the rise of Louis Napoleon Marx and Engels were showing that the class analysis of history was still valid’ is superfluous. To discuss the state – any state – is by definition to be discussing class society. What Richard Sheppard is seeming to suggest is that we have two separate phenomena, that is, on the one side we have the ruling class and on the other side we have the state bureaucracy which is always subordinate to this ruling class even when it achieves some relative independence. Could it not be that the state and ruling class are, in some societies, coterminous?
Marx and Engels discussed Bonapartism in relation to clear historical examples of the state’s achieving relative independence from the economically dominant class, but we should not thereby extrapolate this specific discussion into the whole of history. If one looks at Marx and Engels’ discussion of Asiatic society it becomes clear that they did consider it possible for the economically dominant class to be located within the state machine. In such a situation the whole concept of Bonapartism falls to the ground, but does not therefore make the concept wrong. What we have to do is always to establish the concrete historical circumstances of the phenomena that we are discussing, and not use certain categories as holdalls into which we stuff inconvenient facts or ideas.
The point here is that we should be very careful about transposing the concept of Bonapartism, which Marx and Engels developed for certain historical circumstances, onto another situation which may not be the same. And that situation was Russia after 1917.
 
Does Bonapartism Apply To the Soviet Union?
Richard Sheppard obviously thinks this to be the case:
Trotsky analysed the Stalinist regime in the USSR as Proletarian Bonapartism, in other words the Soviet bureaucracy had a certain independence from the economic base of society; the Stalinist bureaucracy held political power but the power was based on controlling a state which rested on an economy where the predominant relations of production were socialist: commonly owned by the working class. [3]
It is here that we come up against one of the biggest sources of dispute. Richard Sheppard assumes that the relations of production within the Soviet Union were socialist, but nothing is produced to support this contention. Comrade Sheppard makes the same mistake in this respect as did Trotsky and the whole of his tradition, that is, confusing state ownership of property with socialist relations of production. I do not deny that when the capitalist class is expropriated this will most likely take the form of taking their property into social ownership, but this must take on a much deeper content than the mere transfer of ownership to the state. Above all the hierarchical structure of relationships must be transformed if the workers are not rapidly to be once more subordinated and alienated. But in Russia within months of the October seizure of power by the Bolsheviks the old forms of hierarchical relations were restored throughout society, especially in industry.
He immediately follows on from the above passage with: ‘The bureaucracy balanced between the interests of the different classes, fundamentally the international capitalist class, the peasantry and the working class.’ [4]
This again makes a number of assumptions. Firstly, there is no international capitalist class of the kind implied here, there is no homogenous international capitalist class, only a number of different national capitalist classes who do have interests in common against other classes, but this is often vitiated by the antagonism between these capitalist classes, Moreover, there is no evidence to suggest that the Soviet bureaucracy ever carried out policies or actions merely to placate or please any capitalist class except where it judged them to be in its own interests. Secondly, there was no Soviet working class after 1918–19. The proletariat and the capitalist class form a contradictory unity of the capitalist system, they are necessary and essential components of a dialectical relationship. Once the capitalist class is removed then the working class itself begins to lose part of its defining and essential character. This will be so even in the most advanced capitalist societies after the demise of the bourgeoisie as a class. But in Russia this aspect was aggravated, firstly by the small numbers of the proletariat and secondly by the dispersal, death and de-classing of the industrial workers between 1917 and 1921. By 1921 the working class that had participated in the overthrow of Tsarism and the provisional government had been removed from the social equations. Only the peasants remained recognisably a class, this being so because of the primitive nature of that class formation. But even this class no longer acted as a class (if it ever did), rather it exerted its influence and pressure by way of its non-activity as producer of food and raw materials. Hence the need for the NEP in 1921. This class too was atomised and dispersed in the cauldron of the forced collectivisation that the Stalinist state bureaucracy carried out in the period 1929–33.
A Bonapartist regime balances between classes, whilst maintaining the fundamental interests of the economically dominant and exploiting class, by virtue of the need to moderate the clashes between the contending forces. That is to say it must be possible for the contending classes to be able to exert pressures as classes. But in the Soviet Union of the 1920s which class was able to act in such a manner? None. The working class was not only not the economically dominant class, it did not exist even as a class in itself. To argue that the ‘working class’ was the economically dominant class because industry was nationalised is to reduce the idea of the self-activity of the working class to a nullity.
The capitalist class of Russia had either been killed or fled, it was not a factor within the equation. Even the ‘international capitalist class’ did not exert pressure in a consistent and unified manner. It must be remembered that the USSR and Germany had concluded a pact which enabled the German army to train on Soviet territory, this in exchange for German weapons technology. Hardly a case of pressure! Even at the height of intervention during 1918–19 there was no overall coordination by the capitalist powers, each one jockeyed for its own particular state interests.
Only the peasantry remained as a class, but as pointed out above this did not act as a class, since it too hardly existed as a class in itself.
 
Lenin’s Appreciation of the Situation
Richard Sheppard quotes several passages from Trotsky’s book The Revolution Betrayed, the whole thrust of which is that the Stalinist bureaucracy arose because of the backwardness of Russian society, the weariness and dispersal of the working class, plus the international isolation. All of which was and is plausible, but cannot be accepted as the whole answer. Richard concludes that ‘Trotsky, in essence, represented the weakened faction of Bolshevik workers, Stalin represented an increasingly independent bureaucracy’. Independent of whom? The implication is of the working class. But the Soviet state had achieved this long before Stalin became master of the situation. By late 1918 the Soviets had become mere shells, packed with Bolshevik supporters. Lenin recognised this in March 1919 when he said:
... the Soviets, which by virtue of their programme are organs of government by the working people, are in fact organs of government for the working people by the advanced section of the proletariat, but not by the whole working people as a whole. [5]
During the Civil War the new Red Army had absorbed much of the old state machine, and the policy known as War Communism effectively installed a commandist bureaucratic regime. Moreover, it was the old Tsarist state with a lick of Red paint that was effectively re-established. Again witness what Lenin said in 1922:
Obviously, what is lacking is culture among the stratum of the Communists who perform administrative functions. If we take Moscow with its 4,700 Communists in responsible positions, and if we take that huge bureaucratic machine, that gigantic heap, we must ask: who is directing whom? I doubt whether it can truthfully be said that the Communists are directing that heap. To tell the truth, they are not directing, they are being directed. Something analogous happened here to what we were told in our history lessons ... sometimes one nation conquers another, the nation that conquers is the conqueror and the nation that is vanquished is the conquered nation. This is simple and intelligible to all. But what happens to the culture of these nations? Here things are not so simple. If the conquering nation is more cultured than the vanquished nation, the former imposes its culture upon the latter; but if the opposite is the case, the vanquished nation imposes its culture upon the conqueror. Has not something like this happened in the capital of the RSFSR? [6]
By 1921 all opposition had been outlawed, both inside and outside the Bolshevik Party. Strikes by workers were repressed by the Cheka/GPU in 1922–23, yet Trotsky did not protest. In essence then Trotsky represented a wing of the bureaucracy, not the workers. The fact that Trotsky believed that his faction represented the workers does not alter the truth of the matter.
In some respects Lenin had a better understanding of what had happened after the revolution than Trotsky had, hence his preparations for a struggle against the bureaucracy whilst he was still politically active during 1922–23. However, it is doubtful that even Lenin could have faced up to the whole truth of the matter. What is a little more surprising is that Trotsky did not come to terms with post-1917 Russia, since he had dissected in a very thorough manner the role of the Russian state in the history of that country many years before in his book 1905. In that work he had pointed to the dominating role of the state in the development of Russia for nearly 400 years, a role which it had not relinquished in 1917.
I conclude therefore that the theoretical conception of Bonapartism did not apply to the Soviet Union. To refer continually to this conception as a model in these circumstances positively prevents clear thinking. We have once more seriously to analyse the question of the state.
 
Some Historical Points
Comrade Sheppard says regarding the Left Opposition’s proposals for industrialisation: ‘All this was sneered at by Stalin. His allies at this time Bukharin, Rykov, Molotov and Tomsky argued for “socialism at a snail’s pace” and mocked the proposals for large-scale industrial schemes.’ [7]
The snail’s pace that is always trailed before us on these occasions in fact referred to the socialisation of agriculture, from early 1927 Bukharin was urging an increased tempo of industrialisation. And it was in 1927 that the First Five-Year Plan was launched, that is, when Russian industry and agriculture had reached prewar levels of output. If one compares Trotsky’s writings in the period 1929–33 one finds a coincidence of views between Bukharin’s views and his own. (I have dealt with this question in my book Bukharin’s Theory of Equilibrium. [8])
Again Comrade Sheppard says:
... by 1928, the working class in the cities faced approaching famine. The Kulaks (the rich peasants) carrying with them the middle peasants were storing grain mainly because they were exerting their new-found muscle and felt that the economic return was not enough. The Kulaks held the revolution by the throat by a process of withdrawing food supplies from the cities. [9]
This is the standard Trotskyist explanation (and Stalinist come to that), but it is exceedingly simplistic. The tenor of the report is that the Kulaks deliberately began starving the cities. When it is said that the Kulaks were the rich peasants, what is actually meant here? The fact is that these ‘rich peasants’ were so-called by the simple fact of owning a few horses and cattle; compared to farmers say in Germany or the USA they were practically poverty-stricken! Only in a society so bereft of material possessions could these people be judged to be ‘rich’. The productivity of Russian agriculture was appallingly low by international standards. The problem for the Russian state was that its industry was even less productive, both per person employed and in total. It was this gross imbalance that led to the lack of grain on the market in 1928. The peasants as a whole could see no reason to sell their grain for low prices when there were insufficient manufactured goods for them to buy even with this poor price. There was a perfectly possible solution to this problem, that is, what was known as goods intervention, that is the purchase of manufactured goods abroad to make up some of the deficit of Soviet production. This was never attempted, hence the contrived crisis of 1928.
Comrade Sheppard argues:
Five-Year Plans were instituted. Mass industrialisation was now to be rushed through, often with forced labour. The Gulag began. Politically, the right wing were now chopped and given the same treatment as the Left Opposition. Only those who jumped quickly enough behind Stalin were saved; only ‘yes-men’ survived.
Not wholly true. The ‘right wing’ were not imprisoned until much later. Moreover, the Gulag did not begin with the Five-Year Plans, it began in 1918. What happened during the Plans was that the Gulag developed enormous economic significance. But the basic structure of the Gulag was well established under the regime of Lenin and Trotsky. The slave labour of the Gulag was an essential ingredient in the building of huge infrastructural projects that were necessary for industrialisation, without this slave labour the Stalinist scale of industrialisation would not have been possible. Trotsky hardly mentioned this fact, he regarded the successes of industrialisation as being due to planning. He saw what he wanted to see and ignored the most unpalatable aspects of the process. I do not say this was done deliberately, but Trotsky was only human.
Regarding ‘yes-men’ saving their skins, only for a short time. In the purges of the mid-1930s all factions of the old Bolshevik Party were murdered, along with millions of non-party citizens. Nearly the whole of the Stalin faction within the party were disposed of during this period.
 
Once More On Bonapartism
I want now to examine some further remarks of Richard Sheppard, since they demonstrate what I believe to be the central failures of the Trotskyist theory of Soviet Bonapartism. Firstly:
Stalin carried through a caricature of the programme of the Left Opposition. Like Marx’s examples of bourgeois Bonapartism, where the capitalists do not have political power yet capitalism developed, the Stalinist regime was able (in fact forced by the needs of its own survival) to strengthen the basis of the nationalised economy up to a point. The dialectical contradiction is that Stalin did this without workers’ democracy and, in fact, at enormous expense of workers’ lives and by polluting the whole Bolshevik tradition. Moral detestation at the crimes of Stalin should not blind us to the fact that the basic forms of production are crudely those of a workers’ state, but without the crucial ingredient of workers’ democracy. [10]
When arguing that Stalin carried through a caricature of Trotsky’s programme this is usually done to point up the differences between the two. Could it not also imply that there was considerable similarity? Even with the Spitting Images’ rubber caricatures there has to be sufficient similarity for them to be recognisable as the people they represent. But in the case of Russia we are not dealing with rubber puppets, we are dealing with vast social events. To suggest that Stalin’s programme was a caricature is to recognise that the similarities were greater than the differences, if not we should not be able to make such a comparison. Merely contrasting the differences between the two, and there were differences, detracts us from asking: was Trotsky’s programme correct? Was it suitable? Was it a socialist programme? Did it avoid exploitation of workers and peasants or only to a lesser degree than Stalin? It is these and similar questions that are avoided by a constant repetition of the genuine differences between the two programmes.
Comrade Sheppard tells us that Stalin carried through his programme without workers’ democracy, but where in Trotsky’s programme of 1927 was there a commitment to workers’ democracy? Certainly Trotsky called for the restoration of Party democracy, but that was not the same as workers’ democracy. Moreover, Comrade Sheppard tells us that this workers’ democracy was a ‘vital ingredient’. But if you try to bake a cake without a vital ingredient you don’t end up with a cake, degenerated or deformed, but with a mess! This is a central problem for any analysis of Russia after 1917. If socialism was to be the creation of the self-activating working class, what was actually created? You do not teach people democracy by banning all political parties, by banning all independent political activity, by sending dissidents to the Gulag; on the contrary you end up with a totalitarian regime.
To attempt to separate out politics and economics in a system where the state owns the means of production is futile. Preobrazhensky made this elementary error in his book The New Economics and thus was one of the first leading Trotskyists to capitulate to Stalin. Trotsky’s theory was little better in this respect, but his instincts were sounder and he spent the last decade of his life bringing his theory back into line with his basic instincts.
I have to ask why should ‘moral detestation’ for Stalin’s crimes blind one? This is said in such a manner as to imply that moral outrage somehow has no place in our political lexicon. Our moral outrage should inform our critique of Stalinism, but without such moral outrage our ideas will become desiccated and inhuman. Without such moral outrage it is possible to end as apologists for many types of dastardly crimes committed in the name of socialism.
Finally, on the above passage, I come back to the question of relations of production. Comrade Sheppard tells us that the basic forms of production were ‘crudely those of a workers’ state’. Here again we find a confusion between forms of production and relations of production. What were the forms? They were state-owned property, which was not peculiar to Russia. The judicial form of nationalisation is merely an empty shell until it is filled out with some definite content. Where in Russia did we find any socialist content? Nowhere. To use a popular adage Comrade Sheppard is asking us to ‘never mind the quality, feel the width’!! A capitalist Bonapartist regime often does come down very heavy on individual capitalists, even to the point of sending them to jail, but the bulk of the economically-dominant class are never in doubt about their position in society. In Russia the whole of the ‘ruling class’ was put in jail! I suggest there is a substantive difference here.
Let me now come to this passage:
The Stalinist bureaucracy never rested on capitalist forms of production. The Soviet regime was a transitional state economically on the first stages to socialism but ruled like a Bonapartist regime. It is for this reason that Trotsky termed it a Proletarian Bonapartist regime. [11]
It is true that the Stalinist bureaucracy did not rest upon capitalist relations of production, but they certainly attempted to introduce the forms of that system, mostly without success. The technology and production methods introduced during the Five-Year Plans were the last word in capitalist methods, but it was never able to emulate the levels of productivity of capitalism. As for the Soviet Union being a transitional state on the first stages to socialism, I would have to ask: show us the evidence. It seems to me that after 70 years or more of this transition it was only an historical detour on the road to capitalism, and ‘third world’ capitalism at that!
The formula of a ‘Proletarian Bonapartist regime’ is not merely inadequate to explain what happened in Russia, it positively prevents analysis. Comrade Sheppard ends his second article with a quotation from Trotsky’s Revolution Betrayed and it actually exposes most of the weaknesses of the position. Trotsky says the ‘bureaucracy has converted itself into an uncontrolled caste alien to socialism’. What is a caste in this context? It is not a class yet, but takes on the characteristics of a class, it is in the process of becoming. Certainly it was uncontrolled by the working population in Russia of town or countryside, but this had occurred well before Stalin took command. Yet it was eventually controlled by Stalin. And if you doubt this, examine the fate of huge layers of this caste during the purges. Only after the death of Stalin did this caste reassert its own control. It certainly was alien to socialism, so why should it push, drag or even coax Soviet society along the road to socialism? It is nonsensical to suggest that this totalitarian regime, which turned the whole Soviet Union into a prison house, was somehow forced against its will to march along the road to socialism. Socialism? What sort of socialism was envisaged? Nothing like Marx or Engels ever proposed. Further on Trotsky says, ‘the social revolution, betrayed by the ruling party, still exists in property relations and in the consciousness of the toiling masses’. Here again we have this confusion of property forms and social relations, as though one property form only admits to one social relationship. But history demonstrates that property forms are only one part of the defining characteristics for any social formation. How about the consciousness of the masses? If this is true it is taking some peculiar paths in the ex-Soviet Union today! Not once have we seen a mass movement of toilers demanding the extension of socialism in Russia, on the contrary we have seen support for the restoration of capitalism!
 
The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the Nature of the State
The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990 was merely the final gasp of a peculiar formation which had no coherent relations of production, being historically limited and without any future. Let me return to what I said earlier about the state. It is clear that a part of the explanation for the collapse of the Soviet Union was that it was failing to meet the most elementary needs of society, and therefore we have a descent into chaos. However, within this chaos it is also clear that the Russian state is still very much alive and doing well for itself. The uncontrolled caste that Trotsky quite rightly pointed to has shed one aspect of itself, that is, the old Soviet ‘Communist’ Party, but still effectively controls the state. Large segments of this caste are now trying to formalise their control of parts of the economy by transforming themselves into capitalists in the judicial sense. Other parts of the caste are clinging onto control of the state and state property, herein lies the struggle at this time, with the masses by and large standing to one side rather bemused by the catastrophe that has hit them.
Up to now the Russian state has not represented any class in society, it had its own interests which it protected. When we understand this and stop playing ‘hunt the class which the state represents’ we shall be in a better position to analyse the actual historical events and the current one as it unfolds. The historical peculiarity does not lie in Russian developments, on the contrary capitalism has been the historical peculiarity with its separation of economic and political power. Russia was never a capitalist society before 1917, and most certainly was not after that date. However, we may well be witnessing the birth of a capitalist society within Russia, but it will be a peculiar kind still moulded by the historic Russian state. If this is the case, then perhaps it will be much more justifiable to speak of a Bonapartist regime coming into being in the future than it was in the past. Even so, it will be a peculiarly Russian form of Bonapartism.
Let us stop applying abstract formulæ to concrete historical events and formations. One of these abstract formulæ is that the state is the ‘executive of the ruling class’; it is true as a general summation of capitalist society, but does not apply to all historical formations. On the contrary, we often find that the state is the ruling class. And on the other hand, it is quite possible for the state to achieve complete independence from the economically dominant class, so that there is a sharp division. Each of this variety of situations needs to be concretely analysed and not judged by formula. If I have convinced comrades to look at some situations with a fresh eye, I shall be content.
7 November 1992

Notes
1. Red Banner, no. 2, p. 4.
2. Red Banner, no. 2, p. 4.
3. Red Banner, no. 2, p. 7, my emphasis.
4. Red Banner, no 2, p. 7.
5. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 29, p. 183.
6. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33, p. 288.
7. Red Banner, no. 3, p. 9.
8. K.J. Tarbuck, Bukharin’s Theory of Equilibrium: A Defence of Historical Materialism (Pluto Press, London 1989).
9. Red Banner, no. 3, p. 9.
10. Red Banner, no. 3, pp. 9–10.
11. Red Banner, no. 3, p. 10.
 

 Tarbuck: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory (II: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory: The Blood on the Wall)



Ken Tarbuck   |   ETOL Main Page

Ethiopia & Socialist Theory

Ken Tarbuck
Ethiopia and Socialist Theory

II: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory: The Blood on the Wall

Introduction
Mengistu Haile Mariam was a bloody militarist and nationalist dictator; how is it then that for a period in the 1970s he was hailed as some sort of socialist by many on the left? That indeed is the puzzle and I hope to indicate in this essay the type of confusion which led to this predicament.
The fall of the military regime of Mengistu in Ethiopia which had effectively ruled the country since 1974 poses a number of extremely important questions for socialists, both at the level of theory and in practical activity. The regime in Ethiopia had been a self-proclaimed ‘socialist government’ which had attracted considerable support among the left in the capitalist countries during the 1970s. It was touted as being a regime worthy of support, since it was alleged to have had a socialist orientation, whatever that may mean. Moreover, on a broader canvas the revolution of 1974 in Ethiopia presented some very sharp questions of theory about the role of the state in society, its class nature and its functions. Above all it presented the problem of the nature of a regime in a society that was manifestly underdeveloped from a capitalist and industrial point of view, which allegedly was in a transition to socialism.
The present essay is written on the basis of notes made for a talk given in London on 4 October 1992. This was the first time that I had publicly spoken about Ethiopia since my return from that country in the early 1980s. The reason for my reticence up to that point was that I did not wish to implicate any of those people who had been associated with me whilst I was in the country. The fall of the Mengistu regime has allowed me to speak freely for the first time.
Ethiopia may seem to be a remote country, mainly known in the mass media for its continued famines, but its revolution of 1974 poses questions of near-universal significance for socialists as we near the start of the twenty-first century. It may well be that we shall need to revise some long-held ideas once we have examined the facts of the situation and cast aside some preconceived formulae. To understand the revolution of 1974 it is first of all necessary to establish a few facts about the history of Ethiopia. It is there that I shall begin.
 
I: The Historical Background and the Imperial Regime
Ethiopia has a very long history of civilisation, going back to the Pharonic period in Egypt. It was known to the Egyptians as the land of Kush, and Eritrea was Punt. The peoples seem to have come over from the Arabian peninsula in prehistoric times. There was a large and thriving kingdom centred on Aksum for many centuries, and which converted to Christianity around the third century. The decline only set in after the arrival of Islam, in the eighth century, on the coastal area and in Sudan. This effectively cut off Ethiopia from the outside world, driving the native peoples into the highland plateau. However, there is a rich cultural heritage, written, art, music. The Coptic church still uses the ancient language of Geez and its script. In this respect Ethiopia was very different from most of the African peoples conquered by the European imperialist states.
During the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries some contact was made from Western Europe. Probably the most important development was the import of guns, since this enabled the Shoan aristocracy/monarchy to establish military superiority over their neighbours. The historic empire had maintained itself in five provinces: Tigre, Gondar, Welo, Gojam and Shoa. In 1855 Theodore became king and consolidated his empire, restoring the power of the monarch, which had been in decline. John assumed the throne in 1872 and began the conquest of the South. Menelik came to the throne in 1889 and he was the one who made major conquests in the South, establishing the southern borders of modern Ethiopia. The last conquest was made in 1898. He established a new capital, Addis Ababa, thus moving the centre of the empire from the North to the South of the old kingdom. The dynasty set up at that time was from the Shoan aristocracy, and was considered by the Tigre ruling families as being upstarts. This was to have consequences right down to 1974.
When Menelik died in 1913, the heir was only 13 years old. Ras (Prince) Tafad was appointed joint co-regent with the dowager empress. In 1930, having disposed of the young emperor, Ras Tafari assumed the crown as Haile Selassie.
The social, economic and political structure of the empire was feudal, although admittedly of a particular kind. Although there were certain differences in landowning forms between the older and newer parts of the empire, essentially the form of surplus appropriation by the ruling class was feudal in character. However, in the newly-conquered territories, the Shoan/Amharic conquerors were installed as the feudal lords, so that often class and nationality went together (rather like England after the Norman conquest).
Moreover, because of the very low level of surplus, the extractions of the landlords were very rapacious, rarely less than 50 per cent, often as much as 75 per cent of the produce. Even in very good years the peasants were permanently hungry and undernourished.
In the North, because land allotments were divided equally between sons, the holdings tended to get smaller and smaller. Particularly after 1945, some very rudimentary health measures were introduced thereby allowing the population to rise steadily. This meant that there was large-scale deforestation (fuel needs), and hence land erosion. This reinforced the cyclical pattern of famines due to rain failures. In the South, where tenants only held their land on short leases, there was absolutely no incentive for the peasants to improve their holdings, nor for the landlords to invest, since there was an abundant labour force begging for land. Alongside this there were large tracts of land lying idle, owned by the emperor and landlords. The emperor needed this land to make grants to his supporters, this being the main way of ensuring loyalty. The landlords also needed fallow land, to put pressure on the landless peasants seeking leases. One of the consequences of this was again a tendency for the land actually in use to deteriorate.
There had been a very short interregnum between 1935 and 1941 when the Italians had occupied the country. The British defeated the Italian army as a part of the strategic drive in that part of the world during the Second World War. Haile Selassie rode back to power with the support of British bayonets, but not without opposition from some of the aristocrats of the North. Since 1945 Haile Selassie had been attempting to create a modern state to help enforce his will against the local aristocratic families. Above all he had created a modern unified army, an education system and administrative structure for collecting taxes. However, he never completely established himself as the sole power, in some provinces he never succeeded in imposing his own governors, they always came from the local élite. Thus there was often the appearance of some modernity superimposed upon the reality of feudal power. We can therefore say that Haile Selassie was attempting to establish an absolutist state, but right up to 1974 had not completely succeeded.
Since 1945 there had begun to develop a small industrial sector, but this was hardly sustainable since there was no real money economy for the vast majority of the population. Even in 1974 there were only approximately 55,000 workers in industry, but about 100,000 white-collar workers in banking, commerce, the state and education. This in a population of some 30 to 35 million (or recent estimates, 50 to 55 million). Industry, such as it was, was concentrated in textiles, brewing, soft drinks (Coca Cola!) and construction. There was almost no bourgeoisie, since even those industrial developments that had taken place were dominated by foreign investors and the royal family and aristocrats. In Addis Ababa it was estimated that approximately half the population (of half to one million) was made up of plebeians or lumpen-proletarians, having no permanent or regular jobs.
So, the overwhelming make-up of the class structure was until 1974 peasants and feudal lords, with an extremely small working class, and some new social groups, for example, capitalists (extremely small), petty-bourgeois (white-collar employees), the army and in Addis Ababa a growing group of unemployed university graduates, plus a rapidly growing lumpen-proletariat.
 
II: The Revolution of 1974
The crisis of the regime in 1974 was caused by a combination of factors, many of which had been present before.

Famine, which had raged in Wolo during 1973 but was kept hidden from the world and the rest of Ethiopia.
 
Protests in the army about pay and food.
 
Protests in Addis about rising prices.
 
A strike of trade unions for higher pay and better negotiating rights.
 
Student unrest.
 
Escalating fighting in Eritrea.

Let us look at these in a little more detail.

Famines had been endemic for many years, indeed centuries, in Ethiopia. But the Wolo one of 1973 was enormously aggravated by the soil erosion, lack of government aid, and landlord demands (even during the famine the landlords were demanding their rents). In the event it escalated from a disaster to a catastrophe, causing the deaths of between 100,000 and 200,000 people.
 
There had been protests before in the army about pay and conditions. But this time it spread from one part of the army to most of it, thus preventing the emperor from crushing one part with another. The protests grew into strikes, committees were formed to coordinate units, etc. Many of the junior officers were involved, and many of these had been overseas for training, thus showing them what modern societies were like. In the process they picked up many political ideas, and these were fed into the turmoil. It was a combination of these factors with the defeats in Eritrea that sparked off the army unrest.
 
This was the period of the oil crisis and prices explosion. This filtered into Ethiopia and the government tried to enforce a 50 per cent increase in petrol prices, causing the taxi drivers to go on strike. Taxis were an essential part of transport in Addis, since they were used rather like minibuses rather than conventional taxis. This sparked off demonstrations, which the police at first fired upon but then allowed to happen since they became larger and larger and uncontrollable.
 
These events coincided with a general strike of trade unions, the first (and up to now the last) such strike in the history of Ethiopia. This for the first time brought together industrial and white-collar workers in a joint struggle for higher pay and better trade-union rights. This was forced upon the trade-union leaders by the rank and file. Up to this point the trade unions had been fairly tame, since they had been ‘assisted’ in their formation by the US trade-union movement, which as we know was often a cover for the CIA.
 
Student unrest had happened before but had been swiftly dealt with either by the police or army, in a quite brutal way with batons and bullets as the first resort. Students were not only those still at high school or university, but all those who had graduated and not found employment and maintained contact with the campuses. Among these latter were many who had been abroad for post-graduate work and had picked up many advanced political ideas, socialist and Marxist ones. The students this time were able to join in the mass demonstrations, instead of remaining isolated, and feed into them ideas, slogans, rudimentary organisation, etc.
 
Eritrea: a war of national liberation had already been going for 13 years and had been an enormous drain on the resources of the state. The army had suffered some bad defeats and this caused morale to decline. The war had become a running sore in society and now was thrusting itself forward demanding urgent attention. It was an enormous burden upon an impoverished treasury, hence the delays often encountered in payments to the army.

In years gone by Haile Selassie had been able to cope with any one or two of these outbursts, but coming all together they proved to be the climacteric of his reign. He was very old by then, well into his eighties but no one was sure of his exact age, and was only able to deal lucidly with business for a few hours a day. Since he was the sole authority for making decisions this meant that the crisis could not be dealt with speedily or efficiently. And even then, on the threshold of its downfall, the feudal aristocracy attempted to intrigue against the power of the emperor. Above all the unrest in the army was the final cause of his downfall.
However, the army, even the coordinating committee that eventually emerged, played a very contradictory role. Early in the period of unrest the air force had displayed a very radical stance but the army had suppressed its main base in the initial stages of the revolution in 1974. Similarly, on occasions the army intervened to suppress demonstrations in the capital, but not always, it was a creeping coup. It was as though the army leaders used a ‘stop-go’ method of allowing popular pressure to express itself when it needed to force the hand of the Court.
However, during 1974 the army gradually assumed all the functions of government, and step by step stripped Haile Selassie of all his power. In this sense the revolution was a gradual one, not conducted in one fell swoop but over a period of months.
 
III: The Derg Assumes Power
It was only after the event that it became clear that right from the start of the events there had been a very determined group of junior and middle-rank officers who had manipulated the soldiers’ committees, shaping them, directing them. Through a whole series of army/government committees, starting with those set up by Haile Selassie at the beginning of the year, right through to the army’s own committees there had been an inner committee which had a very clear idea of what it wanted. The overthrow of Haile Selassie was finally brought about by the Provisional Military Administrative Council (PMAC) with his deposition late in the year.
But then the Derg emerged as the final power behind all these events. When the provisional military government had been announced there had been protests and demonstrations in the capital, but these had been ruthlessly suppressed by the military. Indeed the Derg’s assumption of power had been the occasion of a veritable bloodbath of the high officials of the old regime, in one fell swoop 60 high military and state officials had been executed, and these were followed by many, many more. One of the first to go was the first chairman of the PMAC, his house was surrounded by tanks in the middle of the night and without warning reduced to rubble with him underneath. All of these deaths and imprisonments could be said to be of those from the old ruling élite. But at the same time the Derg proceeded to eliminate all other groups supporting the revolution. Students were some of the first, when they protested at the imposition of a military government many were arrested, some were shot out of hand. The whole leadership of the trade unions were imprisoned and new appointees put in place. Thus there was what can only be described as a counter-revolution within the revolution.
However, at no point did the Derg make any compromise with the old ruling class. It systematically destroyed the cadre of that class to prevent any possibility of a rallying, and then destroyed its basis of power.
 
IV: Socialist Ethiopia? Ethiopia Tikdem: A Nationalist Regime
Roughly translated Tikdem means First, so Ethiopia Tikdem means Ethiopia First. And this was the slogan under which the Derg ran its revolution. This meant that it was committed to maintaining the old borders and retaining a unitary state based on Addis. This meant, in turn, that it was dedicated to maintaining the dominance of the Shoan/Amhara ethnic grouping. Its socialist measures were land to the tiller and the nationalisation of the largest industrial units, leaving small industry and trade to the private sector. It also came to an agreement with the church. Although the church lost most of its lands, it was not touched in any other way. But at no time was there any attempt to create popular organs of control. In Addis there were created local committees – Kebeles – but these rapidly became organs of the state, that is, the Derg.
The overturn in the countryside came after the fall of the regime in the capital and was initiated from the centre. The Derg closed the university and high schools in Addis and sent the students to the countryside to help spark off the land reform. Thus with one move they destroyed the power base of the old élite and got rid of a group from the capital who might make trouble whilst they consolidated power. The overturn in the countryside was swift, complete and bloody. Once the peasants understood that the army, far from suppressing them, was actually encouraging them to act against the landlords, they acted with great speed and brutality. The landlords were often hunted down and butchered; given the generations of bloody exploitation that the feudal lords had dealt out it was hardly surprising that their own comeuppance would be bloody. From all the evidence available so far, it would seem that the anti-feudal revolution in Ethiopia was the most complete in history.
The regime that emerged from the revolution in 1974 was a self-proclaimed socialist one. It had certainly expropriated what tiny bourgeoisie there had been. It most certainly carried through a complete and thorough anti-feudal revolution. But at the same time it had repressed and suppressed all other points of political independence. It had repressed the working class and the students. It had imposed a military dictatorship of a most brutal and bloody kind. The one force that attempted to challenge it, the Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Party (EPRP), had been hunted down and systematically wiped out. The EPRP had started a campaign of terror via bombs and bullets, but the Derg not only answered in kind but on an enormously enlarged scale. This was the period known as the Red Terror, officially called that, which claimed an estimated 55,000 victims in Addis alone. During that time students, workers, intellectuals of all kinds, were rounded up and slaughtered. Sometimes the security forces would descend on an institution and line up everyone and pick out victims and shoot them on the spot, the army would then take the bodies away in trucks (collecting a burial fee from the family).
The EPRP was finally eliminated when the army literally cordoned off the whole of Addis Ababa and searched every house. Usually houses occupied by foreigners were exempted from searches, this time they were not, only those with diplomatic immunity escaped. This search went on for several days and the whole population was confined to their houses during this time. Those people who were positively identified as being members of the EPRP were shot on the spot, the other were taken for interrogation. Those lucky enough to survive arrest did not emerge from prison unless they were thoroughly broken. Of course during this search some remnants of the old ruling class were brought to light; they too were dispatched.
For a very brief spell during 1974 the press and radio had been free of censorship, this was re-imposed. All meetings, social gatherings, etc., had to have permission to be held. A curfew was in force from 10 p.m. to dawn. This regime had obviously had a plan of campaign right from the start to eliminate all real, potential or imagined centres of resistance to its power and was prepared to wade through blood to attain this. Even members of the Derg itself did not escape, since this too was purged on several occasions before Mengistu emerged as the first amongst equals.
 
V: War with Somalia and Soviet/Cuban Intervention
During the turmoil ‘Socialist’ Somalia attempted to regain the Ogaden, which had been conquered by Menelik. This resulted in a war during 1977, which meant that the Derg was fighting on three fronts, i) against internal opponents, ii) against Eritrea and iii) in the Ogaden. The US had been the closest ally of the old regime and would not supply the Derg’s regime with weapons or munitions, and thus lost its place as the dominant foreign power.
Thus it was only in 1977, three years after the revolution, that the USSR intervened. It supplied a brigade of Cuban troops, air force personnel and planes, plus huge amounts of war matériel. Ethiopia had to pay for much of this aid with its hard-earned export revenue, and spent an estimated 17 billion dollars on arms. Very little other kind of aid was sent to the county from the ‘socialist’ countries, except a few education specialists. Eventually, because of this military assistance the Ethiopians won their war against Somalia, but at an enormous cost of life because of the use of ill-trained conscripts, only numbers and greater fire-power saved the day in the Ogaden. But this was not the case in Eritrea.
 
VI: The Personal and the Political
I went to Ethiopia in 1978 as an Assistant Professor in the Economics Department of Addis Ababa University. Not knowing, I might add, much of what I have outlined above. If I had known I might have hesitated before entering such a situation.
My very first impression of the country was at the airport. My baggage was searched by a very attractive female customs officer, who carefully noted the serial numbers on my typewriter and tape recorder, smiling the most dazzling smile whilst she did this. Behind her stood a soldier, wearing jungle greens and (as I later discovered) the yellow goggles of the Flame Brigade (Mengistu’s élite force) toting a sub-machine gun and totally unsmiling. The contrast was quite dramatic.
Despite promises I was not met at the airport, so had to make my own way to the university. I was very tired after a 14-hour flight and wearing a heavy suit, so I was as hot as hell in the sub-tropical temperature. I was ushered into the University Vice-President’s office, he stood up to extend his hand to me and as he did his coat fell open, revealing a 0.38 Smith & Wesson on his left hip. This small cameo encapsulated most of what I was to experience during my stay. Firstly, the unfailing courtesy and friendliness of Ethiopians in everyday exchanges. Secondly, almost nothing ever happened on time and promises quickly given were quickly forgotten by bureaucrats. Thirdly, behind the smiles hovered guns and menace.
Let me now detail a few things that are relevant to understanding the situation. First, my annual salary was 19,800 Bir, the annual per capita income for the whole country was 184 Bir. My monthly salary 1650 Bir, average monthly wage in Addis 30 Bir. Therefore my monthly salary was 55 times greater than the average wage in the capital. The hotel bill for my room only 240 Bir per month, remittance home 495 Bir, left in my pocket 915 Bir. The point I am making here is that although I had a relatively lowly position in the bureaucracy, my standard of living was far beyond the average person’s in Addis. I stress Addis, since wages were higher there than in other parts of the country. This will indicate the huge gulf between the mass of the population and the bureaucracy.
I taught three groups of students for Political Economy and Philosophy. These ranged from 250 to 300. I was allotted six teaching periods of 1.5 hours. Most lasted two hours or more. These were compulsory subjects which had been introduced on the advice of Soviet instructors. I also taught some evening classes for part-timers.
The semester I had arrived the intake into the university had been doubled at a stroke. But without any increase in student accommodation. This meant that students were sleeping as many as 10 to a room and queuing for an hour each meal time. There had also been a new policy adopted of quotas for intakes from various areas. This was to ensure that rural students were allocated a fair proportion of places. However, this also meant that students who would have normally qualified from Addis were excluded, leading to considerable discontent. Because all the high schools and the university had been closed down for a year during the rural campaign, it meant that the 1978 intake of students had rather poor English. The official teaching language was English because of the large number of languages spoken in the country (approximately 40). Therefore teaching became even more difficult than usual. This was an extremely important issue for the students, since they had to pass the first semester exams to proceed to further courses. If they failed they were thrown out of the university. This meant that there were attempts to put pressure on the staff, by some students, to ensure a pass in the first semester exams.
When I had first arrived I had been rather taken aback by the presence of armed guards in the university, not only on the gates but patrolling the grounds and even appearing at the back of lecture halls. I had assumed that these guards were connected with the Red Terror, they were but not wholly, a part of their job was to protect the university staff from students! Lectures were rather like public meetings, the numbers being so large. These lectures were absolutely crucial to the students, since they were the only means of obtaining the information they needed for their courses. The nearest approximation to student seminars or tutorials as known in British universities were the impromptu but regular sessions of questions and answers I held on the steps outside the lecture hall when the official lectures had finished: I was then usually surrounded by anything up to 20 or more students all eager to continue the dialogue. This meant that my teaching periods which were officially scheduled to last an hour and a half could go on for anything up to two and half hours. Such was the desperation to learn, particularly by those wishing to escape the grinding poverty of rural life.
There were no text-books available, first- and second-year students were not allowed into library stacks. This meant that they had to know what books to look for in the index and hope that the one or two volumes had not been taken out. Such was the poverty of most of the students that even when text-books were available for sale they were unable to buy them.
Now I want to mention some of the general conditions in Addis Ababa, as I observed them. The city itself was full of great contrasts. On the one hand there was the Addis Hilton Hotel which was like any other Hilton hotel, it had all the usual standards of comfort and service that its clients expected. Standing in the shadow of the Hilton were the more usual dwellings of the majority of the city, that is, baked mud houses with corrugated tin roofs, with perhaps one electric light, no running water or sanitation. There were many modern buildings throughout the city, mainly government ministries, banks, hotels, shops, cafés, etc., these stood along the main highways but behind them stood the traditional dwellings, it was rather like the Potemkin villages of old Russia. There were very few hard roads, only the main highways were paved, once one left these the roads became tracks. The highways were usually dual carriageways with grass growing on the central reservation, on which goats and sheep grazed. The animals were appreciably smaller than those I was used to seeing in Britain, and the same applied to cattle slaughtered for meat.
Beggars infested nearly all public areas of the city, many of them small children. Equally these places were frequented by hordes of petty traders. These traders would hold packets of cigarettes offering to sell them singly, a sure indication of the generalised poverty both of sellers and buyers. About half the population dressed in traditional Ethiopian garb, usually barefooted, whilst the other half dressed in European-style clothes with some sort of footwear. In one of the big squares of the city there was a large traffic roundabout, the centre of which was grassed; one saw the incongruous sight of modern traffic roaring around the square and in the centre was a flock of sheep being tended by a barefooted shepherd standing leaning on his staff. But the shepherd was no romantic figure, packs of wild dogs, infected with rabies, roamed the streets at night.
I lived in a modern hotel, but even there sanitation was poor and one never drank any of the local water – bottled water was an absolute necessity for health reasons, otherwise one risked infection from amoebic parasites. Across the road was a bus shelter and every night there was a tussle between beggars for the privilege of sleeping on the seat, the contrast with my own relative comfort was stark.
The most all-pervading sight and experience of Addis Ababa was that of armed guards everywhere. I have already mentioned their presence at the university, but every building used by the public had armed guards (several at each door), hotels, large shops, banks, restaurants, all government buildings, etc. Everyone was searched as they entered these buildings. In fact it was some weeks before the guards at my hotel stopped searching me, even though they saw me every day! Many people carried weapons, these were people who had permits to do so, and were referred to as ‘cadres’. These ‘cadres’ were supposed to be those most likely to be the target for assassination attempts, hence the weapons. It was a little unnerving, however, to be in a public bar having a drink and to notice someone sitting on a bar stool with a revolver strapped to their waist!
The secret police were all pervasive. They were not so secret either. One could usually spot ‘security’, as they were referred to, by their sharp suits and perennial sun-glasses. They could stop anyone anywhere, and ask for identification papers, where you were going, etc. It became a part of life to be stopped for questioning almost at every turn and often searched for weapons. But one never actually got used to it. There was, of course, the 10pm to dawn curfew. At night armed soldiers patrolled the streets. Occasionally one would hear gun shots, sometimes single, sometimes volleys, and one could spot dark patches on the road some mornings that were not oil leaks or holes in walls that had not been there the night before. Telephones were tapped as a matter of routine.
It soon became clear that certain subjects were taboo as far as my colleagues at the university were concerned. One did not discuss the terror, the Derg, Mengistu, the situation in Eritrea, and most certainly not the EPRP. However, as we got to know each other one could gather information by allusions, nod, winks, etc. But it was done very cautiously, after all none of us was sure which members of staff worked for ‘security’. However, there was one way of knowing what was permissible for conversation, that was the government daily newspaper. The paper was printed in English and Amharic six days a week. If something appeared in the paper it was safe to talk about it! The downside of this for me was that there was a column printed every Tuesday by someone whose job it appeared to be to warn people about who was ‘in’ and who was ‘out’: this was full of warnings about ‘Trotskyite troublemakers’, ‘counter-revolutionary wreckers’ and other choice phrases. I must admit that sometimes I felt the back of my neck prickling when I read some of the stuff, it sounded like something straight from Pravda circa 1937–38, and I hadn’t got an exit visa stamped in my passport.
There were a number of Russian and Polish instructors at the university, and there was quite a contrast between them. The Russians lived in a special compound with their families and kept very much to themselves, hardly ever mixing with the Ethiopian or other staff. Their method of teaching was quite revealing about conditions in the Soviet Union. There each lecture had to be written up in advance and a typed text produced, which was then approved by the head of the department. No deviation from the text was allowed. The instructors had brought the same methods with them to Ethiopia, which was not necessary, but old habits die hard. The result was that their lectures were actually merely the reading of a text. The fact that the English of these instructors was quite poor coupled with the poor English of the students meant that communication was often a problem. The Russians actively discouraged questions by the students, and their answers to any tended to be a repetition of paragraphs of their text.
The Poles were quite different, they were much more relaxed, their English quite good, and actually gave lectures, not merely reading texts. They were also quite happy to answer questions. Moreover the Polish instructors socialised extensively with the rest of the staff. The result of all this was that the Russian instructors were not at all popular, either with staff or students. The only Russian in Addis who seemed to mingle with the locals was the Pravda correspondent, but then everyone knew he was the local KGB man! I began to break down the reticence of one of the younger Russian instructors towards the end of my stay. This began when he noticed a copy of Imperialism and the Accumulation of Capital by Luxemburg and Bukharin on my desk, which I had edited in 1972. He showed an interest in the book, telling me he only knew of both authors by way of the criticisms levelled against them in text-books in the Soviet Union. He was very pleased when I gave him a copy and pointed him in the direction of other such works both in the library and the local bookshops. He never actually ventured any opinion about the book, other than to say it was ‘interesting’, but I think I knew what he meant!
This brings me to another peculiarity of the situation in Addis, the university library and the bookshops. In the university library and in the bookshops one could find books by Trotsky, Sweezy, Baran, Mandel, Deutscher, etc. All of these authors had been banned during the regime of the emperor, so it was clear that almost as soon as the old regime fell, and during the period before Soviet ‘aid’ arrived, there had been an outburst of book importing of all these authors and ‘security’ had not been organised to purge them from the bookshelves. Along with these imports from Western countries there were all the usual works of Marx, Engels and Lenin printed in the Soviet Union being sold at quite modest local prices. It has been estimated that the Mengistu regime spent approximately 17 billion dollars on armaments from the Soviet Bloc, whilst the aid sent in non-military items amounted to 50 million dollars. This then was the benefits of Ethiopian ‘socialism’, huge amounts of weaponry and big fat volumes of Marx, neither of which did much for the vast majority of the population.
One particularly bizarre ceremony were the drives of Mengistu through the city from the imperial palace, where he had his headquarters, to various government buildings. The first intimation one would have was the wailing of the sirens of the police motorcycle outriders. The drill then was that everyone stopped walking, turned to face the roadway and held their hands in front of them. By which time several large jeep-like vehicles would flash past, these had members of the Flame Brigade in them with very large calibre machine-guns mounted on them. Then several large black limousines with curtains at the windows charged past, any of which had Mengistu in. These were followed by more military vehicles and finally a few police outriders. Only when the last motorcycles had gone by and the sirens could only be heard faintly would people begin moving again. I had been told about this circus and what to do almost as soon as I had arrived. The reason for this was that the guards with Mengistu were very trigger-happy and any sudden movement in the crowd could result in a burst of machine-gun fire.
Like nearly all dictators Mengistu loved to give speeches to captive audiences. The result was that mass demonstrations were a regular part of life, all ending up in Revolution Square where ‘The Chairman’ would expound the latest line. These demonstrations were freely attended and spontaneous, except that there was a fine levied by the local committee if you didn’t attend! Needless to say the masses turned out in great numbers.
It was clear that the level of poverty was appalling (see the appendix for some details). Fear was evident among nearly all Ethiopians. I had to consider just what were the actual prospects for this society from a materialist point of view.
This was one of the most important experiences of my life, it made me think very hard and deep about the conditions for the achievement of socialism. It made me review nearly all of my previous positions on Russia, etc. For the first time I was brought face to face with the actual conditions of Third World countries. It brought me face to face with the victims of state political terror. It brought me face to face with the violence of a genuine revolution. I had to think very hard about the support blithely given in the metropolitan countries for such regimes by the left.
When people begin to sweat and their hands shake when they mention certain topics, you know you are in the presence of real fear. I was in no danger, most of those around me were. The worst that would have befallen me had I fallen out of favour would have been being put on a flight back to England.
During the whole of my stay in Addis Ababa I only ever had one relatively free conversation with any Ethiopian. This was arranged by way of going out for an evening meal in a crowded restaurant where there was music being played, and thus we were able to sit and smile, talking about some of the appalling things that had gone on and were still going on. I did not repeat this, since I made it a policy not to socialise with my Ethiopian colleagues except in groups and usually at the university. I did not attempt to maintain contact with anyone when I left, letters from abroad were routinely opened and in any case the mere contact could have been sufficient to compromise the recipient of my letters.
 
VII: Socialist Rhetoric – Bureaucratic Nationalist Practice
What are we to make of this revolution? The Derg’s regime was finally overthrown in 1992, after many years of protracted and bloody war. The elements which carried through this overthrow converged from at least three different points of the compass, but with one alleged aim. The aim was the restoration of democracy and freedom for the national groupings of the old empire. But who can doubt that the Ethiopia of 1992 is quite radically different from that of 1973–74?
I have pointed out that there was a real and thoroughgoing revolution during 1974. The old emergent absolutist regime was overthrown, the feudal class that had battened upon the country for centuries was swept aside, often into grave in the literal sense. National unity was proclaimed, although ethnically there was no nation, only a collection of nations which had been cobbled together by a conquering élite. Even democracy was preached, but never carried out. All of these things would have stamped this as a semblance of a bourgeois revolution, except what bourgeoisie there was was also expropriated. So we seem to have a bourgeois revolution without the bourgeoisie.
Socialism was proclaimed as the aim of the revolution. However, socialism is supposed to be the aim and work of the working class, when it is not merely a ‘class in itself’ but a ‘class for itself’. But the working class hardly existed. And what there was was suppressed along with practically the whole of society.
Which class benefited most from the revolution? The obvious answer is the peasants. They were freed from the brutal extractions of the landlords and had land given to them. Can we call it a peasant revolution? Not in any way. The revolution had taken place in the centre and then had deliberately unleashed the overthrow of the feudal class in the countryside when it had power in its grasp. The peasants made a revolution, but only by following the lead from the towns. It is true that the peasant revolution once it was unleashed was practically uncontrollable, it was not manipulated or held within bounds. Therefore one could not say that the revolution was driven by the peasants. It is true that they supplied the muscle power in the countryside and in the towns, but not the guiding ideas or organisational forms.
Who then did supply the guiding ideas and organisational forms for the revolution in Ethiopia? The answer to that question is much more difficult in terms of class analysis within Ethiopia. All of the main class actors in classical Marxist terms were absent from the seat of power during the revolution.
The most powerful class in Ethiopia up to 1974 was without doubt the feudal aristocracy, and this was in contest with the feudalist absolutist state of the Solomonic dynasty that Haile Selassie personified. The main class conflict was between the aristocracy and the absolutist state on one side and on the other the peasantry. That is to say that the dispute between Haile Selassie’s state and the aristocracy was about who would have the most power and the biggest share of the surplus, but it was not about how that surplus was to be generated and extracted.
The dispute between a nascent bourgeoisie and a feudal class is precisely about how to generate the surplus and how to extract it, they represent different historic forms of exploitation. This dispute had hardly been put on the agenda up to 1974 in Ethiopia.
The dispute between the Ethiopian absolutist state and the feudal class had been niggling away for many years. But having been largely disarmed, the feudal class could only maintain its power with the aid of the state, that is, the army. In 1974 this feudal aristocracy plotted against Haile Selassie because it thought that the army would always ‘come right in the end’. Neither the court nor the aristocracy understood that all the wheeler-dealing and concessions that were given through 1974 was to a group intent on smashing the whole social structure and not just scheming to get a better deal for itself within the existing social relations. Because the Derg did not reveal either itself or its full intentions immediately, each concession and change was seen by the court and feudalists as part of an age-old process of bargaining for a share of the loot. Each of the changes that the Derg introduced before it deposed Haile Selassie was made in the name of the emperor, seemingly by a loyal army intent of protecting him. Eventually it was too late for either faction of the old élite to do anything to save itself. The decisive reason for this was that in the army there was by then no group willing or able to move to defend the old order. But was all this a class struggle? If it was, which class did the Derg represent?
We can rule out the working class. This class hardly knew of itself as a class in itself, and having put its head above the parapet in its general strike was promptly shot down again, not to revive until 1992.
The bourgeoisie? It hardly existed, and at no time during the revolution can it have been said to have formulated any demands of its own or appeared as an actor in the events of 1974.
The lumpen-proletariat? This grouping only appeared briefly in the early days of the revolution, having no demands of its own, no ideology, no organisation. It was always used by other groups or classes for their own ends.
The petty-bourgeoisie? Like the working class it hardly existed as a class, it was more of an emerging social group. The only people from this grouping who had ideas and organisational form did not act as members of the petty-bourgeoisie but as surrogates for others.
The students? They certainly came from the petty-bourgeois, but actually constituted a separate grouping with its own identity. The main expression of the students was the EPRP, and as we have seen this group was hunted down and killed without mercy.
The only social body that can truly be said to have been the driving force of the revolution was the state, with a commanding section of the army as its spearhead.
Can it be argued that the grouping within the state acted for outside forces? Not in the least. It was not prepared to bend before the US, and was certainly not the tool of any other capitalist regime. The Soviet Union? Again emphatically no. It was three years after the revolution before the Soviet Union appeared on the scene and then its aid was only accepted on Ethiopian terms. It is true that some of the trappings of the Soviet state was adopted, that is, the Marxist-Leninist phraseology, but this was a thin veneer over strident Ethiopian nationalism. In the end we have to seek the social forces behind the Ethiopian revolution within the country.
It is true that according to what has been accepted as classical Marxist theory the state has no interests of its own, and that it represents a class within society.
The only analogy I can think of in history is that of Napoleon III, who Marx said rested on the French peasants. But this was in the context of a firmly-established bourgeois society. And the Bonapartist state balanced between the interests of the peasants and the bourgeoisie. There was no such society in Ethiopia. The state was an absolutist feudalist one. This leads me to conclude on this point that what has passed for a Marxist definition of the state needs refining, and that a state machine can indeed develop interests of its own, that do indeed go against the ruling class of a society. And in this instance the state won. It won because there was a crisis of regime for the old ruling élite and the state for a short time espoused the cause of an oppressed class. And whilst the revolution did not wholly free this oppressed class in political terms, it certainly did so in economic terms, only for the state to demand its due when it was once more firmly in the saddle.
From what I have said so far I do not want to imply that I in any way supported this regime. It is true that it carried out the tasks of a bourgeois revolution, but in a particularly brutal and bloody way. These tasks could have been carried out without the Red Terror directed against the urban population, and in fact it could have been carried out without a great deal of bloodshed.
However, the reason for the bloodshed did not wholly lie on the side of the Derg. The EPRP was a grouping heavily influenced by Maoist ideas and launched its own terror campaign which gave the Derg an excuse for its own Red Terror. This grouping fervently believed that it could introduce socialism in Ethiopia and the Derg certainly claimed this also.
None of the major actors in these events was prepared to acknowledge that socialism was an impossibility in Ethiopia. Each laid claim to a vision that was unobtainable. Ethiopian society was socially, economically, culturally and politically totally unfitted for the introduction of a socialist society. Given the overwhelming preponderance of capitalist relations on a world scale and the existence of horribly malformed society that arose on the bones of the Bolshevik revolution in Russia, the only road open to Ethiopia was the introduction of a bourgeois/capitalist form of society. The EPRP would have rejected such an idea out of hand, the Derg did in words but in practice prevaricated.
Lastly I want to say a few words about the support given to the Derg’s regime by some socialists in Western Europe. They helped to feed the illusions of the EPRP and similar groupings in Ethiopia and elsewhere by their own confusion about the world we live in and its readiness for socialism. At every conceivable opportunity there has been a rush to support the most vile and bloody regimes because they have claimed to be socialist. All those who did this have helped further to tarnish the image and prospects of socialism in the advanced capitalist countries by making socialism appear as something repulsive and oppressive. The next time such a regime appears on the world stage I suggest that some of our intellectuals go and live there for a time, as I did, then they will see that the red on the wall is not the Red Flag of socialism but the blood of socialist victims and the odour is not the scent of roses but the smell of fear. Perhaps when they have done this they will be a little less ready to support any little dictator that comes along singing the Internationale.
December 1992


Appendix 1: Reading, In Order of Quality
René Lefort, Ethiopia: An Heretical Revolution? (Zed Press, London 1983). This is by far the most comprehensive and thought-provoking of the works that I have read on this topic. Much of its corroborates in fine detail what I was able to ascertain from my personal experiences.
Ryszard Kapuściński, The Emperor (Picador, London 1982). This work is especially illuminating on the Byzantine quality of the court and on the ideology of those who surrounded Haile Selassie and cunning of the Derg in dealing with him.
John Markakis and Nega Ayele, Class and Revolution in Ethiopia (Spokesman, Nottingham 1978).
Addis Hiwet, Ethiopia: From Autocracy to Revolution (Review of Political Economy, 1975). Both this work and the one above are valuable from the point of view of being written by Ethiopians, but because they were written comparatively early could not make an analysis of Mengistu’s regime.
Fred Halliday and Maxine Molyneux, The Revolution in Ethiopia (Verso, London 1981). Mainly notable for its discussion of the bizarre notion of ‘states with a socialist orientation’, nevertheless quite good on many of the facts.
Raúl Valdés Vivó, Ethiopia: The Unknown Revolution (Editorial de Ciencias Sociales, Havana 1977). This is a creepy apologia for Mengistu, coming from that bastion of freedom Cuba.


Appendix 2: Ethiopia: Some Basic Facts Circa 1973–74
Population: About 30 to 35 million, of whom:



Amhara


7.8 million




Oromo


6.8 million




Tigrean


3.6 million




Wollamo


0.9 million




Sidamo


0.8 million




Somali


0.8 million




All these figures are ‘guesstimates’.



Population growth rate estimated to be 2.5 to 3.0 per cent per annum. Nearly 50 per cent of the population is under 15 years old. Population density varies from one inhabitant per square kilometre to more than 200.
Land Area: 1.25 million square kilometres. The central mountainous plateau covers two-thirds of the country. Mountains rise to 4000 metres. The central plateau is the most densely populated and fertile area.
Agriculture: Approximately 90 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture. This covers 10.0 to 10.5 million hectares, the average hold 1.5 hectares. Agriculture contributes more than half the GNP. Main crops: teff, maize, sorghum, barley, wheat and coffee. Coffee is an important export crop, accounting for 75 per cent of exports. Livestock: cattle – 28 million, sheep – 12 million, goats – 11 million.
Industry: Contributes 16.5 per cent of GNP, of which one-third is construction, one-third small handicrafts. One-third are small workshops employing 10 or fewer people. Numbers employed in manufacturing industry in 1971: 51,312.
Transport: 8,000 km all-weather roads. 800 km of railway line, connecting Addis with coast. Two ports, Assab (with oil refinery) and Massawa.
Gross National Product: Estimated 5.5 billion Bir in 1976, that is, about 2.64 billion US Dollars. Annual income per capita: 184 Bir or 88 US Dollars.
Education (before revolution):



Enrolment rates urban:


boys 52.0 per cent;


girls 16.0 per cent.




Enrolment rates rural:


boys   9.5 per cent;


girls   0.5 per cent.




Enrolment rates average:


boys 13.0 per cent;


girls   6.0 per cent.



One university, founded in 1960; one agricultural college.
Illiteracy Rate: 90 to 95 percent.
Health: One doctor per 75,000 people, half in the capital Addis Ababa.
Average life expectancy: 35–40 years.
 

 Tarbuck: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory (IV: The Rise and Fall of Mengistu)



Ken Tarbuck   |   ETOL Main Page

Ethiopia & Socialist Theory

Ken Tarbuck
Ethiopia and Socialist Theory

IV: The Rise and Fall of Mengistu

Review of Andargachew Tiruneh, The Ethiopian Revolution 1974–1987: A Transformation from an Aristocratic to a Totalitarian Autocracy (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1993)

Andargachew Tiruneh is the latest of numerous authors to attempt to come to terms with the Ethiopian revolution of 1974 and the subsequent years of military dictatorship. In one respect he has an advantage that most of the other writers did not have: his book was written and published in the closing years of the reign of Mengistu. Indeed, he was able to add a postscript outlining the immediate events leading to Mengistu’s flight from Ethiopia and the assumption of power by the opposition coalition.
In this respect the book is well documented regarding the political events from 1974 to 1991, but unfortunately has much less information about the economic conditions of those years. And although it is said that the author had access to oral information, there seems little sign of it in the text, on the contrary there appears to be a heavy reliance upon official documents, reports and newspapers. The book will therefore disappoint those who were hoping for a more thoroughly-researched work.
What we have here is not the full story of the Ethiopian revolution as is implied, but rather a much more narrowly-focused account of the internecine struggles among the Ethiopian élite in the aftermath of the deposition of the emperor Haile Selassie in 1974. And from this point of view the book is a valuable addition to what is already known. The author is now Senior Lecturer in the Faculty of Law at the University of Addis Ababa, and his text reads as though written by a lawyer, not an historian, it is also heavily laden with sociological language. In sum it is an academic work. This need not have been a disadvantage had the author allowed himself a little more rein to his feelings, feelings which do occasionally show through but are quickly pushed back under wraps. History is made by passionate people, and needs to be written by those who are at least willing to acknowledge their own passions.
However, the book has a number of pluses to recommend it.
The first thing the book does is to detail how the Derg arose and assumed power in 1974, clearly indicating that the officer junta at the centre of the Derg had no coherent ideology. The adoption of, first, ‘Ethiopian socialism’ and then ‘Marxism-Leninism’ was demonstrably a need to ward off criticisms of the left political groups, plus a need to acquire an identity recognisably different to the old autocracy. I recall that at the time I was in Ethiopia I said (to another British ex-pat) that the Mengistu regime reminded me of a ‘military dictatorship salad with Marxist dressing’. Andargachew’s book confirms in some detail this off-the-cuff remark.
Secondly, there is the evidence that nearly all of the left-wing political groups that emerged in 1974 were rooted in the Ethiopian student associations which had been formed in Europe and the USA. These student-based movements brought to the Ethiopian revolution an ideology and purpose lacking in the military junta. Unfortunately this ideology was a) heavily larded with Stalinism (aka ‘Marxism-Leninism’), b) not rooted in the social conditions of Ethiopia, and c) bringing with it the instability inherent in student politics.
Thirdly, there is evidence produced to show that the mass struggles in the urban centres were largely spontaneous, but without a clear political aim, other than the removal of leading officials in the respective organisations, factories or administrative units. All of the mass struggles did have clear but limited economic demands, none of which were – in themselves – revolutionary. What was revolutionary was the mass actions themselves, that is, the very act of mass strikes, mass demonstrations, petitions, and demands became revolutionary in the conditions of 1974. Andargachew does not always seem to appreciate this point. The history of all mass revolutions demonstrates that the initial spark is often a seemingly insignificant event, the revolutionary aims and aspirations only emerge in a dynamic process, not as preconceived goals. However, the intervention of the left student groups did provide some coherence to the mass movements of early 1974. And this again is not unusual.
However, these mass actions in the urban centres began to flag in the middle of 1974 and then began to be repressed by the Derg when it assumed full power. It is this latter point that marks out the Ethiopian revolution, since rarely has a counter-revolutionary group evolved so rapidly right at the heart of the main instrument of the revolution and succeeded in taking control of the process. Ethiopia and Iran both provide clear examples of counter-revolutionary revolutions, something previously not considered possible. Perhaps what baffled people longer in the case of Ethiopia was the adoption of ‘socialist’ rhetoric by the military.
Andargachew also provides clear evidence that the mass executions, the ‘Red Terror’, etc., although engulfing large sections of the population, were essentially power struggles within the new modernising élite created by the old autocracy. They were not, and could not be, class struggles even of a surrogate nature. Each of the factions loudly proclaimed adherence to ‘Marxism-Leninism’, and labelled their opponents with all the political swear-words from the Stalinist lexicon. Since 90 per cent of the population were illiterate the nature of such ‘discourse’ must have been a mystery. However, to be thought to be on the ‘wrong’ side could mean the loss of life. It is little wonder then that official policies could be guaranteed approval by acclamation.
Perhaps what is most interesting in this book is the attempt to bring in the international dimension of the Ethiopian and other such revolutions. The most significant, overbearing fact of life for any such revolution was the Cold War. Any such revolution was faced with a dilemma. The US-dominated coalition looked upon even the mildest reformism as ‘communist’ and hence had to be subverted, repressed and finally overthrown. Revolution was anathema. The only power that was capable of providing any sort of aid to such revolutions was the Soviet Union (and to a lesser degree China). And along with such aid came ‘Marxism-Leninism’. And we all know what that meant. Perhaps with the demise of the Cold War there now arises the possibility of modernising revolutions that need not fall foul of these dilemmas, but the prospects are not good.
As I said earlier, this book does add to our knowledge on a number of the details of the period 1974–87 in Ethiopia, and as such is to be welcomed. However, it seems to me that Andargachew has not sufficiently dug into the origins of the Mengistu clique who came to supreme power in 1977. From the evidence that he presents it suggests that this clique was in being before the revolution began, hence its ability – being strategically placed within the military – rapidly to become dominant. Perhaps this will become clear as time goes on, when archives have been opened fully.
Finally, what is lacking in this book is any ‘feel’ for the mass of the ordinary Ethiopians who had to endure the bloody years of Mengistu’s rule. Valuable as it is, the concentration upon the faction fights within the élite cannot be the whole story. The masses only appear as a backdrop to the story told in this book, yet without them there would be no story. The author claims that the mass of ordinary people were actually worse off at the end of Mengistu’s rule than they were before 1974. This may well be true, given the enormous sums devoted to armaments, but it would have been useful to have some figures.
 

 Tarbuck: Ethiopia and Socialist Theory (I: Preface)



Ken Tarbuck   |   ETOL Main Page

Ethiopia & Socialist Theory

Ken Tarbuck
Ethiopia and Socialist Theory

I: Preface
The two essays brought together here have both been published before, the first, on Ethiopia, was published in New Interventions, Vol. 3 no. 4, January 1993. The second essay, on the topic of Bonapartism and the state, really follows on from the first and was indeed published in Red Banner, no. 5, February 1993. However, both essays were written almost simultaneously, and this is why they can stand together, since they both address some important questions that need resolution if Marxists are to lever themselves out of routinised thinking.
Why does this need arise? I would argue that with the collapse of the Soviet Union we have witnessed an epoch-making event, one that puts into question many of the received certainties of the past 70 years or so. The need to question, discuss and clarify is an urgent one for socialists if they are to come to terms with the world as it really is and not as they imagined it to be. Not only has the nature of the – now no longer existent – Soviet state been put into question once more by its collapse, but also the very nature of ‘the state’ itself. The ideas explored in these essays suggests that the social formation known as ‘the state’ is far more complex and heterogeneous than many, if not most, Marxists have assumed up to now: always seeing it as, ultimately, the servant of the ‘ruling class’, never ascribing it an independent role even in its Bonapartism form. Such a view needs to be challenged.
The evidence we now have of a number of historical experiences should suggest that there is a need to develop a more sophisticated and flexible view of ‘the state’. In particular I draw readers’ attention to the Ethiopian experience. The lessons to be learned from the Ethiopian revolution of 1974 have still to be fully assessed. However, such as we have, the evidence points to the conclusion that in this instance, at the very least, ‘the state’ did not represent ‘the ruling class’ or even the economically dominant one; on the contrary, it exhibited an independence and a purpose of its own. If this can happen in an economically underdeveloped society, where the social surplus was quite meagre, what does it suggest about a comparable formation within advanced industrialised or capitalist societies? Does it not suggest that where the social surplus is considerable ‘the state’ has that much more room for manoeuvre? Does it not also suggest that Marxists need to refurbish and refine some of those tools bequeathed to us by Marx? I certainly think this is the case, and I see these essays as my own further steps along this path. It is time to stop being shocked by new ideas, rather we should begin acting as historical materialists and examine the accumulating evidence before our eyes and ears.
Finally I have appended a review of a new book on Ethiopia which has been published since I wrote my original essays. I include this to bring the reader as up to date as possible.



 


Ken Tarbuck
July 1993



 



Dear Comrade
Your letter was of great interest because it raised quite a number of points that need to be clarified.
You say that you are ‘not sure’ that cadre building is the ‘vital thing’ and suggest that it is more important to get young workers and students involved in activity. I can well understand your impatience on this question, because it seems there is a dichotomy between these two functions. However, I would suggest that this dichotomy is not – or should not be – a real one. Our point of departure must be ‘how can we advance the fight against capitalism and bring it to a successful conclusion’. The point I was trying to make in my article The Making of Revolutionaries: Cadre or Sect was that many people start from this generalised and abstract proposition only to arrive at a dead-end, even though for a time they seem to have made some progress. Some knowledge of the British labour movement will tell us that it is littered with many attempts to find a way out of the impasse. In the event – up to now – they have all failed, and to say this is not to disparage the devotion and sincerity of those involved. The proposition that I advanced was that – leaving aside the objective conditions, which have played a large part in this failure – they all fell down either because they were unable to create a revolutionary cadre or did not understand the nature of such a cadre. This is why I devoted so much space to examining this question.
However – and this must be clearly understood – cadres cannot be created in an ivory tower, separate and apart from the actual struggles that are taking place at any given time. On the other hand, participation in such struggles does not automatically create cadres. What is involved here is: what does one mean by cadres? I repeat what I said in my original article, one must not confuse activists and cadres, to do so means to have an administrative and manipulative concept of cadres. Cadres in the Leninist or Gramscian sense of the term are revolutionary intellectuals, or intellectuals of a new type. That is not to say, therefore, that one must hand out labels to those who participate in a movement and accord them some differing and exalted status, in the last analysis people will decide for themselves what their role is by their contribution.
I agree that the activist approach should be given as much importance as cadre building – if one sees them as being separate, but I do not. In my article I attempted to point out that for genuine revolutionary activity to take place, and by this I mean that the situation has materially affected the relative position of the various classes within society, then there must be a fusion of theory and practice, that is, praxis. What I wanted to drive home was that only rarely has this been the case up to now, rather we have been faced by sects that have produced activists, and sometimes unthinking ones. The essence of this point is that we must get away from seeing some sort of dichotomy between activity and intellectual effort. I made the point by asking was Marx merely (!) theorising when he was writing Capital, and was Castro merely (!) being an activist when he landed from the Granma? It is only by understanding the fundamental unity of such apparently diverse ‘activities’ that one grasps the concept of praxis.
If I understand the drift of your next point, you are saying that in the last [1] two years or so the most important thing is to create activities and demonstrations around student and Vietnam issues because you ‘think that with involvement in activities and raising revolutionary consciousness ideology would follow, more easily and quickly’. First let me deal with the question of Vietnam. There can be no denying that until recently this issue was one that aroused a great deal of feeling and enthusiasm among wide layers of students and young workers. Moreover, from a revolutionary Marxist standpoint it is one’s duty to defend the Vietnamese struggle and if possible expand the movement once more. This is doubly important because (a) it is an elementary duty to defend those who are under attack by imperialism, and (b) because the Vietnamese have shown in practice that it is possible to stop imperialist aggression and defeat it. However, to predicate the whole of one’s strategy on this (or any other single) issue – in practice, if not in theory – is to fall into a trap. Whilst it may be true that many people were drawn into activity by the issue of Vietnam, many were not. To have concentrated on this one issue (or today upon student struggles) almost to the exclusion of others is to ignore the very real law of combined and uneven development, one that operates not only internationally, but also nationally. For the proper development of cadres there has to be a number of areas of work and issues in which one operates. Of course it is necessary that there should be priorities, but these have to be worked out on the basis of a full and rounded-out analysis, not by empirical reaction to events. Secondly, on the question of involvement. I would not deny that it is possible to raise the consciousness of many by bringing them into such activities as the anti-Vietnam War campaign. But for this to be utilised properly it is necessary to have a cadre that is conscious of its own role, one cannot rely upon spontaneity. This was the most dangerous aspect of VSC [2] and the present round of student militancy. There seems to have developed the idea that demonstrations and clashes with the police and/or university authorities is all that is necessary to develop revolutionary consciousness. But, to avoid any misunderstanding, let me say that such demonstrations are necessary, and I would be the last to disparage the tremendous work that has been done by such demonstrations.
I find your remarks about the New Left Review and ‘intellectual chatter’ most interesting and revealing. I think it indicates the general anti-intellectual character of British society, and also of the British labour movement. You obviously equate ‘intellectual chatter’ with idle chatter. Such attitudes are of great service to the bourgeoisie in helping to maintain their ideological grip upon the working class. The greatest asset that the bourgeoisie have in keeping their society afloat is the ‘common sense’ of the working class who don’t listen to ‘them… long-haired intellectuals’. As for NLR not being ‘exactly proletarian’, neither was Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky, Luxemburg, etc. It is a mistake to try to type people by their class origins. There is nothing particularly sanctifying about the proletarian condition, as Marxists we want to abolish it. What we have to separate out is how certain classes act and not to confuse this with how individuals, or even relatively small groups of people, act. If we were to seize upon the activities of individuals or those of small groups and use this to characterise a whole class or stratum of society, how would we characterise the working class after those dockers had marched to Parliament to support Enoch Powell? Again, please do not misunderstand me, I do not think the sun shines out of all intellectuals’ big toe. But I think to dismiss people one must have some knowledge upon which to base this. All too often in the Marxist movement one hears of ideas being dismissed because they are ‘bourgeois’ or ‘petty-bourgeois’ (apparently a most horrible thing to be), nothing is more indicative of a closed mind than the use of clichés to answer problems.
Are there so many cadres around? I would think that this is a slightly more complex question than appears at first sight and also how you pose it. On the one hand there is certainly not a revolutionary cadre formed as yet, taking Gramsci’s definition as one’s criterion. On the other hand there are certainly many people around who would and could form the basis for such a cadre. But it is not a question of lumping together a certain number of people and when one reaches a certain arithmetic number saying that a revolutionary cadre has been formed. The formation of a cadre is a dialectical process. The collective impact of such a cadre is much greater than the mere summation of individual efforts. Therefore the problem is not merely grouping together the largest number of people possible, perhaps by using a low common denominator, but of grouping together talents as will have a revolutionary impact upon society. Initially such a grouping can be relatively quite small, but their impact and success will generate further growth.
I do not think you are being ‘naive’ when you say ‘some sensible person talked about the immediate necessity of making revolution not talking about it’, you were merely misquoting him. The sensible person I presume you refer to is Fidel Castro, now as far as I know he has talked about the duty of revolutionaries to make revolution. I do not recall his saying anything about immediately. Now of course Castro was not saying this is something we can put off into the distant future. I take him to mean that no matter what the present conditions revolutionaries must clearly have a perspective of revolution, one on which we base all our activities. But it would be absolute nonsense to say that all revolutionaries must rush out now and start the revolution. There is a small item called the objective circumstances which have to be taken into account. If I correctly interpret Castro’s slogan (and we should remember it is a slogan) I take him to mean that revolutionaries by their activities help to change these objective circumstances, because they are not god-given and immutable. Looked at in this way this slogan begins to take on a deeper significance than a mere tautology, which it may appear to be at first sight.
And now to your last point. The French events of May–June 1968 were unexpected in the precise way in which they developed, and the rapidity with which they became a pre-revolutionary situation. I would not suggest that Marxists are able to forecast the precise timetable of mass movements, we are not crystal-ball gazers. Yet at the same time such mass upsurges should not have taken Marxists by surprise to the extent of being disoriented by them. Marxists should not only respond to circumstances, they must also help to shape them. If our theory does not allow us to do this then it is ‘intellectual chatter’. Revolutions are only unpredictable if one stands passively watching, if one enters into the mass movement and attempts to help shape them, then the unpredictability becomes much less. The scale and effectiveness of such interventions depend largely upon the preparations that precede such situations. This is why a revolutionary party is both a subjective and an objective factor within any such situations. Men make their own history, but they do so with all the weight of the past and present bearing down on them.



 


Yours fraternally
Ken Tarbuck





Notes
1. The word ‘next’ seems to be more apt here – MIA.
2. VSC – Vietnam Solidarity Campaign – MIA.
 



In order to discuss and assess the perspectives for the workers’ control movement, and to indicate the role that cadres play within it, it is necessary to make a brief survey of the main features of the development of the campaign since 1964 – when the campaign began – up to the present time. This is not to say of course that the ideas of workers’ control only started in 1964, but it was in that year that a serious campaign began once more to inject the whole concept back into the living labour movement.
It is possible to distinguish three phases, so far, in the development of the present movement.
The initial stage ran from 1964 to 1966, during which the movement sought to define its central strategy, and during which it attracted the support and active participation of some small groups of workers, and several key individual worker militants. Sponsorship and organisation of conferences plus publications were at this stage carried out by the group around The Week in Nottingham, together with the editors of Union Voice and Labour’s Voice in London and Manchester respectively. Tribune was usually involved as a sponsor, though without any real participation in the practical work. The London Cooperative Society was involved as a sponsor in the important second conference in 1965, which was held in London. The various left tendency journals participated in the early conferences and considerable effort was expended in debating between the groups, particularly between the IS [1] and The Week. The later controversy centred between possibilist oppositional militancy and activity, advocated by IS, and the transitional demand for opening the books of the bosses, advocated by The Week tendency. This was an important clarifying debate for many of the participants. It is now possible to characterise the IS position of that period as representing the apolitical, or economist local spontaneity of the stewards’ groups of the 1950s, whilst the programmatic approach which was advanced by The Week was an anticipation of the politicised trade unionism which has emerged under the impact of the Labour government with its ‘incomes policy’ and productivity bargaining, anti-union drive generally which has been thrust upon the government and employers by the sharper economic crisis of the mid and late 1960s. In this sense the period since 1964 – with its enormous balance of payments deficit – can be viewed as a turning point in postwar history in this country. In this phase too, the practice of organising conferences and activities along seminar lines, which at first sight might have appeared somewhat ‘academic’, forged the continuing alliance between socialist cadres and workers – at first in small numbers – which has given the movement its resonance and living quality. There was also the conscious attempt to pick up the thread of the historical tradition in the British labour movement, reaching back to the 1910–26 period, when a genuinely hegemonic ambition prevailed among large sections of the British working class in its industrial politics, and to re-establish the authenticity of that tradition. However, this tradition was never more than the expression of a minority, albeit a large one. Critics sometimes saw this as a rather academic or nostalgic exercise, yet no movement which aims at hegemony can neglect the historical roots of consciousness, if it hopes to build upon and in the mass labour movement.
Even without any conscious stimulus, it was inevitable that anarchism, syndicalism, guild socialism, utopianism and participationist reformism would emerge and struggle with revolutionary Marxism within the movement, as soon as a class-based strategy for the transition to socialism was reopened. So it proved. And therefore the necessity of establishing and preserving an open movement, in which the debate between all tendencies and views could continue. This meant that there should be no premature search for a formal closing of the debate on issues. For it is of fundamental importance that this debate engages workers and revolutionary cadres together. A didactic and consciousness-forming process is generated by such a debate, both for the worker-militants and for the revolutionary cadres who are formed and developed as the movement grows. (And this will be a continuing process just as long as the movement draws to it new and wider layers of workers.) Indeed, in the process, the gulf fixed by the capitalist division of labour between the intellectual and the worker is narrowed. The problem of overcoming that gulf must be high on the agenda of any discussion about the future development of cadres in the workers’ control movement. It should be obvious that after five years of development and expansion, it cannot be overcome by any narrowing of the debate on the issues themselves, or by establishing a rigid orthodoxy for the cadres.
At the end of the first phase then, a general strategy of transitional demands existed, alongside other tendencies, and an important start had been made in specific research and programme-building in one or two industries. Notably steel, docks and road transport. The demand for opening of the books had been taken up by the seamen during their national strike in a genuinely mass campaign.
The second phase of the movement, from 1966 to 1968, was characterised by more intensive programme-building, by responses from the official labour organisations (for example, the Labour Party’s Report on Industrial Democracy), by the widening of the working-class base, and by an attempt (not wholly related to the needs of the workers’ control movement) to build an organisational structure to link the various activities together. At the end of this phase 500 delegates were assembled at the 1968 Nottingham conference, it was quite clear that a more structured organisation was necessary to continue the expansion of the movement. This point had really been indicated by the 1967 conference, when Bill Jones, a London busman and lay member of the TUC General Council, took the chair, and there was the first appearance of Hugh Scanlon – then campaigning for the AEF Presidency – brought together significant forces from the left wing of the trade-union leadership, and also rank-and-file militants from transport, engineering and vehicle production, who recognised that the movement was serious, and was attempting to base itself on an appreciation of their problems. These problems were in themselves, of course, becoming more acute in the period of wage freeze and compulsory incomes policy. The Labour Party response – policy document already referred to – was also debated at the 1967 conference, and partly as a result of this the movement was involved in a debate that still continues on the distinction between participation and control. (The debate on definitions was indeed widened beyond these two terms, since the whole question of self-management in a socialised economy was and is a continuous preoccupation for us. A cadre force in this field must study this issue in general, theoretical terms, must examine experiences in such countries as Yugoslavia, Algeria, etc, and must use its expertise in its participation in such actual political situations as have developed in, for example, Czechoslovakia.) The protagonists of participation do not form, in this debate, a single ‘school’. There are at one extreme, the authors and practitioners of a deliberately corporate strategy to be found amongst employers, right-wing academics, and the Labour government. But there are also genuine reformers who are motivated by the idealistic version of industrial democracy, and who aim to reform institutions and structures within the existing social framework. Judgement on the latter category cannot be made a priori, since in certain circumstances they represent a crippling ‘institutionalisation’ of workers’ control demands, whilst in others they do create embryonic situations of dual power. In the first category, we might place some of the recently created ‘productivity committees’ set up by joint management–union agreement in factories; in the second, especially at the present time, we should certainly place the joint control exercised by dockers over the system of discipline, hiring and firing, in the Dock Labour Scheme. This example – in the context of a different country – occurred to Ernest Mandel when he wrote:
Where is the dividing line between ‘institutionalisation’ and dual power? That is the real problem and the real difficulty. It is very hard to advance a fool-proof formula. Tentatively I would say that every form of ‘effective demand’ whose realisation is compatible with a more or less ‘smooth’ functioning of the capitalist system, which does not create a situation of explosive crisis… is a situation of ‘institutionalisation’ which should be avoided. At the contrary, every effective demand whose realisation creates a permanent crisis for the system, a situation of permanent conflict, is an embryonic element of dual power.
You might say that this doesn’t give you a concrete answer in each and every case – especially where local industries are concerned (one should take into consideration however the great sensitiveness of the employers and the bourgeois state to problems of ‘principle’ and of ‘bad examples’). You can also say that it becomes a matter of subjective judgement – whether or not a given effective demand could be normally ‘assimilated’ by the system or not. I agree. As in so many other questions, here applies this eternal truth of Marxist dialectics: the real test of knowledge is praxis; the ‘proof of the pudding is in the eating’. It is only in practice that you can find out whether you have campaigned for ‘dual power’, or whether inadvertently you have permitted neo-capitalism to ‘integrate’ a radical group of workers.
But this should not inhibit you in the least. If you don’t risk anything and limit yourself to abstract preaching you won’t get one inch forward to socialism, under the given conditions. So my advice would be: full speed ahead, while bearing in mind the dangers I tried to underline.
While writing this letter, a good example just comes to my mind. The Antwerp shipyard and dockworkers made a huge conquest some 20 years ago. A definite number of workers would get a card as ‘stable workers’ under union control, and receive minimum pay, whether there was work for them or not. This demand, born of the experiences of the years 1929–38, would have been revolutionary and ‘unassimilable’ for capitalism under condition of crisis; under conditions of 20 years of nearly uninterrupted ‘boom’ in the docks, it became undoubtedly a means of corrupting a radical sector of the workers, creating in addition a dangerous division between the ‘permanently employed’ and privileged ones, and the ‘temporarily employed’ who have to go back on the dole each time the jobs are slightly reduced.
The above should in many respects be a key text for any Marxist cadre engaged in practical political work, especially in the field of workers’ control. The business of the workers’ control campaign is the ‘making of puddings, and the subsequent eating of them’, in docks, cars, education, communications, etc., etc. However, there are obvious dangers here in two directions, firstly adventurism, which could lead certain groups of workers into untenable positions. Secondly opportunism, that is, deluding oneself into accepting certain situations as being victories, when in fact they are merely participationist assimilation. The dividing line in each case can be very narrow, that is why it is the responsibility of Marxists both to give a lead and to remain with feet firmly planted on the ground of reality.
Before leaving the question of participation, however, it is necessary to describe a third sense in which the term is used. Ernie Roberts [2] was quick to point out (at the 1967 conference) that workers themselves may demand ‘participation’; but they may well mean by that word something much closer to what we mean by control than what the employers and government mean by participation.
An argument parallel to this question of control or participation arose in the context of the 1967 conference, and was resumed in a slightly different setting in 1968. This was the question of the efficacy of pursuing demands for legislative reform through parliament. Here again, it would be wrong to adopt a dogmatic anti-parliamentary position; gains which feed the appetite for, and consciousness of, control may be adopted in certain critical circumstances by a bourgeois legislature. Just as the conscious revolutionary forces may make mistakes in the direction of ‘assimilation’ so may hard-pressed governments, looking for concessions, err in the opposite direction. And we should bear in mind that reforms at one moment are on one side of the dividing line, yet fall on the other in different circumstances. Who, for instance, would have called one-man, one-vote a revolutionary demand before the events in Northern Ireland over the last 18 months? It would have been dismissed as a reformist demand, yet it (and other similar demands) sparked off a situation which had elements of a pre-revolutionary situation within it. When the Derry workers drove the police out of Bogside, that was not a reformist move. However, it remains axiomatic that the major breakthrough will most probably occur in industrial struggle, and our problem here is to make the transition from propagandist activity, or an educational role, to the work of initiation. That problem is most intimately connected with an earlier point – that our cadre-building must solve the division between workers and ‘politicos’. Our cadre must contain the worker militant leaders at the very core of its structure or it will fail. When that is achieved the solution to the propaganda–action dichotomy will probably follow. Yet perhaps this is a little too mechanistic; we should recognise that action for workers’ control demands can and probably will occur at any time, before any neat solution to this problem is found (GEC-EE Merseyside). [3] We should not underestimate the degree to which workers’ control is already a part of the conscious programme in several key industries.
So much for the second stage of development and its principle controversies. Of course we should expect that newly-recruited activists and whole sectors will continue to work their way through these phases anew: no one will come to the workers’ control movement fully appraised and conscious of this development. However, as the process takes place we may perhaps expect the transitions to be more rapid, as the movement learns to assimilate new groups of workers.
The third stage of development was marked by the conferences of 1968 and 1969, and the formation and work of the Institute of Workers’ Control. It is not difficult to identify a qualitative change in the movement, as a result of these events and developments. The numbers participating at the conferences, the increased representation of the industrial trade-union rank and file, the greatly expanded range of publications, all point to this change.
As the movement has grown in size and significance, it has attracted the attention of the left political groups. Some of them are wholly negative in their attitude, yet as organised forces they may find it possible to achieve some presence and exercise a divisive influence. It is now necessary to coordinate the thinking and the work of all those whose positive attitudes to the movement include a determination to protect it from such ultra-left forays, and also protect the movement from the place-seekers who wish to have some of the glamour of ‘leftism’ cast about them without in reality being committed. Neither of these tasks will be carried out by bans and proscriptions, but only by open and honest debate and discussion. But this debate must not be one-sided. The Lawrence Dalys [4] of this world must be told that the workers’ control campaign is not a vehicle for their own advancement.
No ready-made group at present has lived through this whole building process. It is therefore necessary to construct a Marxist cadre which is flexible enough, yet also committed enough, to carry the movement beyond its propagandist role into its activist one. This process must be a dialectical one, the present workers’ control movement will run into the sands of opportunism or ultra-leftism if no viable Marxist cadre is formed within, conversely no Marxist cadre can be created unless it participates in the building of this movement. Workers’ control is not just another campaign, it is central to the thinking of creative Marxists, those who are deeply committed to a vision of society that is self-managed.
We are now about to enter a new phase of industrial struggles, as we have seen by the wave of militancy over the last six months or so. One of the big questions looming ahead (indeed is here now) is that of productivity bargaining. The left must have an answer that is more than mere rejection, for at the heart of productivity bargaining is the question of power, and this is what the workers’ control campaign is also about.

Notes
1. IS – International Socialists, later the Socialist Workers Party – MIA.
2. Ernie Roberts (1912–1994) was a left-wing militant in the engineering industry; he became Assistant General Secretary of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers in 1957, and was the Labour MP for Hackney North during 1979–87 – MIA.
3. GEC-EE – General Electric Company/English Electric, a major engineering company – MIA.
4. Lawrence Daly (1924–2009) was a left-wing militant in the National Union of Mineworkers; he became General Secretary of the Scottish section of the NUM in 1965, and was General Secretary of the NUM during 1968–84. He was a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain during 1940–56, the Fife Socialist League during 1957–64, and after that the Labour Party – MIA.
 



Ernest Mandel,
Europe versus America? Contradictions of Imperialism,
New Left Books, London
In this short book (139 pages) Ernest Mandel sets out to examine the problems and contradictions facing the West European bourgeoisie in its attempts to compete with US imperialism. Also he examines the relative decline of US imperialism in the last decade. The book is extremely well documented with references and illustrative examples of the points Mandel wants to drive home.
One of the most important phenomena that have arisen in the postwar world and especially in the last decade has been the international concentration of capital. (Mandel seems to use this term rather indiscriminately to cover concentration, that is, growth of individual capitals by accumulation, and centralisation, that is, the bringing together of two or more existing capitals by way of mergers, etc.) Mandel distinguishes four forms which this concentration takes:

The complete takeover of a nation’s industry, or at least the most significant portions, by outside capitalists. Thus the country is reduced to a semi-colony.
 
Where only certain sectors of industry are taken over by foreign capital.
 
Interpenetration of various capitals without any one country predominating.
 
Concentration purely within the national boundaries.

He argues, and brings forward material to back up, that all of these processes are taking place, but that the one that is being pushed forward most vigorously is the interpenetration of capital. He convincingly demonstrates that the very nature of capitalism today urges on this process via international competition and technological innovations that this induces on an expanding scale. He writes about the third industrial revolution that we have witnessed since the end of the last war (which comprises atomic power, automation, computers, etc.) and points out how this has been part cause and part effect of this capital concentration. This arises today because there are some projects that need such vast amounts of capital to get them off the ground.
Mandel also brings into his analysis the thesis that since the last war we have lived through an upward movement of a Kondratiev ‘long wave’, and now we are moving into a downward movement. This would partly account for the long and sustained boom in the capitalist world since the early 1950s. However, this does somewhat contradict Mandel’s references to the ‘permanent arms economy’ which are thrown in without any explanation of what he means by this phrase. One can only presume that he means something different from what the Cliff–Kidron school infers from this, since he is at some pains throughout to snipe at Kidron in his extensive footnotes.
We can see then that the main theme of the book relates to the question of whether American imperialism will dominate West Europe completely in the coming decade or whether the West European bourgeoisie can extend the EEC and develop large and powerful units with which they can not only survive but also compete. In the process it becomes abundantly clear that the nation state is no longer a viable instrument for the protection of capitalism in Europe.
However, Mandel does not deal adequately with the question raised by Servan-Schreiber (The American Challenge, Pelican Books): the tremendous expansion of US capital inside Europe and the prospect of its becoming the third largest industrial power in the world within the next decade. Mandel’s treatment of this point is somewhat cursory.
Although there is a chapter devoted to the division of the world market and some very useful material provided regarding the relative decline of the importance of the ‘Third World’ in international trade, there is no attempt to analyse the real changes that this indicates as to the nature of imperialism. One sentence points to very important problems that this trend brings: ‘It is evidence of the increasing trend of industrial nations to exchange their industrial products amongst themselves, thus denying the safety valve of the export of industrial goods to non-industrialised countries.’ Yet this point is never taken up and developed. This is rather disappointing because the whole process raises quite fundamental questions about the theory of imperialism and also the concrete one of the continued impoverishment of the colonial world.
At one point when writing about the working class and inter-imperialist conflict Mandel gives an indication of how out of touch he is regarding the realities of the British scene when he writes: ‘... it should be noted that the attempt by Enoch Powell in England to exploit racist currents politically has so far only found an echo among the most demoralised and backward sectors of the British working class.’ If Mandel does not understand that Powell has in fact found quite wide echoes in most strata of the population and that he (Powell) has in fact legitimised racial prejudice to some extent then he is whistling in the dark.
The above is perhaps indicative of the rather sweeping generalities which are scattered through this short book. It is merely a skeleton on which much more could have been built. There is a great deal of information here but it has been compressed to the extent that it cannot deal with all the questions it raises. At the end of the book there is an impressive list of sources quoted, but unfortunately no index. Whilst it is a book that should be read because of the questions it raises, it is overpriced at 35 shillings.
 



Tony Cliff,
The Employers’ Offensive: Productivity Deals and How To Fight Them,
Pluto Press
Tony Cliff has done a very thorough and well-documented job in exposing the dangers and pitfalls inherent in the present wave of productivity deals that is being unleashed. This is a book of over 200 pages, the bulk of which deals in some detail with various aspects of productivity bargaining. As the ‘blurb’ on the front says: ‘A concise and thorough explanation of the many pitfalls which exist for workers under the guise of productivity bargaining. A book that every trade unionist ought to read.’ This is an opinion that I would agree with.
Cliff deals with measured day work, greater flexibility in the deployment of labour, job evaluation, time and motion study, redundancy and much more besides. This gives one an idea of the scope of the book. In particular his exposure of the so-called ‘science’ of time and motion study is a very valuable addition to any shop stewards’ armoury. His quotation from the ‘father’ of time and motion study is a gem:
Now one of the very first requirements for a man who is fit to handle pig iron as a regular occupation is that he shall be so stupid and so phlegmatic that he more nearly resembles in his mental make-up the ox than any other type. (F.W. Taylor, Principles of Scientific Management, 1911)
It is precisely the hope of the bosses to reduce their employees to this bovine state by productivity deals, not in such a crude or blatant manner perhaps, but nevertheless they want workers who are amenable as oxen.
One of the other valuable features of this book is the large number of workers who have given evidence directly to the author, as well as his quotations from official documents and agreements. Many of the comments in these items from shop-floor workers are revealing in more ways than one. Firstly, many of them reveal the worsening of conditions where productivity deals have been in operation, and secondly they show that the workers may have to work like oxen, but they don’t think like them.
The picture emerges of an overall offensive by the employers to prop up sagging profit rates, at the expense of the workers. Peter Jay, who gave a lengthy review of this book in The Times Business Section, tries to pass off the evidence presented as so much ‘drivel’, but it is noticeable that he makes no attempt to challenge even one item of fact in the whole book. This either means that he has not done his homework or could not come up with anything worthwhile. However, the fact that The Times chose to pay so much attention to this book means that it views the contents seriously, and so should every worker.
Cliff has made an excellent job of cataloguing the many pitfalls in this field for the unwary worker. However, when he comes to attempt to prescribe an answer he is not so successful. Quite correctly he says:
In productivity bargaining the traditional form of negotiations – workers making demands on their employers for better wages and conditions – is reversed. Now it is the employers who are demanding changes, and in doing so try to force the workers into taking a purely passive role and simply responding to these demands. (p. 211)
This sums up the position very well indeed, but what is Cliff’s answer?
Now comes the 64,000 dollar question – how do we fight a productivity deal? I hope no one who has read this book so far will be in any doubt where I stand on the question of productivity dealing – bitterly and unalterably opposed to it. But this does not in itself solve the problem of developing a strategy for fighting them. Any fool can denounce a productivity deal and say we should have nothing to do with it. It is an entirely different matter to lead a group of workers in successfully resisting such a deal. (p. 215)
That is clear and to the point, and eminently sensible, because it is not an easy task to fight the present methods of employers’ attacks, when they are so well gilded with what seems to be large increases in pay. But we turn over the page and Cliff says this:
We must always start by opposing the productivity deal completely and then later, if necessary, retreat to a position where we try to get the best out of the deal we can. (p. 216) [!!]
And on the next page we have:
... any steward has to remember the first rule of negotiation – the girl who starts by saying ‘No’ gets a higher price for her virtue than the girl who talks money at the outset. (p. 217)
In other words if you cannot beat them join them! Despite all the good intentions Cliff is unable to come up with a coherent counter-strategy. True enough that he has some very useful ideas about [1] productivity deals should be dealt with once they are entered into, but he presents no overall strategy which will take the workers on to the offensive before the bosses make their move. This is the missing link, since right here and now this is precisely what workers need. The rising tide of militancy will be beaten back unless such a strategy is adopted. The only concrete answer that Cliff comes up with is to sell the ‘rule-book’ as dearly as possible, despite his good intentions and protestations. That is exactly what the employers want. He explains this himself in earlier sections of the book, so that his alleged answer is a let-down.
However, despite the grave shortcomings of the last chapter, this book is still worth buying, because it can supply a great deal of ammunition to those who care to extract it from its pages.

Notes
1. The word ‘how’ seems to be missing here – MIA.
 



Since the ‘prices and incomes policy’ of the Labour government has been a relative failure we have witnessed the growth of the demand by the bosses for ‘productivity deals’ and this has had the full backing of the present government.
The question we have to pose here is: why the emphasis on such bargains? There are two main answers to this. Firstly – like all of the measures taken over the last six years – it is an attempt to stop the tendency of the rate of profit to decline, or to use the euphemism of the employers ‘to reduce labour costs’. Secondly it is a question of power. This is intimately linked with the first aspect, because the underlying reasons behind productivity deals is that since the end of the war in 1945, workers have managed to wrest some degree of control over their wages and conditions of employment, that is, there has been a decline in managerial control over certain aspects of the work situation. Productivity deals are meant to whittle away the controls established by the workers and once more reassert full managerial control over the whole productive process.
The demands of the employers of course vary from one plant to another, depending upon which aspect of control they feel to be the most important to reassert their authority over. In some factories this has taken the form of a drive to introduce Measured Day Work, that is, the abolition of piece-rates. In other situations it has been an attempt to regain control over the allocation of overtime, but above all there is the demand for ‘flexibility of labour’. This essentially means that the management can move men or women around at will, and also determine the manning of productive lines. Each case is decided on in an empirical way, the criterion being where do the shop stewards have the most control and then attempting to reduce it.
The employers and the Labour government have common aims in this drive, Barbara Castle urging on the employers to push for these sort of deals. However, this spills over into the political arena, because along with productivity deals there have been the attacks on the right to strike, as was witnessed last year in the notorious document In Place of Strife (sic). The present Labour government has done all that it could to assist such deals, particularly in the creation of a postwar record number of unemployed. This is another aspect of productivity deals that has to be taken into account, and that they ultimately help reduce the demand for labour in any given area that they [1] implemented on a large scale. There have been a number of productivity deals agreed to that in the first instance produce no redundancy, but as ‘natural wastage’ takes place the actual number of workers taken on to replace this declines, so that the net effect is to reduce the demand for labour and reinforce the upward trend in unemployment. Along with this higher unemployment has gone the attempt to absorb even further the trade unions into the state machine and to make them pliant tools of the employers. Also the same thing is being attempted at shop-floor level where shop stewards are being drawn into collaboration with the management in the implementation of productivity deals and the ‘disciplining’ of any workers who kick over the traces.
The response of the trade-union movement as a whole has been uneven and fragmented, there has been no cohesive strategy worked out. On one extreme there has been downright opposition but with no counter-strategy to them, to one of whole-hearted welcoming. In between these two extremes there are several stances taken up. The Transport and General Workers Union have a potentially useful approach, in that on paper they put forward the idea that productivity deals should be concluded in such a way as to increase workers’ take-home pay and extend shop stewards’ control. However, the reality of how this union has operated leaves a great deal to be desired. The TGWU method could rebound painfully upon its members if this is taken to be a form of conditional support for productivity deals.
The aims of productivity deals are summed very well in the Prices and Incomes Board report of 1968 when it said: ‘A change in the method of working is an essential part of any productivity agreement… The calculations of management must show that the total cost per unit of output will be reduced.’ [2] That is very clear and to the point, because in simple language it means that each individual worker must be exploited to a greater degree, that there must be an increase in the surplus value extracted from the worker. Under no conditions can Marxists support such deals under capitalism. It may well be that the individual worker seems to be better off in monetary terms, but this is only so under conditions of speed-up, tighter supervision and great effort, the lion’s share of which will go to the bosses. Furthermore with the rate of inflationary price increases as they are today it means that the extra monetary ‘reward’ will soon be swallowed up, but leaving the bosses with the gains in reduced costs and greater control over the worker.
What has been the real effect of the prices and incomes policy and productivity bargaining? In 1967 productivity in manufacturing industry rose by 5.9 per cent, average wages by 5.3 per cent, but retail prices rose by 2.5 per cent, thus leaving the workers worse off in real terms than before. In 1968 the corresponding figures were, productivity up by 6.9 per cent, wages 8.1 per cent, prices 5.6 per cent. [3] So that once again any gains in monetary terms were considerably reduced. The nett result of the combined policies of the government and the employers mean that at the very least the share of wages in the national income has been limited to its previous level, but it is more likely that the nett effect really has been to reduce this proportion.
In essence if trade unions accept productivity bargaining on the terms laid down by the government and employers it means that they accept the present division of the national product, and the present distribution of wealth, that is, they accept status quo in this area. But in fact things do not stand still, the ultimate logic is to increase the share of the national wealth going to property and the capitalist class. What has happened in certain cases where productivity deals have been accepted has been that while the wage rates have increased the actual take-home pay has been reduced! This is because there has been a loss of overtime, bonus payments, or piece work.
I mentioned earlier that under certain conditions the introduction of productivity deals has resulted in the reduction of demand for labour; coupled with all the other effects this puts further power into the hands of the employers, because it helps swell the pool of men and women seeking employment, and therefore puts those who are working at a disadvantage because they can feel the pressure of those without work breathing down their necks, and tends to make them more pliable as far as the bosses are concerned.
There is another aspect of productivity bargaining that has to be considered. This is, that it tends to break down solidarity among the workers. Because productivity bargains are usually negotiated at local or plant level, this gives the employers a further lever. Previously minimum wage rates have been usually negotiated at national level, thus at a minimum level giving some feeling of solidarity. Now with productivity bargaining the employers can take the offensive and attempt to play off one plant or section of workers against another. All the time this process goes on it means a reduction of the small elements of control that workers have fought for in the postwar years.
This is why I said that the question of productivity bargaining was a question of power.
What should the workers’ response be to this developing situation? A straightforward rejection, which stays at that level merely leaves the initiative in the hands of the employers. What is needed is a counter-strategy which will take the offensive into the employers’ camp. The very first demand that any group of workers should make is an opening of the books thus getting the information needed to assess the real potential for wage increases or improvements of conditions. Secondly they should frame their demands in such a manner as will give to the workers an increased share of any new wealth created. Coupled with these measures should be the demand that workers will have the right to veto any changes in conditions that they do not agree with. To carry out such demands means that industry-wide rank-and-file committees need to be set up to police both the employers and the full-time officials of the unions. And since we are in the age of the international firm these committees must coordinate their activities with those of workers in the same industry in other countries.

Notes
1. The word ‘are’ seems to be missing here – MIA.
2. Quoted by Tony Topham, Trade Union Register (Merlin Press, 1969).
3. Quoted by Tony Topham, Trade Union Register (Merlin Press, 1969).
 



The present time is a very disturbing one for Marxists in Britain, it is full of questions and many seem imponderable. The election of the Labour government to office has once again thrown both the Social-Democratic left and the Marxist movement into a state of confusion and tension. At a time when advances for socialism seemingly could be made, all is inverted, stood on its head. In a period of acute crisis for British capitalism Marxists stand unarmed, without the means to intervene and not knowing how to. Only the most marginal victories are being won by the left, if any are being won at all. The question therefore poses itself very sharply – ‘Why is this?’ It is the purpose of this essay to examine and explore certain facets of this question, not to attempt to give definitive answers – few exist in the abstract.
Two other points should be made. Firstly, this essay makes no attempt to argue the need for a revolutionary Marxist party, this is assumed. Secondly, it does not deal with the more general or objective factors relating to the failure of such a party to emerge in Britain. There have been many such discussions and I have not attempted to pass any judgement on them.
 
First Approximations
Among those who have attempted to grapple with the present situation have been the New Left Review editorial team. All credit must go to them for their efforts over the past few years in trying to break out of the vicious circle that British Marxists are in. With some remarkable insights and a great élan they have attempted to unlock the present. It is not to their discredit that they have not entirely succeeded, and they would not claim to have done so. However, it is up to those who disagree with certain aspects of their work to take up the issues and discuss them.
To help clarify matters I intend to carry out a part of the discussion around the article by Perry Anderson entitled Problems of Socialist Strategy. [1]
Let us begin with a quotation from this article:
Two strategic models have dominated our history, and divided the socialist movement in Europe from the turn of the century to our time. The momentous schism between Social-Democracy and Communism directly derives from them. They can be called the parliamentary and the insurrectionary roads to socialism. (p. 233)
Perry Anderson posits these two paths as being the basic difference within the socialist movement, and much of his analysis seems to be grounded on this one point. Unfortunately this cannot be accepted as a tenable thesis. The division that runs deep within the labour movement, not only in Britain but also internationally, is not predicated upon such a simplistic dichotomy. The real and fundamental difference is related to the need, or otherwise, for a thoroughgoing and basic change within society. That is, whether as socialists we want to abolish wage slavery and its accompanying alienation, and establish a free human society in which man is truly his own master and not the adjunct of capital. If this was not immediately apparent before 1945 (and I would argue that it was) then it has become increasingly so since. With the advent of relatively full employment and the amelioration of certain aspects of poverty, the real and substantive differences between reformists and revolutionaries has become increasingly clear. That this is not apparent to many is an indication of the vulgar economic materialism that passes for Marxism in many quarters, not least amongst the bourgeois ‘Marxologists’. Those who want to smooth down rough edges, establish ‘good industrial relations’, etc, etc, are the reformists. Those who want to abolish industrial relations and replace them with human relations are the socialists, the revolutionaries.
This, above all, is the essence of the dispute, not insurrectionary versus parliamentary roads. Not that such disputes are unimportant, on the contrary, they sometimes become crucial. But at this point of time to allow oneself to get bogged down in what would be an essentially abstract dispute would be fruitless. No one who considers themselves to be Marxist could quibble over the question of violence. We do not live in an age of peace, the violence of imperialism is endemic, it cannot survive without it. However, one must realise that such disputes are secondary and subordinate to the key question – ‘Do we reform capitalism or do we build socialism?’ Moreover, a dispute over methods very often only serves to cover a dispute over aims.
Even before 1914 this was a subject of controversy within the labour movement, when Bernstein wrote his Evolutionary Socialism. Rosa Luxemburg saw this distinction clearly in 1900 when she wrote:
... the final goal of socialism constitutes the only decisive factor distinguishing the Social-Democratic movement from the bourgeois democracy and bourgeois radicalism, the only factor transforming the entire labour movement from a vain effort to repair the capitalist order into a class struggle against this order, for the suppression of this order – the question of ‘Reform or Revolution?’ as it is posed by Bernstein, equals for the Social-Democracy the question: ‘To be or not to be?’ In the controversy with Bernstein and his followers, everybody in the party ought to understand clearly it is not a question of this or that method of struggle, or of the use of this or that set of tactics, but the very existence of the Social-Democratic movement. (Social Reform or Revolution?) [2]
These words still hold true today over half a century later, only perhaps more so.
The year 1917 and the October revolution drew a line – an indelible one – through the labour movement. It true that old habits are hard to shake off, for example, German Social-Democracy only finally sloughed off the vestiges of its Marxism in the late 1950s. But the truth was that Bernstein only articulated existing practice when he began his attack, as the First World War revealed. In the same way the struggle in the Labour Party over the attempted revision of Clause Four of the constitution saw a defeat for Gaitskell, so in Germany earlier in the century Kautsky came out to defend the prevailing orthodoxy and won. In neither case was the victory real or enduring, both parties today are open proponents of the mixed economy and the rule of market economics, that is, both parties openly proclaim that they only want to reform capitalism, that is, if they deign to mention such an ‘outmoded’ expression. To pose the question as did Perry Anderson is to have a wholly pre-1914 conception of Social-Democracy, and is to try to grapple with ghosts of those long since departed.
 
The Party
Centralism Versus Democracy? Following through this line of thought Perry Anderson examines the question of the role of the party in the struggle for socialism. True, this is done obliquely, rather than directly, nevertheless there does emerge a concept of the Leninist party that is erroneous. Unless this problem is cleared up no discussion on socialist strategy can be meaningful.
What does Anderson say?
For Lenin, the road to socialism was short but sheer: it required the armed insurrection of the proletariat against the established state, its capture and destruction. (p. 224)
Leninism has been ... a success in its own terms and context. It won power in Russia, carried out the expropriation of capitalism and totally transformed the economy and society of the largest country in Europe ... What was the secret of this success? The answer is surely this: Leninism was almost perfectly adapted to the specific conditions of its time and place. It is precisely in backward inchoate societies, dominated by scarcity and integrated by the state, that such a strategy has its meaning. (pp. 227–28, emphasis in original)
But its very adaption to its Eastern environment, which has been the secret of its success, radically dis-adapts it from the Western milieu where capitalism remains supreme today. For the societies of Western Europe constitute a wholly different universe from those of Eastern Europe ... For the moment it is important to emphasise that a Leninist strategy in the West is fundamentally regressive: it threatens to destroy a vital historical creation ... (p. 230, emphasis in original)
What is this heritage that Leninism allegedly threatens? Without doubt Perry Anderson means liberal-democracy, as a reading of his essay indicates. I think he is completely mistaken in this assumption; and in also assuming that liberal-democracy is the pattern for Western Europe. At the time that he wrote the essay it would have only been necessary to point to Spain and Portugal to show the error of such an assertion. Moreover, the France of De Gaulle is not a liberal-democracy, but rather an authoritarian regime with electoral plumage. Western Germany cannot be blessed with the accolade either, since the Communist Party is legally banned. And of course since the essay was written the military regime has been installed in Greece, and on the bones of a regime it would have been difficult to describe as liberal-democracy. The universe of liberal-democracy becomes contracted under examination.
Does this mean there is no validity in Anderson’s contention and concern? Yes, there is validity, in the sense that no Marxist would wish for any diminution of the civil and political liberties that have been won within certain countries. Therefore we can share his concern, insofar as it is legitimate. However, it would be exceedingly naive not to understand that such liberties are conditional and somewhat precarious. One has only to look at the mounting attack on the trades unions here in Britain to understand this. And equally the threat to radicals and revolutionaries implied in the Race Relations Act, for example, the imprisonment of Michael X.
The answer to the question must be ‘no’, in the sense that Leninism as such is not and never was a threat to civil liberty or the working class. To attempt to equate the Stalinist police regimes with Leninism is to fall into the same trap as many bourgeois liberals have done. For them the terror directed against counter-revolutionary White Guards was the same as the terror of the Stalinist bureaucracy against the Bolshevik Old Guard. The whole spirit and ethos of Leninism is directly antithetical to any suppression of liberty, indeed it was directed towards the release of enthusiasm and tremendous self-activity. Any reading of State and Revolution should clear this matter up because Lenin there visualised a workers’ state which was only a semi-state, one that was beginning to prepare the ground for its own demise.
A further error creeps into Perry Anderson’s explanation of Leninism, he seems to suggest that Lenin’s concept of the party was predicated on the fact of Russia’s backwardness and the autocracy of the Tsarist regime. This is misleading and blurs the issue. It is true that the specific conditions that Lenin visualised, and created, the Bolshevik Party under were conditions of repression. Therefore, Lenin emphasised certain features because of these particular conditions, but it is an error to construe certain facets as the whole of Leninism. In this context we should also note that Gramsci – that most neglected of Marxists – is also misunderstood because he wrote under conditions of Fascist dictatorship. Neither Lenin or Gramsci predicated their views of the party on these conditions of backward economies or autocracy. Rather the leitmotif of their views is to be found in their struggle against economism and theories of spontaneity, and their emphasis of the role of consciousness. This is the inner logic, core and historic value of their contribution. The role of consciousness assumes tremendous significance in the struggle to create a Marxist party. Those who today demote the role of the conscious elements within the working class could do well to ponder these words of Lenin:
Any belittling of the role of ‘the conscious element’, of the role of Social-Democracy, means ipso facto (quite irrespective of whether the belittler intends it or not) the strengthening of the influence of the bourgeois ideology upon the workers. All those who talk about ‘overestimating the importance of ideology’, about exaggerating the role of the conscious element, etc, imagine that the purely workers’ movement by itself can and will work out an independent ideology for itself, if only workers ‘tear their fate from the hands of the leaders’ ... the spontaneous development of the labour movement leads precisely to its subordination to the bourgeois ideology ..., because a spontaneous labour movement is trade unionism ...
This does not mean, of course, that the workers do not participate in working it [the ideology] out. But they participate not as workers but as theorists of socialism, Proudons or Weitlings; in other words, they take part only when, and in so far as, they succeed to a greater or lesser extent in acquiring the knowledge of their age and in advancing this knowledge. And in order that working men may succeed in this more often, it is necessary to concern oneself as far as possible with raising the level of consciousness of the workers in general; it is necessary that the workers should not confine themselves to artificially restricted limits of ‘literature for workers’, but should learn more and more to master the general literature. It would be even more correct to say confined instead of ‘confine themselves’, because workers themselves read and want to read everything that is written for the intelligentsia, and some (bad) intellectuals think that ‘for the workers’ it is sufficient to tell them about factory conditions and chew over and over again what has long been known. (What Is To Be Done?, pp. 70–71, emphasis in original) [3]
Two very important points emerge from this. Firstly, the spontaneous drives of the working class are only capable of producing trade-union consciousness. Yet trade unions, by their very nature, are an expression of the division within existing society between capital and labour; and are a recognition of this division. Capitalist commodity production here, it must be emphasised, is not a given set of techniques but a set of social relations, therefore any attempt to overcome them must of necessity be a partial withdrawal from these relations. Trade unions on the contrary must take them as given and seek to obtain a better bargain for the sellers of labour, and only by a tacit or open acknowledgement of these relations do they carry out their functions as trade unions. This trade-union mentality is not confined to narrow trade-union affairs, on the contrary, it spills over, pervades and dominates the whole labour movement. Its political expression is reformism. Therefore, secondly the question of the role of intellectuals becomes a key one. These intellectuals must bring socialist consciousness into the working class. But, these intellectuals must be of a new type. One of the misunderstandings current on this point is that such intellectuals must of necessity come from the traditional intelligentsia. It is true that initially members of the intelligentsia can and do play a vital role in bringing conscious socialist theory into the ranks of the working class; and as the Petőfi circle of Budapest showed in Hungary in 1956, they can act as a catalysing agent at times of crisis. Moreover, note what Lenin said above. Such intellectuals ‘of the new type’ must by definition have broken with bourgeois ideology in all its forms, but they can equally come from the ranks of the working class as from the ranks of the intelligentsia. Moreover, without these intellectuals being drawn from the ranks of the working class any attempts at creating a vanguard solely from the intelligentsia will end in ‘intellectualism’ of the worst kind. Those who think that Lenin had any great affection for intellectuals or accorded them some special place should familiarise themselves with One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, it is littered with withering phrases about ‘whining intellectuals’, ‘unstable elements’, etc., etc. These should be understood in the class context in which they are used. Lenin was using the term intellectuals here as a social description indicating the general characteristics that intellectuals displayed as a social class.
The role of the intellectuals of the new type is not to satisfy their own ego or literary ambitions, but to challenge concretely the ideological dominance of the bourgeoisie and to prepare the instrument for its demise. Gramsci points this out when he says:
Marxism does not seek to sustain ‘simple people’ in their primitive philosophy of common sense, but instead to lead them to a higher view of life. If it asserts the need for contact between intellectual and the simple people it does so, not in order to limit scientific activity and maintain unity at the low level of the masses, but precisely in order to build an intellectual-moral bloc which makes possible the progress of the masses and not only for a few groups of intellectuals. (The Modern Prince, p. 66)
Herein is the significance of the concept of the intellectuals of the new type. Members of the intelligentsia and the working class have to be remade into revolutionary intellectuals. And this re-moulding is not a process carried out on ‘inert’ material, it has nothing in common with the ‘brainwashing’ so beloved of the vulgar Marxologists. It is a process that can only succeed to the extent that the individual participates and furthers it.
 
What Are Cadres? I want now to pose this question – What do we mean when we speak about Marxist cadres? If the new type of intellectuals are the cadres of a Marxist party, what has been the practice of all those groups on the left that claimed to be creating cadres?
Gramsci lays down three essential elements for building a Marxist party, they are:
i) A widespread element of common, average men, whose participation is provided by discipline and faith, not by creative and highly organisational spirit. Without these the party would not exist, it is true, but it is also true that the party would not exist ‘only’ with these. They are a force as far as there is someone who centralises, organises, disciplines them, and in the absence of this force they would break up and cancel each other out in scattered impotence.
ii) The principal cohesive element, which centralises in the national field, which render effective and powerful the totality of forces which left to themselves would count for nothing or very little, this element is endowed with a highly cohesive, centralising and disciplinary power which is also, perhaps because of this, inventive (if what is meant is ‘inventive’ in a certain direction according to certain lines of forces, certain perspectives or certain premises). It is also true that this element alone would not form a party, but it would do so more than the first element. They would be generals without an army, but in reality it is easier to create an army than to create generals ...
iii) A middle element, which links the first element with the second and puts them into contact, not only ‘physically’ but also morally and intellectually ... (The Modern Prince, pp. 49–50)
Let us now look at my question in the light of what Gramsci says. It is my contention that all the present groups of the revolutionary left in Britain have up to now been intent on producing the third element, yet they have little or none of the second. Moreover, it has to be understood that a party can only emerge from a movement, one that embraces wider and more heterogeneous elements than a party.
Concretely this has meant that it is activists or agitators that have been produced, and not cadres or intellectuals of the new type. Gramsci, here, has refined Lenin and brought this question into a closer focus. Looking at the question from this standpoint one can see that the quest to build a revolutionary party by many small groups has foundered to a large extent because of a lack of understanding of this key question (there are other factors and some are discussed later). It may be objected that the Communist Party has had (relatively) large numbers of intellectuals within its ranks, this is true and these were largely from the intelligentsia. However, at no time have these been in any position fundamentally to influence or guide the party, even if they so desired. Moreover, most of them have been in the grip of Stalinist orthodoxy and because of this were mental cripples. Those that broke with the CP in the middle 1950s have, in the main, been destroyed as Marxist cadres, either dropping into passivity or – in reaction to Stalinist orthodoxy – become enamoured with populism. (A certain small segment of this generation having taken their intellect out of pawn from King Street went with all due haste to Clapham High Street, unfortunately for them with similar results to their previous visit to ‘uncle’.) [4]
No other group on the Marxist left has collected any appreciable number of intellectuals, either from the intelligentsia or the working class. This is not surprising since none of these groups have the concept of building Marxist cadres in the Leninist or Gramscian sense.
Indeed one of the characteristics of all these groups is that they are anti-intellectual in the ‘best’ British tradition. Because of this they are all to some extent prisoners of the corporative consciousness of the working class, deferring to it and taking it as the level of their departure. In this they are fatally mistaken. Marxists cannot start at the level of consciousness of the working class, they must be the bearers of the highest and most advanced theory and consciousness. Certainly any Marxist must take cognisance of the level of consciousness of the mass of the people, otherwise one falls into the crassest voluntarism. However, this does not mean that one accepts this level. It is the acceptance of this level that has meant in practice that all the Marxist groups have been content to ‘produce’ the third element of Gramsci. Trotsky was well aware of this problem when he wrote: ‘A pedagogical adaption to the more backward layers of the proletariat must not become transformed into a political adaption to the conservative bureaucracy of the trade unions.’ (In Defence of Marxism, p. 146) [5] No doubt many will be offended by my saying this, and there will perhaps be cries of ‘prove it’. The answer is all around you, unfortunately in a negative form. Where is the cadre that should be challenging Wilson’s government, or that has even cracked the shell of the British working class’s corporate world? To ask the question is to answer it. And sad to say even our ‘generals’ of the left are almost indistinguishable from the army.
Now whilst it is true that the revolutionary party creates intellectuals, it is only done on an expanded basis. Initially it is the intellectuals who create the party, even if this is only an embryo party. They constitute the grain of sand around which the pearl forms. Therefore the most critical task is to assemble this grain of sand. This cannot be done on an activist basis alone, it can only be done on the basis of ideas, that is, of theory. But this theory must be expounded in practice, and at a number of levels, not in a single-issue campaign. The ‘mere’ literary exposition of theory leads to intellectualism. This may sound as though what is being said is that ‘the chicken and the egg’ arrive simultaneously, but this is not so. One of the truisms of the Marxist movement is that there should be unity of theory and practice. This is a necessary and valid truism, nevertheless the danger is that activism is equated with practice, and theory becomes subordinated to activity. When this happens theory becomes a badge, an adornment, a suit of clothes, which can be changed to fit the mood. Theory then becomes ex post a justification for practice or has no relation to it. However, for Marxists theory is not something that is empirically made up as we go along, past experience provides an approximation which we abstract and turn into theory and this should guide our present practice. The badge approach to theory is a bowing to the division of labour imposed by class society. This is because intellectual activities are not seen as activities as such, but as something that takes place outside of the collective. There arises in small political groups the practice of each having its own ‘theorist’ who hands down the ‘line’. It does not occur to such leaders that a major part of their task is to train people to replace them.
For Marxists, within the concept of practice is embodied theory, therefore the truism ‘unity of theory and practice’ can become a barrier to our understanding of this. Let me elaborate this point a little. Was Marx theorising or practising when he was writing Capital? Were Castro and Che practising or theorising when they landed from the Granma? These are, of course, dramatic examples, and few of us can aspire to reach such historical proportions; yet unless we envisage a revolutionary party in this way we do not have the perspective of revolutionaries. Therefore, it is very necessary that in the process of gathering the ‘grain of sand’ a vulgar interpretation is not given to the word activity. Practice must be understood as encompassing many, many things. It must be a genuine praxis.
 
Which Crisis of Leadership? One of the factors that has contributed towards an activist concept of cadres has been the phrase ‘the working class suffers from a crisis of leadership’. What is understood by this, and what should be understood by it? A mechanical and undialectical application of this idea implies that the working class is straining at the leash, only waiting for the call to revolution or on a more mundane level only waiting for the right charismatic leader to speak at a Labour Party conference to rout the demon Wilson. Now it is true that at certain times this can be and has been correct because the mass of the working class has moved further and faster than its existing leadership, and at such times these leaders become an absolute brake. The Spanish Civil War was one example of such a situation. But such situations are rare, pre-revolutionary or revolutionary situations do not come round like the date on the calendar in orderly succession to be waited for with patience.
Such situations have to be ‘made’, not in the sense of exploiting favourable situations, that is an elementary task for Marxists. No, revolutions have to be ‘made’ by a process that stretches far back beyond particular situations.
Yet even in ‘normal’ times this crisis of leadership does exist. This particular crisis manifests itself at these times by the reformist leadership accurately reflecting the false consciousness of the masses. Seen in this way it is not the reformist leaders who have to be ‘exposed’, rather it is the corporate consciousness of the working class (needless to say the reformists need to be opposed tooth and nail). But our task as Marxists is not to denounce reformists as though the working class had a clear-sighted vision of socialism which was being impaired by using reformist spectacles. Rather it is our task to convince the working class of its ‘defective’ eyesight. Only in the process of doing this does the question of using Marxist ‘spectacles’ arise. But this should not be seen as a series of stages, both tasks have to be carried out simultaneously.
If one does not understand this process one falls into a world of demonology and good men versus bad men. This is the world of the super-voluntarist who thinks that if only he can blow his trumpet loud enough the walls of reformist Jericho will fall down.
The crisis of leadership is much more complex, pervasive and subtle, resting on the mystification engendered by bourgeois ideology. To combat this much more than activism is required, there has to be an ideological assault on the institutions that mediate it.
The dialectical novelty of the crisis of leadership is that it besets all groups and organisations of the working class. Each of these reveals an inner dynamic and rhythm of development which – unless it is able to burst asunder the integument of bourgeois hegemony – reaches an apogee and then declines, leaving it subject to that which it set out to destroy. This subjection may take many forms, each of them expresses a failure to grapple with the reality in which they exist, and an adaption to the false consciousness of that reality.
 
Sects and Sectarianism: Much of the foregoing helps to explain why, instead of Marxist cadres being created, there has been a proliferation of sects. Most of the existing groups started their life as a fraction [6] within an already existing organisation. This gives us part of the reason for the subsequent evolution.
A fraction is a grouping that arises within a party or group often over a single issue and is turned inwards hoping to achieve a clear-cut ideological resolution of that issue. For this reason a fraction should be considered to be a temporary and short-lived formation. Initially there is no counterposing of an entire programme to that of the existing formation. The issues are seen as being the correction of an error of tactics or strategy, or even merely the consistent and energetic application of an existing programme.
The party, in contrast, sets out to group within its ranks all those who subscribe to its programme, but at the same time allows wide divergences of opinion on tactics and strategy, always with the proviso that the dissentients should subordinate themselves in activity to the majority decisions. This in no way demands of the dissentients that they should renounce their views, merely that they accept majority decisions and work in accordance with them. But a fraction has a different internal regime to that of the party. Because of the narrow basis for its existence it draws the dividing line between members and non-members with hair-line precision, even transitory tactical differences can make it impossible to coexist within the same fraction. For example if there arises a difference within a party over a tactical orientation, for example, whether an election should be boycotted or not, then two fractions may arise and many in the party may be undecided. Obviously the question of adherence to one of the fractions is a very clear-cut matter, any wavering immediately puts one outside of the fraction. There is no need for a formal decision in that situation, the doubter is just dropped from the fraction, which itself may not be a formal one.
Very few parties start out in life as such, they normally begin as fractions within existing organisations. But such fractions become parties in the process of political struggle; and because of this it is an objective fact, and not their own subjective view of themselves, which makes them parties.
A sect is usually a fraction that has failed to become a party, and has maintained the internal life of a fraction. That discipline which is necessary for an internal struggle is carried over into its independent existence and because of this it becomes burdensome and repulsive as the sect takes shape. The specific features usually take the form of near hysteria to the raising of any meaningful criticisms (not to be confused with the type of ‘self-criticism’ sometimes practised) of the strategy or tactics being pursued. Because at this stage the initial reasons for the sect’s existence (in reality as a fraction) has become ossified into dogma, they manifest violent reactions to any challenge. To be present at such confrontations is to witness a most bizarre scene. The critics will be subjected to such treatment as one would think only the class enemy deserves. In such an emotionally-charged atmosphere nearly all differences can lead, and usually do, to an eventual split or the expulsion of the minority opinion.
Such situations and results have little to do with the personalities involved. Certainly, the personal characteristics displayed can exacerbate or moderate the clash, but only to a degree. The basic response is structured within the subordinated and alienated life of the sect. Even those fractions which consciously set out not to perpetuate the regime of a fraction, and hence to slide into a sect existence, will fall prey to this condition if they fail to transform themselves into parties or embryo parties. Good intentions are not enough.
Each fraction announces itself to the world by flourishing certain characteristics that proclaim its identity. At its inception these may be valid and legitimate weapons to free itself from a past that had acted as a brake. The transformation into a sect, which may be a long or short period of time, witnesses a transmogrification of these points, characteristics or attributes into totems or fetishes. The closer any criticisms come to these totems the more violent is likely to be the reaction. This, I believe, goes some way to explain that strange phenomena of the left, that is, the closer two groups appear to be in programme the more bitter the hostility displayed, either publically or privately, to each other. Lest anyone feel smug, let me point out that no group or organisation, no matter how large, is immune from this process. Nor has it ever been known for a sectarian to recognise himself in the mirror. Only life and political activity can say, after the event, which is and which is not a sect.
 
What Should We Do?
Any group or party that sets out to be revolutionary must break out of the corporate shell of the working class and adopt an hegemonic, worldwide vision of reality. Only conscious elements can do this, not merely conscious of the poverty, misery and inequalities of capitalism and imperialism, this consciousness must also incorporate knowledge of the precise ways in which bourgeois hegemony is exercised; not merely in the general sense but in the particular and concrete conditions of a given society. Although Marxism arms one with a universal and hegemonic viewpoint, this, if it is to be transformed into an instrument of liberation, must be applied in the particular situation one is confronted with. It is not sufficient to understand that capitalism is an irrational and contradictory society, one must know how and where these irrationalities and contradictions exhibit themselves within any particular society. The most general contradiction in any capitalist society is that between labour and capital. However, one must also understand certain structures within any society gain a certain relative autonomy. Because of this autonomy the basic and determinant contradiction may well express itself through the apparent over-determination of subsidiary contradictions. It is by an evaluation of these relatively autonomous structures and their relationship to the basic contradiction within society that Marxists are able to develop a programmatic perspective.
The hegemony of the British bourgeoisie is mainly, but not wholly, maintained by the mystification of the realities of the world we live in. This, at a vulgar level, takes the form of common sense and Galbraith’s ‘conventional wisdom’. Therefore, the false consciousness that we speak of is not something that appears to have been imposed from outside of the individual, but rather it manifests itself as internalised norms, etc. As such – because they are unconsciously imbibed – they present themselves as spontaneous expressions of ‘human nature’. This process is continually reinforced by the manipulation of the means of communication. This mystification is mediated by intellectuals of all ranks, who operate in the educational system, the press, television and radio, etc. In present-day conditions the organs of repression, which some Marxists unfortunately see as being the main or only instrument of bourgeois hegemony, are subordinated in their role. They only are brought into play when other means have failed to produce the required results. This is not to say that these organs are unimportant, or that they can be dismissed, on the contrary it is likely that they will be used more in the coming period than has been the case during the last 20 years or so. There has certainly been a weakening of the fear of those in authority since 1945, and this is indicated in a number of ways. Perhaps the most commented-on aspect is the attitude of workers to authority within the factories, but this is only a particular expression of a more general phenomenon. But this phenomenon is at best inchoate, and has yet to find a generalised positive expression; common sense still rules the mental universe of the working class. Such a situation is no doubt irritating for the ‘establishment’ and even at times worrying, but as yet not decisively so. Such situations are manifestations of the general crisis of British capitalism, which has been chronic since 1945, and the particular conditions relating to full employment. Such a crisis can drag on for decades, as Gramsci points out, unless a cohesive and well-organised force appears to challenge the hegemony of the ruling class.
Régis Debray, in his book Revolution in the Revolution, makes the point that it is important to strike at the enemy’s élite troops, because they are the key element in holding all the forces together. The question for us here in Britain is – Who are our enemy’s élite troops? I have pointed out that the mystification process is mediated via the intelligentsia, and this group constitutes the ‘élite troops’ of the British bourgeoisie. This stratum carries out this role in a very concrete manner, at many levels of society, but it is in the higher reaches of the educational system, communications system and industry that it constitutes a real caste. It is in the sphere of the production of these intellectuals that the state plays an important role. It is important in this context to understand why there is such hostility displayed towards those students who demand a voice and vote in the running of institutions of higher learning. This area of life is one of extreme sensitivity for the dominance of bourgeois ideology.
The aim of Marxists in this situation must be the creation of cadres (intellectuals of the new type) drawn both from the working class and the intelligentsia who will ‘attack’ this élite corps. Such an attack must not only have the element of destruction but also one of positive affirmation. To do this there must be a separation, dividing lines must be very sharply drawn. A weak cadre cannot afford to enter alliances, because it will be absorbed by its allies. This weakness does not only refer to numbers but also to ideological quality. Only in irreconcilable struggle can Marxist cadres be gathered and maintained. Lenin said: ‘... we declare that before we can unite and in order that we may unite, we must first draw firm and definite lines of demarcation.’ (What Is To Be Done?, p. 56) [7] Note the phrase ‘and in order that we may unite’, this process of demarcation does not mean a withdrawal into isolation and literary Marxism, it means that one must be very clear on who is an ally, who is a cadre and who must be opposed. All alliances seen from this point of view must have the aim of enlarging the numbers and influence of the Marxist cadre. But for this to take place there must be a period of separation. In practice, here in Britain this means that the Marxist cadres must be ideologically formed in opposition to and outside of the Social-Democratic milieu. This is not to be construed as a rejection of the need for Marxist cadres to participate in the labour movement as we find it. But one cannot properly carry out the ideological struggle necessary by only using Aesopian language or looking over one’s shoulder in fear of expulsion.
The key areas for the gathering of the ‘grain of sand’ (not to be confused with the building of a mass movement) must be where the material is most likely to be found, and these are in the educational system and the rank-and-file activities of the working class. These areas are very sensitive. Within the educational system students represent a volatile and impressionable segment of society, because of their age and the fact that they are in the process of equipping themselves with certain techniques. Many of them today are seeing themselves as workers who have to fight for better wages and conditions. It is no accident that in an age of mass technology the intellectuals are becoming proletarianised. Far from becoming a substitute for the working class they are becoming a part of it as never before. The rank-and-file militants on the other hand represent the best and most active section of the working class. Because of their experiences these militants have begun to react to the bureaucracy in the trade unions. Such people must be gathered and have their ideological vision widened and a fruitful interaction brought about.
Marxists should not allow the enemy to dictate the field of action, when this happens one can be sure that it is done because the enemy feels confident of victory. Bourgeois morality must be used and transgressed. All of the existing Marxist groups, in practice, accept the dictation of the field of action by the bourgeoisie. In doing so they accept their subordination. The monopolist control of the means of communication is accepted, and Marxists only participate on such conditions as usually to emasculate their message. What are needed are open and unfettered means of communication which are outside the present monopolist system.
Régis Debray analyses the idea of the revolutionary foco within the context of Latin America. Briefly, the foco implies that the cadres choose their own field of battle away from the ruling-class strongholds and concentration of fire-power of the cadres so that the superiority of the enemy is lessened and possibly overcome. However, it should be clear that such focos are not intended to defeat the enemy on a military level but rather to act as sparks that set the inflammable material surrounding them alight. Is there a lesson for us here? I think so. Firstly, in the first stages of gathering together a cadre there must be a concentration of the few available people. Secondly, a concentration enlarges the ‘fire-power’ of such a cadre. Given sufficient concentration there is a qualitative enlargement of the abilities of all the component members. In a period of ‘social peace’ the spreading of cadres over large areas, either geographically or in spheres of activity, inevitably leads to a dilution of effort and effectiveness. The concentration must not be seen as being for the cadres’ comfort and mutual solace, it is for its external effects in acting as a polarising force that it must be undertaken.
The process of forming such an initial cadre will not be an easy or short task, it can only be achieved by a continuous and conscious effort of will. If this sounds like voluntarism, the answer is that all Marxist activity at this period has a large element of this, without it we remain captives of ‘common sense’. Gramsci makes the point:
Too much (and therefore superficial and mechanical) political realism often leads to the assertion that the man of state must only work within the sphere of ‘effective reality’, not interest himself in ‘what should be’ but only in ‘what is’. This would mean that the man of state must have no perspective longer than his nose.
Engels’ phrase ‘freedom is the recognition of necessity’ cannot be understood in a passive way, recognition here implies an active and creative participation in the making of that freedom. In this way, to have a perspective or knowledge of the future implies action that is incorporated in it. If one refuses to take positive and meaningful action, one remains passive in the face of the objectivity that dominates instead of being transformed and transcended by revolutionary praxis. In the sphere of building a Marxist cadre this means that old, subordinate and anti-intellectualist methods have to be replaced. The cadre will not be built by drawing a large periphery around an indeterminate centre, but like a pearl which is built up layer by layer around a hard core. It is because the process must evolve in this way that a confrontation with bourgeois ideology must take place in all spheres. Lenin made this point when he said: ‘In order to bring the worker political knowledge, Social-Democrats must go into all classes of the population, must send out units of their army in all directions.’ (What Is To Be Done?, p. 102) [8]
All directions means in all spheres of life, and that Marxists do not only concern themselves with the problems of the working class but with all the oppressed. It is only by creating a mirror of the whole society that the working class can perceive itself. The Marxist critique must be articulated at all levels of society, in history, science, economics, sociology, art, sport, etc., etc. Any such critique must be creative, not formalised or ritualised. Lenin said that Marxists have to impart a very clear idea of the totality of the universe we inhabit:
And this ‘clear idea’ cannot be obtained from any book. It can only be supplied by vivid pictures and arraignments compiled on the basis of fresh evidence of what is happening around us at a given moment, of what everyone is talking, in his own way, or at least whispering about, of what is expressed in such and such events, such and such figures, such and such court judgements, etc., etc. These all-embracing political arraignments are a necessary and fundamental condition for educating the masses in revolutionary activity. (What Is To Be Done?, pp. 95–96) [9]
Unless one starts from this premise then one loses one’s way, for a cadre – even a ‘grain of sand’ – does not start its activities from an abstract and remote plane, but from the very real and material prerequisites that already exist; even though at times it is necessary to raise these to the level of abstraction to reveal their inner content. Such a critique can only start with the material at hand both objectively and subjectively, that is, it is not possible to cover the whole range of possibilities initially. First and foremost a Marxist cadre must be consistently oriented towards the working class. The struggle against bourgeois ideology must be fought in that sphere above all. It matters not one whit if one only defeats bourgeois ideologists in well-mannered debates before middle-class audiences if this is not transmitted to the working class. Marxist ideology must become a living material force within society and it must seek this force within the working class.
Any process of clarification means sloughing off the old outworn elements. Similarly, to achieve as pure a product as possible it is necessary to exclude impurities. Therefore cadres can only be built on the basis of the strictest selection. This selection must be emphasised. In the recruitment of new people there has to be a high standard of competence demanded. The door to membership of a Marxist cadre organisation cannot be wide open. If the cadre is to do its work properly there must be a deep rapport. This rapport must be very different to the type of uniformity imposed by subordination to one or two ‘theoreticians’. Such rapport must arise from a meticulous attention to theory and education, plus meaningful activity. Such education cannot be seen as something handed down, rather it must be seen as a continuing process for all concerned. Moreover, such education, whilst having as its basis the texts of the Marxist movement, must have its content continually enriched by actual struggle.
I want now briefly to mention the question of internationalism. No Marxist cadres can be created on a narrow national basis. It is true that we have to work in the situation in which we move and much of our experience will be drawn from this. But there can be no relapse into narrow national solipsism. Lenin, again, has something very useful to say on this point:
... the Social-Democratic movement is essentially international. This does not only mean that we must fight national chauvinism, but also that a movement starting in a young country can only be successful if it absorbs the experience of other countries ... it is not sufficient merely to be acquainted with it, or just to copy the latest resolutions. It requires the ability to treat this experience critically and to test it independently. (What Is To Be Done?, p. 9) [10]
There you have three key words – absorb, criticise and test – only thus armed can one approach the question of internationalism, any undue weight given to one of them leads to a one-sided and stunted appraisal. Internationalism is not a one-way process, the benefits that accrue from international collaboration will increase manifold only to the extent that each participant contributes. The need for a mass revolutionary International is more pressing today than it was in 1919. As in other matters, its creation will not be completely dependent on objective circumstances, the recognition of the need implies active work for its creation now. (This subject will be given a more extended treatment in the next article.)
 
Conclusion
There may appear to be a lack of very concrete propositions for action put forward in this essay. This, of necessity, must be the case because concrete and detailed propositions relating to the subject-matter can only be made after thorough discussion on the main postulates, and these have been to some extent a critical analysis of the past. The tasks that need to be carried out will not automatically present themselves from this analysis, but the main areas of activity have. Moreover, tasks cannot be discussed in a vacuum or suggested to disembodied spirits, they can only be discussed with real people. Certainly the most concrete action initially is the publication of this essay with the intention of beginning a discussion around the analysis. But this can only be a first step, although a continuing one, as the discussion unfolds actions will be initiated.
Precisely because I have attempted to raise the discussion along unfamiliar lines it may appear to be somewhat abstract, nevertheless it is grounded, indeed very firmly so, in the actual conditions that have been traversed and still face us here and now. What we make of these depends on each and every one of us.

Notes
1. See Towards Socialism (London 1965).
2. Rosa Luxemburg, Social Reform or Revolution?.
3. V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Vol. 5.
4. The headquarters of the Communist Party of Great Britain was for many years in King Street in the Covent Garden area of London; the Socialist Labour League had its headquarters at this juncture in Clapham High Street. The author’s reference to ‘uncle’ is referring to the change of allegiance of these intellectuals from ‘Uncle Joe’ Stalin to Gerry Healy – MIA.
5. L.D. Trotsky, From a Scratch To the Danger of Gangrene, In Defence of Marxism.
6. It seems that the word ‘faction’ is meant here and in the following paragraphs – MIA.
7. V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Vol. 5.
8. V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Vol. 5.
9. V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Vol. 5.
10. V.I. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Collected Works, Vol. 5.
 



I
The problem of international liquidity [1] has been the grumbling appendix of imperialism for a number of years now, one that has been nagging and insistent. With the devaluation of the pound sterling last autumn it seemed to be in imminent danger of assuming unmanageable proportions. Therefore it is necessary to analyse what this means and the possible consequences.
A significant indication that this question was reaching crisis point was that in the year 1966 no new gold was added to world (that is, capitalist world) reserves. The January 1967 Economic Letter of the United States First National Bank pointed out that this was the first time in modern times that this had happened. All the new gold that came on to the market went into the hands of private speculators or was used for industrial purposes. The letter said ‘during the first nine months of 1966 official gold stock, as published, actually declined by some $50m, as compared with a gain of $250m in 1965’. From 1955 to 1964 the average growth of official gold stocks each year was in the order of $600m. Since 1966 official gold stocks have actually declined. [2] ‘The situation became dramatic when official stocks of gold after the devaluation of the pound lost over $3000m to private speculators.’ [3] The largest loser of gold has been, of course, the United States, which had $23,000m in gold reserves in 1957, but today this has sunk to $10,000m.
To understand the full significance of all this it is necessary to retrace our steps a little and examine how the present international monetary system came into being. Up to the early 1930s there operated in most countries what was known as the Gold Standard. This was the system whereby the amount of currency in circulation was in a ratio to the quantity of gold held, and gold was also used to settle outstanding international debts. Therefore when a country had a balance of payments deficit and it lost gold from its reserves there was supposed to be an automatic reduction in the amount of money in circulation, and ultimately there would be deflation, unemployment, decreased imports, etc. [4]
Because of the great slump in the early 1930s, Britain and nearly all other capitalist countries went off the Gold Standard and there ensued a period of floating exchange rates and devaluations in a period which was dominated by what Joan Robinson has aptly described as ‘beggar my neighbour policies’.
After the Second World War there was devised what is known as the Gold Exchange Standard. Under this system the only country whose money was directly related to gold was that of the US. [5] However, all currencies are now linked together via the dollar and gold. The US Treasury set the price for gold at $35 per ounce in 1934, and has not increased this price since. Therefore there is now a system where the rest of the capitalist world currencies are only indirectly linked with gold, and this for international purposes only, since exchange rates are quoted in dollars or gold. But for internal usage the limits put upon the quantity of money circulating by the old Gold Standard no longer obtain. An integral part of the Gold Exchange Standard is that the dollar and sterling have played the role of key or reserve currencies, in other words they were accorded a special status, but it should be noted that as far as sterling is concerned this has been by courtesy of the US.
Due to the greatly expanded world trade since the end of the Second World War there is no longer sufficient gold supplies to maintain an adequate reserve. World trade itself has grown at a staggering pace in the postwar period, more than trebling in the last 20 years, and more than doubling over the last 10. [6] Between 1950 and 1966 world trade increased at the rate of 7.5 per cent per annum, gold stocks by less than 1.5 per cent. This led to an extension of the use of the two key currencies, particularly of dollars, as reserves. Central banks have been willing to hold these two currencies as part of their reserve. Since both are on the Gold Exchange Standard this has meant that in theory both could be regarded as being as ‘good as gold’.
This was fine so long as both currencies were strong. But one of the major problems has been that sterling has not been strong. Given the high ratio of liabilities to reserves (running at approximately four to one since 1945, as against one to one before the war) it has meant that the British contribution to international liquidity has been declining, and an unstable element. Similarly the decline in US reserves has been matched by a rise in its liabilities to overseas creditors. In the period 1957–68 these liabilities rose from $10,000m to $33,000m. [7]
The Gold Exchange Standard was able to function quite well so long as all the capitalist countries outside the US were short of dollars. These were needed to buy goods and capital equipment which in the immediate postwar years only the US could supply. During this period dollars were eagerly sought after, and the US had a surplus on its balance of payments. The situation began to change in the mid-1950s when the boom in Western Europe and Japan really got into its stride. These areas began to build up large dollar balances, and the US found itself running into balance of payments difficulties. In some respects there is a similarity between the US’s and Britain’s problems, but they are more apparent than real. The US has a favourable balance of trade, that is, it is still selling more overseas that it imports, its balance of payments deficits arise from other sources. (There is some indication that the balance of trade may turn against the US this year.) The British problem is that along with some of the factors that relate to the US it also has an unfavourable balance of trade, that is, it imports more than it exports. This has been usual for Britain historically.
The deficit of the US has two aspects. On the one hand it is an expression of the increasing strength of its competitors. On the other hand it is an expression of its still great superiority in economic and technological terms. The US has still a favourable balance of trade as can be seen from the following.

Export of goods: 1958: $16 billion; 1965: $26 billion.
Import of goods: 1958: $14 billion; 1965: $21 billion. [8]
Goods and services Imports, 1967: $26.99 billion.
Goods and services Exports, 1967: $30.47 billion. [9]

Where does the deficit come from then? From two main sources, overseas investment and military expenditure overseas. In much the same way as Britain, the US has increased its overseas investments tremendously since 1945. The value of this investment has risen from $19 billion in 1955 to well over $50 billion in 1966. [10] The reason for this is not hard to find, it has been estimated that the rate of profit for overseas investment for US corporations is 15 per cent as compared with 10 per cent at home. Moreover, this capital export helps maintain sagging profit rates at home, that is, all things being equal, if the capital exported were to be invested at home it would further depress the existing rate of profit. Military and other US government overseas grants amounted to $3.4 billion in 1965, in the same year the net private overseas investment was $3.7 billion. In that year the US had a balance of payments deficit of $1.4 billion.
Similarly, Britain has increased the export of capital on a great scale since the end of the last war, the latest estimate puts it at £6,000m, and the latest total for British overseas investment is now estimated to be in the order of £11,500m. [11]
However, certain factors have to be noted about this. Investment income for 1950 was gross £271m, and net £159m. By 1961 these figures were £676m and £252m respectively. [12] This would seem to be a healthy trend. But net property income as a percentage of means of payments for imports declined from 14.0 per cent in 1950 to 6.0 per cent in 1961, that is, although the total amount has increased the specific weight of this item in the balance of payments has declined. (Historically the decline has been much greater, in 1913 this item accounted for 25 per cent.) [13] Another element has to be noted, this is the increase in the Government Account in the balance of payments figures; in 1950 this stood at £136m, by 1964 it had swollen to £439m. In this way both of the major imperialist powers have a common pattern, that is, rising foreign investment, rising overseas military expenditure, and continual balance of payments deficits. Military expenditure overseas has been a big factor in both cases. The British government deficit on current account, that is, the amount it spends overseas less any amount of income from such activities, rose from £67m in 1955 to £273m in 1966, there being some reduction in 1967 to £258m. [14]
Although there is no close correlation between capital exports and overseas military expenditure in the sense that the two items do not necessarily take place in the same countries, it is obvious that the intensity and extent of the colonial revolution since 1945 must account for a large part of overseas military expenditure. Therefore, it can be seen as a necessary cost in an overall way for the maintenance of overseas investments. This is why both the US and Britain have been putting pressure on their allies in recent years to share some of the cost involved.
 
II
I said earlier that the deficit of the US was an expression of its own superior economy and the relative strengthening of its capitalist competitors. This can be explained in this way. The large dollar reserves accumulated by Western European countries are an indication of their recovery from the prostration of the immediate postwar years and their increasing role as competitors. The contradiction arises because the dollar reserves are only one side of the coin, the other side is that these reserves represent a large penetration of US capital into Western Europe. In 1957 there was approximately $500m US investments in Western Germany, by 1965 this had risen to around $2400m. Since 1958 US investment in Western Europe as a whole has been over £10,000m, which represents more than a third of the total US overseas investment in that period. In Britain, in 1957 US investments stood at a little under $2000m, by 1965 this had risen to $5000m. [15] What has been taking place has been a massive invasion by US capital and the taking over of some dominant sectors in some industries. For instance, in Britain 80 per cent of the typewriter industry is owned by foreign-based companies, mainly US; 50 per cent of the British automobile industry is now controlled by US firms. In the field of computers, a key industry in the development of modern technology, the industry is becoming dominated by US giants such as IBM. In the field of electronics, US companies hold a dominating place in all Western Europe. One writer has put the position in these terms: ‘Fifteen years from now it is quite possible that the world’s third largest industrial power, just after the US and Russia, will not be Europe, but American industry in Europe.’ [16]
This invasion, and dominance, is one of the major questions at the heart of the ‘liquidity dispute’. The French have been the most vocal and persistent critics of the large American deficits, and until this year had been converting their dollars into gold. They were not the only ones, most of the other Western European countries have been doing the same, but without such fanfare. Hence the steady decline in US gold stocks. There are two aspects to this resistance to US capital inflow. Firstly, there is the fact that the Europeans have been largely paying for this themselves. Only 10 per cent of the $4000m invested by US firms in Europe in 1965 came from direct transfers from the US. [17] In other words by holding large amounts of dollars the West European countries help to finance the US balance of payments deficit and indirectly US investments in their own countries. The second aspect is the fear that vital parts of the economies will be completely subordinated to US interests. The problem here is that there is a fear that in the event of a general recession it will be European subsidiaries that will suffer cutbacks, rather than the US parent company; and also that research will more and more be concentrated in the US and Europeans will become even more dependent than they are today for technical advance. Given the fulfilment of the above projection it would mean the transformation of Western Europe from a position of relative vassalage to one of absolute dependence. De Gaulle’s ‘anti-Americanism’ is therefore far more than the whim of an old man. (In the same way the French attitude to British entry into the Common Market can be viewed not as something irrational but because they see Britain as the Trojan horse of US imperialism.)
The accumulation of gold has led to an intensification of the quest for a settlement of the liquidity problem. At the moment the large dollar balances that have accumulated in Europe and the rest of the capitalist world have helped to lubricate international trade. These dollar reserves also have the advantage of earning interest, since they are largely held in the form of short-term US government bills. The exchange of these into gold means that no interest is earned. Therefore the larger the amount of reserves held in gold the larger the amount of capital that is frozen and unremunerative.
At present the official gold price of $35 per ounce fixed in 1934 is one of the big disputes within the liquidity problem. The US was until recently willing to buy or sell gold at this price to any non-American citizen or government. However, since this is a fixed price it means that because of inflation the value of gold in real terms has declined over the years. In this situation where large holdings of dollars have accumulated with overseas creditors it has entailed a transfer of value to the US, that is, the longer you hold a dollar in a situation of rising prices the less you will be able to obtain for it. The French, and others, have been arguing that one solution to the present shortage of international liquidity would be to increase the price of gold, even suggesting $70 per ounce would be a proper price today. In effect this would mean a devaluation of the dollar and all other currencies in relation to gold. This the US has strongly resisted. One reason for this opposition is that at present the US dollar is probably over-valued in relation to other currencies [18] and any tampering with it would probably entail this being corrected to the further detriment of the US. Along with the suggested price increase for gold there has been great pressure put on the Americans to reduce their balance of payments deficit, since it is argued that these continual deficits have an inflationary effect upon the rest of the world economy. Of course behind these arguments is the dispute about power and US hegemony.
The uncertainty engendered by these discussions explains the disappearance of gold into private hoards, the speculators were hoping for a price increase and so make a ‘killing’ when they unloaded it back on to the market, or back to the US Treasury.
When sterling was devalued last November (1967) the pressure on the gold market became very great indeed. Therefore earlier this year there was a hurried compromise reached between the US and the other central banks of the capitalist world. This compromise in effect decided that there would be two prices for gold. The first was the old rate of $35 per ounce at which the central banks would buy and sell gold to each other, but not to private speculators; the second price would be a free-market price which would be determined by supply and demand on the world market. This decision helped to ease the situation somewhat, since the free-market price for gold rose above the fixed price and some of the speculators unloaded their gold taking a much more modest (but still considerable) profit than they had anticipated. However, most commentators agreed that this was only a temporary measure.
Alternative ideas for increasing liquidity have been circulating for a number of years now. One that both the US and Britain favoured seems to have won out in the end. This was that the International Monetary Fund should create new international reserve units which would be acceptable to all countries in the settlement of debts. The crucial problem of such a plan is who is to control the creation of this new unit, and how will it be distributed and on what terms.
The whole point in having reserves is to enable one to continue buying when one’s income is reduced, or when one wants to buy more than current income will allow. If the IMF is to control the use of such reserves it means that it will be able to dictate economic policy to those who wish to borrow. This in fact has been happening already, particularly with the underdeveloped countries. Since those who put most into the fund also get the most say, this has in effect meant that America has controlled the fund. On the one hand America has been following a policy of deficits for itself, paying its creditors with paper dollars; on the other hand it has, through the IMF, been forcing the small fry of the world (including Britain) to adopt deflationary policies when they run into balance of payments problems. Therefore the US has been getting the best of all possible worlds. Should a new international unit of money be created which has been cut off from its gold base the stage will be set for the complete domination by the US, and an orgy of inflation. This is what the other capitalist powers are afraid of.
However, the urgency of the situation was becoming evident some two years ago. The editorial of the Financial Times of 3 January 1967 said: ‘The pressure on gold supplies in general ... and the possibility that it may increase makes it even more urgently necessary to agree some means of stretching these supplies to support the continued growth of world trade.’ Further on, talking about the conflict between the US and France it said: ‘ ... it may be necessary to devise some compromise scheme in which composite units are created for use as a supplement to gold in international settlement.’ This compromise was in fact reached at a meeting of the IMF in September 1967. Then a scheme was agreed to create Special Drawing Rights (SDRs). SDRs have been said to be some kind of new international currency, and their creation was trumpeted as a solution to the liquidity problem. However, on closer examination their real value is much more limited. Member countries will be able to pay off external debts by transferring their claims on the Fund to other nations. In this way they are a form of overdraft to which they will be entitled to over and above their normal quotas, which depend upon their contributions to the Fund. Therefore the ability of the IMF to create SDRs will depend upon the amount of gold and national currencies it holds, in just the same way as any commercial bank is limited in the amount of overdrafts that it can grant by the amount of reserves it holds. In both cases there is a definite ratio. Even when SDRs become fully operative in 1969 they will only be creating new reserves at a rate of one to two billion dollars per year, while trade grows at the rate of seven billion dollars per year. Therefore the gap between reserves and needs will not be appreciably narrowed. [19]
 
III
There is one aspect of the problem that I have not yet dealt with, this is the question of the underdeveloped countries, that is, the colonial and semi-colonial world. Reading the general and financial press this aspect is rarely mentioned, nor is this surprising since control of international liquidity is an aspect of imperialist domination of these countries. On this aspect all the capitalist powers are united.
If the situation between the imperialist powers is contradictory, then the relationship between them collectively and the colonial world is doubly so. The problem is not only that the imperialist powers want to obtain raw materials and food products as cheaply as possible, but they also need to sell their exports to such countries as dearly as possible. Despite the fact that the largest increase in world trade since the end of the Second World War has been between the advanced countries, this does not mean that the trade between the ‘two worlds’ has declined; far from it, it also has increased. To attempt to overcome the problem of realisation of surplus value the imperialists will look more and more to the underdeveloped world. It is in the process of world trade that much of the exploitation of the colonial world takes place, even after formal independence has been granted:
Trade between industrialised and underdeveloped countries at ‘world market prices’ is not based upon an equal exchange of value, but on a constant transfer of value (surplus profit) from the underdeveloped to the industrialised countries, exactly in the same way as exchange between firms, some of which enjoy monopolies of technical know-how (and so produce at a level of productivity above the national average), transfer surplus profits to those firms on the national market of a capitalist country. [20]
In a crude way this can be seen from the balance of trade figures for the primary-producing countries over the years 1956 to 1967. [21]



Year


 


Exports
in $ billion


 


Imports
in $ billion


 


Balance
in $ billion




1956


  7.15


  7.64


−0.49




1957


  7.38


  8.54


−1.16




1958


  7.03


  8.09


−1.06




1959


  7.46


  7.96


−0.50




1960


  7.87


  8.89


−1.02




1961


  8.03


  9.03


−1.00




1962


  8.41


  9.19


−0.78




1963


  9.22


  9.65


−0.43




1964


10.08


10.73


−0.65




1965


10.56


11.52


−0.96




1966


11.27


12.07


−0.80




1967


11.65


12.65


−1.00



Thus we can see for the whole period the primary-producing countries were in deficit, and since such countries have very little in the way of invisible earnings this is important. One point should be made, such countries as South Africa, Australia and New Zealand are included in this category. Also world prices have moved against primary-producers during this period, so that to obtain an equivalent amount of exchange more products would have to be exported. Henry Vallin, in the Summer 1966 issue of International Socialist Review, makes the point tellingly in relation to Nkrumah’s downfall:
... the real conspiracy that brought Nkrumah down was not the military one ... The real conspiracy was the catastrophic decline in the price of cocoa during the last seven years to nearly one-fifth of what it was in the late 1950s. From a peak of over $1,000 a ton in 1957–58, the price dropped to $504 in 1963–64 and down as low as $210 last summer ... [22]
This of course reveals one side of the picture, the transfer of surplus value to the imperialist powers and the unbalanced trade of the colonial countries. However, this itself presents a contradiction because the lower the income of these countries the less they are able to import. Ernest Mandel indicates how this is partially overcome:
... the adverse evolution of the terms of trade is no absolute check on the imports of manufactured goods by underdeveloped countries, so long as supplementary purchasing power can be found: a) in the revenue of the native ruling classes, exchanged for imported luxury goods (which might imply a drain of gold and silver, if the adverse trend of the terms of the trade creates balance of payments deficit); b) through the increase in the quantities of primary products produced and exported, which might offset the effects of the adverse movements of the terms of trade on balance of payments; c) through a development of capital exports by industrialised countries, which play the role of credit, enabling the underdeveloped countries to increase their imports of manufactured goods ... [23]
It is this last point that has special relevance here.
Referring back to the table of the primary-producing countries trade balances we can see why the provision of credit assumes such an important part of the question of international liquidity. Allowing for some effect from Mandel’s a) and recognising that the ultimate outcome of b) will probably be a further decline of income per unit, and possibly a decline in total income, the question of credit assumes an overwhelmingly predominant place not only for the underdeveloped countries but also for the imperialist powers. In this context it is interesting to note that immediately after the coup in Ghana European banks advanced a loan to the military regime, and the IMF moved in a little later with a larger loan. This had been previously refused to Nkrumah, for obvious reasons, but the imperialists were very anxious that the economy of Ghana should not grind to a halt, for this would imply a cessation of imports.
Total reserves of gold and foreign currencies for the industrial countries in 1955 stood at $37.50 billion, by 1966 they had risen to $49.72 billion. However, those of the primary-producing countries had only risen from $10.69 billion in 1955 to $13.98 billion in 1966. [24] Therefore as a whole world liquidity was becoming smaller in relation to the increased trade, and the primary-producing countries were actually slipping back, that is, although total reserves have risen their ratio to trade declined. From the point of view of the needs of the primary-producers they should have had access to more liquidity. Balogh explains this so:
Poor countries will probably have a greater need for holding reserves than richer ones, and this for two reasons. On the one hand, the instability of primary-products markets and the harvest is notorious, and they mostly depend on a few products of this type, which increases their risk. On the other hand their capacity to obtain credits on reasonable terms is much less than that of the richer countries. Unless purposive international institutional arrangements are made ... the limitations on the choice of policy (for example, the prohibition of direct control over imports and exports) imposes disproportionate burdens on poor countries. Their acceptance of such burdens is rational only if international arrangements are made to offset this burden by special grants or credit arrangements. [25]
However, from the point of view of the underdeveloped countries the suggested remedies are at best only palliatives that cannot basically alter their situation. Their poverty and slow development remains a function of imperialism just so long as that relationship exists. Loans can only be short-term measures, nor should the cost of them be ignored. But from the imperialists’ point of view the grants and loans are very profitable. The profitability of loans needs no explanation, both in terms of interest and induced exports. Grants need a word or so more. Seen from the point of view of the ‘national interest’ the grants of aid by the imperialist powers to underdeveloped countries seem to be very altruistic. However, seen from the point of view of the monopolists who are interested in exporting either consumer or capital goods, these grants to colonial countries are a permanent subsidy to the metropolitan exporters. In just the same way overseas military expenditure can be seen as a debit in the balance of payments account but as a gift to the monopolists. The point here is that the whole of the economy, via taxation, pays for aid and military expenditure whilst the monopolists make the profit. True enough that they also pay taxes but this is only a fraction of the cost of either of these two items, particularly in Britain where the incidence of taxation on consumption has risen far more than that on companies since the mid-1950s.
Another aspect of this question is that more and more developed countries who give aid are tying the loans, so that the recipient country is forced to buy from the donor. The US has recently been in conflict with the International Development Agency over making the quota that it subscribes to the Agency tied, and because of the balance of payments deficits it is encountering now insists on 95 per cent of its aid being tied.
 
IV
At the moment it is difficult to hazard any prediction as to how the imperialist powers will resolve the related problems of international liquidity. Without the massive American deficits the situation would be catastrophic for the capitalist world there would be a tremendous contraction of international trade. Therefore the French suggestion of a return to the Gold Standard which implies a drastic reduction of international liquidity in present circumstances – can only be seen as an extreme bargaining position. No matter how much they twist and turn the West Europeans are caught in a dilemma that they will have to face up to; this is the fact that despite their improved financial position since the mid-1950s they are in no position as yet to have a direct confrontation with the US. The overwhelming technological and economic superiority of the US ensures its eventual domination in the financial sphere, even though it appears to be somewhat weakened at the moment; for as I have tried to indicate this apparent weakness flows from its basic strength. Moreover, since Congress has at last passed new tax increases this will take some steam out of the US economy, which in turn will affect its balance of payments.
The devaluation of sterling last November opened a phase in the postwar world financial structure. Steps are now being taken to end sterling’s role as a reserve currency. The Basle $2,000m credit that was arranged this September does in the words of The Times indicate ‘an epoch-making plan’. [26] In essence this plan is one that will allow Britain gradually to divest itself of the large sterling balances that are held as reserves by a number of countries. This loan will enable Britain to meet these obligations if need arises without undue strain on British reserves, of course the money will have to be repaid but over a period, so it gives time to put matters in order.
But with the gradual rundown of sterling as a reserve currency comes ever nearer the problem of expanding international liquidity. In some ways the international capitalists are in a cleft stick. On the one side it is argued that to put matters right both Britain and the US have to reduce deficits, on the other hand it is recognised that they cannot do this without some other form of international liquidity being found, for the removal of the deficits means a contraction of liquid funds. Given the fundamental irrationality of the present system, where international reserves are still tied to gold, and there is sufficient of this commodity to serve its dual function as a measure of value and an industrial material, it seems that the problem is almost insuperable. Moreover, if the Vietnam war is ended within the foreseeable future this will mean a further reduction in the US deficit and the predictable consequences. This will further strengthen US imperialism, since it will be better equipped to exert its economic superiority over its rivals. This liquidity question partially explains the reasons for the desire of the US to pull out of Vietnam. It is not only that it has been unable to defeat the NLF, but their very efforts to defend imperialist interests has actually led to a weakening of its own position vis à vis its imperialist rivals. This very exertion of tremendous military strength has paradoxically exposed the system to unforeseen strains, thereby exposing the limits to which Keynesian ‘solutions’ to capitalism’s problems can be pushed.
Those who advocate the creation of an international dollar issued by the IMF [27] fail to realise that such a dollar will merely be the US dollar with a different hat on. The creation of such a monetary unit, one that is divorced from a gold base, would lead to US imperialism getting a firmer grip than it has already, and further international inflation, and all things being equal it is always the poor who suffer more from inflation than the rich.
For the underdeveloped countries an increase in world liquidity may mean further loans and a little more ‘aid’, but this will only be to chain them more firmly to the imperialist system. And this implies their further slide into poverty.
The editors of Monthly Review wrote in December 1966 that ‘the United States balance of payments deficit is a powerful time-bomb ticking away in the financial engine-room of the world capitalist system. Unless the bomb is defused in good time a shattering explosion is inevitable ...’ It is to defuse this bomb that finance ministers scurry around the world. That the bomb is still ticking away we should be in no doubt, Malcolm Crawford writing in The Sunday Times of 29 September 1968 said that unless a solution was found ‘the chances are still that there will be one unholy explosion in the engine shed, and the existing monetary set-up will blow itself to pieces’. The apparent stability of world capitalism is today more threatened than at any time since the great crash of 1929. Not only does it have the ‘time-bomb’ ticking away, revolution reaches new heights each year. The end of an epoch for sterling, France May–June 1968, Vietnam, gold crises, all these things are interconnected. They are not separate phenomena but merely different facets of the same system, and that system is one of semi-permanent crisis.
20 October 1968

Postscript
The new exchange controls introduced by the Treasury and the Bank of England in October, which prohibits sterling being used to provide credits for trade between non-sterling countries, is a further blow to world liquidity. When all such credits that are outstanding are repaid the reserves will improve by about £100m. However the actual loss to world liquidity will be much greater since trade credits are usually three or six months, that is, this £100m could have financed trade of between £200m to £400m in any one year. This measure, along with the Basle credits, is an indication of the changing role of sterling in the international economy. It also indicates the continuing instability of sterling, and indeed the international monetary system.
6 November 1968

Appendix
Readers should clarify in their own minds the difference between a trade deficit and a balance of payments deficit. The trade balance is the difference between physical imports and exports. The balance of payments is made up from a number of items, of which the trade balance is only one item. Such items as invisible earnings, that is, insurance, shipping, etc., enter into balance of payments, also earnings from overseas investments, and capital account.

Notes
1. Liquidity can be described, briefly, as command over money or near money, that is, those assets that one’s creditors will accept in payment for a debt, or that one can easily turn into money. For instance if one holds a bill of exchange that is due to be paid to you in three days’ time this is much more a liquid asset than a bill that is not due to be paid for 12 months. In this sense international liquidity is the reserve of ‘money’ that is available in the capitalist world that is acceptable for international debt settlement. It is a very important element within the system, because it partially regulates the flow of trade.
2. Financial Times, 2 July 1968.
3. Dr F. Aschinger, economic adviser to the Swiss Bank Corporation, Financial Times, 2 July 1968.
4. See appendix for definitions.
5. There are moves afoot to dispense with this link now.
6. See The Sunday Times, 20 September 1968.
7. Financial Times, 2 July 1968.
8. Quoted by D. Michaels in Monthly Review, December 1966.
9. National Institute Economic Review, August 1968, Table 5, p. 22.
10. D. Michaels in Monthly Review, December 1966.
11. Bank of England report quoted in The Sunday Times, 19 September 1968.
12. See A.R. Conan, The Problem of Sterling (Macmillan, 1966).
13. M. Barrett-Brown, After Imperialism (Heinemann, 1963).
14. M. Panic, Britain’s Invisible Balance, Lloyds Bank Review, July 1968.
15. See Geoffrey Owen, Financial Times, 2 January 1967.
16. See extract from J.J. Servan-Schreiber, The American Challenge, The Times, 15 July 1968.
17. See extract from J.J. Servan-Schreiber, The American Challenge, The Times, 15 July 1968.
18. P.M. Oppenheimer, Economic Welfare and the Price of Gold, Westminster Bank Review, August 1968.
19. See Malcolm Crawford, The Sunday Times, 29 September 1968.
20. Ernest Mandel, Contemporary Imperialism, New Left Review, No. 25.
21. NIER, National Institute Economic Review, August 1968, Table 26.
22. International Socialist Review, Summer 1966, original emphasis.
23. Ernest Mandel, Contemporary Imperialism, New Left Review, No. 25.
24. NIER, National Institute Economic Review, November 1966 and August 1968, Table 29.
25. T. Balogh, Unequal Partners, Vol. 2 (Blackwell, 1963), pp. 243–44.
26. The Times, 9 September 1968.
27. For example, Paul Derrick, World Liquidity and the Price of Gold (City Labour Discussion Circle, 1968).
 







Editor’s Note: This article was first written in October 1967 in response to an essay that appeared in New Left Review, No. 44. Although it was submitted for publication in NLR – and tentatively accepted – it has not yet been published. One reply to Nicolas Krassó has been published in NLR, No. 47, by Ernest Mandel and it is well worthwhile for readers to obtain this and the original essay. The present article stands in its own right, since the points in dispute have a significance beyond the pages of NLR. The place of Trotsky in the history of Marxism is one that still has topical import.
Since the original article and the reply were written major events have taken place that demonstrate both the validity of Trotsky’s contribution and of its relevance for politics today. Both the French events and the Czechoslovakian events, each in their own way, have shown the relevance of Trotskyism to today’s world.
The present article has been amended slightly from that version which was first submitted to the NLR in October 1967. However, in the main it still stands as it was written then.





Nicolas Krassó’s article attempting to appraise Trotsky’s place in the history of Marxism was both too long and too short. It was too long in the sense that it tried to cover such a long time-span, one that was explosively full of history-making events; too short because the nature of the material handled meant that nearly every point could only be touched upon in a generalised way. Perhaps this is the price that is paid for initiating such a discussion. However, this has raised certain problems in the writing of this reply, it has meant that not every point could be taken up and argued but only those that seem to have an important bearing on the central issues.
 
Permanent Revolution
The first point I would like to take up is the question of Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution. Nicolas Krassó calls this an ‘inept designation which by evoking the idea of a continuous conflagration at all times and at all places – a metaphysical carnival of insurrection – it lent itself to distortion in the polemic both of Trotsky’s opponents and his followers’. We are told that Trotsky’s formula conflated two quite distinct problems, the character of the Russian revolution and its ability to maintain itself without an international extension of the revolution. [1]
Nicolas Krassó contends that ‘the illegitimate nature of this process is all too obvious’, but is it? The illegitimate posing of the problem only arises if one views the question from a formal logical position. The question of the survival, or otherwise, of a successful revolution in a hostile capitalist world did hinge on the character of that revolution. If one compares the reaction of the capitalist world generally, and the Allied powers in particular, to the February revolution and the reaction to the October revolution, one sees the conflation that is objected to taking place in real life. Nor was this hostility manifested merely because the Bolsheviks sued for peace, interventions continued and grew in intensity after the defeat of Germany. Is Nicolas Krassó going to suggest that had Kerensky continued in office, with all that that would have implied, that there would have still been interventions; or on the other hand that the interventions that did (and still do) take place were merely fortuitous? To attempt to separate the two aspects of any revolution today, after all the experience that we have of imperialist interventions, is to take the discussion back half a century.
Moreover, it can be seen from living experience, that of Cuba, that the international conditions at a given time and place help to determine the nature and scope of a revolution. Any examination of this experience will show that the particular course of this revolution has been profoundly influenced by the intervention of US imperialism and the support for the revolutionary regime gathered from the workers’ states. There is another aspect to be considered, this is the international effects a victorious workers’ revolution would and does have. This side of the theory of permanent revolution implies that revolutions do not take place in isolation, but are part of an international process. Again one can point to living experience for the validity of this proposition since 1945. The victory of the Chinese revolution in 1949 and the Cuban revolution in 1959 are not two separate disconnected events, rather they form parts of that permanent revolution that Marx and Trotsky wrote about. Nicolas Krassó injected the phrase ‘metaphysical carnival of insurrection’ and then proceeds on the assumption that this was also Trotsky’s view. This is an utter distortion of Trotsky’s real views. It is interesting that Trotsky was not allowed to ‘speak’ for himself about this matter, perhaps because no quotation could be dug up to prove that he ever said that the Soviet Union could only be saved by ‘simultaneous revolutions in Western Europe’. Such nonsense will not be found in Trotsky’s writings. Deutscher presented a balanced synthesis of the permanent revolution when he wrote:
Trotsky’s theory is in truth a profound and comprehensive conception in which all the overturns that the world has been undergoing (in this late capitalist era) are represented as interconnected and interdependent parts of a single revolutionary process. To put it in the broadest terms, the social upheaval of our century is seen by Trotsky as global in scope and character, even though it proceeds on various levels of civilisation and in the most diverse social structures, and even though its various phases are separated from one another in time and space. (Introduction to The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology, p. 19) [2]
Nicolas Krassó’s attempt to refute the theory of permanent revolution is an attempt to refute the process of life in the modern world. The theory is no longer one that lives solely between the pages of a book. Since 1917 it has been subject to empirical verification and has been endorsed in the process.
 
Socialism in One Country
Nicolas Krassó’s muddled thinking on the question of permanent revolution leads him to serve up an historical and theoretical pastiche on the question of ‘Socialism in One Country’. We are told:
It was naive to speculate whether revolutions would or would not occur in the West, in general. Bolshevik strategy should not be based on the presumption of an occurrence of a European revolution; but nor should the possibility of one be discarded. After Lenin’s death, however, this dialectical position disintegrated ...
This imputes a view to Lenin that he did not hold. Lenin said very specifically on a number of occasions that ‘world imperialism cannot live side by side with a victorious advancing social revolution’. On 23 April 1918 Lenin said: ‘Our backwardness has thrust us forward and we shall perish if we are unable to hold out until we meet the mighty support of the insurrectionary workers of other countries.’ [3] These and many more references put him without question in the camp of those who thought that an isolated workers’ state would not survive for long. If, as Nicolas Krassó implies, the Bolsheviks had a non-committal attitude (it is a misuse of language to call it dialectical) to revolution in the West why was there such enthusiasm for the creation of the Third International? Moreover, the Third International did not ‘speculate’ about revolutions in the West but was viewed by nearly all the leading Bolsheviks, Lenin included, as being the world party of revolution in a very concrete and active way. Indeed any reading of the early days of the Russian Revolution makes it very clear that it was seen as a prelude to revolution in the West.
However, this was not the only aspect of ‘Socialism in One Country’ that was opposed by the Left Opposition in the 1920s. The other aspect concerned the type of society that was envisaged when one spoke about socialism. The point of departure for the Opposition was the fact that capitalism had created a world market, world economy and a worldwide division of labour. Therefore in the age of imperialism national boundaries become more and more restricting on the development of productive forces. If socialism is to develop the productive forces on such a scale that standards of material well-being are far superior to those under capitalism and men freed from routine drudgery then this international division of labour will have to be carried to a much higher pitch. To talk about the building of socialism in backward Russia was an essentially reactionary and utopian idea, it implied the abandonment of a perspective of international revolution, and along with it the best defence for a backward workers’ state.
 
The Intelligentsia and Socialism
The line of argument pursued by Nicolas Krassó in this section is rather obscure. He accused Trotsky of bitter hostility towards intellectuals, bringing forward an article written in 1910 as evidence. Trotsky is said to view the intelligentsia in a ‘wholly pre-Leninist manner’ and hence his views are un-Marxist! Apart from the setting up of Lenin as an icon, this interpretation is very misleading. Trotsky, in the article in question, was analysing the role of intellectuals as a social layer within capitalist society. Lenin, in contrast, wrote about and directed his activity towards intellectuals breaking from this environment and becoming revolutionaries. Trotsky did not dismiss the intelligentsia in toto, he postulated conditions under which they would move towards socialism. He said:
The intelligentsia might go over to collectivism if it were given reason to see as probable the immediate victory of collectivism, if collectivism rose before it not as an ideal of a different, remote and alien class but as a near and tangible reality; finally, if – and this is not the least important condition – a political break with the bourgeoisie did not threaten each brain-worker taken separately with grave material and moral consequences. [4]
It is obvious that here Trotsky was concerned with the conditions which went to mould the intelligentsia, and the forces that operated against its allying with the working class. It certainly could be argued that such conditions are today not so pressing, particularly here in Britain. But it would be unwise to assume that such conditions are no longer operative at all.
It would also be well to recall that Trotsky was writing in 1910 and that his assessment of the role and attitudes of the intelligentsia in relation to the working class was a realistic one. Looking at the British labour movement of 1910, for instance, one could see that intellectuals as a social layer played a minimal role, the Webbs et al. notwithstanding. When numbers of the intelligentsia did move into the Labour Party, after 1918, they further debased the dominant labourism. However, it must be noted that even today the intelligentsia, as a social layer, have not decisively gone over to socialism here in Britain, even of the Labour variety let alone revolutionary socialism. It is clear that only when individual members of the intelligentsia commit themselves to a working-class party does their role inside become a critical one. If today more individual intellectuals commit themselves to socialism, does this prove Trotsky wrong? It certainly does if one attempts to read him as a sort of Gospel or Holy Writ. However, it does not prove him wrong if one takes into account the October, Chinese and Cuban revolutions. Collectivism is no longer a remote ideal but a living reality. On the other hand, one of the lessons of all three revolutions is that, along with the dispossessed ruling class, large numbers of the intelligentsia also flee and take up hostile positions to the new regimes. Even those that stayed in Russia after 1917 had to be wooed by special privileges. One is not being bitterly hostile to them because one acknowledges the truth about their position in society. This position is that they are dominated by the hegemonic ideology of the ruling class and help to perpetuate it.
To try to insert Gramsci’s concept of a new type of intellectual produced by a revolutionary party into a discussion about intellectuals as a social layer is to befog the issue. The roles of the individual intellectual and that of the intelligentsia are separate problems, even though obviously related. Nicolas Krassó writes that ‘the party ... an autonomous structure ... recombines and transforms two different phenomena – the intelligentsia and the working class’. This is indeed an odd way of putting it. How can an autonomous structure – the party – recombine two classes? If this autonomous structure were to carry out this feat it would not be autonomous and class and party would be synonymous! The charge of identifying class and party which is laid at Trotsky’s feet should be laid elsewhere. The modified elements which engage in new political practice, that is, the revolutionary party, are not the intelligentsia and the working class but only individuals and perhaps sections from these two social formations. To say otherwise is precisely to confuse class and party as Nicolas Krassó does.
 
1917–1921
It is necessary to have a clear factual understanding of history if one sets out to interpret it. Unfortunately Nicolas Krassó does not have this. This is evident when he says: ‘Trotsky was determined to strengthen the power of professional military officers with a Tsarist past in the Red Army, and he fought the imposition of control over them by political commissars appointed by the party.’ This is very far wide of what the real situation was. The dispute over the employment of the ex-Tsarist officers was if they should be used at all, and this was only a subsidiary question to the wider one of a centralised army versus militia. This was debated at the Eighth Congress of the Bolshevik Party. Trotsky wanted to use these officers in their capacity of military experts, but at the same time made a specific request to the Central Committee to supply him with reliable Communists to act as commissars. Deutscher says that Trotsky ‘implored’ the Central Committee for these men. There was never any question of the ex-Tsarist officers having more power since all their orders had to be countersigned by their political commissars.
Nicolas Krassó uses these unfounded assertions to insert the idea that Trotsky was an essentially military figure, more at ease in a command situation. He says:
He [Trotsky] had authority ab initio to organise the army; as People’s Commissar for War he had all the prestige of Lenin and the Soviet state behind him. He did not have to win this authority in a political arena by persuading his peers to accept him.
Again, this is a perversion of the real situation. Deutscher puts the matter differently:
The new campaigning season was approaching, but even now, a year after Trotsky had become Commissar of War, his military policy had not yet received the party’s blessing – he carried it out as if on his own responsibility. (The Prophet Armed, p. 429)
It was not until the Eighth Congress that the party formally endorsed this military policy of Trotsky. But even then it would be grossly misleading to suggest that the role of a military leader was only one of command. In any civil war situation appeals and persuasion play a far greater role than routine authority or command. In the case of the creation of the Red Army this was particularly so. There was no tradition, no historical precedents, no hegemonic ideology holding undisputed sway. It is in this light that Trotsky’s role must be viewed, and this was essentially a political one. The early formations of the Red Army were entirely voluntary, only when a reliable proletarian military cadre had been formed was it possible to resort to conscription. Even when conscription was used it must be seen in a very different way to ‘normal’ induction. In a civil war there is no guarantee that your conscripts will not desert in large numbers to the other side, or perhaps just desert, if there is not a firm political basis laid.
Nicolas Krassó tells us that ‘the voluntarist is in his element haranguing crowds or dispatching troops – but these roles should not be confused with the ability to lead a revolutionary party’. What he forgets is that before anyone can ‘dispatch troops’ he must have them at hand. Therefore the art of a revolutionary military leader is the gathering of the troops and convincing them of the need to be ‘dispatched’. This is where Nicolas Krassó utterly fails to see the similarity, and at times identity (Cuba), between a revolutionary army and party.
Again, Nicolas Krassó misunderstands the reality of the early days of the Soviet Republic and the nature of the military policy. He says that Trotsky:
... as a pillar of the Soviet state ... had to give orders to his subordinates for precise purposes. His task in either role was to ensure the means to a previously determined end. This is a different task from that of ensuring that a novel end prevails among various competing opinions in a political organisation.
This improperly assumes that the end of a civil, or any other, war is predetermined. This is not so, the only end predetermined in a war situation is that the enemy should be defeated. Also in a revolutionary party the only end predetermined is that there should be revolution. In both situations the means, methods, tactics, etc., will be subject to discussion and debate. This is not to suggest that in a civil war the debate will be conducted at all levels within the army, but neither will it be in the party; the nature of the situation sometimes precludes it. Furthermore, even if one assumes that for the Red Army per se ends were predetermined by the Central Committee, Trotsky played a part in arriving at the decisions. He was not a passive onlooker waiting for his orders to be handed down to him.
Trotsky could hardly be called a pillar of the Soviet state until late in the civil war, because no such state existed in the accepted use of the term. The term pillar is misleading; it conjures up a picture of a solid, well-founded and established regime, when in fact very often the continued existence of the regime hung in the balance. What we are given, by implication, is a picture of Trotsky moving in an orderly, established structure of known and given dimensions, when in fact society and every subordinate structure, including the revolutionary party, was in a condition of flux. Only holding a static and unreal vision of revolution could lead one to see Trotsky, or any other Bolshevik leader, in a command situation in those early days.
 
1921–1929
Nicolas Krassó here turns to the theme of substitution and identity in the relations between party and class, implying that Trotsky fell into the ‘error’ of identity, that is, of seeing the party and class as identical. He presents us with a quotation from The New Course which seems to bear him out; but it would have been better had he completed the quotation. It would have given an accurate picture of what Trotsky said. Here is the quotation with the missing sentences restored:
The different needs of the working class, of the peasantry, of the state apparatus and its membership, act upon our party, through whose medium they seek to find a political expression. The difficulties and contradictions in our epoch, the temporary discord in the interests of the different layers of the proletariat, or of the proletariat as a whole and the peasantry, act upon the party through the medium of its worker and peasant cells, of the state apparatus, of the student youth. Even episodic differences in views and nuances of opinion may express the remote pressure of distinct social interests and, in certain circumstances, be transformed into stable groupings; the latter may, in turn, sooner or later take the form of organised factions which, opposing themselves to the rest of the party, undergo by that very fact even greater external pressure. Such is the dialectics of inner-party groupings in an epoch when the Communist Party is obliged to monopolise the direction of political life. (The New Course, p. 27, emphasis added) [5]
The emphasised sentence is the key to a proper understanding of what Trotsky was discussing; only by leaving it out was Nicolas Krassó able to present his interpretation to an unwary reader. The chapter that this comes from is Groups and Factional Formations. In this Trotsky was discussing the politics of a one-party state, as the above makes clear. He was not talking about parties in general, nor was there any suggestion that party and class are identical. What he was doing was to explore the nature of groups and factions in a situation where only one party was the prescribed form of political activity, and in so doing was breaking new ground. For socialists and Marxists the situation in the Soviet Union was a novel and unprecedented one. Certainly in 1917 no one foresaw such a situation. The subsequent developments in the 1920s seem to have borne out what Trotsky was saying in 1923. Indeed, later on the experience of the monolithic one-party state indicates that unless the party does reflect these differences then it ceases to be a party in the accepted use of the term.
We are also told that Trotsky was guilty of ‘sociologism’, and this first led him into the trap of equating party and class in the theoretical field; and in practical politics urging the proletarianisation of the party as an antidote to bureaucracy. Further, we are told that Stalin followed this advice with disastrous results for – Trotsky! However, Deutscher puts the matter rather differently:
The triumvirs [Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev] resolved to open at once a spectacular recruiting drive in the factories. But while Trotsky had advised a careful selection, they decided to recruit en masse, to accept any worker who cared to join, and to waive all customary tests and conditions. At the Thirteenth Conference they recommended the recruitment at a stroke of 100,000 workers ... This was a mockery of Bolshevik principle of organisation which required that, as the élite and vanguard of the proletariat, the party should only accept the politically advanced and the politically battle-hardened. (The Prophet Unarmed, p. 135)
Trotsky indeed made the point that the process of recruitment of workers should be slow and then ‘only under conditions of noteworthy economic advance’ (The New Course, pp. 20–21). [6] Here a different picture emerges from that of a primitive sociologism – workers good, bureaucrats bad – here we see Trotsky grappling with a real problem, that of declining worker membership, and its implications for the future of the party. Nicolas Krassó seems to imply that the social composition of a revolutionary socialist party is of no consequence. Perhaps what he means is that such a party should be for the workers but not necessarily of them. Surely, Trotsky was making the point that the socialist revolutionary party, especially one in power, with only a minority of workers was a long-term determinant contradiction. Therefore he urged that steps should be taken to rectify the situation. It is somewhat bizarre to imply that Trotsky had an idyllic view of workers in Russia at this time. He wrote a considerable amount about the low level of culture during this period, and had a lively appreciation of the political problems this posed.
 
Collectivisation and Industrialisation
The question of industrial development in underdeveloped countries is still one that has a burning topicality, especially for those countries which have broken free of the capitalist orbit. In such circumstances the question will arise – ‘Where will the surplus come from?’ This is indeed a crucial point. However, Nicolas Krassó paints far too black and white a picture:
Bukharin advocated an ultra-right policy of private peasant enrichment at the expense of the towns: ‘We shall move forward by tiny, tiny steps pulling behind us our large peasant cart.’ Preobrazhensky urged the exploitation of the peasantry (in the technical economic sense) to accumulate a surplus for rapid industrialisation.
Of course it is possible to show these formulations as being violently contradictory, since they are men of straw. To talk of Lenin’s policy is, in this context, misleading, since he did not have time to formulate a fully coherent and articulated one before his death. Bukharin and Preobrazhensky are presented in a way which belies their respective attitudes. Another point should be added – Trotsky was not wholly in agreement with Preobrazhensky’s ideas as put forward in The New Economics; but there is no doubt that they were in agreement on the practical policies put forward by the Opposition. Therefore one should make some distinction between Trotsky and Preobrazhensky.
Bukharin, essentially, argued that the development of industry should be geared to rural demand, and that light or consumer goods industry should be given priority. Such a policy did in fact encourage the revival of capitalist elements in the countryside, and meant that in practice the state industries became subordinated to the market. However, it would be wrong to say that Bukharin urged the enrichment of the peasants at the expense of the towns, since this would have meant the exploitation of the working class. What he no doubt intended was that his policy would generate the surplus in the countryside and this would lead eventually to accumulation. He failed to appreciate that an agricultural surplus does not necessarily lead to accumulation, and indeed the evidence is that in underdeveloped countries in the capitalist orbit this surplus is largely squandered or invested in land and usury. Only by consciously breaking the law of value (not ignoring it) can this be overcome.
Preobrazhensky’s analysis was, originally, a theoretical one which posed the conflict between the private sector of the economy (mainly agricultural) which was the majority and the small state-owned industrial sector; and the need for a fast rate of industrial accumulation. He designated a law of primitive socialist accumulation in this way:
The more backward economically, petty-bourgeois, peasant, a particular country is which has gone over to the socialist organisation of production, and the smaller the inheritance received by the socialist accumulation fund of the proletariat of this country when the social revolution takes place, by so much the more, in proportion, will socialist accumulation be obliged to rely on alienating part of the surplus product of pre-socialist forms of economy. (The New Economics, p. 124)
He argued that because of the small absolute and relative amount of surplus available in Soviet industry the main contribution must come from agriculture. This does imply ‘technical exploitation’ of the peasants, but this process should be explained since it is possible to forget one half of the term – technical – and concentrate on the other – exploitation. Preobrazhensky explained the matter very clearly:
The task of the socialist state consists here not in taking from the petty-bourgeois producers less than capitalism took, but in taking more from the still larger incomes which will be secured to the petty producers by the rationalisation of the whole economy, including petty production, on the basis of industrialising the country and intensifying agriculture. (The New Economics, p. 89, emphasis in original)
Nicolas Krassó injects into this debate an essentially static view of economics when he says:
For the poorer the peasantry was, the less surplus it had over and beyond what it consumed itself, and the less it was ‘exploitable’ for industrialisation. Bukharin’s conciliation of peasantry and Preobrazhensky’s counterposition of it to the proletariat were equally distortions of Lenin’s policy, which was to collectivise but not crush the peasantry, not wage war on them.
Now clearly, if one views national income, or the social product, as a given quantity, then one is justified in arguing that an increase in one class’s share is based on another class’s share decreasing. However, if one views national income as a stream that is increasing in size through time, then it is possible for all to have an increasing total consumption, but at the same time one section of society may have a smaller percentage share than previously. [7] However, this is a very simplified approach to the particular problem.
A first approach to a proper understanding of the problem is clearly to distinguish accumulation between maximum and optimum rates of accumulation in the short run. This is where Nicolas Krassó is mistaken in assuming that Stalin took over (and denatured) the Left Opposition’s economic policies. The first Five-Year Plans were in fact based on the premise of a maximum rate of accumulation but turned out to be increasing production at a slower lower rate than if an optimum rate had been aimed for.
Some would consider an optimum rate of accumulation in purely economic terms to be that rate which increases the social product by a maximum amount in a given period. But no Marxist could accept such a definition because it leaves out the class forces involved. A policy which reduces the living standards of the working class, creating demoralisation and political apathy would be totally unacceptable. Moreover, one could not accept any assumption which postulated that productivity of labour was independent of the level of consumption. This is what the Stalinist bureaucracy did with disastrous results for Soviet agriculture and for the Soviet working class in the first two Five-Year Plans. In the frenzy to achieve a maximum rate of accumulation there was in fact a lowering of the maximum increase of the social product that could have been gained, had an optimum rate of accumulation been adopted.
Another point is that Nicolas Krassó uses the term peasantry indiscriminately; none of the protagonists in the original discussion made such an error. If he looks at the Platform of the Left Opposition 1927 he will see that an analysis was made of the ‘class differentiation among the peasants’. In trying to assess the situation in rural Russia in the mid-1920s such a mistake as Nicolas Krassó’s is impermissible. The Left Opposition had a policy of support for the poor landless and middle peasants along with proposals for generous credit terms and a speedy introduction of mechanisation into agriculture; and of course collectivisation via cooperatives. They certainly had a policy of containing and finally eliminating the Kulaks (as a class), who were becoming the basis of a new capitalist development within the Soviet Union. Does Nicolas Krassó think this wrong? Stalin, to whom Nicolas Krassó accords the accolade of being ‘confirmed by history’, had, along with Bukharin, pooh-poohed the warnings of the Opposition, but was later thrown into a panic by the growing power and resistance of the Kulaks. This problem was ‘solved’ in a brutal and bloody repression. To suggest that the policy of the Left Opposition had any connection with this is to stretch credibility too far.
Perhaps the biggest mistake that Nicolas Krassó makes over the debate on industrialisation is to suggest that this was primarily concerned with administrative options, whereas the debate over ‘Socialism in One Country’ only concerned international articulations. Planning in any transitional regime will be essentially the ‘allocation of scarce resources’. This commonplace of bourgeois economics will then become a reality, for the allocation will then be done by conscious decision and not by the anarchy of the market. Nevertheless, the basis for political economy will still be the relationship of men (and classes) to each other in the distribution of scarce resources, that is, to the means of production. It is this fundamentally different approach that distinguishes Marxist economics. Nicolas Krassó makes the error of assuming that economics is a ‘technical’ or ‘administrative’ subject, and thereby confuses techniques and ideology. The debate in Cuba over moral versus material incentives was an interesting example of the fusion between economics and politics. The particular techniques that are used or that are chosen, will, by and large, reflect (even if only in a diffused way) the political decisions they are based on. For instance, the decision by Wilson in 1964 not to devalue the pound debarred him from using a number of techniques for grappling with the economic crisis. The original decision was a political one. It is possible to argue about this or that aspect of policy since then, and indeed we should, but unless one takes into account the central political decision then one can get lost.
Therefore, to suggest that the debates on economic policy and ‘Socialism in One Country’ were separate and unconnected does not stand up to investigation. The economic debate was around how much surplus was to be generated and who would benefit. ‘Socialism in One Country’ was the reaction of the bureaucrats wanting to hang on to their share. Both arose from the backwardness and isolation of the Soviet Union.
 
1927–1940
Despite some notable theoretical writings in this period we are told that Trotsky led an imaginary political movement and therefore the activities of these years were futile. I am not concerned here to argue the merits or demerits of the Fourth International. What I want to do is pose some questions myself. How is it that 30 years after it was founded, this body – the Fourth International – exists at all? When one considers a) that it was founded at a time of working-class defeats, b) that many of its small cadre were killed in Europe, either by the Gestapo or the Stalinists, and c) that in the years immediately after 1945 Stalinism seemed to be greatly strengthened, then one perhaps begins to ask the right questions. When one looks around the international scene for the other numerous anti-Stalinist groupings that existed in the 1930s and 1940s one looks in vain. When one examines the pathetic attempts to create a Maoist ‘International’ with the resources of a great state behind the venture, one can begin to measure the real strength and resilience of the international Trotskyist movement. Nor is this body a group of ageing cultists (despite certain bizarre manifestations in England), on the contrary there has been a steady replacement by youth, which in recent years has increased and this has been a worldwide phenomenon. The question remains: why? I think this is best answered by reference to Che Guevara when he wrote:
How soon we could look into a bright future, should two, three or many Vietnams flourish throughout the world with their share of deaths and their immense tragedies, their everyday heroism and their repeated blows against imperialism, impelled to disperse its forces under the sudden attack and increasing hatred of all peoples of the world? (Vietnam Must Not Stand Alone, New Left Review, No. 43, p. 90)
What Che Guevara demanded was an international strategy against imperialism. The time and the situation demand it. The concept of proletarian internationalism is not an abstract theory. The maimed, the dying and the fighters in Asia, Africa and Latin America cry out for, and are testimony to, the need for such a strategy. The question of the formation of a new revolutionary International was implicit in the holding of the OLAS conference, even if such an International has yet to emerge. It is this that gives the founding of the Fourth International in 1938 its historical validity; all the sneers about a mythical movement cannot erase it. Trotsky was too much of a realist to assume that the small body that gathered round him in 1938 would be the International. What the Fourth International does offer to new and rising generations of revolutionists is an historical continuity with the best of classical Marxism and a programmatic analysis of the modern world that is unrivalled on the international scene.
 
The Dead Dogs of Stalin
The picture that Nicolas Krassó presented of Trotsky was remarkable only for its rigidity, its lack of development, and its pedestrian quality. It was a lifeless picture and we are given no feeling that Trotsky learned, profited or matured from his mistakes.
Reading the article one is left with the impression that Trotsky sprang on to the stage of politics fully equipped, warts and all, and that there were no real changes. As such the figure is a cardboard one.
The portrait of Lenin is painted in the same style. Lenin is made to appear as some sort of deus ex machina that popped up at the right moment and pulled his muddle-headed party out of trouble. This puts Lenin in the role of a political Svengali, not of a leader. There is no doubt that Lenin played a tremendous role in the Bolshevik Party, and at times this was crucial, but one should not fall victim to a one-sided appraisal. In the last analysis such a picture does no credit to Lenin and certainly not to the Bolsheviks.
But why discuss Trotsky’s concept of the party now? What was the object of the exercise? Above all the other faults in Nicolas Krassó’s article the absence of conclusions is the most startling. Can it be that this long essay was only an exercise in ‘historical’ analysis? Not only here in Britain under the Wilson government, but internationally the question of a Marxist party has a burning topicality. Yet on this Nicolas Krassó is silent. Implicit in the article is the view that there is a need for a Leninist party here and now, and leaving aside the implied difference between this and Trotsky’s concept of the party, one would have thought that if this was the case then it should have been stated. But on this important question we are left, not even with a question mark, but a blank. This brings into question, not Trotsky’s Marxism, but Nicolas Krassó’s. For what is the object of Marxist theory? Is it merely to hone and bring to razor edge individual intellects or should it have as its aim a guide to action? One need not espouse a vulgar interpretation of this axiom, yet any perspective must also incorporate a programme. And this is where Nicolas Krassó’s essay shows its grave deficiencies – there is no programme.
Another aspect of this deficiency is the lack of any analysis of Lenin’s or Trotsky’s concept of an international party; a very strange omission for someone who delved so deeply into a relatively minor article such as the one Trotsky wrote on the intelligentsia. How can this be squared? Such scholarly searchings must have disclosed something on the question of an International, but a reader of the original article would find no hint of this. Only Nicolas Krassó would be able to explain this absence but it would be unwise for the reader to conjecture at it.
A discussion of Trotsky’s contribution to Marxism could have been stimulating and rewarding. It certainly should have been critical, but criticism should be tempered with knowledge and understanding. Unfortunately, we were presented with undigested historical data laced with a Lenin ‘fixation’; neither help in arriving at a sober assessment. In the preface to The Prophet Armed Isaac Deutscher referred to the ‘mountain of dead dogs’ that covered Trotsky’s place in history, and that the events of 1956 (Hungary, etc.) saw half that mountain blown to the winds. Unwittingly, Nicolas Krassó is throwing a few of the canine corpses back onto the remains of the mountain. Looking at the world around us today it would seem that he engaged in a rather Canute-like occupation. His obvious talents deserve a better use.

Notes
1. On the point of a ‘metaphysical carnival’ it might be pertinent to point out that Marx himself originated the phrase permanent revolution in The Class Struggles in France when he wrote: ‘This socialism is the declaration of the permanence of the revolution ...’ (The Class Struggles in France (Moscow 1952), p. 196) If Trotsky was guilty of being inept then he erred along with Marx.
2. Introduction, The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology (Dell Publishing, New York 1964). – MIA.
3. V.I. Lenin, Speech in the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, Collected Works, Vol. 27.
4. L.D. Trotsky, The Intelligentsia and Socialism.
5. L.D. Trotsky, The New Course.
6. L.D. Trotsky, The New Course.
7. This may sound like the familiar arguments put forward by Wilson & Co with their appeals for higher productivity. Formally it is a correct argument, in the short run, but for Marxists the real question is, who does what with the surplus? If the extra surplus is privately appropriated or bureaucratically misused that is where the fight should begin. We have no argument per se against increased production.
 



Condemned from the Dock:
John Maclean’s Speech to the Court in 1918 [1]
The reprinting of this speech is a step that is very welcome at the present time. John Maclean has long been a neglected figure in British working-class history; both the Labour Party and the Communist Party, each for their own reasons, have tended to bury his memory. However, it is well that workers should be reminded what red-blooded Marxist leaders are like. Having suffered over the last few decades from a surfeit of boneless wonders, Maclean’s words come as a breath of fresh air: ‘I am not here as the accused; I am here as the accuser of capitalism, dripping with blood from head to foot.’ Little wonder that Lenin was happy to have such a man as the first Soviet Consul in Britain. As Nan Milton says in the Foreword: ‘His speech ... was a vivid exposition of international socialism, and should be preserved as a part of the socialist tradition.’
I certainly recommend this pamphlet as a ‘good buy’.

Notes
1. Obtainable from Smith, 61 Fergus Drive, Glasgow NW, 2/− post free.
 



Ken Coates, Tony Topham and Michael Barratt Brown (eds.),
Trade Union Register,
Merlin Press Ltd, price £2 hardback, £1 paperback
Merlin Press have this year published a stable-mate to Socialist Register, it is the Trade Union Register. The new Register is edited by Ken Coates, Tony Topham and Michael Barratt Brown. There is an impressive list of contributors, which seems to cover many shades of the left (and centre?). The book claims to be ‘a symposium designed for active trade unionists’. However, one can hardly imagine that an ‘active trade unionist’ would find time to read all the material collected in these 350 pages. If future issues are to live up to the stated aim they will need to be slimmed down somewhat. One has the feeling that the editors were a little unsure of their own aims when assembling the material and hence the large selection. Some of the essays are more suitable for publication in journals than in a book, which presumably is meant to be partly a reference volume. Also some of the essays are so heavily annotated that the references serve to impede one’s progress.
These are however minor criticisms compared with the real value of the book. All the contributions are of a fairly high standard, and many introduce new ideas on perennial topics. Janet Blackman’s contribution on the Campaign for Women’s Rights is a must for all those who are interested in this subject (and shame on you if you are not). Her point about there being two labour forces – men’s and women’s – is a very useful idea. She points out that far from women gaining equal rights what is really happening is that a small number of women are jumping into the male labour force without changing its character, and the vast majority of women still work in what is classified as women’s work. Men do not join this labour force under any circumstances.
Tony Topham writes a very solid item on productivity bargaining, tracing its development since the early 1960s, and demonstrates how this has now become the central part of the employers’ and government’s insidious attack on the unions. He also examines the reactions to this development by the trade-union movement, ranging from full cooperation to outright rejection. He also demonstrates that this is a method of keeping the proportions of the division of the national income either static or pushing it in favour of profits. Quite cogently argued is the need for an offensive strategy by the unions in face of this development.
John Hughes, Ken Coates and Richard Silburn all contribute essays on low pay, and John Hughes analyses the unemployment trends since 1964 bringing out some very disturbing and little-noticed factors.
One essay in particular makes this volume significant. This is Andrée Hoyles’ item on the occupation of factories in France, May 1968, which is based upon on-the-spot research, the basis for which was an extensive questionnaire which was used in selected factories. This seems to be the only attempt so far to find out what was actually happening in the factories and among the rank-and-file workers. Most writings that have appeared so far on the French events have concentrated upon the political-cum-student aspects, not surprising in view of the ease with which material can be gathered on these aspect and the fact that the students in particular were very articulate. However, in many ways Andrée Hoyles’ research presents a more fundamental picture of what was actually going on during those very hectic days, it is much closer to the grass-roots. No one who wants to obtain a full picture can afford to miss this vital piece of research.
It is not possible in a short review to mention any more of the contributions, but most of them are worth study. One final point, the book contains a very useful diary for 1968 and several statistical tables, both of which are useful for those who do not have the time to hunt around for such information.
 



It is clear from Comrade Greenlark’s comments in the last issue of Marxist Studies that he is not familiar with the history of the British Trotskyist movement because he refers to the Socialist Labour League (SLL) as though this had had a continuous existence for over 20 years. The SLL was in fact launched in 1959, and the group which he referred to as the one that the Cliff tendency broke from was only one of the component parts of the SLL in 1959.
However, that is a minor aspect of the question. What I am concerned about is to examine the proposition that the Cliff tendency came into existence because of the pressures of the Cold War, and in particular its hot phase, that is, the Korean War. Unfortunately for those who like their history and politics handed out in neat simple packages, the truth was far more complicated and to understand it, it is necessary to go back a little further than 1950.
The situation after 1944 was that for the first time in the history of British Trotskyism there was one united organisation, that is, the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP). After the advent of the Labour government to office in 1945 there arose a dispute within the organisation on the question of entry into the Labour Party. Gerry Healy was the leader of the minority faction in favour of entry, whilst the majority faction which opposed entry was led by Jock Haston.
This particular dispute was waged fiercely for three years, but the minority still remained the minority. In 1947 the Executive of the Fourth International stepped in and decided that this dispute could only be settled in practice. It decided to allow the minority to enter the Labour Party as a separate organisation under the direction of the International. This was done despite protests from the leadership of the RCP. De facto this once more split the British Trotskyist movement, although in theory there was supposed to be still only one section. (Incidentally, it was in the same year that Cliff issued his theses on Stalinist Russia [1], and hardly caused a ripple either in the majority or the minority faction because they were locked in combat over the Labour Party question.)
Therefore, from 1947 there were two official British sections of the Fourth International, the RCP and the Healy Group inside the Labour Party. This situation caused relations between the factions, and between the RCP leadership and the International, to become even more embittered.
The Healy Group were instrumental in the publication of a monthly (later weekly) newspaper — Socialist Outlook — which gradually gathered support inside the Labour Party and trade unions, but no spectacular results were obtained in the first three years or so. At the same time the RCP gradually declined in numbers and influence, and the circulation of its publications declined considerably. The RCP leadership, which had pinned its hopes of a turn to the left of the rank and file of the Labour Party and an eventual split, gradually became disillusioned and began to capitulate intellectually to reformism. As they had previously exaggerated the prospects for revolution now they exaggerated the real changes brought about by reformism.
In 1949 the majority of the RCP leadership decided to recommend entry into the Labour Party, and even those who were against it decided not to fight on the issue. Therefore when a special congress of the party was held in 1949 the leadership won the day fairly easily, despite misgivings on the part of even their own supporters. At the same time it should be noted that the demoralisation amongst the leadership had been carefully screened from the membership even by those who were not capitulating to reformism.
When this had been accomplished, the RCP and the Healy Group fused, once more becoming a united organisation. But with this difference, the Healy faction demanded, and were given, a majority on the executive bodies of the fused organisation. Shortly after this fusion took place Haston and others of the old leadership resigned from the organisation, renouncing their Trotskyism. This was a tremendous blow to the morale of those they had led. Moreover, the regime of the unified organisation was a very authoritarian one, with many members being expelled for formal infractions of discipline, or on trumped-up charges.
There is another factor that has to be considered. Trotskyism as an international and national political tendency had been forged in a battle against Stalinism. Therefore, much of the propaganda of the movement was directed to criticising Stalinism. Having sprung from the world communist movement Trotskyism was therefore very largely oriented towards it. The transition to entry work was for many members a very difficult change to make, because the mode of operation, priorities and milieu were radically different to that of an open party. The pages of Socialist Appeal (the RCP’s twice-monthly newspaper) were studded with biting attacks upon Stalinism, but in contrast the entry paper Socialist Outlook made only the most passing and muted reference to this question.
It was with this background that the outbreak of the Korean War made its impact upon the organisation. This war was partially a civil war and partially an imperialist attack upon North Korea. In such circumstances it was the duty of revolutionary Marxists to support and defend the North Korean state but at the same time it was necessary to distinguish between support for such a state under attack from imperialism and the particular regime of that state. The North Korean state was a Stalinist police regime, which should have been criticised, Trotsky always emphasised that whilst one’s support for a workers’ state was unconditional, this in no way meant that one gave unconditional support to the regime. In the case of Korea the line pursued by the Healy leadership was completely uncritical of the Stalinists. This meant that Socialist Outlook was indistinguishable from the Daily Worker (now Morning Star) and to many people outside the organisation (and inside) it seemed that a Stalinist policy was being pursued.
This was the final cause of the crisis inside British Trotskyism in 1950. It was in this situation that Cliff emerged from the obscurity that he had rested in since 1947, and proceeded to argue his case. The logic of his case was fairly simple, in essence he said: ‘If you continue to call these states workers’ states you end up carrying out semi-Stalinist or Stalinist policies and practices.’ The evidence he presented was very real, firstly there was the internal regime of the organisation which seemed designed to drive out all those who opposed the leadership; secondly there was the complete lack of criticism of Stalinism in the public policies of the organisation. In a situation where many members felt betrayed first by Haston and then by Healy, Cliff for once found fertile ground for his ideas. If one were to examine this situation in detail one would understand that for many people Cliff was merely carrying on the traditions that they had known, but carried them to their ‘logical’ conclusion.
When the SLL today thunder about the iniquities of ‘Pabloism’, it is conveniently forgotten by them that it was Healy that first introduced this dread virus into British Trotskyist body politic. Cliff was not the only person to break from the British section at this period. A smaller group of people who were not state-capitalists also broke, and they too argued that Healy was giving in to the pressures of Stalinism. But perhaps even more important is the fact that most of the people who actually joined the Cliff group at this period did not leave the British section of their own accord, but were expelled because they opposed the leadership.
Therefore, to argue in such simplistic terms as that ‘the Cliff group was formed because of pressures from the general anti-communist feeling at the time’ is to say the least inaccurate. The complex of pressures was much greater than allowed for. Personally I think it fair to say that the person who did most to create the Cliff Group was — Gerry Healy.

Notes
1. Tony Cliff, The Nature of Stalinist Russia.
 



Stephen F. Cohen,
Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography 1888–1938,
Wildwood House, £4.50
Like most of the other leaders of the Bolshevik revolution, Bukharin has, for the last 40 years, been in the shadows cast by Lenin, Trotsky and Stalin. It is only of recent date that Bukharin’s ideas and legacy are being re-examined and with a little more objectivity. The biography of Bukharin by Stephen F. Cohen fills a gap and has been much needed; from this point of view the book is very welcome.
One of the problems facing any biographer of a Bolshevik leader is the inaccessibility of Soviet archives and of private papers located in the Soviet Union. As Cohen points out, only Trotsky’s private archives are open to inspection (and until 1980 some of these will remain closed); the remainder of the Bolshevik leaders’ private papers are still under lock and key in the Soviet Union. This problem has meant that anyone wishing to write such a book as Cohen’s must, of necessity, largely rely on published records. Cohen recognises these limitations when he remarks: ‘When Soviet scholars are eventually able to study and write freely about their revolutionary founders and their formative history, the account in this book will presumably be supplemented and some judgements revised.’ Any such biography is even more of a work of detection than biographical researchers normally have to face. But I do not think we have to wait until the Soviet archives are opened before some of Cohen’s judgements are revised, but more on that later.
Such a biography of Bukharin is long overdue, since it helps to restore a proper perspective to what for many is now rather a remote period. Moreover, a biography of Bukharin is doubly welcome, since it also serves as a signal reminder of the central place that he occupied in the development of Bolshevik theory and practice. The true stature of Bukharin has been overlaid and obscured by the attention focused upon the latter part of his life, ending in the obscene farce of the 1938 Moscow trial. Among revolutionary Marxists Bukharin has largely been ignored, partly because his name has tended to become synonymous with the appellation ‘right-wing’ that was justly bestowed on him in the last decade of his life. However, it might be pertinent to remind ourselves that, firstly, Bukharin did not always carry such a label and, secondly, that even in his right-wing days he was the leader of Bolshevik-Communists, even if right-wing ones. Because of this neglect it has been left to liberal academics to rescue Bukharin from his undeserved obscurity.
Cohen documents much of Bukharin’s pioneering work in the theoretical field on such questions as imperialism and the imperialist state, and how he related to both these phenomena developments in modern capitalism (circa 1916). Among the Bolsheviks and Russian socialists generally, Bukharin was among the first to develop ideas about the nature of imperialism and the consequences of monopolisation upon the state. Lenin drew heavily on Bukharin’s work when he came to write his own much more widely-known book Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism, although it is wrong – as Cohen indicates – to suggest that there were no differences in the approach of the two. The differences substantially revolved around the question of the role and nature of the imperialist state, Lenin tending to think that Bukharin was showing semi-anarchist tendencies. The war and the collapse of the Second International, however, forced Lenin to reappraise a number of previous positions. In this sense Bukharin’s writing on the imperialist state prefigures and points the direction for Lenin’s State and Revolution. After a period of disagreement on the subject of the state, Lenin came to acknowledge the correctness of Bukharin’s ideas, and embodied them in his own work of 1917.
Bukharin also pioneered study of the theoretical implications of the transition to socialism in his work The Economics of the Transition Period. Cohen has not given an adequate treatment of this book, which is a highly compressed text – Bukharin himself admitted that it was written ‘in almost algebraic form’. A proper consideration of this text would have enabled Cohen to understand many of the constants in Bukharin’s subsequent evolution during the 1920s.
However, Cohen gives an interesting description of Bukharin’s independent cast of mind in his relations with Lenin. It shows a finely balanced relationship, being a mixture of affection and heated exchanges. Whatever Bukharin’s faults, he was not a sycophant with Lenin, in fact of all Lenin’s close collaborators Bukharin seems to have disagreed with him most often; and Lenin does not always emerge with credit from Cohen’s account.
Bukharin was the youngest of the top Bolshevik leaders in 1917, and this point needs to be weighed when assessing his subsequent evolution. The Bolshevik seizure of power in Petrograd has always claimed the overwhelming attention of those who study the revolution of October 1917. Cohen’s account brings out two important points that have tended to be obscured in this respect. Firstly, in the period leading up to October, from April 1917, Lenin relied heavily upon the younger Bolsheviks in winning the party to his position, firstly in the struggle to get his April Theses adopted and then to take the decision to seize power. Bukharin played a key role in this process, since he was the leader of the younger generation in the Moscow organisation, and it was he and his peer group who overturned the older, established Bolsheviks in the Moscow region. In the discussions of the actual seizure of power it seemed likely that Moscow would be the first to take the uprising from the sphere of discussion to that of action. In the event it was Petrograd that led the way. However, it is worthwhile to note that Bukharin was only 29 years old when he led the uprising in Moscow. Unlike the Petrograd events, there was fairly heavy fighting in Moscow in which 500 party members lost their lives. Bukharin is usually portrayed as being wholly intellectual – not a ‘practical’ man – yet his role in Moscow in 1917 does not bear out this assessment. The second point that emerges from Cohen’s account is that it was Trotsky and his group, who only joined the Bolsheviks in June 1917, who dominated events in Petrograd during the period of preparation and actual seizure of power. Almost without exception the old guard of Leninist Bolsheviks played subordinate roles or actually opposed the party in the October revolution. Cohen quite skilfully and concretely demonstrates the validity of these two propositions.
Insofar as Cohen has written only a one-volume biography he has been forced to be selective. However, even allowing for the lack of Bukharin’s private papers, I feel that there are certain important areas and points that are missing. The most notable absence is any real treatment of Bukharin’s role in the Comintern. From its inception in 1919 Bukharin played a leading role in the functions of that body. It is true that, until his fall from power in 1925, Zinoviev played the central public role, and only after 1925 did Bukharin occupy the centre of the Comintern stage. But Bukharin’s involvement was on a continuing basis for 10 years. Cohen’s failure to make more than a passing reference to these activities seems to me to flow from more than the need to compress. From the year 1920 onwards Cohen has concentrated his attention on Bukharin’s relationship to internal Soviet and party affairs, and in particular his role in the industrialisation debate. Coupled with this is an inadequate analysis of the social forces behind the debating positions.
This is where Cohen’s treatment falls down: without an adequate analysis of international events, particularly the failure of the German revolution and the débâcle of the Chinese Communist Party under the tutelage of Bukharin and Stalin, one cannot grapple with the rise of the Soviet bureaucracy and its subsequent victory. It is true that internal Soviet conditions were themselves alone sufficient for the rise of such a social formation, but there was no inevitability about its victory and Cohen does not really try to explain the rise of this formation and its relationship to external factors. Nor can one divorce the triumph of the theory of ‘socialism in one country’ from the rise of the Soviet bureaucracy. Cohen makes no attempt at such an analysis and because of this muffs his discussion of the origins of the theory. It is true that some of the phrases and ideas that he pinpoints from Bukharin seem to be the first utterance of the theory, but one feels that had events taken another course one would not remark upon them now. Cohen does not ask why, despite what seem to be hints and allusions from Bukharin, it was Stalin who first articulated the theory of ‘socialism in one country’ in its most rounded manner. If Cohen had examined this point he might have been led on to the question of the bureaucracy. And if he had done so he would have been forced to look at Bukharin’s relationship with that particular force. In this respect Cohen’s treatment of Bukharin’s fear of the ‘new Leviathan’ is devoid of class content and as such tends to downgrade Bukharin to a liberal-democrat.
Whilst there is, obviously, a fairly full treatment of Bukharin’s economic ideas in the 1920s, Cohen does less than justice to Bukharin’s opponents and this often tends to obscure the discussion. Every now and again Cohen admits that the ideas of the Left Opposition were distorted, but he makes no attempt to present a balanced picture. Nor is this accidental, as we shall see.
There is another aspect with which Cohen has failed to deal, namely Bukharin’s role in the campaign against ‘Trotskyism’ in the mid-1920s. Bukharin and his Red Professors unleashed a deluge of lies and distortions upon the left – and Trotsky in particular – which played no small part in rallying a large part of the new intake of raw party members (the Lenin levy) around the Central Committee majority. (I leave aside the particular ‘skills’ which Stalin used at the same time.) To write a biography of Bukharin with such omissions vitiates its overall usefulness. Bukharin helped to perfect the techniques which were later to lead to his own rout by Stalin in 1928–29, but Cohen passes this over. Was he perhaps afraid that it would detract from his hero? I say hero deliberately, for that is how Bukharin appears in Cohen’s account. Perhaps all good biographers have this tendency, but Cohen seems to have allowed it to obscure his judgement.
Cohen started out to write this biography with a particular thesis which he wanted to prove. In the preface he writes:
Much of what follows will suggest that by the mid-1920s Bukharin ... and his allies were more important in Bolshevik politics and thinking than Trotsky or Trotskyism. It will suggest, in short, that the view of Trotsky ‘as the representative figure of pre-Stalinist communism and the precursor of post-Stalinist communism’ is a serious misconception. (p. xvi)
This theme is linked, right at the end of the book, to the idea that Bukharinism is the underlying ideology of ‘socialism with a human face’ in Eastern Europe. In trying to prove his thesis, Cohen is trying to prove too much. If Trotsky was not the precursor of post-Stalinist communism, how does Cohen account for the enduring and increasing appeal of Trotsky’s ideas to the youth of the world? Every time there has been a radical upsurge Trotsky’s ideas have gained currency. One may not like some of the ways that Trotsky’s ideas are presented, but I have not seen any Bukharinist organisation propagating its ideas recently. Any groups that owed allegiance to Bukharin faded away in the late 1930s. To say this does not in any way detract from Bukharin’s merits, but it does mean that in the scales of history Trotsky weighs far more than Bukharin. For history is not made by Professors of History writing books, but by people – such as the 29-year-old Bukharin – acting it out in actual struggle. (Incidentally, I feel that only an academic could talk of Stalinist communism, there is no way these two terms can be coupled in reality, since they stand in constant opposition to each other.)
But, it may be said, in Eastern Europe, in the ‘socialist’ countries, Bukharin and his ideas inspire the ‘liberalisers’. Suffice it to say here that it is among the bureaucrats that a bowdlerised version of his ideas are popular. However, serious consideration must be given to the idea of the convergence of basic ideas between the Bukharinist opposition and the Trotskyist one, particularly in 1929–30. Moshe Lewin, in his Political Undercurrents in the Soviet Economic Debate, provides much evidence to support this thesis. Cohen, on the other hand, does not seriously consider this question, and this arises from his determination to ‘prove’ his thesis that Bukharin was more realistic than Trotsky. However, it must be admitted that any serious reading of the economic ideas advanced by both Trotsky and Bukharin in this period does show considerable agreement when faced with the excesses and irrationalities of Stalin’s industrialisation and collectivisation drive.
The fact that many Left Oppositionists capitulated to Stalin at this period (1929–30) is usually taken as a sign that they thought that Stalin was adopting, albeit in a bureaucratic manner, the economic policies of the Left Opposition. After some momentary initial hesitation, Trotsky came to the conclusion that this was not the case, and remained firmly in opposition to the whole of Stalin’s policies. And Trotsky, who for a number of years had appeared to be the radical on economic questions, was now forced into the role of moderate. It seems to me that Trotsky did this because he realised that without, as a first step, the restoration of inner-party democracy, the vastly increased tempo of industrialisation and wholesale unprepared collectivisation of agriculture presented as many dangers, if not more, than the previous snail’s pace tempo. The fact that Trotsky was prepared to consider a bloc with Bukharin against Stalin, to fight for the restoration of inner-party democracy, indicates Trotsky’s appreciation of the seminal importance of an overall, and not one-sided, strategy of development for the Soviet Union.
In this respect it has to be considered whether Trotsky merely stood firm on his previous positions when faced with capitulations within his own ranks, or whether he came to realise that the Left Opposition had not been so homogeneous as had been (and still is) assumed. The fact that Preobrazhensky, the leading economist of the Left Opposition, capitulated to Stalin, while Trotsky remained firmly opposed, should provide some ground for reconsideration of the period and the evolution of Trotsky and Bukharin. The years 1929-30 presents a picture of two ships that pass in the night, both seeming to be on the same course, but this did not last.
Cohen consistently fails to come to grips with these problems, since it would tend to detract from the picture he wishes to present of Bukharin. There was a clear shift on the part of Bukharin in 1928–30, which brought the possibility of a bloc with the Left Opposition within sight. The fact that it did not take place is not only important in assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the Left Opposition, but even more so in examining the Right Opposition and Bukharin in particular. Cohen does not even attempt to deal with such problems, since for him Trotsky and the Left Opposition are merely a small band crying in the wilderness, whilst Bukharin apparently represented a broad, if diffused, opposition within all sections of Soviet society. What Cohen forgets is that the social base of the Left Opposition – the Soviet working class – has been enormously increased since 1930, whilst the social strata that the Right Opposition reflected – the small peasants – has all but disappeared from Soviet society. The Left Opposition may have been crying in the wilderness by 1930, but in the last analysis all that Bukharin could do was to cry in anguish at the actions of the predatory monster he had helped to victory.
The historic merit of Trotsky lies precisely in the fact that he did not capitulate, that he was prepared to carry on a principled struggle against the Soviet bureaucracy against all odds. In the process he forged many of the intellectual weapons that are needed, firstly to understand this phenomenon and secondly to combat it. Bukharin’s consistent refusal to take up the struggle against Stalin in public meant that he always had to compromise to Stalin’s advantage. It was of little consequence after 1930 that Bukharin’s private views sometimes coincided with Trotsky’s public positions, because Bukharin never did anything about them, while Trotsky did.
If this review has seemed overly critical, it is because the matters dealt with are not merely ones of historical interpretation or judgement, they are central to politics here and now. And as such the omissions and failures cannot go unnoticed. This is not to say that those who are interested in uncovering the real heritage of revolutionary Marxism should not rescue Bukharin from his undeserved oblivion, but at the same time it may be necessary to rescue him from his more uncritical admirers. A study of Bukharin’s writings is necessary for us to reappropriate our heritage, those who do so will be richly rewarded. But they have to study critically. Cohen’s book needs to be used in the same way.
 



Isaac Deutscher died on 19 August 1967, yet his influence and achievement still illuminate modern Marxism. How should we remember him? Merely as the biographer of Stalin and Trotsky? No, for to remember Deutscher merely for his historico-biographies would deny us the pleasure and education which can be derived from his many other writings. Nor should we solely remember him as a writer, for in his early youth he was a political activist and leader who worked in illegal conditions in pre-war Poland, and in his later years he also became an active political educator. The pleasure that we can derive from his writings arises from the clarity, precision, richness and culture with which he used the English language. Moreover, even in his English prose there is at times a lyricism that hints at his success as a poet in his very early youth. Inevitably, comparisons can be made between Deutscher and Conrad – both were Polish by birth and both wrote their finest works in English. But Deutscher’s achievement is the greater of the two since he not only gave (and gives) us pleasure, he informed and taught – a rare combination. Moreover, his achievement has to be set against the fact that he had to hew his way forward, not only against the Stalinist perversions of Marxism, but also against the bourgeois environment that grudgingly tolerated him.
Deutscher was born in Chrzanów, which is nearly 20 miles from Cracow. The year was 1907, 10 years before the Bolshevik revolution, the study and interpretation of which was to become the major, but not only, focus of his mature writings. The place of his birth was near the point of congruence of three empires, Russia, Germany and Austro-Hungary. His parents were Jewish and his father ran a printing business, given the overall situation he had a relatively educated environment in which to grow up, although he and his family were subject to all the disabilities and pogroms that befell the Jews. In this respect there is an affinity between Deutscher and Rosa Luxemburg. Both of them came from a cultural background that was truly European, and both extended their influence far beyond their original homelands. Moreover, both Deutscher and Luxemburg had more than a touch of the heretic in their personality and works.
I personally first became aware of Deutscher with the publication of his biography of Stalin in 1949. It was a major event in many respects, it marked his emergence as a writer of international significance and was the first appraisal of Stalin’s career (up to that point) which came from an avowed Marxist who did not worship in Stalin’s church. (I say this in spite of Trotsky’s earlier book on the same subject, since it is incomplete and its published form is marred by its fragmentary nature and the long and politically vulgar incursions of the translator.) This is not to say, of course, that one was uncritical of Deutscher’s work on Stalin. It has always seemed to me that in his desire for objectivity Deutscher was often prepared to give Stalin the benefit of the doubt when it was not warranted. However, this did not detract from the overall value and importance of the work. We should appreciate the courage of Deutscher in publishing this work when he did. The times were hardly propitious for scholarly and objective works about Stalin and the Soviet Union. With the outbreak of the Cold War in 1946, initiated by Churchill’s Fulton speech, there was released a flood of vulgar and shallow writings on Soviet life, lies being judiciously mixed with the undoubted truth about the horrors of Stalin’s rule. Moreover, all aspects of – and adherents of – Marxism were subjected to renewed assault by professional Kremlinologists. The more debased forms of this flood have only abated within the last decade. In this respect Deutscher stood out in stark contrast to the intellectual warriors of the Cold War. With his Stalin he firmly nailed his Marxist colours to the mast. He not only manned the ‘watch-tower’ – as he modestly put it – but he also helped to keep alight the torch of Marxist scholarship in a world that seemed to be all but totally dominated by imperialism and Stalinism.
However, it was with the publication of the first part of his Trotsky trilogy, The Prophet Armed, in 1954 that Deutscher could be seen in his full maturity. I will not go into the disputes on this or that point in his work, since such disputes could only be marginal to his overall achievement. Stalin was by now dead, but he had yet to be dethroned by his acolytes, and the myths created in earlier times still subsisted. But Deutscher’s biography of Trotsky began clearing away the ‘mountain of dead dogs’ which had been heaped on his grave. For those of my generation this book was both a fulfilment and a promise. It fulfilled our needs at many levels, it presented an overall account of Trotsky’s titanic contribution to Marxism and the Russian revolution (up to 1921) and gave a panoramic view of the times in which Trotsky lived and moved. Deutscher also gave promise that Trotsky’s ideas and struggles were neither irrelevant nor in vain. The account given was like a window being suddenly opened on a world that had almost been forgotten. It was the world of classical Marxism, of a truly Euro-Marxism that existed before 1914. The heirs to this classical Marxism had been the Bolsheviks and for the most part they had perished at the hands of Stalin. Moreover, the Euro-Marxism of this era was not intellectually bounded by the geographical contours of Europe but rather drew its sources from and analysed these on a world scale. It was also fitting that this biography of Trotsky should have been published in the year that French imperialism was decisively defeated at Dien Bien Phu (in North Vietnam), since this event – coming five years after the victory of the Chinese revolution – was a striking confirmation, if in an unforeseen manner, of Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution.
Furthermore, this book restored Trotsky’s rightful place in the history of the Russian revolution. In years to come Stalinist falsifiers, in the capitalist world at least, would have to try to come to terms with Deutscher’s account. On this point Deutscher said:
My account of Trotsky’s role in the Russian revolution will come as a surprise to some. For nearly 30 years the powerful propaganda machine of Stalinism worked furiously to expunge Trotsky’s name from the annals of the revolution, or to leave it there only as the synonym for arch-traitor ... Trotsky’s life story is already like an Egyptian sepulchre which is known to have contained the body of a great man and the record, engraved with gold, of his deeds; but tomb-robbers have plundered and left it so empty and desolate that no trace is found of the record it once contained. The work of the tomb-robbers has, in this present instance, been so persistent that it has strongly affected the views even of the independent Western historians and scholars. [1]
Deutscher had originally intended to write a one- or two-volume biography of Trotsky; in the event, as he later explained, the complexity and scale of his subject’s life forced him to extend the work to a trilogy. We can see the foundations being laid in the above passage, taken from the preface of the first volume. Nearly a quarter of a century later it may, in turn, now seem strange and come as a surprise that Deutscher had to make these points, so changed has the intellectual climate become. Yet his work can be seen as part of the process of change itself, since it initiated innumerable young militants into the true history of their inheritance.
The trilogy was completed in 1963, and the last volume – The Prophet Outcast – was probably the most controversial as far as the Trotskyist movement was concerned. Deutscher had actually participated in some of the events he described in the book. He had been expelled from the Polish Communist Party in 1932 for his opposition to the suicidal ‘Third Period’ policies of the Comintern, and for his attempts – like Trotsky – to sound the tocsin against the advance of the Nazi barbarians in Germany. For a period Deutscher was associated with the International Left Opposition, forerunner of the Fourth International. However, he and the other Polish oppositionists disagreed with the founding of the Fourth International in 1938 and thus they parted company. But this disagreement did not mean a retreat from Marxism as in many other cases. The disagreement stemmed basically from a different evaluation of the viability of such a new International in a period of working-class defeats, since the previous Internationals had been founded in periods of rising working-class activity.
It is a curious contradiction in Deutscher’s make-up that he should have failed to understand the necessity for the Fourth International precisely because of the working-class defeats of the period, since in many ways it had to try to do collectively what he had tried to do individually by his withdrawal into the ‘watch-tower’. The Fourth International could never be a mere repeat – even in a different form – of any of the other three Internationals. This is not to say, of course, that Trotsky and the other founders of the Fourth International started out with the intention of such a withdrawal, but this was to be its historic role for many years. Nor did Deutscher understand that without such an organisation his own work would have been largely shouting in the wind, since those young people who were stirred by his writings could not have turned their message into meaningful activity without the prior existence of a political organisation.
Given his own evolution it comes as no surprise that Deutscher was highly critical of the last period of Trotsky’s life, seeing all his efforts doomed to failure. One wonders if Deutscher’s view of Trotsky’s last struggle – to found and build the Fourth International – was not coloured by a desire, unconscious no doubt, to justify his own retreat from active politics into the ‘watch-tower’. Such a justification was hardly necessary since the corpus of his writings are ample testimony to his prodigious efforts and his unswerving commitment to socialism. Nor was his retreat complete or long-lasting; his activities, speaking, teaching and encouraging young people in their attempts to cleave a way towards a scientific understanding of the world they lived in, were manifold. In his last years Deutscher was a powerful catalyst upon the American scene and the burgeoning anti-Vietnam War movement in particular. Nor should his work upon the International War Crimes Tribunal be overlooked, since participation in that body meant an unequivocal stand against imperialist barbarism.
The only time I heard Isaac Deutscher speak was revealing of the man and his power. It was in the winter of 1963–64, and he had been invited to speak at a student meeting in Oxford. This was, of course, before the big surge forward in student activity that occurred a few years later, so there were probably only 50 to 75 people present. (In later years he was to address audiences of thousands.) Deutscher stood up after the chairperson had introduced him and apologised for not coming as well prepared as he thought he should have. He told us he had been suffering, and still was, from a heavy cold. He asked our indulgence and read us the script of the introduction to the Trotsky anthology he had recently completed. [2] Despite the obvious handicap he was under, his voice, slightly hoarse, gradually swept up and along his audience as he gave an incisive survey of Trotsky the man and his ideas, and their relevance to the modern world. We all sat rapt as Deutscher took us in our collective mind’s eye out of that small room, away from the pervading dampness of an English winter, into the world of Trotsky, the man of action, of ideas and of classical Marxism. When he stopped there was a slight pause, as though no one wanted to break the spell that Deutscher’s words had woven, and then enthusiastic applause which seemed to last a long time. He sat down and rather deprecatingly blew his nose. The lecture and the gesture seemed to sum up the man: immense intellectual power, the use of language that enchanted, and modesty.
There was a passage in the lecture that struck me forcibly as being a powerful, yet simple exposition of Trotsky’s theory of, and vision of, permanent revolution:
Trotsky’s theory is in truth a profound and comprehensive conception in which all the overturns that the world has been undergoing (in this late capitalist era) are represented as interconnected and interdependent parts of a single revolutionary process. To put it in the broadest terms, the social upheaval of our century is seen by Trotsky as global in scope and character, even though it proceeds on various levels of civilisation and in the most diverse social structures, and even though its various phases are separated from one another in time and space. [3]
I am not suggesting that the above contains the whole of Trotsky’s theory, but I feel that it does contain the essence. It brings out the essentially visionary quality of Trotsky’s theory, but indicates that the vision is based on the grasp of the real and material processes taking place in the world system.
Needless to say, the book to which Deutscher referred has had a place among my own books ever since I was able to buy it. I doubly value it for Deutscher’s contribution and Trotsky’s.
If I seem to have mentioned classical Marxism several times so far, it is because it is a recurring theme in Deutscher’s writings. Given his own intellectual roots this is hardly surprising. He explained what he meant by classical Marxism as follows:
I hope I have explained in what sense I am using these terms – classical Marxism and vulgar Marxism. I shall perhaps sum up my argument: classical Marxism offers deep historical insight into the working of capitalism, into the prospects of the dissolution of capitalism, and, broader still, into man’s relation under this system with other men, with his own class and other classes, his relationship and attitude to the technology of his age. Vulgar Marxism does not need all that insight; it is fully satisfied with a small fraction of all that understanding, which it places in the severely limited orbit of practical needs, practical striving, and practical tasks. We have here an historic hypertrophy of practice and an atrophy of thought. [4]
Here, again, Deutscher was able to convey in simple, concise language both the essentials and panorama of classical Marxism and contrast it with the withered and desiccated ideology that is embodied in vulgar Marxism. As is clear from all his writings, neither the warp nor the weft on their own can make the cloth whole. In this way he imparted a surer, deeper and more subtle understanding to what he undertook to analyse and explain.
Some clue to Deutscher’s concern to ensure some unity in the traditions of classical Marxism can be apprised from his essays The Non-Jewish Jew and Who is a Jew?. [5] There he touches upon the liquidation of the Yiddish-Jewish culture of Poland and Central Europe by the extermination programme of the Nazis. Perhaps he worried that Stalinism would have the same effect upon the Marxist tradition that he drew his resources and inspiration from – and was a part of, enlarging it and endowing it with his own works. Deutscher’s own understanding of the historical processes would, of course, have provided him with an assurance on this point, since the material foundations upon which the Yiddish culture grew could not be recalled from the dead; while the material foundations of Marxism are re-created every day under capitalism. Nevertheless, it must have been as agonising for him as for Trotsky to witness the destruction of the Bolshevik old guard and of the foreign exiles in Moscow by Stalinism; and at the same time the equally destructive rampage of fascism throughout the rest of Europe. Deutscher was also to witness the obscene trials that took place in the so-called ‘People’s Democracies’ in the late 1940s and early 1950s of alleged ‘Titoists’. He certainly had an understanding of the terrible dilemmas and traumas inflicted upon many others by this period. He says, for instance, of Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four: ‘Nineteen Eighty-Four is in effect not so much a warning as a piercing shriek announcing the advent of the Black Millennium, the Millennium of damnation.’ [6] Perhaps in his dreams he also gave such a shriek. If he did, he did not listen to it in his writings.
Given the nature of the times, Deutscher and the tradition that he cherished were driven into the margins of history. However, he was fortunate enough to live to see those margins once more begin to widen. Deutscher’s own margin was particularly narrow at certain times in his life. Whilst working upon the research for and writing his books he had to earn his living as a journalist. This seemed to be his loss, since such work took him away from his major preoccupations, but to some extent it was our gain, since even the most hurriedly written articles had his particular stamp on them. Had he not been forced by circumstances he probably would not have written as much of the analysis of current events that he did, but against these gains we have to set the unwritten biography of Lenin.
Despite the apparent ease with which he used the tools of Marxist analysis he only came to his understanding and skill through an essentially auto-didactic process, as he told us in Discovering Das Kapital. [7] Like many others who tread this path his first approach was not fruitful, since he attempted to study Capital more as a duty than a necessity. And, like many others, he failed at his first attempt, but later, when it did become a political necessity because of his expulsion from the Polish Communist Party, Marx’s work began to fall into place:
I felt the need to re-examine my own political thinking and the principles of communism and Marxism. I decided to take nothing for granted. Could Stalinist policies and practices be justified in terms of Marxism? Has Marx’s analysis and critique of capitalism stood up to the events of our time? These were the questions which troubled me. I made up my mind to plough through the whole of Das Kapital, all three volumes of it, and also the many-volumed Theorien über den Mehrwert, Marx’s history of economic doctrines. I was determined to scrutinise this whole intellectual structure coolly and sceptically and keep my eyes open to its possible flaws and cracks. [8]
It was with this questing need for solutions to burning problems that Deutscher came to grapple with Marx. In reality there is no other way to do this, Marxism cannot be understood as a mere academic study – it has to be situated within the class struggle. Without the class dimension and the quest for answers, the visions of Marx elude one and the ‘boundless horizons’ that Deutscher found are constricted by academic anaemia. Whilst it may be possible to appreciate the soaring architectonics of Marx’s writings as a work of art, a full appreciation can only come about by using them as a tool to unlock past, present and future. This Deutscher did. Moreover, if we are to unlock the future we must engage the present in unremitting struggle; and it is a measure of Deutscher’s commitment to the socialist future that the present continually called him away from his interrogation of the past:
The study of Das Kapital did not merely confirm me in my Marxist conviction ... It also revealed to me the full depth of the gulf that lay between classical Marxism and the cynical expediences, the dull scholasticism, and the inquisitorial methods of Stalinism. Ever since, it has seemed as incongruous to blame Marx for Stalin as it would be to blame the Bible and Aristotle for the dogmas of the mediaeval church and the Inquisition. It was as a Marxist that I went on opposing Stalinism. [9]
How apt that Deutscher should draw the parallel between the Inquisition and the methods of Stalinism. In so doing he illustrated the power of the tool that Capital becomes when its methodology is mastered. And, in addition, Deutscher also discovered another essential truth when at a later stage he went back to re-read parts of Capital:
Only in the last few weeks have I begun reading it anew. I have so far gone through the first three chapters, those reputed to be exceptionally involved and abstruse ... I still find myself fascinated by the old familiar pages; but what strikes me about them now, as it never did before, is their essential simplicity. [10]
The truth of this simplicity is something each reader, or rather those who are questing, discover with the same surprise. The puzzle is why is Marx considered to be difficult? The difficulties that new readers encounter are well known, they often quail when confronted with Capital. Yet the essential simplicity that Deutscher perceived is also evident. How do we explain these apparent contradictions? A part of the problem for English readers was offered by Deutscher when he maintains that Marx is not easily translatable: ‘Marx’s style and language cannot easily be anglicised, although existing translations are far more clumsy and stiff than they need have been.’ [11] However, this cannot be the whole explanation for these problems. We must also seek them in the dominance of bourgeois ideology, with its reified forms of intellectual activity.
Deutscher was able to extract what he saw as the essence of Marxism from his study. He claimed that it was:
... not in this or that aspect of his [Marx’s] analysis of the trade cycle or even in his views on the impoverishment, relative or absolute, of the working class, important though these views were politically ... for me the essence of his analysis lay in what he says about the central contradiction of our social system, the conflict between the socialised process of production and the unsocial character of the control which capitalist ownership exercises over the process. Inherent in this is the worker’s estrangement from his own labour, from the products of his labour, and from the structure of society which his labour perpetuates. [12]
Here he gets to the heart of the matter, since he emphasises the totalising capacity of Marx’s theory, its ability to combine numerous aspects and different levels into a comprehensible whole, including the contradictions within that whole. This stands in sharp contrast to bourgeois ideology, which tries to atomise scientific thought, as the bourgeoisie continually tries to atomise the working class. Since no one arrives on the scene as a fully-developed Marxist (not even Marx did) the difficulties of Capital resolve themselves into the problems of the struggle to subvert and cast off bourgeois ideology. Moreover, this subversion can only take place through practical as well as intellectual struggle. If, today, looking at Deutscher’s life with the ‘superior’ wisdom of hindsight we feel that he did not always seem able truly to combine these two aspects, we should remember this ‘superior’ wisdom is due in part to his own efforts.
Despite his proven anti-Stalinism there was an undoubted ambiguity in Deutscher’s attitude towards the Soviet bureaucracy. By this I do not mean that he in any way doubted its reactionary essence, rather that he seemed to suggest at times that this bureaucracy might be peacefully put aside. In 1953, shortly after Stalin’s death, he wrote:
The economic progress made during the Stalin era at last brought within reach of the people a measure of well-being which should make possible an orderly winding-up of Stalinism and a gradual democratic evolution. [13]
This evolutionist-cum-reformist perspective of the restoration of Soviet democracy has been confounded by the course of events in the last 24 years. In fact it had been largely confounded in Deutscher’s lifetime, yet he never wholly gave up his hopes for this type of solution. In his last book which was published before he died he still said: ‘What seems possible in the near future is that society should be able to retrieve its civil liberties and establish political control over the state.’ [14]
What Deutscher did not face up to was how these civil liberties were to be retrieved; it was not as though they had been accidentally mislaid and were just waiting for someone to come along and pick them up, there was the no small matter of the whole repressive apparatus of the bureaucracy to be dealt with. Where he was correct was to understand that the growth, education and consolidation of the Soviet working class, along with an extension of revolution, provide the material base for the destruction of the bureaucracy. However, as we have seen, these are necessary conditions for political revolution but in and of themselves they are not sufficient. Here we can see the other issues which divided Deutscher from Trotsky. While Trotsky had firmly set his face against the possibility of such a peaceful evolution, Deutscher clung to this idea as though afraid of the effects of a new revolution. His problem was that despite some very perceptive insights he was unable either to accept or to reject Trotsky’s analysis of the Soviet bureaucracy. There is an undoubted change in nuance between his formulation of 1953 and that of 1967, but this basic ambiguity remains.
Despite his brilliance and scholarship Deutscher was firmly barred from an academic post that would have given him the financial security and conditions that he needed, so he worked on – praised but shut out. [15] Perhaps the academics really understood that Deutscher was a dangerous man – he was a man of principles, Marxist ones to boot, a rare combination in the wintry days of the Cold War. It was a measure of Deutscher’s magnanimity that when the academic world finally deigned to give him token recognition – he gave the George Macaulay Trevelyan Lectures in Cambridge in 1967 – he did not spurn it.
The title of these Cambridge lectures, when published, was The Unfinished Revolution and it is also perhaps a comment upon Deutscher himself. He was working on a biography of Lenin when he died, and in this respect his own life’s work was unfinished. All that we have of this work is the fragment that was published as Lenin’s Childhood. [16] It can only give the faintest hint at what the completed work would have been like. Had he finished it there is no doubt that it would have equalled his Trotsky trilogy, and probably been the pinnacle of his endeavours. He was not an old man when he died – at least by today’s standards – and still had a great deal to contribute to both history and politics. Revolutionists make sacrifices in many ways, some die in heroic circumstances, others suffer great physical pain and hardship, still others sacrifice careers and families. Deutscher, also, paid the penalty for his devotion to Marxism, partly by the lack of security in his career, and partly by the intolerable strains created by the constant struggle against the stream – very often in isolation – in a hostile environment. He saw many of his family disappear in the death camps of Hitler, and was to be an exile from 1939 to the year of his death; and in the end his heart gave out.
The 10 years that have passed since his death have only served to emphasise the debt we owe to Deutscher for his long years in the ‘watch-tower’. They have underscored the unique place he had, and still does have, in modern Marxism. It will be a long time before we see his like again. Meanwhile let us not mourn him, let us celebrate him in our individual and collective efforts.

Notes
1. Isaac Deutscher, The Prophet Armed, Trotsky: 1879–1921 (Oxford University Press, London 1954), pp. v–vi.
2. See [Introduction], The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology (Dell Publishing, New York 1964).
3. [Introduction], The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology (Dell Publishing, New York 1964), p. 19.
4. Isaac Deutscher, Marxism in Our Time, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), pp. 19–20.
5. Isaac Deutscher, The Non-Jewish Jew and Who is a Jew?, The Non-Jewish Jew and Other Essays (OUP, London 1968).
6. Isaac Deutscher, 1984 – The Mysticism of Cruelty, Heretics and Renegades and Other Essays (Hamish Hamilton, London 1955).
7. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972).
8. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), pp. 257–58.
9. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), p. 260.
10. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), p. 263.
11. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), p. 263.
12. Isaac Deutscher, Discovering Das Kapital, Marxism in Our Time (Cape, London 1972), p. 260.
13. Isaac Deutscher, Russia After Stalin (second edition with an introduction by Marcel Liebman, Cape, London 1969), p. 168.
14. Isaac Deutscher, The Unfinished Revolution: Russia 1917–1967 (OUP, London 1967), p. 107.
15. See the reference to the offer and then withdrawal of the offer of a post at Sussex University in Daniel Singer’s essay Armed with a Pen, in David Horowitz (ed.), Isaac Deutscher: The Man and his Work (Macdonald, London 1971). There is also a useful select bibliography of Deutscher’s works in this volume.
16. Isaac Deutscher, Lenin’s Childhood (OUP, London 1970).
 

