

Alan Wald
The Revolutionary Imagination: the Poetry and Politics of John Wheelwright and Sherry Mangan
Chapel Hill, 288p., $28.00
The international revolutionary movement has been enriched throughout its history by the adherence of talented literary figures to its ranks. The years following the victory of the October Revolution in Russia were particularly fruitful in this respect. In Europe, major literary figures like Henri Barbusse, André Malraux, Bertold Brecht. Auden and Spender were among those who were drawn into the Communist movement, and in the United States this influx heralded by people like Max Eastman. John Reed and others.
As the revolutionary wave ebbed and fascism reared its ugly head many of those intellectuals saw the Soviet Union as the shining beacon in the sea or darkness. But Stalinism sought to implant its image on art as on any other forms of human activity. This had a stultifying effect on the emergence of new art forms and the creativity of artists. John Wheelwright, one of the two poets who form the subject of this meticulous study by Alan Wald, recognised this even before he joined the organised socialist movement in 1932. About the American Communist Party, he wrote: ‘they grind out the dialectic, just as a papal court grinds out its dialectic’. Under Stalinism, the artist had to conform to the twists and changes of party policy, veering from the ultra-leftism of the ‘Third Period’ to the reformism of the popular front. This was completely foreign to the conception of the role of art in the years immediately following October.
Trotsky, in his classic Literature and Revolution, written In 1924, wrote:
‘... Art must make its own way and by its own means. The Marxian methods are not the same as the artistic The Party leads the proletariat but not the historic process of history. There are domains in which the Party leads, directly and imperatively. There are domains in which it only orientates itself. The domain of art is not one in which the Party is called upon to command ... The Party cannot and will not take the position of a literary circle which is struggling and merely competing with other literary circles …’
Under Stalin and Zhdanov, all this changed. The Patty did constitute itself the supreme arbiter in all things, including the arts. Thus, in the late ’20s and ’30s the so-called proletarian novel became a cult only to be abandoned in 1935 when the political line changed.
To independent minds like Wheelwright and Mangan, the conformity which Stalinism demanded from the poet was repugnant. Developing in the same literary traditions as T.S. Eliot and with the same class background, unlike Eliot who moved to the right, they became acutely aware of the decadence of capitalist society They were formed and transformed, as the author writes: ‘by consecutive immersions in two movements of thought that allured the most advanced of the inter-war generation of writers. First as Harvard poets and periodic y Stalinism with its sterile theory and repressive attitude to the arts. John Wheelwright and Sherry Mangan turned to the repository of revolutionary Marxism – Trotskyism. They joined the Socialist Workers Party (USA) in the 1930s. When, as a result of the Stalin-Hitler pact in 1939, the intellectuals began to leave the cause of revolution in droves, Wheelwright and Mangan remained firm in their political commitment. They saw no contradiction between their literary activities and their politics. They had a great admiration for Leon Trotsky, who they considered the foremost political figure of that day. Trotsky’s definition of art as ‘an expression of man’s needs for a harmonious and complete life ... his need for those major benefits of which a society of classes has deprived him ...’ completely fitted in with their own conception of their role as artists and revolutionary socialists.
As Wald writes, ‘they came to personify Trotyky’s conception of the bond between the dissident artist and the political heretic’. Unlike many of the contemporaries who confined their contribution to the revolution to their literary work, Wheelwright and Mangan realised that art alone was an inadequate instrument for the transformation of society and allied themselves with the working-class movement. In these successive stages of artistic and political rebellion, they remained pledged to a higher order of values than they believed existed in the society around them.’ Not for them the comparatively passive role of ‘fellow-travellers’. Once he had decided to throw off the shackles of his Boston upper-class background, Wheelwright threw himself enthusiastically into the living socialist movement. He took part in demonstrations, spoke from soapboxes and ran for office as a revolutionary socialist candidate.
Wheelwright’s poetry has been rescued from obscurity by the publication in 1972 of the Collected Works of John Wheelwright (Alvin H. Rosenfeld (ed.), New Directions, 278pp., $10) and Alan Wald’s book has added a new dimension to the appreciation of his life and work both as poet and revolutionary. He remained an active member of the Socialist Workers Party (USA) till his tragic death in 1940.
When Sherry Mangan became radicalised in the 1930s, he wax already regarded as a young man of great literary promise. But for Sherry the revolution now became the prime motive for his existence. While working as foreign correspondent for Time and Fortune magazines in London and Paris, he was secretly working for the Fourth International as journalist and translator, and as a member on the International Secretariat. He sacrificed his life of comfort and literary creativity for the cause in which he believed with all his heart. When a boyhood friend asked him what socialism had done ‘for’ him as well as what it had done ‘to’ him, Sherry replied:
“For me it has given a guidance and a purpose far beyond any personal one that I might have conceived, save poetry itself. To me, yes ... it has made me pay and pay dear. But I won’t change one opinion, one iota because of it.”
Under the name of Terence Phelan, he became the European correspondent of Socialist Appeal, then the organ of the SWP. When his articles arrived m New York. Max Shachtman, then editor of Socialist Appeal, read parts of them aloud to the editorial board as exemplary Marxist journalism. During the German occupation of Paris and before America entered the war, he contrived to keep in touch with the Trotskyist underground. In 1943, back in London, he set to work trying to unite the disparate Trotskyist groups. After the war, he played a leading part in re-establishing international contacts and setting up the International Secretariat in Paris. He was also active as a member of the Central Committee of the French section.
As a revolutionary journalist, Sherry was, as Max Shachtman said, exemplary. His article, The End of French Democracy, which appeared in the Fourth International in the spring of 1941, was a brilliant Marxist analysis of the historical reasons why France had fallen so easily to the Nazis. Just how much Sherry gave up by his devoted work for the revolution is perhaps best summed up by the letter he wrote shortly before his death in Bolivia in 1960: ‘Even though revolutionary politics are an honourable occupation, it’s poetry I still love best.’
Everyone interested in the left-wing literary tradition who wants to learn how intellectuals can find a place in the revolutionary movement should he grateful to Alan Wald for this authoritative research into the lives of these two people for whom the revolution completely synchronised with the future of humanity, and who gave their all to its cause.
CHARLIE VAN GELDEREN is a Trotskyist of 50 years standing.
 



Reg Groves
The Balham Group: How British Trotskyism Began
Pluto Press, hardback £1.80, paperback 75p
When the definitive history of British Trotskyism comes to be written  –  a long overdue task  –  this little book by Reg Groves will provide valuable source material. It records the founding of the first Trotskyist organisation in Britain and provides information which it is difficult to find elsewhere.
In May 1932 a handful of members of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) published, anonymously, a duplicated journal The Communist, most of it devoted to Trotsky’s Germany  –  The Key to the International Situation. The very fact that the publishers did not dare to publish their names reflected the situation which had developed in the Communist International and in its British section with the rise of Stalinism. Gone were the days of free discussion and critical assessment of policies which were characteristic of the Comintern of Lenin and Trotsky. In its place was policy making from above, bureaucratically imposed. To oppose was to invite expulsion.
The Balham Group, as the early Trotskyists grouped round Reg Groves came to be known, fought Stalinism on principled grounds, attacking the ultra-leftist Third Period, the rejection of the Leninist tactic of the United Front, and the sectarianism which proclaimed social democracy a greater danger to the working class than fascism. (This at a time when Germany was on the very brink of the fascist avalanche which was to create such havoc in the European labour movement for years to come and imperilled the very existence of the Soviet Union itself.) Trotsky’s desperate efforts from his Prinkipo exile to sound the tocsin and to steer the Comintern back on the road of Leninism not only went unheeded but were violently denounced as ‘Left Social-Fascism’.
In 1935, after Hitler’s victory, the Stalinised Comintern swung from the ultra-leftist denunciation of the Leninist United Front to the opportunist class-collaborationist policy of the Popular Front. Principled Communist opposition to imperialist war gave way to opportunist manoeuvres with petty-bourgeois pacifism. It was for their fight against the fake Amsterdam World Congress for Peace that Groves and his comrades were expelled from the CPGB.
It will be difficult for younger members of our movement to imagine the difficulties involved in this open breach with the Party. These comrades had been deeply involved in Party activities. The Communist Party was the party of Lenin and Trotsky; the Soviet Union was the fatherland of all the toilers. A break with the Party meant ostracism from life-long comrades and isolation from the mainstream of working class politics. It is no wonder, therefore, that the Balham Group hesitated before finally throwing in their lot with the Left Opposition.
Today, when Groves has joined the ranks of the International Socialists, he tries to justify this hesitation retrospectively, as if even then he had doubts about the nature of the Soviet Union and Bolshevism. He writes:
‘Our doubts were, if not dispelled, at least held in limbo by our respect for Trotsky’s brilliant mind, experience and revolutionary integrity. He argued forcefully ... that the Russian state ... remained a workers’ state, temporarily off course because of wrong leadership and policies. It did not convince us deep down in our troubled and uneasy consciences ...’
One would search in vain through the writings of the members of the Balham Group at the time for any such expression of doubt, as the very valuable collection of documents of the period which the booklet contains will verify. It is only with his belated conversion to ‘state capitalism’ that he can now equate Bolshevism (in its Trotskyist form) with Stalinism and write that ‘We were still in the same psychological sphere as the people with whom we were in conflict’.
Groves, of course, broke organisationally with the Trotskyist movement many years ago. By 1935 he was well entrenched in the Labour Party, a parliamentary candidate and an active leader in Stafford Cripps’ Socialist League, in which role he was particularly hostile to the Trotskyists who entered the Labour Party and the Labour League of Youth as an organised tendency in that year But his early contribution to our movement and that of the small band of comrades round him will be remembered and valued long after his subsequent journey away from Trotskyism is forgotten.
A few comments should, perhaps, be added on the review of Groves’ book published in Workers’ Press, 15 June 1974. While much of Jack Gale’s political criticism of Groves’ present-day role and retrospective renegacy is correct, the language in which it is couched is reminiscent of that used against oppositionists by ‘Third Period’ Stalinists. This is, perhaps, no accident. For, while Groves, Wicks, Purkiss. Sara, Dewar and the rest fought this ’Third Period’ madness, the present leader of the Workers’ Revolutionary Party (WRP) remained a loyal member of the CPGB throughout this whole period and only broke with Stalinism when it swung from ultra-leftism to popular frontism.
Perhaps it is significant that when an international commission came to Britain in 1938 to unite the various Trotskyist groups prior to the Founding Congress, only two groups refused to enter the unified British Section of the Fourth International  –  that led by Groves and the Workers’ International League in which Healy of the WRP and Ted Grant of the ‘Militant’ current were prominent leaders. Above all, this reflects the insularity of that tradition of ‘British Trotskyism’ which pays lip service to proletarian internationalism but abjures it in practice.
 



Karl Marx: Early Texts
translated and edited by David McLellan
Basil Blackwell. 25/- (p&p 3/-) from Red Books
In the 1930s, “Marxism” became fashionable among a large section of the intellectuals in Europe and America. It largely took the form of fellow-travelling with the Slalinised Third International. Even the trials of the 1930s failed to shake the loyalty of all but a few of these fellow-travellers. Here and there a protesting voice was heard. Some, like Koestler, turned from Marxism to unbridled anti-communism. A few others, unwilling to throw the baby out with the bathwater, claimed to discover in the younger Marx of the early 1840s a “more critical and undogmatic humanism” than in the later Marx and, of course, in Bolshevism, which they wore now beginning to equate with Stalinism. The destruction of German Social-Democracy by Hitler also led to a lot of “new thinking” about the future of socialism, and its exponents also turned to the earlier writings of Marx for inspiration.
But the cult of the “Young Marx” received its greatest impulse after Krushchev’s 20th Congress speech, exposing the crimes of Stalin. Although everything he said had long been known – especially through the writings of Leon Trotsky – even the most devoted fellow-traveller could no longer shut his eyes to the nature of the regime in the Soviet Union. To denounce Marxism, however, would be to denounce their own past and especially their theoretical integrity. So they sought refuge in the “Young Marx”. This tendency received a fresh impetus after the events in Poland and Hungary in 1956/7.
This neo-Marxism even became respectable. Courses in Marxism were instituted at universities which had never before even included it in their curriculums. The whole intellectual world seemed suddenly to be debating Marx’s theory of “alienation”. While ignoring his writings on economics and dismissing dialectical materialism as so much “metaphysical hot air”, there was increasing, interest in Marx as a “humanist” and respect for his profound understanding of history and human nature.
To these people It appeared that there were “two Marxes” and an irreconcilable clash between the early writings and the mature system of Marx’s later years The “Young Marx”, according to these newly fashionable thinkers, was first and foremost a philosopher rather than an economist.
 
Marx: Early Texts
This collection of Marx’s earlier works should convince any honest reader that the “two Marx’s”, which the neo-Marxists claim to have discovered, simply show how little they really understand Marxism, despite their intellectual pretensions What is true, of course, it that his thinking developed and matured over the years. Marx was no ivory-tower philosopher shut up In the reading room of the British Museum, as so many assume. He, with Engels, was passionately involved tn the class struggles of their day. They learned from actual events and applied their analytical method dialectical materialism – to these events. Their aim was to help to change the world and not merely to explain it. A study of these writings leaves no doubt about the unity of Marx’s thought after he had broken with the idealistic conceptions of Hegel.
As David McLellan points out in his valuable introduction. there is no justification for those who claim that alienation aa a concept was central to Marx’s early thought but abandons by him later. Daniel Bell, for example, has said that “whereas in the young Marx there was a double vision of the nature of alienation Marx’s thoughts developed along one narrow road of economic conceptions of poverty and exploitation while the other road which might have led to new, humanistic concepts of work and labour, was left unexplored.” McLellan replies that “not only the concept but also the term itself occurs on several occasions in Capital”. In Vol. I (p.432 Moscow Edition). Marx writes “the character of independence and estrangement which the capitalist mode of production as a whole gives to the instruments of labour and to the products , as against the workman, is developed by the means of machinery into a thorough antagonism” McLellan goes on to say that “ it is not only a question of terminology, the contents too of Capital is a continuation of Marx’s early thoughts. The main theme of Volume I of Capital, surplus-value, tests on the equation of work and value that goes buck to the concept of man as a being who creates and the conditions of his life – a conception outlined in the Paris Manuscripts.” (1844) Marx the philosopher, Marx the economist, Marx the revolutionary socialist, was one, the unifying thread being dialectical materialism.
Any doubt which may still have existed about the continuity of Marx’s thought was finally bid to rest by the publication of Grundrisse der Kritik de Politischen Oekonomie (Elements of a Critique of Political Economy). Written in 1857, mainly for the purpose of clarifying his own thinking, this 1,000-page draft served as a basis for Critique of Political Economy (1859) and of Capital (1867’). Marx himself wrote to Lassalle that the Grundrisse represented “the result of 15 years’ research, that is to say the best years of my life.”
Early Texts is essential reading for all who want to thoroughly understand Marxism and the development of Marx’s thought It is an excellent collection and lucidly translated.
 



Dear Editor
The very interesting contribution to the history of Trotskyism in Italy in 1943–44 by Paolo Casciola (Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no. 4) is an important addition to the history of our movement.
There are, however, one or two points in his article which I would like to question. I must emphasise that I rely entirely on my fading memory. When I first met Nicola Di Bartolomeo in 1944, he was undoubtedly under the influence of the Shachtmanite Workers Party. He had been isolated from the international movement during the years of his internment, first in France, then in Italy, and his first contact was with Walter Gourlay, a member of the Workers Party, a supporter of the Johnson-Forest tendency within that organisation. But he never, to my knowledge, committed himself to Shachtman or Johnson’s theoretical position. He firmly supported the Transitional Programme. He did have some doubts at the time about the physical existence of the Fourth International. ‘The important thing’, he said to me, ‘is the programme.’
After Charlie Curtis of the American Socialist Workers Party and Louis Sinclair contacted us, we succeeded in winning Nicola and Bruno over to the position of the International Secretariat. Later I was able to influence Villone, and win him over from his Bordigist position. What I seriously question is that Nicola and Bruno ‘chose the road of entrism into the Socialist Party and its youth organisation’. When I first met them, yes, they were in the Socialist Party, and, indeed, it was from an address given to the Socialist Youth organisation in Naples that they contacted me through Gourlay. But, as soon as they had made contact with the International, they opted for an independent party, the POC, and began publishing Il Militante. This was before we established contact with Mangano.
I, in fact, opposed this move. The Italian comrades were completely isolated from the working class, who in their overwhelming millions were supporting the Communist and Socialist Parties. Nicola was playing an important and influential rôle in the Confederazione Generale del Lavoro. I thought that this was a sound base from which we could begin building a Trotskyist cadre inside the Socialist Party and its youth organisation. I still think I was right.
It was only because of this isolation from the mass movement that they eventually made the compromise agreement with Mangano’s Apulian Federation. They also drew in someone who I think was called Secchi, who published Pensiera Marxista, which increased the Bordigist influence in the POC.



 


Fraternally
Charlie van Gelderen



 



THE DEATH of Ernest Mandel on 20 July 1995 deprived the Fourth International of its foremost leader and thinker. As a writer, speaker and teacher, he was by far the most widely known Trotskyist in the world. Even those who did not agree with him respected his views and the courage with which he defended them.
For Ernest, Trotskyism was synonymous with Marxism. His two-volume Marxist Economic Theory and his introduction to the Penguin Capital placed Marx’s economic theories firmly in the present epoch, and marked him as one of the foremost exponents and champions of Marx’s thought.
His literary output was formidable, but Mandel was more than a theoretician. As a Marxist, for him theory and practice were indivisible. That is why the building and strengthening of the Fourth International were central to his life. Like Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky before him, he knew that the working class could not carry out its historic task without a party, and that that party had to be international, not only in outlook, making mere genuflections to internationalism, but organisationally. Marx’s Eleventh Thesis on Feuerbach – ‘The philosophers have only interpreted the world, the point, however, is to change it’ – was the foundation of his political life. That is why, since the age of 15, he devoted himself to what he regarded as the central task for today – the building of the Fourth International.
He was severely critical of those whom he characterised as suffering from the disease of ‘national Communism’, who subordinated the interests of parts of the world proletariat to what they considered to be the priorities flowing from the needs of party building in their own country. He regarded the argument of the British Socialist Workers Party, that you first had to build the basement and the floor before you can build the roof (the International), as a crude sophism. What architect or group of workers, he asked, could ever build a roof without knowing from the beginning of the building process, what it is going to be and how it is going to be built, not just through a blueprint, but through the current experience of building?
‘National Communism’, even when proclaimed by the best of comrades with the best of intentions, is but a variant of the reactionary utopia of ‘Socialism in one country’. Those who believe that it would be easier to build a strong International with a minimum of discipline on key international issues, as was the practice in the Fourth International, when you first have strong national parties, were totally wrong.
For Ernest, to be a Marxist, a proletarian revolutionary, was, first of all, to be an internationalist. This he was with every fibre of his being. When dedicating one of his books to comrades who had died, the highest praise he could bestow on them was that they were internationalists. Some of the intellectuals, some of them erstwhile members of the Fourth International, who rushed into print with obituaries after Mandel’s death, were scornful of his revolutionary optimism. Typical of this was Tariq Ali’s piece in the Independent (21 July). These people, overcome by the current situation, the temporary success of capitalism in pushing back the frontiers of Socialism and curbing the militancy of the working class, have retreated into reformist politics, or to their ivory towers. They take the doomsday scenario which they survey as permanent, or, at best, existing for the foreseeable future. Tariq accuses him of hiding the truth, of ‘masking the fact with heady rhetoric’. This shows how little he knows of Mandel, whom he probably confuses with the nasty sexist caricature, Ezra Einstein, in his tasteless fictional satire Redemption. ‘One would have to be blind and deaf’, he wrote, ‘not to see that the world situation is still very bad for the wage-earning class, that capital is still clearly on the offensive the world over ...’ (World Socialism Today, In Defense of Marxism, May–June 1995)
In contrast to these intellectuals, who were drawn to the Fourth International in the heady days of May 1968 and the Vietnam campaign, and who now believe that the working class no longer has a rôle to play on the political stage, Mandel, the dialectical materialist, took the long view of history. From that longer-term point of view, ‘several important factors are operating in our favour. On a world scale, the wage-earning class is still growing, and growing in an impressive way, although not in all countries and all sectors at the same pace. Internationally, it has long passed the billion mark. If you add to this the semi-proletariat of landless peasants in important Third World countries, you will probably reach the figure of two billion.’ (Ibid.)
Whilst the pessimists and back-sliders could see only retreats and defeat, like Marx after the collapse of the First International, like Lenin after the betrayal of August 1914, and like Trotsky in the dark days after Hitler came to power, Ernest Mandel, in the best Marxist traditions, analysed the current situation, and came to quite a different prognosis: ‘We believe that we have passed the lowest point of the working class and mass movements’ retreat. The fightback is now rising.’ (Ibid.) He based this optimistic outlook on the growth of those layers of the wage-earning class in sectors like telecommunications, banking and the so-called service industries, as well as those in semi-automated industrial plants. Strike action in these sectors could paralyse the capitalist economy more effectively than the ‘classical’ strikes in mines, steel or auto plants. The incompetence and corruption in the top echelons of these concerns is already affecting the mental outlook of those who live only on their salaries.
For Ernest, the building of the Fourth International was the primary purpose of his life. Of all the groupings that claim allegiance to Trotskyism, the Fourth International is the only one which has succeeded in establishing itself as a genuinely internationalist, world-wide movement, with sections in 50 countries and sympathetic associations in many more. None of the sects which claim Trotskyist orthodoxy can equal this. As he had written many times, it is during non-revolutionary conjunctural phases of the class struggle that revolutionaries develop the capacity to lead their class when the possibility of revolution begins to appear. It was in the period 1912–14 that the Bolsheviks gained the capacity to lead the revolution of 1917.
Ernest Mandel, Marxist, revolutionary, internationalist, fought all his life to change the world, but to change it with a specific purpose to eliminate all social conditions in which human beings are debased, downtrodden and mutilated in their possibility of developing all their human potential. This is what he fought for when he joined the resistance in Belgium during the Second World War. It was to remain his goal right up to the moment when that fatal heart attack struck.
 



No figure looms over the twentieth century like Lenin. When the Churchills, de Gaulles, Kennedies of this world will have become merely shadowy figures in history books, the thoughts of Lenin will still be at work shaping the world of tomorrow.
It is a real tragedy that the two men who could have given the world a worth-while biography of the founder of the Soviet Union, Leon Trotsky and Isaac Deutscher, should both have died before they could complete their work. Certainly Robert Payne’s The Life And Death Of Lenin, first published by W.H. Allen & Co in 1964 and now re-issued as a PAN Paperback (15/–) does not meet the need for a definitive life of the leader of the October Revolution. Indeed, the picture which emerges would scarcely be recognised by those who have studied his works and his contribution to marxist theory.
One of Lenin’s most important works, The State and Revolution, in which he tried to rescue the marxist teaching on the nature of the state from the social-democratic epigones who had distorted it, is described by Payne as “so devoid of logic, a kind of utopian dream,” He pours similar scorn on Materialism and Empiro-criticism, Lenin’s major contribution to marxist philosophy, and his Imperialism. This should service as adequate evidence of Payne’s lack of fundamental understanding of marxism. In fact he tries desperately to show that Lenin was not a marxist at all but one who found his inspiration in the 19th Century revolutionary. Nechayev.
The only real perception which Payne shows is his awareness that Stalin played only a marginal role in the Bolshevik Party in the years of Lenin’s ascendancy. His Lenin is a mixture of stalinist iconology and bourgeois demonology. He recognises Lenin’s immense intellectual and moral superiority over Stalin but to him Lenin is the begetter of Stalin. No wonder the critics of the capitalist press have found nothing but praise for it.
 



There was a time, in the hey-day of Bevin, Williamson and Deakin, when the platform at Labour’s Annual Conference could always rely on the block votes of the trade unions to save it from the wrath of the constituency parties. Those were the days when Harold Wilson used to top the polls in the constituency section, followed closely by Barbara Castle. Those were the days when even the redoubtable Herbert Morrison was defeated in the NEC elections and the special post of Deputy Leader had to be created to get him back on.
All that has changed. Under the impact of the anti-working class legislation introduced by Harold Wilson’s Government, and with a new generation of leaders more responsive to the demands of the rank-and-file, the unions have shifted to the left. This same dismal record of the Labour Government has driven many active socialists either out of the Labour Party or into inactivity. As a result the delegates to conference from the constituency parties represent a more right-ward trend than of recent years. Disillusionment among former activists is another of the achievements of Harold Wilson and his fellow ministers.
The capitalist press has not hesitated to hail Blackpool 1968 as a triumph for Wilson. Did not Frank Cousins himself lead the standing ovation? But a triumph for what? The so-called Mid-term Manifesto was not only an apology for the Government’s shortcomings it was also a pledge that it would continue to under-pin the capitalist system for as far as can be seen into the future.
This same determination to link Labour Britain with the capitalist west was revealed in the NEC’s determination to link condemnation of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia with a call for strengthening NATO. It is encouraging that nearly half the votes were against this.
Although the unions showed their determination to defeat the incomes policy, they did not show the same socialist zeal when it came to dealing with other social issues. The resolution on housing, calling for the nationalisation of building land and the building industry; which condemned rent rebate schemes (so beloved by many Labour controlled local authorities); urged the use of empty office blocks for housing and which rejected the Prices and Incomes Board report on council rents, should never have been defeated. Thia brings home the point that many of the union leaders oppose the Government’s incomes legislation only because it threatens their own bureaucratic positions.
On the National Health services there now appears to be an open conflict between the Labour Party and the Labour Government. The platform accepted the resolution from the Socialist Medical Association affirming support for a free and democratic National Health Service. How will the Government square this with its introduction of prescription charges?
It won’t of course. As far as Wilson is concerned, Annual Conference is now just an occasion when he can exercise his oratorical skills. Anti-Government resolutions help, in their way, to create a happy atmosphere and show how “democratic” we are. They don’t have much effect on Government policy.
Wilson showed his real and utter contempt for Conference by flying, off to meet Ian Smith in Gibraltar, almost immediately after he left Blackpool, despite the fact that a resolution was carried by 5,124,000 votes to 2,661,000 that the pledge of No Independence BEFORE Majority Rule (NIBMAR) was not negotiable. On board the Fearless, Wilson showed that not only was he prepared to sell the 4 million black Rhodesians down the line but also his much ventilated principles to say nothing of the rank-and-file of the party he is supposed to lead. There can be no doubt that the so-called “entrenchment clauses” in the proposed Rhodesian constitution will have as little effect to safeguard the interests of the African majority as they did in the “South Africa Act” which handed power to the white minority in what is now the apartheid state of South Africa.
The false air of euphoria with which conference ended will evaporate and the few active members still left in the constituencies will have to grapple with the consequences as they prepare for the next elections. This Government and the present leadership of the party can only prepare the ground for a devastating defeat at the polls. It is all very well talking about the “virus of Powellism”, but failing a militant, socialist lead from Labour, the dangerous demagogy of Enoch Powell will undoubtedly attract many working class votes. It is time to wake up.
 



Labour’s 67th Annual Conference convenes at Blackpool on September 30th. One wonders what the pioneers who attended that first conference at the beginning of the century would have thought if they could have caught a glimpse of the resolutions which will be debated this autumn! After two Labour governments with large majorities in the House of Commons, resolutions still call for the most elementary of socialist demands. Those early delegates would have been astonished to hear that in 1968 it was thought necessary to call upon a LABOUR GOVERNMENT, in the words of the resolution from Sheffield Trades and Labour Council “to put the interests of working people before the preservation of the pound; to put control of profits, prices and foreign trade before control of wages; and to support all popular movements against privilege, racialism and world imperialism”. Even labour Party members who were far from being revolutionary socialists took these demands as axiomatic within a Labour Party programme.
The capitalist press has already remarked on the fact that there are fewer “left” resolutions than customary on this year’s Conference agenda. Such as there are, with the exception of a few really good ones, seem to be largely inspired by the Tribunite Socialist Charter. The reason for the dearth of left-wing resolutions is not because there has been a rightward shift in the constituency parties. On the contrary! But there has certainly been an increase in apathy and disillusion and many of the active party workers who were responsible for some of the better resolutions in the past have either given up politics or turned to other fields of action, such as the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign. Young Socialists, also a fruitful source of resolutions with a real socialist content, are almost non-existent.
 
What Value Has Conference?
The cause of this is not only the Government’s sorry record of anti-working class legislation. More and more party members are beginning to question the value of conference itself. Is it worthwhile sending in resolutions and going to the expense of sending delegates when clearly, Conference decisions have little or no effect on Government policy – or even on the Parliamentary Labour Party when in opposition? There was a time when annual conference was a real parliament of labour. Now it has been transformed into a meaningless society.
It is time that the labour movement gave serious thought to the role of annual conference. There is no sense in filling the agenda with hundreds of resolutions which are debated or not, according to the whim of an almost omnipotent Standing Orders Committee (viz., the Rhodesia resolution last year). Conference should be re-organised so as to give real democratic control to the party’s rank and file as represented by the assembled delegates.
 
Endorsement or Rejection
Whether Labour is in power or in opposition, the leadership should, each year, present a report of its stewardship before the conference for endorsement or rejection and also an outline of the policies it intends to pursue in the year ahead. This should be subject to full debate and right to more amendments. Both reports should be circulated to the constituency parties and the affiliated organisations, at least three months before the conference meets so that there can be the fullest dialogue between the rank and file and the leadership. Delegates should only be elected after the branches have discussed the policy documents and should reflect the views of the constituency or affiliated organisation. Block votes and mandated votes should be abolished. Delegates must be free to vote on the basis of the actual debates at Conference. Decisions when taken should be binding on the whole party, including the parliamentary caucus and the leadership.
As a corollary to this, the Leader and Deputy-Leader of the Labour Party should be elected by Conference and subject to annual re-election. Reform along those lines could restore a socialist dynamic to annual conference and ensure that the leadership, in office or out, pursue a policy corresponding to the views of the party.
 



Anyone who wants to make a serious study of what is wrong with the Labour Party could usefully study the speeches and writings of Desmond Donnelly, M.P. for Pembrokeshire.
Mr. Donnelly, of course, is a notorious critic of the Wilson administration; but we must not deal with this at length. What we are concerned with at the moment is the question: How is it that a party which still considers itself “socialist” could contain a person with the views of Desmond Donnelly within it ranks for all these years? If we could find an answer to this, we would know what is wrong with the party. For years left-wing critics of the leadership, who wanted to see a more aggressive socialist policy pursued by the Labour Party, have been either witch-hunted, or else bribed with office. Those, like Donnelly, who wanted a party which pursued a policy no different from that of the Tories, are left free to continue their acts of sabotage.
It is no accident that Mr. Donnelly should have chosen this particular moment in history to take leave of the labour movement. There are plenty of precedents for this. At every period when the working class shows signs of losing faith in the traditional parties, prominent leaders have broken away and formed rival parties – parties which whatever the original intentions of the traitors, eventually emerged as fascist parties. Mussolini in Italy, Doriot in France, and Mosley in Britain are the most famous of these. Of course, Donnelly only qualifies as a leader in his own estimation but he, no doubt, has those historic precedents in mind.
Fascism is not necessarily synonymous with racialism. Italian fascism flourished for nearly two decades, until it allied itself with Hitler, without recourse to racialism. The main task of fascism is to destroy the labour movement and to destroy parliamentary democracy which, with its “freedom” for political parties, provides the best soil for the growth of the labour movement. To achieve these objectives it must create a mass movement as a counter-attraction to the mass parties of the working class. This movement acts as magnet for all the discontented elements in society, the small shopkeepers, heavily pressed by the supermarkets and giant chain stores, unemployed workers, etc. In particular, of course, it serves the interests of big business from whom it also gets its financial resources.
When Donnelly left the Labour Party he announced his intention to start a crusade, to woke up Britain. This is typical language of the fascist demagogue. He also manifested the traditional fascist conception of the “leader”. At a dinner given for him by Pembroke Labour Party some time ago, the cocktail sticks bore the legend “Donnelly for Pembroke and the Nation”.
He recently explained his views in an interview with Penthouse, a magazine which caters for men who like pictures of naked women and correspondence about corporal punishment. No doubt it is among these people that he expects to find the nuclei for his future mass following. In this interview he makes his position quite clear. He is opposed to any further nationalisation, comprehensive education, a free National Health Service and what, he calls “confiscatory taxation” of the rich. He wants to maintain Britain’s military commitments east of Suez and the alliance with the United States. In typical fascist fashion, he wants to streamline the trade unions.
When the Penthouse interviewer suggested that a great deal “of what you’ve been saying could belong in a Tory programme”, he did not disagree, The only reason why he was not in the Conservative Party was that he “really wants to do these things” while the Tories only talked about it. “I find ... that I have more in common with right-wing Tories, like Julian Amery, than with the so-called progressive Tories ...”
The key to Donnelly’s thinking lies in his admission that for many years he has been associated with big business – with David Brown, a very large engineering association, with the great Phillips electronic combine, and with Britain’s largest commercial bank. “This has taught me much more than I’ve been able to help them”, he said. He now sees his role as serving the interests of big business but, of course, he identifies this with serving Britain.
We end this article with the same question we asked in the beginning: Why was Desmond Donnelly allowed to remain in the Labour Party for so long? There are, of course, others who share his views. The Labour Party will not find its way back to its working class origins until it has purged itself of those elements.
 



The Centenary meeting of the T.U.C., coming as it did in the fourth year of a Labour Government with a decisive majority should have been a red-letter occasion. The Labour Party is very largely the creation of the trade unions, brought into being to give political expression to the aspirations of the working class. Though the Labour pioneers were by no means marxists, they had an instinctive class consciousness. The Labour Party was seen by them as the party of the working class, arrayed against the politics of the capitalist class. The crown of their efforts was to be a Labour Government, their Government legislating for them and not for the bosses.
At Blackpool the hitherto close relationship between the trade unions and the Labour Party was severely strained. The weary old stalwarts could mount the rostrum and, beating their breasts, proclaim their loyalty to the Labour Government. It was clear to the most casual observer that this did not reflect the views of the rank and file. By a decisive majority the delegates voted against the Government’s incomes policy, recognising it for what it 1st the most vicious piece of anti-trade union legislation since the Tories introduced the Trade Union Act after the General Strike. And it was not only the votes on the floor which told the story. The determination of the engineers to call a nation wide strike despite the penal sanctions involved speaks the same language.
Significantly, the Dyers and Bleachers resolution approving the General Council’s wage vetting machinery was carried by a derisive 54,000 in a vote of nearly 9 million. Almost half of Britain’s trade unionists are not anxious to see the T.U.C. do the dirty work for the Government.
The militant resolution in favour of equal pay for men and women is heartening. But Congress has been carrying such resolutions since the 1880’s. Only if the threat of industrial action becomes effective will this resolution have any meaning. It is high time that the Labour movement acted resolutely to remove this last reservoir of cheap labour – women – from the labour market by forcing equal pay.
The increasing militancy of Labour’s industrial wing was also reflected in the elections to the General Council. Hugh Scanlon replaces the unmourned Lord Carron; Frank Cousins topped the poll with a massive vote of 8,468,000. Jack Jones of the Transport Workers, Alan Fisher of NUPE, Terry Parry of the Fire Brigades Union and George Doughty of the Draughtsmen, all help to bring a alight breeze of fresh air and some recognition of what the rank and file are thinking into the Council Chamber.
 
The Labour Party Conference
The annual conference of the Labour Party is the alter ego of Congress. Without a doubt the Government’s anti-working class economic policies will again be defeated at Blackpool in October. Even with Jennie Lee in the chair exercising all her undoubted charm this can be taken for granted. But passing resolutions is not enough. Like the union, the Labour Party must find a way to make its votes effective. Local Constituency Parties must be prepared to give moral and financial support to any industrial struggle which has this end in view. This will be one way to make the Government take more notice of the Conference resolutions. In the long run, the establishment of genuine links between the political and industrial wings on a local as well as a regional and national level will do more to restore the morale of the movement than even winning the next election.
Conference agenda reveals that it is economic problems which are the main pre-occupation of the movement at the moment. This accounts for the unusual paucity of resolutions on foreign policy. The workers fear mass unemployment, rising costs and savage cuts in real wages in the months ahead. This is reflected in the resolutions and is symptomatic of the almost complete loss of confidence in the Labour Government.
The continuing drop in membership, to say nothing of the 15 parliamentary by-elections, and the local government elections, tell the same story. Labour is doomed for years in the political wilderness if the leadership is allowed to follow its present disastrous course. It is up to the Conference to show, overwhelmingly, that there is an alternative road – the socialist road – to victory.
 






 


Cape Town,
August 22, 1935



To Editor of New Militant:
Dear Comrade,
I am sending you a special report this week because the situation in South Africa is changing rapidly. A wave of reaction is sweeping over the country. The Fusion Government, agents of British imperialism and the Chamber of Mines, is determined to crush the left-wing movement.
A few weeks ago, comrades Roux and Ngedlane of the Communist Party were arrested and sentenced to four months imprisonment in connection with a leaflet they issued on the occasion of the royal jubilee of King George V. The charge was“lese majeste.” Last week, two more members of the Communist Party, comrades Gomas and Mina Gool were arrested on the same charge. Their case will come upon September 3, and there is no doubt that a salutary sentence will be imposed.
Now, the iron heel of the capitalist state is descending on the Fourth Internationalists. On Sunday, August 19, three members of the Communist League of S.A., comrades G.H. Gool, J. Pick, and C. van Gelderen addressed a meeting of over two hundred workers at Langa Native Location on the proposed Native Bills. They were accompanied by comrades J. Gool and L. Solomon, who distributed literature to the audience. At the back of the hall sat six plain clothes detectives, two police sergeants and two native policemen. The forces of reaction were quite evidently prepared for any emergency.
The three speakers dealt at length with the Native Bills. They pointed out that it was a deliberate attempt to deprive the Cape Native of his long cherished franchise, and urged the strongest resistance against the bills. All three speakers stressed that the fight should not only be against the present bills, but that it should go further and press for the extension of the franchise to all sections of the people. Comrade van Gelderen also dealt with the pending Italian attack on Abyssinia, and urged working class action to prevent the despatch of goods from South African ports to Italian troops.
Two resolutions were submitted to the meeting:

That this mass meeting of Langa workers unanimously rejects the proposed Native Bills, which aim to deprive the Cape natives of their franchise, almost the only privilege left to them, and further pledges itself by every means in its power to struggle for the extension of the franchise to the Northern Provinces.
 
That this meeting of Langa workers unanimously pledges itself to support Abyssinia, the only remaining independent African state, against the proposed assault by Italian imperialism, and further pledges itself to do everything in its power to prevent the despatch of goods from Union ports to Italian troops in East Africa.

Both these resolutions were adopted with great enthusiasm by the meeting.
Questions followed, in which the workers expressed keen interest in the program of the Communist League.
When the five comrades were about to leave the location, they were charged with entering the location without a permit, and were warned that a summons would be issued against them.
Notwithstanding the close attention now being paid to them by the police and the Criminal Investigation Department, the comrades intend continuing their propaganda in the location. A mass meeting on the Abyssinian question has been called for the following Sunday.
The reactionary persecutions of the Fusion Government will not prevent the growth of the revolutionary movement in South Africa. The forces of the state cannot prevent the irresistible growth of the movement for the Fourth International.



 


With revolutionary greetings,
for the Fourth International,
Charles van Geldenen [1]





Note by ETOL
1. This is obviously Charlie van Gelderen, a South African Trotskyist, who lived for many years in Britain.
 



LONDON, England – War has brought unprecedented prosperity to the British capitalists who have their money invested in the copper mines of Northern Rhodesia. The demand for copper is unlimited and profits are soaring. The great wealth which is being produced in the copper belt is being almost wholly drained away by the parasitic shareholders in the City.
According to the conservative Economist (March 22nd, 1941):
“In spite of possessing its rich copperfield, the Colony is very poor, even by colonial standards; the land still in the possession of the natives is deteriorating rapidly while large tracts reserved for Europeans lie: empty and unused. The strikes and rioting which took place on the copperbelt a year ago must, therefore, be regarded as a symptom of a deeper malaise than a wage dispute between the mines and the African workers.”
The strikes and disturbances in the copper belt, last year, seriously threatened Britain’s war program and the British Government, wise in the ways of dealing with trouble in the colonies, sent out a Commission to investigate. The Commission’s report has now been published.
It reveals that the Commission was not altogether satisfied with the conditions of the African workers or the relations between them and the Europeans. During the inquiry, the Africans put forward a claim that their work entitled them to a higher wage than they receive at present. The Commission accepted this contention and recommended that the basic starting wage of 12/6 (about $3) a month for surface and 22/6, (about $5.50 a month) for underground workers should be raised by 2/6 (62¢).
Of course the Commission did not concede the demands put forward by the African workers. This was not what they were sent to Northern Rhodesia for. Their real job was to protect the interests of the investors, not of the workers.
Thus, the Commission considers that the Africans’ claim that they can do the work of Europeans is unjustified at this stage. All it concedes is that they will progress and recommends that consultation should take place between the Government and the European workers’ trade union on what portion the African worker should be encouraged to regard as within his grasp.
Unions Outlawed
As for trade unions for the African workers, the Commission sees no immediate possibility of any. It holds that the policy of the Government should aim at the “eventual” establishment of African trade unions.
But “for trade unionism as it is generally understood by the British worker, the African worker in Northern Rhodesia is clearly not ready.” Meaning that the government will not permit it.
Unfortunately for the gentlemen of the Commission, the African worker is hardly likely to wait until they (the Commissioners) consider them ready for trade unionism. The young workers of the Copperbelt in Northern Rhodesia have a splendid tradition of struggle behind them, dating back to 1934 when the Government of the Union of South Africa lent the mineowners a few bombing planes when asked to subdue the striking copper workers. They will learn in the hard school of the class struggle how to make themselves “ready” for trade union organization and for the day of reckoning with British Imperialism and its Commissions.
 



London, England (By Mail) – 2,234 delegates attended the Stalinist-inspired “People’s Convention” which met in London on Sunday, January 12th.
The People’s Convention had its origin – according to its Chairman, Marry Adams – in the “Men of Munich Must Go’’ movement which the Stalinists foster-fathered after the disastrous defeats of the Allied armies in Scandinavia and France last year. The emphasis of that movement was not directed against the imperialist war but against Chamberlain, Halifax, Kingsley Wood and the other appeasers in the Cabinet. It left untouched Churchill and the Labor Ministers whose declared aim was “war to the end” against German Imperialism.
This “Men of Munich Must Go” movement did not evoke much response among the working class. Then came the Blitz over London and the hopeless inadequacy of the Government’s Air Raid Precautions Policy was revealed in all its ghastly horror. The Stalinists seized this heaven-sent opportunity to extend their influence in the labor movement. They whipped up a campaign on the shelter issue. This was actually the birth of the People’s Convention movement.
The official literature of the Convention claim that the 2,234 delegates represented 1,200,000 people in 1,304 organisations. Of these, it is claimed, 1,014,950 represented 1,136 Trade Unions, Factory Committees and other workers’ organizations.
Anyone acquainted with Stalinist arithmetic will find it a simple matter to discover how these figure’s were arrived at. The A—— Aircraft Factory employs 1,200 workers. Of these from 12 to 20 support the Stalinists. This handful of workers would send a “delegate” to the Convention who would simply be listed as representing 1,200 workers in the A—— Factory.
While the Stalinist figures cannot be accepted at anything like their face value, it would, however, be fatal for revolutionary workers to ignore the portent of the “People’s Convention.
Misled by the treacherous Labor Party leaders, the majority of the British working class are today lined up behind the Government’s war policy. There is a genuine belief among great sections of the workers that they are fighting a war against Fascism. This is due to a great extent to the Stalinist policy in the months preceding the war and in the first three weeks of the war, when the Communist Party was even more vociferous than the Labor Party in whipping up support for the “War for Democracy” against “Fascist aggression.” When Moscow ordered the right-about-turn, not all of their supporters followed the new line.
But in the trade union movement there is a small but militant minority who are today definitely under Stalinist influence.
One of the most significant features of this war was the early re-emergence of the Shop Stewards’ Movement, which played such a magnificent role during the war of 1914–18. In the first Imperialist War it wasn’t till 1915 that the Shop Stewards’ Movement began to make its weight felt. In the first year of this war it is already an important factor in the working class movement.
In the trade union field, therefore, the Stalinists are compelled to adopt a militant policy in order to keep the support of this militant minority. To counter this, their political program is deliberately vague and can mean all things to all people.
As part of their political demands, the People’s Convention calls for a “People’s Government and a People’s Peace.” None of the speakers at the Convention made it clear what was meant by these ambiguous slogans. Some of the delegates obviously interpreted it as the Dictatorship of the Proletariat, while to others it meant a Popular Front Government à la Blum. Not one of the three speakers from the platform so much as mentioned the word “Socialism.”
On the crucial question of control of the armed forces, the People’s Convention proposes nothing, except: “Effective democratic rights for members of the armed forces.” A meaningless phrase.
How shall the worker-soldiers secure such democratic rights? What about putting an end to the life-and-death powers of the bourgeois officer-caste? The absolute need of universal military training under the control of the trade unions? The fact that the working class, as a class, must become masters of the military arts in this epoch of war and militarism? The Convention is silent on all this: in a word, it mirrored the purely pacifist policy of the Stalinists and not a proletarian military policy adequate to bring the working class to power and socialism.
The Stalinist crime of preaching impotent pacifism is all the greater because the Convention leaders had fine human material to work on. Although the labor bureaucrats had threatened with expulsion anyone who participated, many militants, especially from the Clyde and the mining areas of South Wales, sent their representatives to London.
Besides the worker delegates, the Stalinists collected together for the occasion all their old friends from Popular Front days. Principal speaker at the Convention was the King’s Councillor, D.N. Pritt, who sold his services to the Kremlin as long ago as the Zinoviev-Kamenev trial. Pritt was Labor Member of Parliament for the Hammersmith Division, and the Hammersmith Labor Party has demanded his resignation. But, though Pritt and the C.P. claim popular support for their Convention, he refuses to take up the challenge and stand for re-election to give the workers of Hammersmith an opportunity to show their feelings at the polls.
 
It Endangers the Real Militant Task
The People’s Convention movement represents a potential danger to the labor movement. By attracting the most advanced sections by its demagogy the Convention threatens to split the labor movement just at a moment when it is necessary for all militants to concentrate all their energies on ridding the movement of the “leaders” who have betrayed them and entered the war cabinet.
It is of course not accidental that the political program of the People’s Convention is so vague. The Kremlin’s foreign policy is in an impasse. Stalin lives in fear of Hitler. Today Soviet foreign policy is still oriented towards the Axis. That is why the British Stalinists in the factories put forward a policy which would, if effective, seriously hamper the war efforts of British imperialism. When Stalin signed the German-Soviet Pact, he also sold to Hitler a part-share in the Comintern. But tomorrow Stalin may be forced to line up with the “Democracies” and in a much [more] active form than he has hitherto participated in the war.
 
Stalin’s British Agents Ready for Switch
So the British Communist Party keeps open a line of retreat – the vagueness of their political program. Not anywhere in the “anti-war” propaganda of the Stalinists do they so much as hint at revolutionary overthrow of the imperialist regime.
Stalin’s British stooges are keeping a wary eye on the Balkans and they are ready to jump at any moment should the Kremlin show a sign that it is turning towards the Western powers. The People’s Convention would overnight cease to be an “anti-war” movement. The Stalinists would discover, not for the first time, that Winston Churchill had all the necessary qualifications for heading a “People’s Government.”
By banning the Daily Worker, the bourgeoisie dealt the Stalinists a shrewd body-blow. Having no real roots in the mass organizations, the Daily Worker was almost their sole means for making their influence felt and for spreading their propaganda. Its suppression has been taken very calmly by the workers, who in their present patriotic mood welcomed the ban in many cases. Nowhere have the Stalinists even dared to call for a demonstration against the suppression of the “workers’ own paper.” Certainly, the London meeting of the People’s Convention would not have achieved the success it did without the sustained daily propaganda of the Worker.
To the British Section of the Fourth international falls the vital task of awakening the militant workers to the dangers inherent in the People’s Convention and to counterpose to its false policy our proletarian military policy, based on the historic needs of the working class at this critical moment in the life of humanity.
 



Eugene D. Genovese
In Red and Black
Vintage Banks £1.25
The Thought and Writings of W.E.B. D u Bois
The Seventh Son (Vols. I and II)
Vintage Books, £1.75 per volume
Chattel slavery in the Western Hemisphere laid the financial foundations for the expansion of modern capitalism. For 200 years the central axis of the economic development of the commercial nations of Western Europe – Britain, France, Portugal, Holland and Spain – was to take the land stolen from the American Indians and work it with labour stolen from Africa. The study of slavery in the Americas must therefore be a subject of great importance to Marxists.
The essays in Genovese’s book are uneven and many Marxists will find it difficult to reconcile their views with that of the author. One of the most interesting essays is Class and Nationality in Black America, in which he deals scathingly with those American Socialists who saw the problem only in a class context and put forward the slogan ‘Black and White, unite and fight’. Trotsky dealt with this in his discussions with Arne Swabeck, a leading American Trotskyist, in 1933. The American Trotskyists had opposed the Stalinist distortion of the policy of self-determination with the demand for ‘social and economic equality’. Trotsky maintained that the argument that the slogan for ‘self-determination’ leads away from a class basis was an adaptation to the ideology of the white workers. American revolutionists, he said, should defend the right of the black people to separation, if that was what they desired. Lenin had made the same point in his Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and Colonial Questions, written for the Second Congress of the Communist International in 1920, when he wrote ‘In this respect, it is necessary for the Communist Parties to render direct aid to the revolutionary movements in the dependent and subject nations, for example, in Ireland, the Negroes in America, etc.)’. (Collected Works, Vol. 10, p. 235)
At times Genovese appears to go out of his way to show that the Southern slave-owners were not the bestial sadists so often depicted. Presumably he wants to bring home the fact that the evil lay in the nature of chattel slavery, which had to be opposed even under the most paternal of slave-owners. In this respect he is very critical of the writings of Marx and Engels on this subject which, he maintains, were characterized by an inadequate knowledge of the real facts of Southern society.
This view was shared by W.E.B. Du Bois, perhaps the outstanding leader of Black America and certainly its greatest intellectual In an article on Karl Marx and the Negro, in the March 1933 issue of The Crisis, he wrote: ‘It was a great loss to American Negroes that the great
mind of Marx and his extraordinary insight into industrial conditions could not have been brought to bear at first hand upon the history of the American Negro between 1876 and the World War. Whatever he said and did concerning the uplift of the working class must therefore be modified as far as Negroes were concerned by the fact that he had not studied their peculiar race problem here in America ...’ Like Genovese, Du Bois was criticizing Stalinist historians like Aptheker who wanted to apply, mechanically, what Marx and Engels wrote in the 1870s to the problems of Black Americans today.
The two volumes of writings by Du Bois are essential reading for anyone who really wants to get to grips with the realities of the problem. In this fascinating collection is traced the development of Du Bois from his early acceptance of the ideology of the ruling class – ‘Wealth was the result of work and saving and the rich rightly inherited the earth. The poor, on the whole, were themselves to be blamed ...’ – to an awareness of the special situation of the American black people and finally to Marxian
During the 1930’s he repudiated the crude version of communism which the American Stalinists were trying to impose. He had become convinced, however, that there was no solution for his people under capitalism. ‘Communism’, he wrote, ‘... is the only way of human life ... I want to help bring that day.’ It says much for him that he finally joined the Communist Party in his 93rd year, at the height of the McCarthy period, when the very name ‘communism’ was anathema in the ear of all ‘right-thinking’ Americans. In his long life, which is reflected in this collection of articles, is the personification of the history of the struggle of the Black Americans, and an echo of their aspirations.
 

