


I am standing for the NEC in the Constituency Labour Party section, in support of socialist policies; to reaffirm the right of CLPs to select the candidate of their choice; and in total opposition to a witch-hunt in the Labour Party.
The need for a mass socialist Labour Party has never been greater. The lives of millions of workers and their families have been blitzed by mass unemployment and a calamitous fall in living standards. Now the Tories are sharpening their knives for an assault on the trade unions.
I stand for a concerted campaign around socialist policies to force an election and drive the Tories from office. Unfortunately, many right wing leaders in the party, echoing the red-baiting of Fleet Street, have concentrated their fire on those arguing for more socialist ideas within the Labour Party.
Rather than conduct such a campaign against our enemies, they seem intent on a witch-hunt against the Left, particularly the supporters of Militant. This would have disastrous consequences for Labour. It would split the party wide apart, wrecking any hopes for a united struggle around socialist policies – the only way to defeat the Tories and their Liberal/SDP shadows.
I believe that the resolutions passed at Annual Conference must be translated into reality.
My right to stand as a parliamentary candidate has been questioned. Some right-wingers, like Terry Duffy have even called for my expulsion from a party I joined more than thirty years ago.
I firmly believe that the attack launched against myself and the supporters of Militant is just the first strike in a campaign against the whole left. It won’t stop at that. Many on the right want to undo all the gains of recent years allowing greater democracy within the Labour Party. They would like to jettison the radical policies adopted by Annual Conference.
To defend these gains and fight any attempted witch-hunt, it is essential that NEC members who stand for building a fighting socialist Labour Party are elected.
It is with this view that I appeal for the support of all Constituency Labour Parties in the elections to the NEC.




For a mass, democratic, socialist Labour Party to defeat the Tories!
 
For rank and file representation on the NEC!
 
For the right of CLPs to select the candidate of their choice!
 
Defeat the witch-hunt!




 



In paragraphs 93–95 of the Housing Finance Bill, the Tory Government spell out uniquely Draconian measures to deal with Labour councils who refuse to implement the Tory measures in full.
The government will take the power to appoint a “Housing Commissioner” if a local authority refuse to carry out all the provisions of the Bill. Any councillor or local authority officer who refuses to supply information to a Housing Commissioner, or who fails to supply information when requested, will be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding £400. Failure to pay the fines will lead to the gaoling of Labour councillors.
In addition, the Secretary of State will be able to reduce or suspend any subsidies under the Act to a local authority in default.
By such means, the Housing Revenue of a local authority would be pushed seriously into deficit. Even under existing legislation, the District Auditor can force rent increases under such circumstances; the Tories hope the odium of such increases would then fall on Labour councillors fighting the Tory measures.
 
£1 per Week Increase
This from a Government that bleats about setting councils free.
Faced with this show of strength from the Tories, the Shadow Cabinet and the National executive Committee of the Labour Party seem determined to confine any opposition to Parliament and “vote-catching” appeals at local level.
The proposals canvassed to date seem to be confined to three main points:

Opposition line by line, clause by clause, to the proposals by the Parliamentary Party. While such opposition is an important part of any campaign, the Tories, with a majority in Parliament, possess the ultimate sanction of the guillotine. In any event, Parliamentary opposition can only be really effective with the backing of a mass protest movement of tenants, led by the Labour Movement.
 
Advice to Labour controlled councils not to succumb to the Tory blackmail of warning councils who refuse to put council rents up by an average of 50p in April, before the Act becomes law, that the legislation will force increases of £1 per week in November.

This proposal merely dodges the issue – what should Labour councils who refuse to increase rents before the Act goes through Parliament, do when the Act becomes law? To have any meaning, refusal to increase rents in April, must imply that the movement is determined to prevent the Bill becoming law.

It is interesting that the Tory controlled Keighley council have refused to increase the rents. By this means they hope to retain control at the local elections, and even if defeated, the odium of a £1 increase will be the lot of the new Labour controlled council

[missing section]
to fix the level of “Fair Rents” at as low as possible. But local authorities will only do the professional assessment of the so-called “fair rent”; the final decision is in the hands of appointed Rent Scrutiny Committees, composed of ex-policemen, army officers, estate agents, and other such “champions” of the working class.
In a recent interview with the Guardian, Frank Allaun, the NEC spokesman on housing is quoted as saying that a number of Labour controlled councils will refuse to carry out the Bill. If that is so, what do the NEC propose in face of such a situation? Will the NEC support such action and if so, how do they intend to organise such support?
All those who are serious about defeating the rent legislation and removing the Tory Government, have a duty to campaign for a real fight against the Bill. In every ward, GMC, trade union branch and Trades Council, we should be demanding total opposition to the Bill.
The first principle of such opposition is the refusal of all Labour councils to carry out the Tory legislation. NO INCREASES IN APRIL OR NOVEMBER, LET THE TORIES DO THEIR OWN DIRTY WORK.
Labour councillors should be addressing meetings of tenants, forming associations where they don’t already exist. As the increases begin to bite, a mass movement of tenants will reinforce the campaign.
Mere opposition, however, is not enough. Concrete alternative proposals are necessary, if we are to win mass support:

Public control of all rented property.
 
Rent Assessment Committees of tenants and trade unionists.
 
A guarantee that the next Labour Government will repeal any Tory legislation.
 
Public ownership of land, the building and building supply industries.
 
A crash building programme to build a million houses a year to eradicate the real cause of high rents and the social misery of slum housing and homelessness

NOT A PENNY ON THE RENTS, DEFEAT THE TORY BILL BY UNITED WORKING CLASS ACTION.
 



AMID plastic bomb explosions, murders, kidnapping, police brutality, strikes and demonstrations, the myth of Charles de Gaulle, architect of a stable France, is crumbling. Four years of de Gaulle’s &lquotStrong State" have failed to find a solution to the problems which divide the French nation. The festering sore of the Algerian situation lingers on.
In Algeria the O.A.S., underground army of right wing extremism, enjoys the support of most of the Colons, especially in Algiers and Oran. The campaign of terror, counter-terror, murder and lynching, as the OAS attempts to cower the muslim population of the cities is of no avail. All the death and mutilation wrought by General Salan and his followers cannot shake the solid support for the F.L.N. show by the Algerian people. For the first time since 1954 the Green and White flag of the Algerian Nationalists is openly paraded in the muslim quarters.
An important section of big business, the section which more than any other supports de Gaulle, wants peace. The war in Algeria costs France over £800 million a year; an army of half a million bas had to be maintained in Algeria. The representatives of the new modernised post-war industries wish to reduce this terrific drain on the resources of the economy. For this reason they are willing to reach an agreement with the F.L.N. and for this reason tired of parliamentary government they supported de Gaulle as the man who could achieve such an agreement.
The reactionary officers of the French army have a burning hatred of the working class, a hatred nurtured by successive defeats in Asia and Africa. Defeats which they blame on the “softness” arising from the democratic rights of the French people. Over the bones of the workers’ organisations this French equivalent of the Gestapo seek to establish a fascist regime in France. An agreement with the Algerian Nationalists could well be the signal for an uprising on the lines of the Franco revolt in 1936.
Facism is not popular today even with big business, yet it remains a reserve weapon to use against the working class, for this reason it is impossible for de Gaulle to deal effectively with the O.A.S. and its sympathisers in the establishment. Self-confessed torturers are acquitted by an army court martial, 8 demonstrating workers are killed by police thugs, right wing politicians escape from jail almost at will.
The Labour Movement in France has been repeatedly betrayed by its leaders – from the sell out of the sit-down strikes in 1936 to the massacre of 40,000 Algerians in Constantine in 1945, by orders of a government which included socialists and Communists. The French Socialist Party voted for increased war credits at the outbreak of the Algerian war, the communist deputies abstained from voting.
The workers have slowly recovered their strength and confidence, the recent strikes and demonstrations give proof of this. Learning from experience a new leadership can be built, based on a clear socialist programme and a recognition that one cannot fight bullets with resolutions of protest. For one thing every worker clearly understands what fascism means, even some of the less backward of the leaders may have learnt this lesson from history and this fact in itself can give a new impetus to a regrouping of the French left.
 



Dear elector,
I am very pleased that the Fazakerley Ward Labour Party have given me the opportunity to contest this ward again.
In spite of a possible overdose of politics during the past twelve months, I feel there are many question which most urgently require attention and which should ensure the usual high poll in Fazakerley ward.
Much of this election special is quite rightly devoted to the serious situation facing this and other local authorities because of the neglect of local government by the Conservatives at Westminster and their vicious financial policy. The removal of the cheap loan policy we enjoyed under the Labour Government, coupled with the absurdly high ratio of interest which the City is forced to pay, on money loaned for the building of houses and schools, means that the big financial interests are enabled to make huge profits at the expense of the ratepayer and the corporation tenants.
Anybody who has lived in this city for any length of time cannot fail to be impressed by the improvements made in the last few years, since the Labour Party gained control. I ask for your support to ensure we can continue the job of re-building this City in a manner worthy of its citizens and free from the slums, dreariness and prejudices of the past.
Assuring you that if elected I will be only too anxious to assist any and every elector who should need my assistance.



 


Yours sincerely,
C.P. Wall



 




WE REPRINT here Pat Wall’s prophetic speech at last year’s BLOC conference as an excellent example of Marxist perspective and revolutionary optimism.

Pat Wall, President, Bradford Trades Council, an Evertonian on his way to Wembley:
In the early hours of the day following the general election I and other activists in the Bradford North constituency addressed some two or three hundred workers who remained to speak to us after that defeat.
We made the point that we felt that defeat was bitter, not as individuals, not in one constituency, but because we saw the defeat of the right-wing leadership in the Labour Party by the Tories as a defeat for our class. Just as we see any defeat for a right-wing trade union leadership by the employers as a defeat for our class.
We said the arena of struggle had moved from parliament, because of the massive Tory majority, into the struggle of workers in industry, and the struggle of communities, like the struggle of Liverpool City Council at the present time.
In less than one year we see, in my opinion, a decisive change in the mood of our class. We are only at the beginning. But if we weren’t at the beginning of a change in mood there wouldn’t be three overspill meetings at this conference; if we weren’t in a change of mood Tony Benn wouldn’t have defeated the national Tory press in the Chesterfield by-election; if we weren’t in a change of mood we wouldn’t have the magnificent struggle waged by the Yorkshire and other miners at the present time.
That marks the beginning of a decisive change as far as the feelings of our class are concerned. And I’ll add to what several other speakers have said – it takes one victory, one victory only, to profoundly change that mood – to approach flood tide. Because there is a reservoir of hate, of bitterness, in our class at the treatment we’ve received over the course of the last few years.
One victory would imbue confidence in millions of workers, unemployed and employed, women and men, black and white, to struggle against the Tories and this system.
 
Leadership
But in the Broad Left we also have to draw the lessons of the past. If we talk about the miners and the victories of ’72 and ’74 we have to recognise how that took place. That they took place out of unofficial strikes in ’70 and ’71 in Yorkshire and South Wales in an effort by the rank and file to push the leadership into a fight. And those rank and file struggles, which were defeated, altered the balance of opinion inside the NUM to conduct the 1972 and 1974 battles and out of them the victories that the miners obtained.
It’s that relationship between the struggles of the ranks to change the opinions and actions of the leadership, and the fact that when the leadership calls for action it obtains a much bigger response than we can ever get as rank and file militants – that’s the struggle that we are in at the present time.
I’d go further. One of the things that saddens those of us who have spent so much of our lives sat in smoke filled conferences of the unions and the Labour Party over the years, and which the Broad Left has to understand, is that for too long we have used ourselves as an electoral machine, to get this person or that person onto an executive, as general secretary or leader.
We have to have troops on the ground. No matter how good a socialist Tony Benn, Arthur Scargill or anyone else may be, unless they are held responsible to the rank and file of this movement, because they are under enormous pressures, and anyone in the leadership suffers those pressures, the possibility exists of them bending and giving way in difficult situations.
The demand of the Broad Left is for the maximum amount of unity in action, for that we must hold our leaders responsible and accountable ...
 
Worker’s moods
I want to finish with one little story to pick up just after where I started my contribution.
When the dockers were arrested in the early 70’s, that was a dispute that started as an inter-union dispute, the Tories and press are trying to make the miners’ strike out to be an inter-union dispute, but in the 1970’s that dispute was between transport workers and dockers. But when they brought the law in, and the police, and the capitalist courts – that unified our class. That’s what led to the official solicitor being brought in and the victory at that time.
Now in an English Electric factory on the East Lancashire road in Liverpool, there was a very good shop stewards’ committee at that time. They heard on the radio that the dockers had been arrested and they held a shop stewards meeting.
They got into the stewards room and discussed it, and they said, “Well they won’t come out, I don’t think we’ll get ‘em out”. But they decided by a majority that whether the workers in that factory would come out or not, they had to call them out.
And they came out of the stewards room and whole factory was empty. The workers had already gone.
I’d say to you that it may not be this month, it may not be next month; but in the next six or twelve months, even the optimists in this hall will be surprised at the response our class will give – if they get any sort of leadership whatsoever.
 



Pat Wall reviews Bird Lives – The High Life and Hard Times of Charlie Parker
Charlie Parker was a genius, Jazz musician extraordinary, he was the leading innovator of the most profound and radical development in Jazz since the 1920’s.
But this brilliant biography by Russell Ross, is more than a chronicle of the life, music and drug addiction of a great negro artist. Written by a white man, it nevertheless provides a searching insight into American negro society and the first tremors, particularly among the youth, which were to erupt into a negro revolt in the Sixties.
Born into a working class family, in the Kansas City area, Charlie, a bright, intelligent youngster, preferred listening to and playing Jazz to school classes. Jazz, to many negro youngsters offered excitement, a sense of purpose, a mode of expression and perhaps above all, a means of escaping the grinding poverty, and spiritual enslavement of the Depression and post-Depression life in the urban ghettos.
From an early age, Charlie roamed the streets and sneaked into the night clubs to listen to the “Kansas City Sound” and the leading Jazz performers. Kansas was an isolated, almost unknown oasis, where Jazz developed with a vitality entirely opposed to the sugary commercialism of the so-called “swing” era, the music of Paul Whiteman and the Benny Goodman Orchestra.
It was only with the breakthrough achieved by the Count Basie Band, that Kansas City music and many of the individual musicians were to exert and influence throughout America and the Jazz world. If the “Bepop” revolution needed a Charlie Parker, then a Charlie Parker could only have arisen in Kansas City.
It is a searing indictment of racialism that Jazz music, an innovative, creative, true art form is today largely unaccepted by the white establishment which control American society.
The majority of American Jazz is played in nightclubs, from the Honky Tonks and Speakeasies of the New Orleans and Chicago periods, to the Kansas City clubs of Charlie’s youth and later in New York.
These clubs, often gangster-owned, the environs of pimps, prostitutes and criminals, and with managements almost always indifferent to the music, are the theatre workshops of the Jazz musician, the night-shift worker artist.
It was almost inevitable, in this environment, that the young, impressionable, struggling musician should gravitate to the drug scene. If he showed a remarkable tolerance for several years, he was to end completely addicted to morphine and heroin, a fact which certainly contributed to his early death.
 
Musical Revolution
Charlie did not achieve musical greatness easily; the thirteen year old with his first, second-hand saxophone, a miracle of rubber bands and sticking plaster could graduate to a high school band. Acceptance among the leading performers, was a different matter.
Charlie’s first attempts to make his name ended in disaster, booed off the stage in Kansas City all-night jam sessions. Yet if he was rejected by this audience of musicians, he was to become above all the musician’s musician. It is perhaps in his very rejection that Charlie’s musical genius took root, unable to reproduce the rhythmic ideas in his head, he set out to teach himself music.
He learned to play in all twelve musical keys, and memorised all the scales, not knowing that the Jazz greats had in the main confined themselves to playing in four basic keys.
The conquest of ignorance leads to knowledge, and it was this “wasted self-tuition” which developed his fund of harmonic ideas and his control of the Alto Saxophone, enabling him to use much harder reeds than the normal Jazzmen, which laid the basis of the musical revolution which was to follow.
Charlie Parker began to be noticed, he became a professional musician, and in 1941 he arrived in New York. It was in “Minton’s Playhouse” that the “Bebop” revolution was to take shape. It was here that “Bird” (nicknamed Yardbird because of his liking for fried chicken) and a group of young musicians came together to change the face of Jazz.
In the great jam sessions at Minton’s the “new school” made its mark. Bird, Kenny Clarke, Dizzy Gillespie, Thelonius Monk, challenged the acknowledged names, Coleman Hawkins, Ben Webster, Johnny Hodges, Benny Cardi, Lester Young, Lips Page, Roy Eldridge, Cootie Williams, Teddy Wilson, Art Tathum, Charlie Christian and many others.
Drummer Kenny Clarke recalls when he first heard Parker:
“Bird was playing stuff we had never even heard before; he was in figures I thought I had invented for drums. He was twice as fast as Lester Young and into harmony Lester hadn’t touched. Bird was running the same way we were, but he was way out ahead of us. I don’t think he was aware of the changes he had created, it was his way of playing Jazz, part of his own experience”.
While the new school won its spurs in the first competitive school, it was largely rejected by the critics and Jazz establishment. While Dizzy Gillespie and others learned to parry the blows of the critics, to await the inevitable acceptance and to proceed to fame and fortune, Bird never forgave this rejection.
It was this which partially explains his legendary behaviour, his appearance half-way through jam sessions, his playing with his back to the audience, his throwing his saxophone out of a hotel window and his enormous appetite for booze, sex and hard drugs.
 
“Bird Lives”
But Bird was also black. Russell Ross describes the indignities of Negro artists playing the Deep South, and how Charlie narrowly averted involuntary brain surgery while incarcerated in a state mental institution, an act which would have destroyed him as a creative artist.
If the new music was rejected by the old guard, it became the music of the younger, unchained, generation in the Northern Negro ghettos.
Bird was a revolutionary before his time; the revolt of the ghettos was to come later. Pianist Hampton Hawes was to recall:
“Bird was like a God. I never crowded him or got too close. He talked to us about things I was not to read until years later in books by Malcolm X and Cleaver. I heard all that in his music ... Bird felt deeply about the black-white split. He was the first Jazz musician I met who understood what was happening to his people. He could not come up with an answer so he stayed high. His only outlet was his music”.
When Parker died, his age on the death certificate, estimated by the coroner was fifty three; he was in fact on thirty four. Shortly after he died the words began to be scrawled on the walls of the Negro ghettos “Bird Lives”.
Yes, Bird Lives, in his rejection of commercialism, in his rejection of racialism and above all in the inspiration of his music.
I owe a debt to Charlie Parker, as a very young socialist I came into the movement during the New Orleans revival. Like most of my contemporaries, I rejected Bop as the music of weirdo intellectuals. It was Parker’s music, music which swung, music rooted in the Blues and the popular ballad, the framework of the great Jazz classics, but music which added a new dimension, that widened my musical horizons. Listen for yourself; many of his recordings are still available.
Russell Ross’ book is above all immensely readable, to me the most readable Jazz book since Mezz Mezzrow’s Really the Blues. But the difference is really profound. Mezzrow, white and Jewish, courageously insisted in prison on being classified a Negro. Those of us involved in the Jazz revival were at best “White Negros”.
No socialist would think that way today, following the events of the past ten years. But it is precisely the movement of the Negro masses, and particularly the youth, which has changed our understanding and raised our consciousness.
Bird’s music was the music of a generation who were to begin the great negro revolt which was to shake American society to its foundations. The civil rights campaign, the Watts and other urban ghetto explosions, Black Power and a new militant consciousness.
If this revolt has in turn reached a blind alley, it will find new and higher roads in a fusion with the re-awakening American working class as a whole, in the struggle for a new society, a society which will provide the creative artist with the means and security to develop his or her talents to the full. A society which will see the full flowering of all art forms at a level undreamed of, even by a genius such as Charlie Parker.
 



“Clay Cross Fights Alone” is the heading of the leaflet announcing the national demonstration to be held at Clay Cross this Saturday 14th April.
After all the promises, after the meetings of Labour controlled council groups at Sheffield last year, after all the election manifestos pledging non-implementation, only Clay Cross and one other small South Wales local authority (now awaiting a Housing Commissioner) have refused to implement the Housing Finance Act.
It is important that socialists understand the reasons for the collapse of the non-implementation campaign. First and foremost the blame must be placed firmly and squarely in the court of the National Executive of the Labour Party and the Parliamentary Party in their refusal to give any lead to local Labour groups.
It was this lack of leadership which led to the “free vote” fiasco, which was the escape clause for those right wing councillors in Labour controlled Authorities. In Labour group, after Labour group, the majority was for non-implementation, but by allowing a free vote in the council chamber a combination of Tories and the right wing secured a majority for implementing the Act.
For nearly twenty years following the war, the right wing controlled the Parliamentary Labour Party and most local authority Labour Groups with an iron discipline. Withdrawal of the whip, suspension and even expulsion was the lot of many left wingers who rebelled against the regime and fought for more socialist policies.
No one on the left wants a return to this system. However, a distinction must be drawn: there can be no justification for a free vote which allows Labour councillors to vote in favour of viciously anti-working class legislation and in favour of Tory policies.
 
Rent Strikes
To those who bleat about fines, distraint on property, imprisonment and, horror of horrors, removal from office, we must say if it’s too hot in the kitchen they should withdraw to the parlour and make way for representatives prepared to fight against the Tories and for the working class.
While many tenants associations have been developed during the campaign against the Act, and in some areas rent strikes have taken place, no one can pretend that any real success has been gained by the tenants movement.
By their nature, tenants organisations ebb and flow sharply, reaching a peak when increases are imminent and dying away as they are implemented. It is rarely possible to achieve the same degree of unity and participation as in a factory or pit during a strike.
For this reason, the tenants’ movement requires, even more than industrial struggle, conscious political intervention and leadership. It requires also to be linked to the organised Trade Union and Labour movement.
It is not accidental that the most successful rent strike took place in Clay Cross itself. Given a magnificent fighting lead by the Labour Council, 84% of tenants supported the total rent strike which lasted six weeks. This fact alone is a crushing refutation of those groups who operate on the fringes of the Labour movement and condemn membership of the Labour Party.
For correct tactical reasons the Clay Cross councillors have called off the rent strike. However, despite the impression given by the national press, they have not implemented the Act nor are they collecting any rent increases. Each tenant in Clay Cross has saved £26 in rent due to non-implementation.
Since 1962, when Labour took control, Clay Cross has carried out a massive slum clearance campaign, solved its housing problem and improved social and welfare conditions of its population. The attitude of the Clay Cross councillors can best be illustrated over the school milk issue. As a non-education authority they used their right to employ a penny rate to provide milk for over sevens.
 
Surcharge
Finding that this would run out two months early, they increased the never-used Chairman’s allowance to cover the deficit and this was donated to the milk fund. In Clay Cross the chairman’s chain of office has been rusting away since 1962.
In an area with 16% male unemployment, the Council has shown what can be achieved even within the confines of local government, when the council is prepared to fight for working class interests.
At the moment, the Clay Cross councillors have been surcharged £7,985 by the District Auditor, although the amount not collected from the Rent Act now amounts to £31,000 and increases by £1,600 per week.
It is the responsibility of the entire labour movement to defend the Clay Cross council to use its industrial and political power to prevent any action, financial or physical, being taken against the councillors. We must demand that such a pledge is given by the TUC and the NEC of the Labour Party.
The price of the average house is increasing by £100 per month and this increase is expected to continue. The government’s hasty injection of £15 million into the building societies’ funds to keep the mortgage rate down to 9½% will not prevent a 10% mortgage rate before the end of the year.
It is now almost impossible for anyone earning less than £2,000 per year to buy a house. Only the private landlords, guaranteed increases of up to 250% for controlled dwellings under the Housing Finance Act, and the land and property sharks benefit. One hundred new millionaires have resulted directly from land and property speculation since the Tories came to power.
In this situation the figures for building council houses are actually declining. This week, Alderman Newby, leader of Bradford City council has announced a deputation of local authorities to protest at the huge increases of estimates being demanded by private building firms. Local authorities are being held to ransom by the building monopolies who are concentrating on the more lucrative property speculation projects in office building.
The absolute necessity for a socialist housing policy has never been more clearly demonstrated. What is required is a real fighting campaign to mobilise the labour movement, the tenants and many owner occupiers around a clear programme which must include:-

The nationalisation of land!
 
The nationalisation of the monopoly firms in the building and building supply industries.
 
The nationalisation of the major industrial monopolies, banks, insurance companies and building societies.
 
The taking over of all private property.
 
The building of a million new houses a year.

The case for public ownership is overwhelming; despite the bureaucratic mismanagement in Russia, 5 million dwellings a year are built and the average rent is only 5% of a workers’ wage. As a transitional demand, we should campaign for rents to be fixed at the cost of maintenance and management and the abolition of all interest charges which at present swallow up at least 80% of local authority housing revenue accounts.
In March next year Clay Cross will cease to exist, swallowed up in the local government reorganisation. Possibly the government and certainly some leaders of our own movement hope that the Clay Cross issue will drag on through the courts and can then be forgotten.
Clay Cross is not alone! The stand made at Clay Cross must not be betrayed! This is the beginning and not the end of the struggle. Above all, the rank and file of the movement must step up the campaign to ensure that the new Labour controlled authorities refuse to implement any further rent increases and begin instead to reduce rents and take on the Tory Government.
 



In the days when he claimed allegiance to Marxism John Strachey wrote a perceptive essay in which he examined how the working class switched from industrial to political and back to industrial action in an attempt to find a solution to the perennial problems of poverty, social deprivation and insecurity.
Finding one avenue blocked, the British workers, in particular the organised section, sought another. Far from being compliant and conservative, in the years between the wars the workers launched a whole series of magnificent struggles.
The struggle ebbed and flowed, but as surely as the tide recedes only to return, the working people resumed the fight. It was not any lack of willingness to organise, struggle and sacrifice which led so often to stalemate or defeat. Then as now it was the lack of a clear Marxist leadership, prepared and determined to draw together the separate strands of industrial and political struggle, to achieve a definite solution to the destruction of the moribund capitalist system and the building of a socialist society.
After the defeat of a Labour Government in 1924, the working class swung onto the industrial front culminating in the terrible defeat of the General Strike in 1926. The vicious anti-trade union Disputes Act of 1927 and the policies of conciliation and collaboration of the TUC through the ‘Mond-Turner’ talks of 1927, forced the organised workers to look for salvation through the return of a Labour Government. Such a government could redress the defeats of the past and achieve what industrial action had failed to do. So now the movement swung onto the political scene.
On May 30th, 1929, the second minority Labour Government was elected to office. Once again it was dependent on Liberal votes in the House of Commons and faced a hostile and overwhelmingly Tory House of Lords with power to delay legislation for three years:



General Election 1929




Labour


 


8,389,512


 


288 seats




Tory


8,656,473


260 seats




Liberal


5,308,519


  59 seats




Others


293,880


    8 seats



Labour had been elected to office mainly on the claim to solve the unemployment problem. The election manifesto Labour and the Nation, boasted: “We can conquer unemployment.” Lansbury said: “our palliative measures for dealing with unemployment are simple. We claim full and complete maintenance for those who cannot find work.”
Unlike 1924, the Government was formed entirely of Labour members, but significantly Wheatley the only success of 1924, was omitted. Beatrice Webb said that the “Labour Cabinet of 1929 unlike the one of 1924 was a pukka Cabinet.” Tawney however warned that the “choice (as in 1924) was living dangerously and honestly or capitulating to the Tories and Liberals.”
The first meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party was significant. John Wheatley, spokesman for the ILP group, prophesised economic crisis and predicted a Labour Government subject to successive humiliations if it permitted itself to become the instrument for cutting the living standards of wage earners and the unemployed.
Wheatley opposed the very idea of a minority government, but if this was what the Parliamentary Labour Party wanted then he supported Tawney’s idea of “living dangerously.” His ideas were rejected by the vast majority who support McDonald’s programme of accommodation with the Liberals.
 
Churchill
The ruling class understood well, the nature of the Labour leadership. Churchill cynically welcomed the Kings Speech with the following words:
“I am glad to see old Parliamentarians whom I have know for a quarter of a century who have played so distinguished part in our proceedings, having at last their share in the responsibilities of government and testing what are called by those who have not long experienced them ‘the sweets of office’. I look forward to having the Financial Secretary to the Treasury deliver us a clear exposition of the gold standard and the solid advantages which it will confer upon the country, and generally to defend orthodox financial matters. No doubt the Financial Secretary will be able to do this when his education by Treasury officials, the Bank of England and the high financial authorities of the City of London have been completed.”
Here the authentic voice of capitalism brutally stated the truth that if the Labour Government was not prepared to challenge capitalism, then it would have to carry out policies in the interests of capitalism.
Churchill was of course correct in his forecast. From the beginning MacDonald was determined to show that his government would be ‘respectable’ and would stand no truck with opposition from the left of the party within.
He opposed any idea of an early election to gain a firm majority. “If I can prevent it there shall be no disturbance of the country by an election within two years, I wish to make it clear that I am going to stand no ‘monkeying’.” The government was controlled by the ‘big five’: MacDonald, Snowden, Henderson, Thomas and Clynes. Wheatley was left out of the Cabinet and Lansbury was brought in to accommodate the ‘left’. He was given a job in the Ministry of Works, where “he could do a good many small things without the opportunity for squandering money” – Snowden.
The capitalist parties soon perfected a division of labour in Parliament, while the Tories denounced the extravagance of socialism, the Liberals attacked the government for betraying its former ideals. One the one hour reduction of the working week for miners and the rationalisation (not nationalisation) of the mines. Lloyd George said: “I do not say they are betraying the miners, because they cannot carry out nationalisation. They are going to carry out what they can and I think it right, but I am bound to point out they are proposing to do what they rejected in 1919.”
To set the record straight the 1929–31 government carried through a number of reforms. The contributory pension scheme was started, mental hospitals improved, slum clearance started, agricultural marketing boards set up and public regulation introduced for road transport. Other reforms such as the repeal of the Trade Union Act (1927) and the raising of the school leaving age to 15 were destroyed by the Liberals, or the House of Lords.
Welcome as these relatively minor reforms were they in no way challenged the power of capital and had little, or no effect on the unemployment situation.
The government was soon to more from reforms to counter-reforms as did later Labour Governments in 1950, 1967 and 1975.
When the government came to office the economic situation seemed relatively optimistic. Steel production stood at its highest since 1917. It was to be almost halved in three years. The index of industrial production stood at 115.8. By 1932 it would fall to 103.2.
But the reality was that the world was on the eve of a profound crisis. The Wall Street crash of September 1929 was the prelude to the greatest slump in history. By 1931 a quarter of the American workforce was unemployed. Four million, later seven million German workers were thrown out of work. The dominance of American capitalism was shown by the disastrous consequences for Britain of the American collapse.
 
Dole cut
The demand for British goods dropped sharply, unemployment doubled and almost trebled. The slump in world trade led to untrammelled dumping of goods. The employers demanded restriction on imports and cuts in the living standards of the workers both employed and unemployed.
Unemployment rose to levels undreamed of in the worst nightmares of Labour MPs:



May 1929


 


1,165,000


 


  9.7% insured workers




Feb. 1930


1,582,000


 




Dec. 1930


1,911,000




Dec. 1931


2,707,000




Dec. 1932


2,843,000


21.9% insured workers



Far from improving the lot of the unemployed, the government introduced the so-called Anomalies Bill which meant that some three hundred thousand of the unemployed would have their benefits cut
Throughout its period of office the Labour Government backed the employers’ campaign to reduce the workers’ living standards. The miners, railwayman, cotton and woollen workers suffered cuts. Government spokesmen called for “increased production” and “sacrifices” from the workers. The Labour votes slumped in local elections as sections of the workers abstained in disgust at the government’s policies and others moved to the Tories and Liberals.
All that remained was the final act of the discredited government.
Following Chancellor Snowden’s acceptance of a Liberal amendment, a committee was set up to deal with unemployment. Headed by Sir George May, former head of the Prudential Insurance Company, it consisted in the words of Beatrice Webb “of five clever hard-faced representatives of capitalism and two tame trade unionists.”
It reported in July 1931, with the almost unnoticed dissent of the two trade unionists and recommended savage cuts in Government expenditure, to boost profits and production. Among its proposals was a 15% cut in teachers’ pay, 25% in service pay and a 20% reduction in unemployment benefit.
The May Committee said there would be a budget deficit of £140 million and recommended a total cut of £97 million with £67 million by public expenditure cuts and the rest by taxation. MacDonald expressed his broad agreement when he said in Parliament: “We are of one mind. We intend to balance the budget.”
The report coincided with a real run on international currencies, particularly sterling. Gold was being lost at the rate of £2½ million a day from July 15th.
By August the Bank of England was warning that the economy was on the edge of a precipice and a drastic situation would have to take place. The remedy was in the hands of the government. They advised a balanced budget and cuts in public expenditure, particularly the dole, as suggested by the May Committee, and French and American creditors were insisting on this particular condition for further loans.
This crisis began on August 13th, and by August 17th, the Cabinet as a whole agreed to major cuts in public expenditure. However on Thursday August 17th TUC leaders expressed their total opposition to any cuts, especially in dole money. The stiffened right wingers like Henderson and Clynes into opposition.
Nevertheless on Friday, cuts to a maximum of £56 million, including £36 million off the dole benefits, were agreed by the whole Cabinet, including Attlee and Dalton who were later to suggest that they had reservations. The TUC maintained their total opposition and for their pains were described as ‘pigs’ by Beatrice Webb.
But these cuts were still not enough for the bankers or the Tories and Liberals who were consulted. Another £20–25 million was demanded. To stop the run on the pound, a further loan from the New York Reserve Bank was needed. Harrison, President of the bank said he would only provide the money if the City of London was satisfied that the government was making enough cuts.
MacDonald proposed to the Cabinet on Saturday 19th August, that a further 10% cut in public money, equal to a mere £12¼ million, be made. The Cabinet was split but voted 11–9 in favour and Sidney Webb supported the cuts. But the opposition included the key Labour figures of Henderson, Clynes, of the TUC and Graham.
MacDonald then asked for the resignation of his Ministers and went to the King. It was there and also at a secret meeting with all the opposition leaders at No. 10 that he was advised, and readily agreed, not to resign but form a National Government. He returned to tell his astonished Labour Cabinet that they were sacked but not him or anybody who was willing to follow him over to the coalition which would have Baldwin as deputy. Only Thomas, Snowden and Sankey agreed.
So feel the Labour Government. It seemed it had just been a trifling £12 million that split the Cabinet. After all the National Government when it presented its budget later only increased the cuts by another £20 million. But after a series of retreats on all the government’s promises and continued acceptance of these retrenchments in the interests of profit by the PLP and the TUC, this last one was the ‘straw that broke the camel’s back’. ‘No more’ said the TUC and ‘goodbye’ said MacDonald And MacDonald chortled to Snowden, “Tomorrow every Duchess in London will be wanting to kiss me.”
John Wheatley had not lived to see the predictions he had made at the first PLP meeting come true, but they had and with a vengeance.
 
Fear
The National Government immediately called an election, while the organised core of the labour movement remained loyal. The election was a crushing defeat for the Labour Party.



National Government


 


14,532,519


 


554 seats




Labour


  6,649,639


  52 seats




Independent Liberal


     106,106


    4 seats




Others


     368,118


    5 seats



The campaign of the National Government was completely based on fear. MacDonald brandished German paper marks used in the hyper-inflation of 1923 to demonstrate to audiences what would happen if Labour won. He described Labour as a ’sectional’ faction not a national party. Snowden described Labour leaders like Henderson and Clynes as ‘Bolsheviks run mad’!
Runciman told audiences that Labour would use their Post Office savings to give more money to those on the dole. The general line of the National Government Ministers was “tomorrow there will be a new England or no England” – that was the choice.
Given the humiliation and betrayal of the Labour leaders no wonder the National Government won an overwhelming victory taking 70% of the vote. But it must be remembered that while Labour was decimated in Parliament, its vote only fell from 8.3 million in 1929 to 6.6 million in 1931. The best sections of the working class remained loyal.
The labour movement had paid the price of appeasement and compromise with the Liberals. The results, especially in a period of economic crisis, was complete capitulation to capitalism and the political parties representing the owning class. Far from gaining the so-called ‘middle ground’ this policy led to electoral disaster.
Right from its inception the Parliamentary Labour Party, and in particular the leadership, has never shown any desire or determination to change society. However while little could be expected from the leadership, more should have been forthcoming from the left of the movement and in particular the Independent Labour Party.
With 140 MPs nominally members and 37 of these financially sponsored and bound by the decision of the 1928 ILP Conference to support ILP policies, the ILP constituted an important part of the PLP. Under the stresses of the crisis not all the 37 would remain loyal to their sponsorship let alone the mass of nominal members. Only 18 actually backed ILP policies in the PLP.
Unlike 1924 opposition to the leadership existed from the start of the 1929 government. In 1928 Maxton, leader of the ILP, and Cook issued a joint declaration attacking the timid policy of the Labour leadership and in particular the class collaborationism implicit in the ‘Mond-Turner’ joint committees of the employers and TUC. But with the ignominious defeat of the General Strike, Cook was a spent force and once again the declaration was from the top and no attempt was made to campaign amongst the rank and file.
The policy of the ILP was similar to that adopted by the Tribune MPs and the Communist Party today. Hobson, Wise and Brailsford challenged the financial experts of the Treasury and Universities, adopting Keynesian ideas before Keynes. They demanded the government spend its way out of the crisis.
They rightly saw the orthodox deflationary policy of the government as a curse for the working people. But what was the alternative? No socialist would oppose public works aimed at giving work to the unemployed then or now but to see this as a means of solving the crisis is farcical. Where would the money come from?
Higher taxes for the rich leads to even less investment in private industry and further unemployment in that sector. Higher taxation for the working people would mean a further lowering of consumption and a deepening of the crisis. Even over a short period the printing of bank notes unsupported by gold, or the production of commodities, leads to depression of the currency and the curse of inflation.
In the midst of capitalist crisis of ‘overproduction’ what is the sense of producing more coal, more railway track, more rolling stock, more roads, more steel, when consumption of all these products declined sharply during the two years of Labour Government. Even today when these industries are nationalised it makes no sense while the vast majority of such products are consumed by the 80% of industry which remains in private ownership.
Only a national plan based on the public ownership of the financial institutions, land and the major industries, could use the resources of the economy to meet the needs of society as opposed to the jungle of the capitalist market and the interests of rent, interest and profit.
The failure of the ILP in 1929–31 and the Tribune and the Communist Party today to advance such policies as the essential basis of an alternative socialist programme means they are reduced to sterile, often utopian, verbalising against the policies of the government.
 
Evolution
Such was the fate of the left wing in 1929–31 although the ‘results’ came think and fast.
The Bondfield Insurance Bill when presented was far from the promises made in the election programme, in particular it maintained the hated “not genuinely seeking work” provision. The opposition was taken to the Party Conference and only narrowly defeated. But far from continuing the opposition the Parliamentary revolt collapsed and a number of ILP MPs resigned from the Party.
On May 22nd Oswald Mosley, assistant to J.H. Thomas, resigned over the lack of policies to deal with unemployment. In the Parliamentary Party he received only 27 votes as against 240. Mosley continued his campaign with a speaking tour of the country. Bevan collected the signatures of 100 Labour MPs calling for the dismissal of Thomas. At the 1930 Party Conference in Llandudno the Mosley Manifesto was narrowly defeated by 1,250,000 to 1,046,000. Mosley left the Party at the end of the year and was soon to become a fascist.
In fact when Maxton moved a resolution demanding that the government adopt ‘socialism’ as a solution, MacDonald replied by saying that socialism must be slow and evolutionary “moving as it were in a great eternal ocean of surge towards righteousness, towards fair play, towards honesty.”
The truth is that the majority of the Parliamentary Party, including the ILP supported the government through thick and thin, as did the majority of the trade union leaders. When Sir Charles Trevelyan resigned following the defeat by the House of Lords of the Bill to raise school leaving age to 15, and called for a new leadership he was received in stony silence.
It is ironic that after the MacDonald betrayal his most bitter critics were the same MPs whose abject loyalty had assisted him in office over the years.
Any student of Labour history can see the parallels between today and 1931. For a quarter of a century the leaders of the labour movement have scoffed at the ideas of “outdated” Marxism. Class war had become outmoded, classes were disappearing, mass unemployment could never return, standards of living and social welfare would continue to improve, Keynesian and other methods could control the onset of capitalist crisis.
History however lies in their teeth. One and a half million unemployed and more to come, living standards cut by 10% a year and more to come, savage cuts in social spending and a lot more to come. Alongside the same Treasury orthodoxy as MacDonald and Snowden, the same false promises of jam tomorrow if you sacrifice today.
As in 1931 we have a Labour Government albeit with a tiny majority, with the support of the Liberals and nationalists and with the tacit consent of the Conservative leadership. The Tribunite MPs play the role of a semi-opposition under Wilson as the ILP left played under MacDonald. The threat of a National Government is implicit in the situation.
The Parliamentary Labour Party, containing a high proportion of lawyers, lecturers, ad-men and open Conservatives, is further removed than ever from the lives and aspirations of the working people.
Why did the ruling class seek a coalition government in 1931? After all MacDonald was carrying out Tory policies. Even if he failed to inspire confidence in foreign bankers he could easily have been brought down. The Tories would certainly have won the subsequent elections. Why then a National Government?
Like Marxists, the strategists of capital recognise that it is the relationship of class forces that determine history not simple electoral or parliamentary arithmetic. The experience of the MacDonald Government impelled a growing number of trade unionists, Labour Party and ILP members to draw socialist conclusions.
Under pressure from the rank and file, sections, at least of the trade union leadership, would have been formed into some form of opposition to the policies of the government. The return of an openly Tory Government however would have led to an immediate and growing struggle by the trade union movement and the unemployed. The ruling class had been seriously disturbed at the power and solidarity of the workers shown in the General Strike. To carry through its policies with the minimum social dislocation, the ruling class required a divided labour movement and a National Government including leading members of the Labour Party.
 
‘Consensus’
The pressure for a national government was already building up throughout the period in the circles of the ruling class. MacDonald from the beginning had considered ‘an understanding’ with Baldwin, the Tory leader, to safeguard his majority. In his opening speech to Parliament he said that MPs “should consider ourselves more as a Council of State and less as arrayed regiments facing each other in battle ... let’s put our ideas in a common pool.”
From ‘consensus’ politics would come a ‘consensus’ government.
MacDonald resigned from the ILP in 1930 and continually invited Baldwin and Lloyd George for regular talks but only the latter accepted at this time. During the final economic crisis many papers began to raise the demand for a National Government. MacDonald and Snowden had regular meetings with opposition leaders as soon as the crisis broke, where both the Liberals and Tories suggested to the bold two that what was needed was a ‘reconstructed’ government, which, is of course what they had advised the King to tell MacDonald.
It had also been planted in the minds of the other right wing Labour leaders. J.H. Thomas had boasted as early as April 1931 that he would be in a National Government by September – this was one of the few forecasts that he got right!
The situation today has of course many differences with 1929–31, but the differences are in the main unhelpful to the ruling class. The labour movement is enormously strengthened, the destruction of the relatively privileged position of sections of the British working class outlined by Trotsky early in the century has continued apace and now enhances clerical and administrative workers and the majority of students.
Nor have the workers suffered in the post-war period, anything like the series of shattering defeats suffered in the twenties. Internationally capitalism stands at bay, with the Portuguese revolution and the developing situations in Greece and Spain.
In this situation the return of a Tory Government would lead immediately to a developing strike wave and the very real possibility of a general strike. Given the relationship of class forces and the lack of preparation of the ruling class such a situation poses enormous dangers from capitalism. Even granted that the present leadership of the trade union movement inspires no more confidence than that of 1926.
 
Pressure
Even more favourable is the fact that even before such a split, the National Executive of the Labour Party and considerable sections of the trade union movement are in the hands of the ‘left’ with a strong move towards Marxist ideas within the constituencies. Any split would not leave the leadership of the Labour Party in the hands of the right wing as it did in 1931. The majority of the right wing leaders like Henderson, Clynes, Webb and Morrison remained to hold back the movement towards socialist policies in the Labour Party.
Now the left wing would dominate from the start and while that is certainly no guarantee of socialist policies and action it would open much more quickly the door towards a really fighting labour movement based on Marxist policies. Nevertheless the ruling class sees a National Government as the best possible alternative as the economic situation deteriorates.
If as seems certain the world crisis deepens, opposition to the policies of the government will inevitably grow exchanging TUC policy of tamely accepting savage cuts in living standards coupled with growing unemployment. As such opposition develops the TUC will be forced into semi-opposition to the government which will find itself subject to enormous pressures from big business on the one hand and from the working people on the other.
 
Prentice
In these circumstances a National Government will offer the best available option open to the ruling class. A National Government, a government of “all the talents” could sweep to power with a scare campaign by the mass media which would dwarf the post office savings scare of 1931, to secure an overwhelming majority. It would allow a period when real preparations for dealing with the labour movement could be organised. Does anyone seriously doubt that sections of the Parliamentary Labour Party at all levels would be prepared to take the MacDonald road?
In a recent speech to Oxford University Democratic Labour Club, a “party outside the party”, Reg Prentice once again called for a witch-hunt against the Marxist wing in the Labour Party.
In the course of his speech he said that Marxism was “narrow-minded, bitter and terribly old fashioned. Its leading exponents have never got beyond the class war dogma of the 1920s.”
The tragedy is that if had, as Prentice suggested, a Rip Van Winkle who had fallen asleep at the end of the twenties awoke today he would see now, as then, growing unemployment, a declining standard of living for the producers of our society and above all the like of Prentice carrying out the same old failed policies favoured by MacDonald, Snowden and Thomas.
Unlike Mr. Prentice, Marxists are prepared to study and learn the lessons of history. It is in the Labour Party Young Socialists and the growing number of trade unionists and Labour Party members adopting the ideas of Marxism that the future lies. In a determination that the Prentices in our movement will not be allowed to repeat the betrayals of the past and that the programme, policies and leadership of the movement will be worthy of the best ideals of our class.
 



Dear Comrades,
I was fortunate enough to spend a few days in Germany recently and meet a few members of the Socialist Youth movement.
When I was in Germany the news came through of the fire in the Cambridge Heath Press printshop, and while the comrades I met made a considerable amount of sacrifices in building up their own Marxist paper, Voran, I was given the following donations: Frankfurt (AM) YS 10DM and Carmen Rathien (Neumunster YS) 30DM.
Just another example of international solidarity.



 


Yours fraternally,
Pat Wall
(Chairman Bingley Labour Party)



 



Bloody Sunday and the events of the Transport Strike of August 1911 are a famous part of Liverpool working class history and folklore.
The depression of 1908–9 had seriously reduced living standards, unemployment had risen and Trade Union membership declined. From 1910 the upswing in economic activity reversed this process and the workers, particularly those in the rapidly growing Trade Unions embarked on a series of struggles aimed at restoring the cuts of the depression years.
Early in 1911 the Liverpool dockers won a notable victory not only against the port employers, but also against religious sectarianism. United demonstrations of Catholic and Protestant workers were held, led by a joint band, complete with green and orange favours. In August a total transport strike, including the railways, broke out, a prelude to the national strike called by the four railway unions. A Government Commission alone managed to persuade the strikers back to work. The most obstinate employers were the Liverpool Corporation.
From its attitude it seems certain the Corporation and the local judiciary prepared the provocation of the peaceful demonstration which became Bloody Sunday. The response of the workers was more than they bargained for, the strikers became more determined. Liverpool was in a state of virtual siege for several days, some accounts claim that the strikers broke into gun shops.
The following eye-witness account by a participant is a valuable page of working class history. Written in the fifties the author had illusions in the ability of Labour and Capital to peacefully reconcile differences. The events at Cammell Lairds Shipyard of the last few weeks show that nothing has really changed. The author’s account of the events of Bloody Sunday has the ring of truth and as we prepare for the stormy period which lies ahead, it should prove of interest to all Trade Unions.
 



The rejection of Reg Prentice by Newham North East Constituency Labour Party and the events at the recent Newham ‘support Prentice meeting’, have provoked a hysterical reaction from the millionaire press and Labour’s right wing.
Roy Jenkins and Prentice echo the Tory press in denouncing Marxists in the Labour Party, fittingly in slightly more moderate tones than the vitriolic outbursts of ex-MPs Griffiths and Taverne. Top of the Bill must be reserved for Andrew Faulds who said in one of his most dramatic roles, “reasonable people” are “in despair as the anti-democrats infiltrate.” The old Gaitskillite ‘Campaign for Democratic Socialism’ has been revived in the form of the ‘Social Democratic Alliance’ complete with subscriptions and membership cards, but not of course a ‘party within a party’.

Immediately following his defeat, Reg Prentice called for a return to the Social Democratic tradition which had, he claimed, predominated throughout Labour’s history.
The right wing are attempting to propound a myth that the traditional democracy of the Labour Party is being subverted by militant left wingers and Marxists. The truth, as any activist of even a few years standing knows, is rather different. Over long periods of its history the Labour Party had a tradition of witch-hunting its left wing. With all its faults the Party is more democratic today than at any time in the post war period.
The so-called ‘Social Democrats’ are either dishonest or ignorant of the history of the Party. Perhaps its confirms what many rank and file members have long suspected, that many are Parliamentary careerists with no real roots in the Labour Movement.
Early in 1939 the National Executive Committee expelled Stafford Cripps, followed by Aneurin Bevan, George Strauss, Sir Charles Trevelyan and Labour candidates Edgar Young and Robert Bruce.
The left had been campaigning in favour of a popular front movement including the Communist Party and the Liberals to oppose the National Government; Cripps presented his policies to the NEC and was defeated by 17 votes to 3. He then circulated his manifesto to CLPs and it was for this that he was expelled. While Cripps was technically in breach of the rules, Bevan, Strauss and the others committed no other crime than opposing Cripps’ expulsion and supporting a petition outlining their policies. The most vitriolic speech at Party Conference in favour of upholding the expulsions was made by that great champion of party democracy George (now Lord George) Brown.
Marxists opposed the policy of the Popular Front seeing such policies as a major factor in the defeat of the Spanish working class. However unlike the right wing, Marxists reject expulsion as a means of resolving political differences.
“In the early fifties the right wing, including an organised ‘Catholic Action’ caucus, dominated the Liverpool Labour Group; many represented ‘rotten boroughs’ in the older parts of the city where party membership was almost non-existent. The late John Braddock was both leader and chairman of the Group, deciding who could or could not speak against his policies. Many of his supporters spent more time in the ‘Vernon’ pub across the road than in the meeting. When a vote was near a messenger would cross the road and back they would troop, many ‘half cut’, to shout down, or even physically threaten opposition speakers. It was the re-distribution of ward boundaries and the growing left wing majority in the Trades Council and Borough Labour Party which ended this state of affairs.”
The ‘Manifesto’ group and the ‘Social Democratic Alliance’ may not have been around in 1939, but some of the leading members should recall that Bevan escaped expulsion by the NEC by only two votes in 1953. Did Roy Jenkins, Shirley Williams or Tom Jackson campaign for tolerance for Bevan or for the various Bevanite/Tribunite MPs who have had the whip withdrawn over the years? The crime of these MPs was to vote against the Tories in defiance of Parliamentary Party decisions, a marked contrast to the 69 who voted with the Tories in 1970 and kept the Heath Government in office. More recently three MPs voted with the Tories on the issue of Clay Cross and more disgustingly were those cowards who went ‘missing’ despite a three line whip.
Intolerance and witch-hunting were even more marked in the constituencies. Are we supposed to forget the disbanding of CLPs, the administrating of ‘loyalty oaths’, the monstrous proscription list, the banning of left wing journals and ginger groups not to mention the divorcing of Trade Unionists from the Labour Party by the splitting of joint Trades Councils and Borough Labour Parties?
Some people have suddenly discovered the decline in Party membership which has gone on for years and is only now slowly reversing. It was right wing policies, ‘Butskellism’ and the lack of democracy which drove hundreds of activists from the Party. This process started with the support for American Imperialism in Korea and the massive arms drive that initiated the decline in membership (and incidentally led to the resignation from the Government of Wilson, Freeman and Bevan). The move from reforms to counter-reforms between 1967 and 1970 had the same effect.
At local level the backbone of right wing policies has been the Local Council Labour Groups. The low level of ward membership led to a self-perpetuating re-adoption of councillors. Without effective rank and file control, this in turn, as the Poulson cases have demonstrated, opens the door to corruption amongst a minority. It was the ‘Social Democrats’ and right wing officials who defended these Labour Group leaders over the years. Even today they have said very little, preferring to reserve their denunciations not for crooks, but the Young Socialists.
“Delegates to this year’s Conference representing Labour, or marginal seats will be subject as usual to the attentions of the ‘seat seekers’, clutching seat plans in their hands, moving from one part of the hall to another seeking consideration for future short lists. We all know the type, book shelves full of volumes of past election results, detailed records of boundary changes. One even suspects some monitor the health of more elderly MPs, latter day cowboys, “have selection speech will travel”. I recall a regional official telling me of an MP who took seriously ill at the end of the week. By the following Monday the Regional Office had received about a dozen telegrams and phone calls more or less saying if he dies can I be considered for the seat.”
The removal of Taverne, Milne, Griffiths and other shows that after years of docile acceptance many CLPs are now taking a critical interest in the role of their MPs. It is this fact which has led to the panic and alarm along MPs and in particular the ‘Manifesto’ Group, who are now beginning to demand changes in the selection and re-selection procedures.
In fact, present procedures bend over backwards to protect the sitting member. It takes three meetings, EC, GMC and special GMC to drop an existing MP; at all these meetings a majority must vote against re-adoption. During the procedure the CLP is prevented from making public comment; no such limitations appear to apply to MPs. If the vote goes against the sitting MP he can appeal to both the NEC and the Party Conference; he also has the opportunity to seek nomination to the new short list and possible re-selection.
With all its limitations the procedure is a big advance on the system that applied in the past. In1964 the Liverpool Exchange CLP refused to re-adopt Bessie Braddock. What was the NEC answer? An enquiry into the Constituency, the reinstatement of Mrs. Braddock, threats to disband the CLP and demands for loyalty oaths – is this ‘Social Deomcracy’?
When the ‘social democrats’ ruled CLPs, rights were trampled on by the NEC. Even mildly left wing candidates were refused endorsement, Illtyd Harrington now deputy leader of the GLC was twice selected by a CLP and turned down by the NEC. One could mention several other similar cases. At the same time dozens of lawyers, lecturers and similar types with a minimal history in the movement were endorsed without question. Is this the ‘tradition’ that Prentice wishes to re-instate?
“At the last Annual Conference of the Labour League of Youth in 1953 several emergency resolutions were received protesting at the attempt to expel Aneurin Bevan. Under instructions from Transport House the chairman ruled the resolutions out of order. Conference then moved the chairman out of the chair, at which point the official suspended the Conference. The National Committee, on which I was one of the minority of elected members (most were ‘selected’) retired to discuss the impasse. The National Youth Officer and the NEC representative, an elderly Trade Union officer, stated bluntly they would close the conference if the resolutions were discussed. When I protested and moved acceptance of the resolutions the NEC representative left his chair and attempted to strike me. A frightening moment, he was so red in the face I thought he might have a stroke. As it transpired my motion only received four votes and the delegates rightly withdrew the resolutions under protest.”
Above all it is the treatment of the Labour Youth movement that the right wing stands condemned. The history of the youth organisations has been one of arbitrary restrictions, gross interference by officialdom, lack of democratic rights, and the closing of branches.
In 1955 the post-war Labour League of Youth was disbanded. After an interval Youth Sections were allowed on a Constituency basis, but they were expressly forbidden from having any contact with each other. Following the 1959 electoral defeat the Young Socialists was formed, but this organisation was in turn disbanded in 1964.
The present Labour Party Young Socialists has a more democratic constitution and better relations with the Party. However a considerable degree of harassment still exists. Many regional officials seem more concerned with closing than opening branches. The promised Field Officer has not materialised and now the grant for the Labour Student Chairman has been withdrawn in spite of the fact that the full time work of last years NOLS chairman produced the biggest increase in branches ever.
Let those who have suddenly discovered the lack of membership campaign for an end to harassment of the LPYS, elect the LPYS Field Officer now, restore the sabbatical grant to the NOLS Chairman. Such actions would speed the success of the growing Labour youth movement and at a time of financial crisis would give a high return for a small outlay.
“When we first married, like most working class couples, we had a terrible time searching for rented accommodation at a price we could afford. One day Pauline was told that a member of her Ward Party knew of a house to rent. That member was Sarah McCard a working woman who devoted her life to the Co-operative and Labour Movement. The house had gone, but we stayed to talk, mainly of the past and old struggles of the movement. During the conversation she mentioned that after some years she and her husband found that they could manage to save a few bob each week to supplement their old age pension and how it took them weeks to find a means of investment, as they considered it immoral to earn more than 2½% interest. Now Sarah may have been naïve, she certainly never knew the present rate of inflation, but when I hear members of private London clubs, socialists with two or three houses, many sending their children to private schools, telling us that they speak for the broad mass of working class people and the aspirations of the movement I think of Sarah McCard. I prefer her principles, her devotion, her courage, her working class decency any time.”
The self-styled ‘Social Democrats’ are politically adept at propounding abstract theories of democracy, particularly abroad. The nearer home they get the less certain the case. It is now suggested that Labour voters should have a say in the selection and more importantly in the re-selection of Labour candidates. MPs we are told represent the Labour voters, party activists only themselves.
We have yet to hear of an MP who denounced the selection procedure when adopted or who dislikes activists during elections. To equate the party rank and file to non-active voters is to reduce them to election work horses with perhaps the right to send the odd resolution to regional or national conferences.
Roy Jenkins is reported as saying at the Prentice meeting, that 80% of the British people were at heart conservatives. Electoral results show that around a third of the population, in the main the organised working class movement and their families, support the Labour Party on a class basis. They vote for the Labour Party as the workers party, they vote for Labour candidates as workers’ candidates. In addition sections of the middle class and the unorganised working class are prepared on occasions to vote Labour. While disputing Roy Jenkins figures, he is partly correct, an element of conservatism does exist even among workers, but how is this overcome by pandering to this conservatism, by making the Labour Party indistinguishable from the Tories?
To win the so-called floating element requires a bold lead, a programme that offers a real alternative to booms and slumps, stop and go and that requires the conscious intervention of socialists in the struggles of working people. It means in the words of the American ‘Wobblies’, we must agitate, educate and organise. In workshops and office even today it is small groups, or even single individuals, who actively campaign and recruit Trade Union membership, often putting their own jobs at risk. It is small numbers of activists in the Branches, CLPs and LPYS branches who develop the organisations and recruit the cadres of the Labour Party.
The present crisis requires leadership, but if that leadership is divorced from the control from the rank and file, its policies now and in the past will become divorced from those of the movement. For this reason socialists should support the demands put forward at this Conference and undoubtedly in the future for greater democracy and rank and file control – for the election of the Party leader by Conference. For Conference decisions to be binding on MPs. For the limitation of MPs salaries and for the right of recall at all levels and in all sections of the movement.
At a time of growing attacks on left wing militants and Marxists in the Labour Party, delegates would do well to recall the words of Aneurin Bevan shortly before his expulsion in 1939: “If every organised effort to change Party policy is to be described as an organised attack on the Party itself then the rigidity imposed by Party discipline will soon change into rigor mortis.”

Pat Wall joined the Labour Party during the 1950 election and was the secretary of Liverpool Garston CLP at the age of 16. He has since held office in Toxteth, Harborough and Bingley Labour Parties, as well as being USDAW Shop Steward and Branch Secretary and Bingley UDC Councillor. He is now President of Bradford Trades Council and a member of the Yorkshire Regional Executive of the Labour Party.
 



With the death of Pat Wall the labour and trade union movement has lost one of the most outstanding standard bearers of the cause of socialism. The news of his death will have brought a profound sense of loss to the countless thousands whose lives he touched an enriched.
In 1964 Pat helped establish Militant. Despite all the pressure and vilification he was to endure, he remained always an unflinching Marxist and a supporter of the ideas of Militant.
Pat could have opted easily for a quiet, comfortable political life. But, whatever the cost personally, throughout his life he remained true to his socialist principles.
At 16 he became the secretary of the Garston constituency Labour Party. In the following 41 years, wherever he lived, Pat played a prominent role within the labour movement. In Liverpool, in the 1950s, as one of the youngest-ever councillors, and as an executive member of the united trade council and Labour Party he helped lead the fight of the left against the established old-guard right wing.
Pat’s work as a mail order company buyer often took him abroad. He would use the opportunity to build links with fellow socialists and where possible assist their work.
In Sri Lanka he canvassed for a socialist parliamentary candidate and after he returned from a visit to the USA he championed the cause of a persecuted black youth.
Pat’s job took him on to Market Harborough and then to Bingley in Bradford. He became a councillor in Bingley and for years led Bradford’s trade union movement as president of the trades council.
Under Pat’s leadership the Bradford trades council became renowned for its consistent efforts to combat racism and to unite all workers against their common oppression.
Bakers, miners and thousands of others forced to fight to defend their jobs and conditions owe a debt of gratitude to Pat for tireless work on their behalf.
Pat was special. In the modern Labour Party few have faced the degree of persecution which Pat suffered. But few have enjoyed the admiration and the respect that Pat received from ordinary rank-and-file members of the Labour Party and trade unions.
Pat was a brilliant speaker. He was one of the greatest popularisers of socialist ideas. A buzz of anticipation would fill a room when Pat was about to speak. He had a gift for relating the general ideas of Marxism to the day-to-day experiences of ordinary workers and for bringing out the essential humanity of Marxism.
Pat always understood the central role that young people must play in a healthy, vibrant Labour Party. Many young activists became convinced Marxists on the socialist climbing and walking expeditions which Pat initiated. He had been a national committee member of the Labour League of Youth and remained always a fierce defender of the right for young Labour Party members to operate free from bureaucratic interference.
Pat liked to relax listening to jazz or watching Everton. His warm personality, his friendly disposition and his refusal to descend to personal abuse was acknowledged even by his opponents. This did not however prevent the avalanche of venom and personal attack Pat faced once he was selected to fight as the Labour candidate in the Bradford North constituency.
In the last two elections attacks on Pat were central to national Tory election propaganda. The abuse from the media became so abhorrent at one time that Pat’s wife, Pauline, pinned the NUJ code of conduct to their front door.
Above all though, Pat had to contend with the vindictive attacks from the leadership of his own party. He had to be selected twice before being allowed to run in 1983. At the height of the election campaign, in an unprecedented outburst, he was denounced in Bradford’s St Georges Hall by the then leader of the Labour Party, Michael Foot.
He faced further inquiry before being allowed to stand in 1987. He won with one of the biggest swings to Labour nationally. Immediately following his election, however, he faced the suspension of Bradford North Labour Party, further national inquiries and the expulsion from the Labour Party of some of his most hard-working supporters.
During much of this time Pat struggled against serious ill health.
Despite the ceaseless attacks from the right, his standing grew even greater amongst the ordinary members of the Labour Party and other working people of Bradford North. In October last year he was reselected as the Labour candidate for Bradford North with a crushing majority over his opponents.
In his election address Pat had written:
“To represent the people of Bradford North Is a privilege and not a stepping-stone in personal advancement. I believe MPs should be full-time with no business ties, no directorships, and no retainers from business lobbies. That is why I have given the pledge to accept only the average wage of a skilled worker, plus expenses monitored by the labour movement. Any excess salary will be donated back to help the work of the labour movement.”
Pat faithfully honoured this pledge. In his years as an MP he made an outstanding contribution as a campaigning Marxist MP. For all those involved in the struggle for a socialist society, where the talents of mankind will be allowed to develop freely and to the full, Pat’s life and his work will live on as an example and an inspiration.
We send our condolences to Pauline, Pat’s wife and comrade, and to their children, Simon, David and Kate.
The Militant Editorial Board.

Dave Nellist MP issued the following statement on the death of Pat Wall:
It was at party conference that I first listened to Pat Wall, enthralled by his ability as a speaker, particularly able to illustrate theory from the daily lives and struggles of ordinary people.
Pat had that rare gift of being able not to speak at or to an audience but for them, so that he naturally became a tribune, as a councillor, trades council president and latterly as an MP.
We had our annual night of pool at a succession of conferences. When he entered Parliament we had adjoining offices.
Over a period of 40 years within the Labour Party, Paddy Wall became an experienced and influential conference delegate. He moved the successful composite in 1972 that shifted Labour sharply to the left on public ownership and workers’ control.
He made memorable speeches on public services, the social contract, defence cuts, pensions and the need for accountability of MPs. He demanded as a rank-and-filer, and lived up to it in Parliament himself, that MPs should take only the average skilled worker’s wage.
I’ll miss Pat as a friend and a comrade, someone from whom you could learn each and every day. The thousands of people whose eyes have been opened by Pat’s work, to the injustices of capitalism and to the need for genuinely democratic socialist change in Britain and elsewhere, will be the living testimony to a life of service to working-class people.

Pat Wall in his own words
“And if we talk about representation of Labour voters, then I will say this.
“In relation to the parliamentary Labour Party, Labour lawyers are well represented in Parliament; Labour lecturers are well represented in Parliament; Labour academics are well represented in Parliament, but Labour lorry drivers ad Labour miners and Labour health workers are very under-represented in the parliamentary Labour Party.
“If we are to build a mass Labour Party then that has got to be a party which allows mass participation and democratic control over its leaders.
“Any Labour MP or representative who represents the interests of working people, who stands at their shoulders and fights for them and who fights to change this society, has absolutely nothing to fear from the constituencies or the ranks of this movement.”
Pat Wall speaking in the historic Labour conference debate on reselection of MPs, October 1979.
(Also extract from Maiden speech in Parliament)
 



On Friday 10 August a memorial meeting in honour of Pat Wall was held in Bingley. It was dignified but extremely political, presided over by Clare Doyle of the Militant editorial board.
All 700 chairs were taken and many more people were standing. From far and wide they had come to pay tribute to Pat Wall – labour movement leaders like Arthur Scargill and Dennis Skinner MP – but also a host of rank-and-file activists and working-class people mourning the Marxist MP who struggled so tirelessly for their rights.
Terry Fields MP said: “We mourn his passing and we celebrate his life. Sleep well, comrade, in the knowledge you gave your best. No-one could give more.”
Militant editor Peter Taaffe, in a message to the meeting, stressed the example Pat had set in building links with fellow socialists during trips abroad – in Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, South Korea and elsewhere. Other messages showed that Pat is remembered around the world.
Socialists from Pakistan expressed their shock at his death and paid tribute to his fight against racism in Bradford. The Marxist Workers’ Tendency of the African National Congress concluded their message: “Go well, comrade Pat.”
On behalf of Bradford’s Asian community, Ragvir Virdee described how Pat Wall had persuaded him to join the Labour Party 20 years ago despite his doubts about the right-wing policies of the Wilson leadership: “In the presence of Pat here today, I rededicate myself to the struggle he and I began 20 years ago.”
Speeches by Ted Grant, Keith Dickinson, Dave Nellist MP, Terry Harrison (see report), Bob Cryer, Max Madden, Mick Richardson and John Ingham were moving and sad, but above all the event was a celebration of Pat’s contribution to the struggle for socialism.
Brian Ingham conducted the funeral ceremony at the crematorium.

Fighting to the end
To the end of his life Pat Wall, the victim of much persecution by the Tory media and the Labour right wing, stood firm in his defence of the labour movement against attack by the capitalist class. On 18th July, in one of his last letters, he wrote to support Arthur Scargill and Peter Heathfield in the witch-hunt that has been launched against the NUM:
“Trade unions do not need any lessons from the capitalist media…Every concession, every reform has had to be fought for and in every battle the media has always shown which class it was backing.
“The NUM has for years been looked up to as the pride of the labour movement, and there are many today who could learn lessons on how to run a trade union from the mineworkers.”
On 25th July Arthur Scargill answered:
“Thank you very much indeed for your kind letter. At a time when we are under constant media attack it is deeply appreciated.
“You can rest assured that Peter Heathfield and I will continue to fight against this appalling witch-hunt, and that we will not abandon our principles or the defence of pits, jobs and mining communities.”

(Various messages of condolences)
The funeral indicated the tremendous support Pat had in the labour movement. It was the largest funeral gathering I have witnessed and it showed the respect and love that people had for him.
I first met Pat when I joined the Labour Party Young Socialists in 1958. He made an immediate impact on me as a speaker and a teacher. He had a tremendous ability to simplify complicated ideas and he espoused a very basic sincerity and humanity.
I’m proud to describe him as one of my mentors. It was Pat who invited me to make a real commitment to the ideas of Marxism and made me realise what this meant.
Pat played a tremendous role on the editorial board of Rally, the journal of the Walton Young Socialists. Although it was duplicated, it had a national and international circulation. He wrote for it and helped build a team.
Pat had 40 years’ Labour Party membership, yet some people persisted in describing him as an infiltrator although he did every job from collector to MP.
It is an indication of the sad state of the Labour Party today that only on the death of somebody like Pat Wall is it possible to stand up and say that he lived and died as a Marxist and a supporter of Militant without facing expulsion.



 


By Terry Harrison



**************
Manchester Militants would like to express their appreciation of Pat Wall’s contribution to the struggle for socialism.
When Pat spoke in the city his speeches were a brilliant inspiration, a lucid and lively explanation of Marxism. For many of us Pat was a bridge to socialism. Too many have crossed that bridge for Thatcher to find lasting relief in the passing of this great workers’ tribune.
We will celebrate his life and honour, his sacrifice by completing the task he undertook – the creation of a socialist world.
Our sympathies go to his family and all those who were close to him.
*****************
Militant supporters in the MSF thank Pat Wall for a lifetime dedicated to socialism and the trades union movement. We offer our condolences to his family on their sad loss.
*************
May I be allowed through your pages to express my deep-felt shock and sympathy towards the relatives and friends of Pat Wall MP at his untimely death.
Pat had travelled on a number of occasions to East Lancashire from the mid-70s to help fight against the emergence of racists and fascists, right up to the mid-80s when six Militant supporters were expelled from Blackburn Labour Party.
Having spoken on the same platform and worked with Pat on a number of occasions I can only say that he was a man who epitomised in many ways my ideal of a socialist.
His commitment and knowledge, coupled with his warmth and humanity, made him a man who earned respect for himself and for the ideas he so forcefully stood for.
The labour movement internationally has lost a tremendous activist. It must be our task to step up the fight to maintain and achieve the goals that Pat’s death so cruelly robbed him of achieving in his lifetime.
With deep-felt sympathy and fraternal regards,



 


Peter Harris
on behalf of all the other expelled Militant supporters
Blackburn



**************
Pauline Wall and her family would like to extend their gratitude for all the love, warmth and help they have received over the last week, which helped to make Friday a very special day for Pat.
****************
Liverpool City Council Broad Left send deepest sympathy to Pat Wall’s wife, Pauline, and her family. The left, not only in the city but in the whole country, will miss Pat dearly for all the good work he has done.
 



After thirty years in power, the Dictatorship in Spain is coming to an end. Following the nationwide student demonstrations of last year, the strikes of miners, metal workers and other sections of the working class, large sections of the middle class and even the clergy openly voiced their opposition to the Franco state.
After two decades of economic stagnation, the Spanish economy has benefited over the last few years from the general expansion of world trade.
Eight million people have drifted from the land into industry, only 34 per cent of the population are today engaged in agriculture compared with 64 per cent in 1936. Industrial investment rose 16 per cent in 1964 and 25 per cent last year, the gross national product has increased by 15 per cent in the past two years. Foreign Capital investments by Dutch, American, German and British firms have amounted to £500 m in the two year period, altogether there has been a growth in the gross national product – in real terms – of 57.99 per cent since 1951.
The working class have benefited very little from these advances, the cost of living rose 12.7 per cent last year alone and for several years there has been a built in rise of around 10 per cent. The minimum wage in Spain is established at 7s. 6d. per day, a million workers have emigrated and millions more work 60–80 hours per week doing two jobs to make ends meet.
With an actual decline in Agriculture and the need to import large quantities of food as well as industrial products, leading to a permanent balance of trade problem, the Spanish economy rests on a very precarious foundation. Above all the enormous bureaucracy consuming vast sums of the nations resources, and acts as a fetter on the economy.
 
Opposition Growing
Four or five years ago, the opposition which has recently been shown would have been impossible: this is the measure of the disintegration which has taken place. Even in Arriba and other organs of the Falange, the only recognised political party, articles have appeared advocating changes “to find a role for legal opposition.” The rapid growth of the clandestine Trade Union movement A.S.O. and the open campaign for the right to strike testify to the regeneration of the Spanish Labour Movement. The question is not will Franco go, but how and when, and more importantly with what will the regime be replaced?
One million people died in the terrible Civil War which saw the defeat of the Spanish working class and the establishment of a fascist dictatorship. Fascism arose from the need of the landlord and capitalist class to depress even further the already appalling standard of living of the masses. Only over the bones of the workers economic and political organisations could Spanish Capitalism compete, even in a limited way with the more advanced countries.
Ironically, the economic boom of the past few years has served to undermine further the Franco regime. A large and relatively prosperous middle class has been created, who more and more feel the restrictions of the authoritarian state, while the workers economic and political struggles intensify. All the conditions for revolution exist in Spain, the divisions within the ruling clique, the social crisis, the gnawing recovery of the working class confidence. All the conditions exist except the most important, a Marxist leadership and a Marxist party.
 
Civil War
The dawn revolt of July 17th, 1936, when General Franco assumed command of the army was met with an immediate reply from the Spanish workers. Within days most of the 50 garrisons were disarmed, many by workers without arms. The three year Civil War which followed saw the open intervention of Hitler and Mussolini, the betrayal of the Leon Blum Popular Front Government in France and the cowardly actions of the T.U.C. and Labour Party leadership who for two years supported the arms embargo on the Spanish Republic. Yet it was not these factions which defeated the heroism of the Spanish workers, rather the complete incapacity of the traditional leaders of the Spanish working class to wage a revolutionary struggle for a Socialist Spain.
The Spanish Communist Party in the programme adopted last year still pursues the Popular Front policy of a coalition with the nationalist and Capitalist parties. No party in Spain has the undisputed leadership of the working class.
 
Explosion Inevitable
Any event, a retreat by the Government, the death or retirement of Franco, a particular act of brutality by the police or military, could trigger off a revolutionary explosion in Spain. The revolt would almost certainly be spontaneous, taking course similar to July 1936 when the workers seized the factories and the peasants the large estates. Lacking a Marxist leadership the very real danger of a “democratic Counter-revolution” to establish parliamentary democracy on capitalist economic foundations exists.
The overthrow of Franco will mark a decisive step forward for the European working class movements. Apart from its immediate repercussions in Portugal, its effect will enormously strengthen the development of a real left wing in Europe. The victory of the nationalist forces in the Spanish Civil War marked the culmination of a series of defeats for the working class throughout the world, resulting in the holocaust of the Second World War. Victory for the Spanish workers today would mean the beginning of the end for Capitalism.
 







Below, Militant reprints the speech made by Pat Wall, Labour Parliamentary candidate for Bradford North, in an address recently made to Labour Party workers following his formal adoption as candidate:



This election is the most serious and important since 1945, when the election of the Labour government led to the post-war reconstruction of Britain and the massive expansion of our health, education and welfare services. The problems we face today are even more serious than 1945 and in many ways worse than those experienced in the hungry ‘30s.
Merely to blame the situation on the world recession is to say that our living standards and the future hopes of our children will be decided by international finances and large multinational companies, most of whom are based outside these islands.
As a socialist, I cannot accept that it is beyond the wit and intelligence of Man to solve the problems of hunger, poverty, unemployment or the even greater problems of peace and war.
Here in Bradford North, 30,000 are unemployed; there is 50% male unemployment in some of our own housing estates.
 
Unemployment restricts lives
Yet, frightening as these figures are, they are as nothing compared with the toll of human misery that unemployment brings to our people. Mass long-term unemployment brings broken homes, battered wives, neglected children, more violence on our streets, more burglary and crime in general and for millions years of grinding poverty.
The unemployed, along with old, the sick, the disabled and single-parent families are forced to lead restricted and often isolated lives on poverty incomes which prevents them from fully participating in the economic, political, cultural and social activity of our society.
 
Socialist Planning
It is absolutely vital that the very first task of an incoming Labour government should be to launch a massive programme of public works to begin to reverse the intolerable lengthening of the dole queue. And that through socialist planning we should seek to rebuild the wealth-producing section of the British economy.
This government has cut the real level of payments to the unemployed, the sick, threatened to ‘claw-back’ from the pensioners and is considering a vicious attack on women and children by introducing ‘means testing’ into the payment of child benefit.
This government of hard-line right wingers has trebled council rents, doubled the price of gas and reduced its grants to local government, placing additional charges on already over-burdened rate payers. This government of hard-faced bigots condemned many of our black fellow citizens to second-class citizenship, divide families and threatened more deportation.
The next Labour government faces enormous tasks. Re-building a shattered economy, restoring the cuts and expanding our health, education and welfare services, abolishing nuclear weapons, opposing all forms of authoritarian dictatorship throughout the world by championing the struggles of the poor, the hungry and the oppressed.
Ninety years ago a small group of dedicated socialists, mostly Marxists, founded the Independent Labour Party in this city. A group which included such giants as Fred Jowett, Keir Hardie and Frederick Engels, all believed in a fundamental and radical socialist transformation of society.
In the main they were poor working men and women who gave their lives and what little finance they had in the struggle to better the lives of their fellow workers. Not one of them would have expected they had a divine right to any public office or position.
Socialism stands for all that is best in life, for replacing fear by hope, narrowness and meanness by generosity and compassion, poverty by plenty, exploitation by co-operation and jingoism by comradeship.
It is the rank and file of the labour movement who will win our victory, having returned myself and the majority of Labour candidates to Westminster. You must insist there is no backsliding in our socialist convictions, that we work just as hard for our people as the Tories have for the wealthy over these past four harsh years.
 



The result of the Walthamstow and Cambridge bye-elections, especially the former, are a crushing indictment of the policies of Wilson and the Labour leaders. As in the Council elections, which showed the same trends nationally, there has been mass abstentionism from voting of a section of Labour voters, who are registering their protest and disgust at the Tory policies carried out by the Government. Even those voters who voted Labour did so out of loyalty to the ideals of the Labour Movement and without enthusiasm. If the Government persists in Tory policies, the Labour Movement can only expect new ‘Walthamstow’ disasters on a national scale.
The three years of the Labour Government have been marked by a crisis in the capitalist economy. This crisis has existed since the end of the Second World War. It was intensified a deepened during the 13 years of Conservative rule. It has been marked by the economics of Stop-Go, which were so mercilessly criticised by the Labour leaders when they were in opposition.
The arguments of Wilson, Callaghan and Brown and other members of the Cabinet have been for “time” to “clear up the mess” left by the Tories. At the last Labour Party Conference Jennie Lee pleaded with the Conference “Give us another year and judge us then”. Now a new Labour Party Conference meets just after the TUC Conference which represented over 10 million organised workers. The results of that Conference demonstrate the dissatisfaction with the economic and social policies of the Government.
During the period of office of the Labour Government the rich have grown richer, the monopolies more powerful, and the difference between the classes has been heightened. Meanwhile Wilson and the other Labour leaders, basing themselves on a capitalist economy and using even harsher methods than they indicted when taken by the Conservative tools of Big Business, have achieved even more disastrous results. Britain is a country which lives by trade, yet is winning a steadily decreasing share of world trade. She had 25% of world trade in 1950. Under the Tories this dropped to 13%. But during the last three years of exhortations to increase exports it has dropped to 10%!
While the workers have been called on to make “sacrifices”, attempts have been made to bribe Big Business to modernise and streamline the economy in order to make it more competitive. Over £2 million a day has been paid as “incentives” to invest and re-invest in the economy. Machine tools, computers, even the recently launched Queen Elizabeth II liner, have received hand-outs from the State.
The terrible decline in world power of British capitalism has been disguised in the last two decades by the increase of world trade, and the further impoverishment of the so-called under-developed world, including Britain’s former colonial possessions, due to the increasing disparity between the prices of raw materials and the industrial goods which Britain produces. This is what the economists call the terms of trade.
Wilson declaimed about the lost wealth by the measures of squeeze of the Tories. According to calculations of capitalist economists (which constitute a gross underestimate) £3,500 million of potential production has been lost in the last five years, and £2,000 million of production will be lost this year alone.
The measures of restruction and the attempt to hold down the wages of the workers in order to increase profits, i.e. the unpaid labour of the working class, (while as every housewife knows the prices of necessities have been increased) have had the predictable results. These policies are Tory policies and alien to the Labour Movement. Now we have unemployment of ½ million, with young me and women going straight from school to the dole queues, and a predicted rise in unemployment to 800,000 or more by February.
All the scourges and sores of capitalism condemned by the Labour Movement for a generation are now appearing. The State has become more and more the hand-maiden of the private banks, the insurance companies and the 380 monopolies which dominate the economy. 1/5 of the people do not even receive a subsistence wage. Taxes have been imposed on the working class as consumers to the extent of £2,500 million. The promise of increased production to pay for more and better schools, houses, hospitals and roads, has turned out to be completely empty. Some reforms, paid out of the pockets of workers have been carried out – like the increase in old age pensions, family allowances, abolition of prescription charges and so on. But this has been countered by a rise in rents, increase in the price of school meals and rises in the price of foods and other necessities.
Meanwhile in the last three years productivity of labour has increased by 11%! The workers have not received the benefits of this increase. The capitalists are demanding still more measures in the interests of profits. Yet all the measures have merely resulted in a decrease in investment of over 3% this year in comparison with last year and 8% last year in comparison with the previous one. As Wilson trenchantly declared at milder measures by his Tory predecessors, this is “the economics of bedlam.” The same “medicine”, the same “sedatives” only in bigger doses, has led the Labour Movement to the edge of catastrophe.
After the “defence of the £” (in reality the defence of the interests of the City of London) has in practice failed, there is more and more talk in the papers of Big Business of the possibility of “devaluation.” The Times in an editorial has demanded that the Government and the “political parties” come to terms with realities. It is no longer a question of “options” but nationally and internationally coming to terms with the realities of the decline in the position of British capitalism.
There is a concerted demand for a cut in State expenditure. Meanwhile the “ceiling” of arms expenditure has been burst open and now stands at £2,200 million per annum. The State accounts for some 70% of the expenditure on scientific research, the results of which the industrialists get free of charge. The nationalised industries and the State account for 45% of capital investment, the benefits of which also accrue to the private sector. At the T.U.C. Conference it was pointed out by a Right Wing trade union leader that 1% of the population own 80% of the shares of industry! All that the workers own is their share of the national debt which is reaching astronomical figures, and which takes a large cut of the national cake in interest charges.
Tory policies whether undertaken by Tory or Labour leaders are bound to have the same results. While sneering at the growth rate under the Tories of 2½%, Britain’s growth rate last year was 1½%. It seems as if it will not even reach that this year.
What is left of the “plan” for 4% increase in production per year, which was going to lead to higher standards of living and big increases in the social services and the “welfare state”? At the beginning of this month, William Davies, the financial editor of the Guardian, wrote:
“To most Socialists it must seem odd that, under a Labour Government share prices have climbed to a peak for the year at a time when unemployment has reached an ‘unacceptable’ level. TUC leaders must find it strange, too, that fat capital gains are apparently being made while Mr. Wilson continues to urge wage restraint.”
Compare this with the official figure of 345,000 families living below the official poverty payments of the Ministry of Social Security. A million children are involved. In 1966 there were a million incomes in excess of £2,000 before tax, 7¾ million on the £1,000 to £2,000, 9½ million between £500 and £1,000. 9¼ million earned the incredibly low figure of less than £500 or less than £10 per week.
No wonder the business of the pawnbrokers has increased greatly during the last year. So many families cannot make ends meet, that week by week, especially in the depressed areas they are being compelled to visit “uncle” and pawn their wedding rings and other valuables.
The Tories have no solution. Demagogically they attack the measures of the Labour Government promoted by themselves. But nearly all Western Europe is affected by the slow-down in production. W. Germany also expects an unemployment figure of 800,000 by February of next year. The “English sickness” is beginning to spread. Entry into the Common Market will not solve the problems of British capitalism. This seems to be ruled out by the policy of French capitalism, and entry 1970 to 1972 at best would be too late even to ameliorate the chronic crisis which besets British capitalism.
Under these conditions drastic remedies are needed. The Left of the Labour Party and the TUC have in part adopted the policy advocated by Wilson and the Right Wing before they came to power. Devaluation, says Clive Jenkins, instead of wage restraint. But devaluation is only an indirect means of cutting real wages, as, other things being equal, it leads to a rise in prices – especially of food, which is important – while wages remain devalued. Selective import-controls and quotas are advocated by Tribune. It is remarkable that in sheer desperation sections of the capitalist class, as revealed by the opinions of the Economist and the Financial Times are advocating just such measures. They were never exponents of policies in the interests of the workers! In any case such policies are self-defeating. Devaluation would be followed by devaluation of other currencies: selective import quotas would provoke reprisals of Britain’s capitalist competitors (“trading partners”). Inflation or deflation are but two sides of the same coin.
The prices and incomes policy was introduced as a “lesser evil” than mass unemployment according to the Labour leaders. Now the workers have the scourge of both. Hence the revolt at the TUC and its inevitable reflection at the Party Conference.
The TUC have passed a resolution in favour of a £15 a week minimum wage. Those who are working should at least receive full maintenance for themselves and their families. The TUC once again passed a resolution for equal pay for women! But unless a campaign is taken up by the Constituency Parties and the trade union branches these can remain only paper resolutions.
That great “progressive”, the Chairman of the Confederation of British Industries has called for an abolition on the restraints on the rights of women. Not equal pay of course, but the laws restricting night work and heavy manual labours should be dropped. No wonder considering the extra profits reaped from the low-paid wages of women doing the same work as men. It is with this CBI that the Government collaborates on friendly terms.
The Regional plans for Scotland, Wales and the North-East lies in ruins. They have gone the same way as the paper national plan. The railwaymen, the miners, the dockers, the shipbuilding workers, and other declining industries bear the brunt of the decline of these “old” industries.
There is not an atom of Socialism in the policies of the Labour leaders. They have now suggested a new gift to the capitalists. The Government is introducing an “Enabling Act” for State Investment in companies which require modernisation, taking compulsory shareholdings in private companies. After great hesitation the governing council of the C.B.I. has rejected the proposal. They have looked hard at this gift horse in the mouth. They are afraid of the implications which the workers will draw from this. The Government must stay out of productive industry, i.e. the 9/10 of industry which is making the profits. The workers might begin to demand the nationalisation of these industries and firms! Tory policies have driven the middle class and the politically backward workers who vote Tory and Liberal to a reinforcement of their prejudices and kow-towing to the rich and successful, to capitalist parties. It has reinforced their view that “Socialism won’t work” and their general cynicism with politics and politicians.
They can only be won with deeds, and deeds mean drastic Socialist measures: an Enabling Act to nationalise the biggest 380 monopolies, the private banks and the insurance companies, with compensation on the basis of need and with selective means tests only for the 1% of the population who own the means of producing wealth. Their system does not work or only works at the expense of the millions.
Yet there are inexhaustible stores of wealth-producing resources in Britain: (i.e.) science, technique and a skilled and education working class. Take over the above and work out the entire resources of Britain to produce wealth, and hours of work could be reduced and standards of living increased by 50% or more. Production geared to a plan in which the trade unions and all sections of population would participate on a democratic Socialist basis: housewives, consumers, businessmen, as well as first and foremost, the shopstewards and workers, would bring overwhelming support from the middle classes and white collar workers, as well as the industrial workers.
There is the road which leads to new Walthamstows, the road of present policies, the road of a new 1931 for the Labour Movement. There is the road of Socialist policies, beginning with £15 minimum and equal pay and the taking over of monopoly capital. The problem of Europe and the world can only be understood in this context. Socialism is international or it is nothing. A democratic Socialist Britain with a planned production, could appeal to the workers of Europe, having set up the example of planned production, for a democratic Socialist Federation of Europe to plan production internationally in the interests of all.
 




The Bradford Trades Council stands opposed to the acceptance of
any redundancies in the Bradford District. All three of the major
sources of employment are now in decline. The wool industry has
suffered a long period of contraction, the Tory controlled District
Council has run down the labour force by a policy of demanning and
now the sharpest decline is in manufacturing, the supposed salvation
for this declining area.
If we allow the closure of Thorns and other threatened
redundancies to take place, one third of engineering jobs in Bradford
will have been lost in the short space of twelve months. Bradford, at
the mid-point of the M62, could soon become an industrial desert, a
process already far advanced on Humberside and Merseyside at either
end of the motorway.
The first priority is to stand firm against the threatened
closures and redundancies and to mobilise the whole labour movement
to this end. The movement also needs to work out a fighting programme
to deal with this whole question of unemployment. At the April
meeting this Thursday, and probably at a special labour movement
conference in a few weeks time, the Bradford Trades Council will seek
to give such a lead.
 




Heavily burdened by the crushing weight of inflation, unemployment, trade deficit and low investment, the giant American economy is trying to stagger to its feet like a weightlifter who has grown too old and too fat.
Millions are idle, while only 83% of industrial capacity is made use of. High prices imprison millions more in poverty, while acres of wheatland are deliberately left fallow.
Such is the huge influence of this, the leading industrial nation, on the world economy, that the leaders of the world’s ailing capitalist economies like Britain intently scour her progress in desperate hope of a general revival of trade. In the coming years of bitter class battles the eyes of the world’s workers will look to the mighty American working class to deliver its own body blows to international capitalism.
The USA’s emergence as the dominant world economy during the early years of this century marked the end, not only of the privileged position of British capitalism in the world markets, but also the privileged status of a certain layer of British workers as compared with those of other countries. Together with the effects of the capitalist cycle of booms and slumps the reduced capacity of the British ruling class to give concessions to the organised workers as a means of avoiding direct conflict led to a marked radicalisation of the labour movement.
The links between the trade union leaders and the Liberal Party were cut and replaced by an independent workers’ party. A series of explosive strikes prior to the First World War and semi-revolutionary strikes from 1918 to 1921 showed the changed temper of the workers.
Today the USA remains the dominant world power, with a continental economy and an enormous home market. Yet this very predominance has led to a sapping of the strength of America. By taking over the role of the world’s policeman from senile British Imperialism the US economy has poured valuable resources down the drain in wasteful arms production for the Vietnam debacle and other increasingly costly military aid. Their replacement by paper dollars poured petrol on the fires of world inflation.
This and the end of the prolonged post-war boom and the return to a more accentuated “pre-war” economic cycle marks the end of the relatively privileged standards enjoyed by large sections of the US workforce. During the past seven years the standards of American workers have not risen; on the contrary, they have fallen. Stormy industrial battles loom increasingly near for organised labour.
 
Dollar Falls
Since last Autumn, the US economy has shown a marked upswing, following two years of depression. This year estimates of the growth of the economy have been revised upwards to 6.9% and corporate (pre-tax) profits are expect to grow by $160 billion.
The labour force has increased by 1½m in the last six months, mainly through women and teenagers taking jobs. But this has been predominantly in the service sector, while employment in productive industry has stagnated or declined. This is reflected in the continued rise in unemployment, which jumped from 6.9% to 7.1% in June. A permanent pool of at least 5m unemployed is now a fact of capitalist life in America.
The economic upswing is based on shaky foundations. While factory output has increased by 10% over the past year, productive capacity has only grown by 2.4% according to Federal estimates. The decline of the dollar means higher import prices and a further increase in the rate of inflation.
During the recent run on the currency, the dollar declined by 9.3% against the yen and 2.7% against the Mark. Behind this weakening is the massive trade deficit, now projected at $25 billion for 1977. With its economy growing faster than Japan or the EEC, the US has been sucking in imports at record rates.
The strategy of the Carter administration is partly to force its major competitors, West Germany and Japan, either to convert their trade balances into deficits, or to revalue their currencies upwards against the Dollar. The latter could gain export markets for the US at the expense of avoiding the necessity for cutting back on oil imports. While OPEC oil bills continue to be settled in US Dollars this would in effect mean Germany and Japan subsidising the US energy bill.
Contrary to the cosy harmony exuded at the seven-power “economic” summit held in London earlier in the year, the major powers continue to carry out policies in their own national interest.
The attitude of European bankers was reflected by a German official who remarked: “If the US continues feeding Dollars into the world economy, then we shall have more world inflation and more currency revaluations.” From the other side of the Atlantic, an American economist wryly remarked: “I cannot see the Germans and Japanese revaluing by so much that we can go on wasting energy.”
All the signs are that the mini-boom is slowing down and that 1978 will see a return to recession, rising inflation and a growing world trade war.
 
Carter Administration
The election of Jimmy Carter as President was due to a coalition of organised labour, the blacks and sections of the white collar workers and intellectuals. His victory raised the expectations of these groups; but Carter has already abandoned the vague electioneering promises, of cutting unemployment , increasing public works and tax credits for the lower paid.
More than anyone, the leaders of the AFL/CIO trade union federation, led by the ageing George Meany, had illusions in a Carter administration. Having delivered the votes, Meany presented Congress with a list of modest reforms, only to find Carter less amenable than Nixon.
The minimum wage has been fixed well below trade union demands of $3 an hour and, indeed, for the average family, below the poverty line. The Situs Picketing Bill, established picketing rights of construction sites, was defeated and now the AFL/CIO has dropped demands for the repeal of section 14B of the notorious Taft-Hartley Act.
Section 14B is the legislative cover for the “right-to-work” laws which operate in some twenty states. “Right-to-work” in this context means “right to scab”: 14B forbids union closed shops in those states with “right-to-work” laws. What is the reaction of the trade union leadership? Will they really launch a mass recruiting drive in the Southern states, something that has been threatened for two decades or more? Will they mobilise the enormous strength of American labour in the key industries to smash 14B? Will they defy, as the miners have done, the numerous court injunctions designed to prevent or delay union shops and union agreements? Will they explain to millions of American workers that the Democrats, as much as the Republicans, are a party of big business?
No! The policy of the AFL/CIO leaders, despite the enormous potential power of American labour, is to water down their modest proposals and continue the lobbying of the same politicians who have just spat in their faces. The policy of the trade union leadership can be summed up in the following: “Let labour get more write-ins [to Congressmen] than big business.”
The dependence on the good will of the “Democrat” party of big business over the years, in place of relying on the strength of their own forces, has weakened the unions. Legislation which gave certain advantages to the unions, like the 1935 Wagner Act, have had reduced effect “because the employers have consciously, intentionally and habitually broken the law.” (The Times, 8.9.77). Carter’s answer to the unions is more legislation, but in discussions over this the unions had to make so many compromises that even Meany complains “The President’s Bill would not change in the slightest the rules governing established labour-management relations. Indeed, it does not change the general rules stating what unions and employers may do at all.”
But the union leaders cannot now guarantee sufficient support from the Democrat Party even for modest concessions. Whereas their lobby could once count on the support of at least 200 Congressmen for their mild pleas, this has dwindled to 130–140, and a majority vote is 218.
As the economic crisis makes the conflict of interests between labour and capital more apparent, the capitalist politicians are coming under greater pressure from big business to toe the line in Congress. Well-financed right-wing lobby organisations are being formed to lobby against pro-union legislation. More and more will we see the public representatives of capital dropping their ‘labour’ mask to reveal their real interests openly.
Already reforms are giving way to counter-reforms. People depending on public welfare are to be denied the right to certain operations on the ‘Medicare’ scheme. The unemployed are to be put to work on pitifully low wages below union rates to pay off their welfare benefits – reminiscent of reactionary ‘poor law’ legislation in Britain 150 years ago! This must have an effect on the rank and file of the unions. Seeing the spectacle of their leaders crawling to the Democrats only to be kicked in the face, the workers will turn their backs and look for a new political voice.
 
The Unions
Until recently, the majority of American workers, especially the skilled sections, have enjoyed fabulously high living standards compared to the rest of the world. As long as the boom lasted, and “free enterprise” delivered the goods, the outlook of the workers was dominated by capitalist thinking. The ruling class, through the powerful mass media at its disposal, skilfully directed its propaganda at the totalitarian nature of the Stalinist states of Russia and Eastern Europe, equating communism and socialism with the one-party state and this denial of basic human and democratic rights. Meanwhile, the leaders of the trade unions behaved like big business executives, and enjoyed the same life-styles. They clung on to the coat-tails of the Democratic Party.
The results of this complacency and class collaboration are plain to see. While union membership, power and influence has increased in almost every advanced capitalist country, in the USA trade union membership has actually declined, from the low figure of 33% in the early post-war years to less than 22% of the workforce today. In the South, under 10% of the workforce are unionised, providing a paradise of cheap labour for employers fleeing from the closed shops of the North.
As Marx said, “conditions determine consciousness”; so it is no accident that “free enterprise” ideology should have reached its highest point in the USA. The CIO (Congress of Industrial Organisations) abandoned its pre-war crusading policies to follow the AFL (American Federation of Labor) into “business unionism”. This process may have been more marked in the USA, but the degeneration of the AFL/CIO was paralleled by a similar process as far as organised unionism, social democracy and Stalinism were concerned throughout the advanced capitalist countries.
Only a Marxist leadership, firmly rooted in the mass organisations, linking the day to day struggles of the workers with perspectives for changing society, could have acted as an antidote to this disease. Until such a leadership is established, the workers of America and the world will continue to pay the price in sacrifice, struggle and hardship.
Just as in Europe, the harsh realities of capitalist decline are having a profound effect on the American workers. Large numbers of strikes have already broken out and major conflicts impend for miners, railway and steel workers.
The movement of the class from below is reflected in changes in the top leadership of the trade unions. Following the dramatic defeat of the old Boyle leadership of the United Mineworkers’ union in 1974, came the campaign of Ed Sadlowski to wrest the leadership of the Steelworkers from I.W. Abel.
Raising class demands, while campaigning for union democracy and the ending of the “no-strike” clause, Sadlowski was narrowly defeated in last year’s elections for the President of the 1.3 million Steelworks. Sadlowski in fact won a majority among steel workers, but lost through the votes of ancillary groups. The election of many of his supporters to key local positions in the UWSA provides Sadlowski with a firmer basis for the 1979 elections. Already, “Steelworkers Fight Back” committees have been formed throughout the industry. The days of the Abel leadership are numbered.
Similar processes can be seen in many of the smaller unions, and a similar reform movement is developing in America’s largest, most corrupt, most gangster-ridden union, the Teamsters. This movement from below, reflected dramatically in changes in the top leadership, marks a growing awareness among the rank and file of the need to transform the unions into fighting organisations on behalf of the class.
The election of Miller or even Sadlowski will only mark a stage in this process of transforming the labour movement, just as the emergence of Jones, Daly, Scanlon and Basnett was only a stage in the movement of the British workers to the left. In the fight for a socialist society the workers will have to transform and re-transform their organisations until they become suitable vehicles for the transformation of society.
American big business can no longer afford concessions to the working people except of the most temporary and fleeting nature. Far from “new deal” Keynesian economics, Carter is attempting to balance the budget by 1979. This is a programme of welfare and education cuts, of increasing resistance to wage increases and higher unemployment.
Already local government workers, including teachers, have been forced into struggle as cuts in local and national government expenditure take effect. This section of workers has suffered a whole series of defeats. During the Heath government the same process took place in Britain with defeat for the postmen and partial defeats for health workers, dustmen and other council workers. However, when the “big battalions” of labour moved into action, railway workers, dockers and miners, we saw an entirely opposite process, culminating in the defeat of the Tory government by only 250,000 miners.
Tomorrow the most organised sections of US labour, led by the miners, will be forced to defend their living standards. Titanic clashes face American trade unions in the coming months and years, which will give new life to the struggle of America’s oppressed minorities and will unleash a tremendous campaign of union organisation, particularly in the Southern states.
The cosy relationship of negotiation and compromise with the Democrats has turned the union leaders into election agents of liberal capitalist politicians. Yet even the election “achievements” the unions have made indicate the widespread influence they could have, given a direct political appeal to the working class for their own party.
In the last election, “A highly elaborate political organisation reached out to more than 12 million voters on computer records and the union claim a large measure of success in persuading their members to turn out and support their candidate.” (The Times, 8.9.77) In the state of Illinois alone “the unions’ vote-getting machine is a million dollar a year operation… Illinois trade unionists turn out in larger numbers than non-unionists and 90% of them vote the union way.”
Thus, the American trade union movement already possess far more funds, machinery and experience for political campaigns than their British equivalents had just prior to the foundation of the British Labour Party by the TUC in 1900. It was only after a whole series of militant strikes by the most downtrodden labourers – dockers, gas workers, etc. – which drew fresh millions of desperately impoverished men and women into the ‘New Unions’, that the ‘aristocracy of labour’ with its narrow craft outlook and craft consciousness was swamped and the conservative ‘respectable’ leaders of those unions who preached class collaboration with the Liberal Party were overruled.
These bureaucratic leaders had held back the emergence of labour as an independent political force for years, but when the capitalist state bared its fangs against union activity and the rank and file pushed the TUC into creating a political arm of the movement, this developed rapidly, leading to the demise of the Liberals. The Liberal Party won a landslide victory in Parliament in 1911, but with the rise of the Labour Party it was reduced to a small rump in 1918, its support being polarised behind the two parties representing the two great classes in industrial society.
The tempo will be even faster in America. The meteoric rise of industrial unions in the 1930s demonstrates this. Had the process not been cut across by the Second World War the movement of the workers would have been impelled towards the formation of a Labour Party.
Now, after three decades of economic upswing on an unprecedented scale, the wheel has turned full circle and a powerful, confident working class stands poised before social battles that will put the heroic struggles of the 1930s into the shade. It is in the fire of these battles that the illusions held by many in ‘free enterprise’ will be destroyed and the militants of a Labour Party will grasp the need for a socialist programme as the only alternative it can offer to the voracious waste, corruption and violence of capitalism.
 




New Orleans, Louisiana, 17th July – Last month I attended a social, a fairly typical social. The teenagers and the record player occupied the garage; neighbours, family and friends conversed, ate and drank; TV addicts captured the settee to watch a satire shows and small children ran in and out of the house.
736 Mockingbird Lane, Destrehan, is a pleasant suburban house on a new estate close to the levees which protect against the floodwaters of the Mississippi river. Apart from the temperature, still in the 80s in late evening, the garden marks the only difference from what one would find in the West Riding. Backing on to almost limitless semi-swamp land it allows the keeping of poultry, a goat and a pig.
Another small difference: every time a beer or a coke is taken from the ice box, or a hamburger from the stove, a small sum of money is deposited in a tin in the kitchen cupboard. It is from this simple act, not unknown to ‘Militant’ fund raisers, that you’d realise that this was not so typical a social, nor is this so ordinary a family. For over two years Gary Tyler has been incarcerated in prison, some of it on death row and much of it in the notorious Angola State Penitentiary.
Gary Tyler is innocent – yet another victim in the long line of racialist frame-ups. Every cent in the cupboard goes to the ‘Gary Tyler Defence Fund’, organised full time by his mother.
Until October 7th, 1974, Gary Tyler was a student at Destrehan High School in St Charles Parish (County) Louisiana. Since 1968, white racialist opposition to school desegregation in the parish had often turned to violence. On this particular day a brick-throwing mob of white youths and adults surrounded the black students’ bus as it left school.
Gary Tyler was on that bus. The students saw a white man in the mob with a shotgun and ducked under the seats for cover. A shot rang out and Timothy Weber, a 13 year old white student near the bus, fell dead.
The police searched the bus and its occupants twice for three hours without finding any gun. The black students were forced to lie on the ground while being searched. During the second search at the police station, female students were forced to strip and several male students were beaten. No-one from the white mob was arrested or even searched.
Gary Tyler protested against police harassment of his cousin and for this he was arrested for disturbing the peace. Gary was severely beaten, the police attempting to force him to say that he had seen who fired the shot. One of the deputies who beat him was V.J. St Pierre, a cousin of the dead youth. Gary was later charged with first-degree murder.
 
The Evidence
Only one witness said she saw Gary Tyler fire a gun: Natalie Blanks, one of the 65 students on the bus. She later admitted she had lied under police pressure.
The so-called murder weapon which could not be found in two searches covering three hours was suddenly discovered at a later time when the bus was empty. Surprise, surprise, the point-45 which the police claimed killed young Timothy Weber had disappeared from a firing range used by the police! No fingerpints were found on the gun. Bus driver Earnest Cojoe, a 25 year veteran of the US Marines, testified no-one could have fired a point-45 within the bus as the sound would have been deafening. All witnesses agreed that the shot sounded no louder than a fire-cracker.
 
The Sentence
Gary Tyler’s original attorney, Jack Williams, failed to ask the judge to move the trail out of St Charles Parish, despite an atmosphere of racialist hysteria. A Klu Klux Klan Rally was held at Destrehan High School the day after Gary’s arrest. Klan leader, David Duke, flew into Destrehan from Boston where he had been involved in racialist opposition to bussing.
Williams made no attempt to oppose the selection of an all-white jury. Mrs Tyler was subpoenaed as a defence witness, but never called by Williams, thus giving Judge Marino an excuse to exclude her from the courtroom during her son’s trial. After deliberating for only two hours the all white jury found Gary guilty of first degree murder. Judge Martino handed down the mandatory death sentence and sent Gary Tyler to Death Row.
 
The Appeal
Not surprisingly Mrs Tyler retained a new lawyer, Jack Peebles, to defend her son. In April 1976 star witness Natalie Blanks testified at a hearing for a new trial that police and prosecutors had forced her to lie at the trial, and that she had not seen anyone fire a gun. Natalie Blanks and another witness, Loretta Thomas, told the court that the police had threatened to charge them as accessories to murder unless they testified against Gary.
Natalie Blanks’ lawyer, Sylvia Taylor, testified at the same hearing that Judge Marino and Prosecutors L.J. Hymel and Norman Pitre had granted Natalie immunity in exchange for her trial testimony. In spite of this overwhelming new evidence of Gary Tyler’s innocence, Judge Marino denied the motion for a new trial.
 
Supreme Court
In July 1976 the US Supreme Court abolished Louisiana’s Death Penalty (although upholding it elsewhere). This set aside Gary’s death sentence. On November 10th, 1976, Gary’s appeal to the Louisiana State Supreme Court was denied. The State showed its determination to uphold the conviction by employing six Assistant Attorney Generals to prepare the brief to deny a new trial.
Not only was a new trial denied, but the Louisiana Supreme Court invented a new penalty for Gary: life imprisonment without possibility of parole for 20 years. Yet when Gary was convicted no law existed which could sentence a juvenile to life imprisonment.
On this basis his lawyer Peebles petitioned the US Supreme Court for a new trail. On May 16th this year they refused to hear the case. No reason was given.
 
The Harassment
The Tyler family and other supporters of Gary have been harassed by police and white racialists. On March 27th, 1976, white night riders shot and killed Richard Dunn, a young black man returning from a fund raising dance at Southern University in New Orleans. Klu Klux Klan members dressed in robes have driven through the Tyler’s community and followed members of the Tyler family.
Terry Tyler, only 16, and key defence witness Donald Files, were both arrested on the charge of burglary. Yet on the night in question, May 16th, Terry was addressing a meeting on behalf of his brother in Detroit! Bond was set by Judge Marino at $5,000 each. In June Marino held yet another brother, Steven, on $2,700 on a phoney charge of disturbing the peace. In January of this year police invaded and searched the Tyler household at gun point.
 
The Fight
The fight goes on to secure justice for Gary Tyler goes on. His lawyer has filed a writ of habeas corpus in the Louisiana court system demanding a fair trial. Gary Tyler fights on. In a recent interview with the American socialist press he said:
“Tell the people, no matter what, keep the faith. I am determined to fight, not only for my own case. My case is not unique. I’m depending on the people and only them, not the court system. The only way for me to be freed is by the people. They are my liberators.”
Mrs Tyler and her family are 100% with Gary. She told the court:
“We are with what Gary wants and Gary is determined to see it through and we are with him all the way.”
 
Our Fight
In a week when it was finally admitted that the famous socialists Sacco and Vanzetti, framed and executed on a murder charge by the police in the 1920s, were innocent, the fight to free Gary Tyler is our fight. Mrs Tyler is most anxious to receive support from abroad. With her, I appeal for resolutions demanding Gary’s release from all sections of the labour movement.
Letters of protest should be sent to Governor Edwin Edwards, State Capitol, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA. Copies of any such protests and donations should be sent to Gary Tyler Defence Fund, PO Box 52223, New Orleans, Louisiana 70152, USA. Messages of solidarity can also be sent direct to Gary Tyler, 84156, Angola State Penitentiary, Angola, Louisiana, 70712, USA.
 




July the 17th marked the first anniversary of the strike by a hundred and sixty coal miners at the Stearns mine in Eastern Kentucky.
Eclipsing even the events of the Grunwick picket line, the owners have hired fifteen gunmen – “goons” to the strikers – who, since March this year, have fired nightly at miners’ pickets and their shack. The gun-men supplied by the “Storm Security Agency” are entrenched in a fortified compound and come and go by helicopter. Shots have been returned at the gun-men, probably by outraged citizens of McCreery County who support the miners.
Two pickets and three “goons” have been wounded. Thirty-two miners, including Lee Potter, the UWMA organiser, face frame-up trials connected with the wounding of the gun-men. Just as the Grunwick dispute has far-reaching consequences for unorganised, or weakly organised workers, the Stearns strike is a pointer to the future as far as American workers, and particularly miners, are concerned.
 
No Contract No Coal
The strike stems from the refusal of Blue Diamond Coal, which operates the Justus mines in Stearns, to sign a contract with the United Mine Workers of America (UWMA), because it provides for a union safety committee. Blue Diamond also operate the Scotia mine in South Eastern Kentucky, where explosions killed twenty-three miners and three mine inspectors in March, 1976.
The explosion at the Scotia mine and the recent explosion at the PMT mine at St Charles, Virginia, which killed four miners, were apparently caused by the build-up of odourless methane gas. Stearns miners claim that gas monitors, which are a legal requirement, and which should automatically shut off equipment if a dangerous gas level is detected, are so fixed that machinery continues to operate no matter what the gas level.
The New York Times quotes Mine Superintendent Caffey as admitting that this was a “violation, but not a reason to shut down the mine.” No wonder Stearns pickets use the slogan: “Mine coal safely – or not at all.”
 
Attempt to Smash Union
The Kearns strike is only a foretaste of the battle which faces the UMWA. The mineowners, with the backing of big business and the Carter administration, are determined to end national collective bargaining in the coal industry.
The UMWA contract with the coal operators runs out in December and a national coal strike could break out any time between now and the end of the year.
Arnold Miller, Miners’ President, is already attempting to open the contract for renegotiation, mainly on the issue of financing the miners’ health and pension funds, as benefits have been severely cut in recent weeks. In refusing to re-open negotiations Joseph P Brennan, President of the Bituminous Coal Operators Association, the owners labour relations arm, declared: “It is a question of condoning wildcat strikes and fooling around with the pension funds, and we are not going to do either.”
Strikes have escalated during the past two years, in the face of the refusal of the coal operators to honour the terms of the three-year contract signed in 1974, especially over working conditions and safety procedures.
In 1976, the owners claim that strikes cost the industry 1.9 million man days and 20 million tons of coal. If anything, the strike tempo has increased this year. Faced with the miners’ militancy, the employers are preparing for a show down. With the end of the old dictatorial John L. Lewis/Boyle era of union leadership, the owners feel that the UMWA can no longer deliver the goods, even with a “no strike” clause in the contract.
The owners are determined to take a hard line. One labour relations vice-president is quoted as saying:
“We’re not going to stand there and offer 50 cents an hour and get nothing back … What we’ve gotten from the 1974 agreement, which was the best on record,” he complained, “was surging wildcats. This year we want quid pro quo.”
Some form of national contract is still possible. To the surprise of many observers, the Aluminium Corporation signed a new agreement with the trades unions at a higher level than expected (but below the inflation rate). This and the earlier national steel contract, could be a sign that the employers view of the miners as the Achille’s heel of organised labour and that the new contracts are also seen as a means of isolating the miners from potential support.
 
Owners’ Strategy
The sober fact is that only 52% of coal is mined under UMWA contracts. UMWA funds are in a chaotic situation and could not sustain strike benefits for a prolonged period. The union lacks staff at both local and national level. The Miller leadership dismantled the “Miners for Democracy” staff it had assembled during the successful 1972 election campaign, instead of integrating them into the union structure. Nor have the rapidly developing safety committees and the stewards been given prominence in the official machinery.
The coal operators therefore see an opportunity first to undermine and then to destroy the UMWA. They are preparing for a prolonged national strike to bleed dry the funds of the union. They plan to supply coal from non-union mines and from the strip of mines of the West. They will undoubtedly be backed by the oil and steel barons who have considerable investments in the coal industry, by the banks, the courts and the Carter administration.
The Carter energy plan calls for the nation’s utilities and industries to double the amount of coal they use by 1985. A market for an extra 380 million tons of coal opens up a vista of profits bonanza for the owners, as well as reducing US dependence on imported oil. At a recent meeting of the National Coal Association in Washington, Federal Energy Administrator John O’Leary promised sympathetic action with regard to pollution control and safety procedures.
When the chips are down, the miners will find no allies in the White House, or among the “Friends of Labour” in a Congress dominated by the Democrats.
If the coal operators are successful in isolating the miners, they will offer local settlements based on a single mine, or company. These would be conditional on a no-strike clause, job speed-ups and an end to union safety committees. For the UMWA, it is not just a battle for a new contract, but a battle for survival.
 
Fighting Spirit
While the odds would appear to favour the owners, the outcome of a national coal strike is far from certain. Despite the apparent national unity of the operators, differences of opinion undoubtedly remain behind the scenes. History shows many examples of retreat and division among the owners when faced by the fighting spirit of the miners.
Over the past decade the owners have tried by every possible means to hold back the miners. They based themselves on the old corrupt Boyle leadership. Then they courted the new Miller leadership and the 1974 contract, with its elaborate and time-wasting grievance procedures, and the miners answered with massive strikes. The bosses relied on the courts with fines and back-to-work injunctions, but the miners defied the courts and won.
In July, 1976, the Cedar Coal Company in West Virginia provoked a strike by miners who were insisting that the rules set down in the 1974 contract should be carried out by the owners. After following the lengthy grievance procedures, the dispute went before an arbitrator. So flagrant were the company’s violations of the rules, that the arbitrator found in favour of the miners, not a common occurrence.
The owners refused to abide by this decision, so the miners then sought enforcement through the Federal Court, but this was refused. Having no other option, the miners came out on strike. The employers then went to court and a judge ordered a return to work, fined the union and even threatened to jail 200 miners. Over 100,000 miners stopped work in sympathetic action, ignoring completely the court injunctions, fines and threats of imprisonment.
The union leadership ordered a return to work. This in turn was ignored and the strike continued for a month. Only when the judges had dropped all injunctions and fines did the miners call off the strike.
 
Union Democracy
For decades the miners were ruled by the dictatorial regime of John L. Lewis, followed later by Tony Boyle. In 1972, the reform movement, “Miners for Democracy”, defeated the old leadership. Arnold Miller was elected President, Harry Patrick Secretary/Treasurer and Mike Trbovich Vice President.
This led to major democratic changes in the union. Elections for local and district office were held, in some districts for the first time in living memory. Miners now have the right to vote on union contracts, the UMWA Journal was opened to rank and file miners, free debate was allowed at UMWA conventions, where opposition militants had previously been beaten up by Boyle “goons”.
In spite of the increasing volume of “non-union” coal being mined, union membership doubled to 180,000 over the past ten years. In 1964 the average age of coal miners was 48, today it is 34. Today the UMWA membership is bigger, younger and more militant than ever before.
Recent union elections, however, show that the rank and file still lack confidence in the deeply divided union leadership. Arnold Miller was re-elected President, with Lee Roy Patterson, favourite of the employers and a Boyle henchman, running second. Harry Patrick, the UMWA Secretary/Treasurer and previously a colleague of Miller in the 1972 campaign, came third. The fact that Miller and Patrick between them secured twice the votes of Patterson shows the miners have no desires to return to the “old regime”. On the other hand, the division between former allies Miller and Patrick, and the election of the President by a minority vote, reflect the failure of the reform movement to purge the old elements and build a fighting leadership.
In the coming struggle, the ability of the miners to create a leadership at local level will be a vital factor. As in Britain, miners have a fund of sympathy among working people, but in and of itself that is not enough. Links will need to be forged with power, steel, aluminium and other industrial workers, to secure the effective blacking of non-union coal.
An immediate appeal for funds is also essential. Faced with the certain intimidation of company “goons”, police, state troopers and the courts, maximum support from other workers in the mining areas must be obtained.
Above all, the miners need a fighting programme to secure maximum unity and to win over the non-union mines: For a $100 a day minimum, union safety committees in all mines, increased sickness and pension funds guaranteed by the owners, the right to strike at local level, a ballot of all miners before any contract is signed.
The miners will need to raise the demand for the nationalisation of the mining industry. But that will remain a pipe dream while American labour relies on the Democratic Party. More than ever, American workers require a Labour Party, independent of the employers, independent of Democratic or Republican politicians, and firmly based on the organised trade union movement.
American workers face a series of stormy battles over the coming months and years. In the course of these struggles the demand for an independent party of labour will grow. Notwithstanding the urgency and importance of the challenge facing American miners, the issue of a Labour Party transcends all other issues for the American workers.
 



Yorkshire area miners’ President Arthur Scargill, speaking at the annual dinner of the Bingley local Labour Party on Friday, 11 January, denounced the idea that the miners were a special case.
The idea had been put forward that the miners were a special case who should be allowed to go through Phase Three while all other workers should be confined to the Government’s limits.
After detailing the tremendous increase in retail prices, particularly of food and the one pound increase in rents over the past year, Brother Scargill stated that he considered the working class as a whole as a special case, and that in order to defend living standards it was necessary for all groups of workers to defeat Phase Three.
The average wage paid to miners, as proved by the holiday pay-out figures, was £28 per week, the NUM figures for present pay are as follows:



Surface workers


 


£25.29




Underground/day wage


£27.29




Coal Face


£36.79



The Coal Board’s offer was in fact 10½% and not 14% or 16% as various Tory Ministers and MPs had claimed. The offer consisted of £45 million, i.e. £35 million as a straight 7% and £15 million for the 3½% claimed for shift working and anti-social hours.
Brother Scargill dealt with the question of democracy and the law, “this dinner, the NUM or Bingley Labour Party, would not exist if our forefathers had not been prepared to break the law”.
He went on to point out that the only real democracy in Britain, was the rights won by the struggle of the Labour movement and that it was continually necessary to fight to defend and extend that democracy. He pointed out that apart from the fines imposed on the AUEW and the TGWU, the Industrial Relations Act was a dead letter, because of the refusal of the majority of unions to accept the law.
He went on to say that if all Labour-controlled authorities had supported the position of the Clay Cross Councillors, then the Housing Finance Act would be a dead letter.
Brother Scargill said that the current crisis was deliberately inspired by the “waxwork” in Number 10 and the Tory leaders. The power stations had 13 million tons of coal in 1972 prior to the miners’ strike, at the beginning of three-day working they had 12½ million tons, enough to last until March. The power stations were burning around 1 million tons per week and receiving, despite the overtime ban, 800,000 tons per week from the pit head.
At the moment the net loss of coal at power stations was only some 200,000 tons which meant that without some escalation by the miners, power station stocks would last until August.
Brother Scargill concluded by stating he was confident that, as in 1972, the miners would win and that as a consequence of the struggle a Labour Government would come to power. If that Government was committed to Socialist policies and a transformation of society, then the hardship and struggle of the miners and the working people as a whole would never again be necessary.
 



On Saturday 18th May two members of the Bradford Trades Council, brother Garry Armitage (National President of the Woolsorters Society) and brother Keith Narey (NUPE Shop Steward) were violently assaulted by a group of some thirty youths.
The two brothers were carrying the Trades Council Banner for assembly on the platform of the Labour Party Young Socialists demonstration against racialism, a campaign fully supported by the Trades Council, which has its own sub-committee against racialism.
The Bradford banner, a magnificent pictoral emblem of considerable value recently restored, has been the emblem of the local labour movement for some half a century.
It was carried on the Jarrow march.
The two Trades Council members were some way away from the main assembly point of the demonstration when attacked by the fascist thugs assembled around an old Mosleyite Union Movement banner.
It is interesting to note that THE POLICE AT FIRST REFUSED TO INTERVENE ON BEHALF OF OUR BROTHERS and virtually had to be dragged into intervention by onlookers. Obviously Bradford Westgate was not London Red Lion Square!
The local Labour and Trade Union Movement were full of praise for the conduct and stewardship of this tremendous peaceful demonstration, but what would have happened if the incident had happened nearer the main demonstration? The Trade Unions and YS stewards would have been more than a match for these misguided pawns of the faceless fascist leaders.
Would the police have been so reluctant to intervene, and what of the press? The incident received some brief mention on local TV and a few tiny paragraphs in the press. One can imagine the headlines which would have followed if local Trade Unionists had dealt with this unprovoked attack on our members. One can also imagine the sentences the court would have given in the circumstances.
Two young men were charged by the police and the case went before the Bradford Magistrates Court in June to be deferred for the defendants to appoint a solicitor. A couple of weeks ago the case again came before the Bradford magistrates. It lasted less than ten minutes. The police prosecutor and the defence agreed to the two accused being bound over for twelve months.
The defence solicitor made a statement that the defendants strongly protested their innocence. By this device Trades Council witnesses were prevented from giving statements.
One trade unionist who arrived a few minutes late to find the case concluded, made enquiries as to the outcome. He was informed by an official that the case had been quickly concluded and that the bench “had concluded that it was a small fracas between rival factions.”
Members of a movement ten and a half million strong are a “rival faction”! A vicious attack on a national trade union officer is a fracas!
The Trade Council’s statement makes plain our position on the incident and on the beginnings of the emergence of extreme right wing groupings. However some comment must be made about the justice dispensed by the courts.
We did not seek to be involved with the court. Its decision shows the nature of capitalist justice. Contrast this decision with the Shrewsbury 24. Des Warren received three years and others lesser prison sentences. What were they accused of? Riotous assembly – did this not exist in Bradford? Conspiracy – how did these people arrive at the same point and assemble around a flag? No proof was ever produced to show that those sentenced at Shrewsbury either attacked persons or damaged property. It happened in Bradford.
In my opinion the lesson is abundantly clear. In a class society justice serves the interests of the exploiting class. It is entirely Utopian to believe that the menace of racialism and fascism can be dealt with by the courts. Only the mobilisation of the enormous strength of the Labour Movement around a clear socialist programme to transform society can provide a guarantee against reaction.
The Bradford Trades Council seeks support for its statement. It would welcome donations to its funds for the purchase of a new banner. One thing is certain, our new banner will never be without adequate protection. We have learned our lesson. It is important that the whole movement does the same.
 

