

By the early 1970s there were 12 million trade unionists, organised by a network of 300,000 shop stewards. The political ferment of 1968 – when France exploded and liberation movements grew internationally – had started to translate itself into workplace militancy in the early 1970s.
The Tories took office in 1970 and battled with the working class for the next four years. States of Emergency were called, with electricity and petrol rationed to three days a week. The hated Industrial Relations Bill, a package of anti-union laws targeting shop stewards, sparked to a wave of struggle.
Millions struck and hundreds of thousands marched as part of the campaign to “kill the bill”. This eventually led to five dockers being jailed in 1972, only to be freed when there was a national dock strike in their defence.
The left played a central role in building the unions and resistance to the bosses’ attacks. The Communist Party was at the heart of the strikes and the arguments over tactics. But it put its faith in efforts to change the unions by changing their leaders. This was – and is – known as a “Broad Left” strategy. Getting left wing union leaders elected could make the unions more likely to fight – but it didn’t guarantee that they would use the tactics necessary to secure victory.
Left wing transport union leader Jack Jones and left wing engineering union leader Hugh Scanlon became known as the “terrible twins”, and were pilloried in the press. But they instructed their members to cross electricians’ picket lines in 1973. Yet at the same time, right winger Joe Gormley led the miners’ strikes of 1972 and 1974, which paralysed the country.
It was the level of anger, confidence and organisation of rank and file workers – the pressure from below – that was the decisive factor in whether or not union leaders would use the militant tactics necessary. So while the Communist Party looked for leaders to back, the International Socialists – forerunner of the Socialist Workers Party – threw itself into building rank and file networks.
The confidence of the workers’ movement fed into the generalised political crisis of the Tory government. In 1974 the Tories called an election, with the slogan “Who rules Britain?” It posed a choice between the Tories and the unions. The Labour Party won.
The level of industrial struggle started to decline, partly because of the unions’ link to Labour. They looked to the new government to solve the problems caused by the onset of the huge economic crisis. Labour chancellor Denis Healey had promised to “squeeze the rich until the pips squeak”. But that was not what he did in power.
The government was squeezed by the International Monetary Fund after it took a £2 billion loan with austerity conditions attached. It demanded that workers take wage freezes, leading to cuts in living standards. Public spending was slashed and unemployment soared.
By the end of the 1970s, the union leaders could no longer hold workers back from fighting, and what came to be known as the “Winter of Discontent” began. Millions struck in an effort to break the pay freeze. But the strikes were characterised by political confusion. After all it was the left union leaders that had justified the pay cuts as necessary to defend “our” Labour government.
This argument was carried across the movement by their Broad Left shop stewards. The strikes were defeated – and so was the government. Margaret Thatcher came to power in 1979 and launched wave after wave of attacks.
Although there was some inspiring resistance to Thatcher – in particular the Great Miners’ Strike of 1984–5 – we are only now starting to see signs of recovery inside the working class from this period.
The lesson of the 1970s is that, although it is vitally important to campaign and elect left leaders, it is political suicide to solely rely on them. Union leaders exist to negotiate on behalf of workers and in times of struggle are used by the right to deliver shoddy deals. And they are even more likely to lead workers to defeat when they are tied down by loyalty the Labour government.
Today, as the debate rages about unions funding the Labour Party, and a Labour government once again bails out capitalism and expects ordinary workers to pay for it, this lesson is as relevant as ever.
 



There is a long-standing current of opinion in Britain that fascism could never take hold here – that it is an “un-British” phenomenon that the establishment would never allow. Yet fascists in 1930s Britain won support from important sections of the ruling class and created a mass following that was only broken by a powerful movement.
Oswald Mosley was an established political figure when he set up the British Union of Fascists (BUF) in 1932. Two years later the BUF had grown to 40,000 members. It grew by exploiting the economic crisis of the 1930s and using the competition that existed for jobs and housing to scapegoat Jews.
Yet the BUF’s growth would not have been possible without the capitulation of Labour and trade union leaders to a capitalist system intent on making workers pay for the economic crisis. The then Labour prime minister Ramsay MacDonald formed a coalition government in 1931 whose only commitment was to attack workers’ living conditions.
Oswald Mosley defected from Labour and formed the New Party, which originally received support from sections of the left. But Mosley’s aim was not to build a left alternative to Labour. It was to embrace fascism. The New Party was short-lived and the BUF was formed a year later.
Mosley had been an MP for 13 years, first as a Tory and then Labour. He was an opportunist and a populist. He argued to put “Britain First”. He claimed to stand against bureaucracy and the powers of large corporations, fighting for the “little man”. He blamed immigrants for society’s problems.
Mosley visited Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini and aimed to emulate them. Mosley said in 1934, “Fascism today has become a worldwide movement, invading every country in the hour of crisis as the only alternative to destructive communism.”
Hitler was clear that the fascist movement had to be moulded and shaped into a fighting force. That was the purpose of Mosley’s Blackshirts – to make BUF members feel powerful.
BUF members paraded through areas with high immigrant populations such as the East End of London, where half the population was Jewish. Blackshirts would march through east London chanting “The Yids, the Yids, we gotta get rid of the Yids”, plastering the area with racist graffiti and attacking individual Jews.
The Blackshirts were well organised thugs, backed up by the overwhelmingly middle class BUF leadership, including many ex-army officers. Fascism never broke into the organised working class, or into areas where there was resistance to unemployment.
Mosley – like Hitler – may have used populist rhetoric about the “little man”, but it was the big corporations fascism really set out to protect. Like Hitler, he planned to abolish parliamentary democracy and ban independent trade unions.
Sections of the ruling class – frightened about losing their profitable system – started to court the fascists. In Germany, where the economic and political crisis was much sharper, the rulers embraced them fully.
Mosley received considerable support during his “golden years” from 1932–34. One of the richest press barons and owner of the Daily Mail, Lord Rothermere, used his Sunday Dispatch to give £1 prizes for the best postcards explaining “Why I like the Blackshirts”. Society magazine Tatler gave Mosley a full page, praising his “rare gift of political courage”.
Tory and Labour MPs supported Mosley as did the Duke of Wellington, the Duke of Montrose, the Earl of Marlborough, Lady Douglas Hamilton and Admiral Nicholson. The BUF had no trouble with funding and received generous donations from the captains of industry. Mosley was wined and dined by many establishment figures and he used this to gain respectability and to be regarded as a part of mainstream political society.
Arguments raged on the left about how to stem the rise of the fascists. The leadership of the Labour Party was hostile to the left. In 1933 the Labour Party issued a statement saying, “Communist dictatorship, or fear of it, has led to fascist dictatorship.” They were to denounce almost every anti-fascist protest – as were the TUC. They believed that fascism could be beaten by argument and education.
Mosley was invited to the Cambridge Union, debated with the leader of the Labour Party Clement Attlee and shared a platform with the ex-prime minister Lloyd George on the BBC. This only served to give Mosley the respectability he wanted.
Mosley’s aim was to capitalise on the BUF’s support and growth by holding large rallies. These, he hoped, would deliver a final seal of approval from his rich backers, galvanise his members and demonstrate his power as a future leader of the country.
Mussolini had been in power in Italy for over a decade, Hitler had just succeeded in Germany and now Mosley thought it was his turn. It may have worked, were it not for the “destructive communism” that Mosley’s fascism set out to crush.
A fascist rally planned for the Olympia in London in June 1934 was a turning point. The opposition to the rally (organised by the Communist Party, with less than 7,000 members) signalled an end to Mosley’s strategy.
Over 12,000 people attended the BUF rally, amongst them many dignitaries, journalists and MPs. Thousands gathered to protest and hundreds managed to get into the hall to heckle. Anti-fascists met brutal force – from the fascists inside the hall and from the police who attacked them outside.
This caused outrage among sections of the audience. From this moment onwards, his respectable support began to falter. Lord Rothermere withdrew support, saying he did not believe in dictatorship, anti-semitism or the corporate state. The next rally was cancelled. But the fascists regrouped and called for a mass rally in Hyde Park, three months after the Olympia event.
The Communist Party had gathered more support for their actions and united with ad-hoc groups, and trade union and Labour Party left wingers to form the Committee for Anti-Fascist Activities. They called a counter-demonstration to confront the fascists. Up to 150,000 anti-fascists drowned out Mosley’s speech to a mere 2,500 fascists, who were cordoned in by 6,000 police.
These were the days before mobile phones and computers – the huge protest was built by throwing leaflets from the roofs in Whitehall, hanging banners from the BBC HQ and from the Law Courts, and chalking on pavements.
This was the future – a movement that could confront the BUF, expose them politically and halt their growth. It was born amid political hostility from the leadership of the TUC and the Labour Party, who denounced the demonstrators, saying they were as bad as the fascists. Despite this, hundreds of thousands of anti-fascists came out and confronted the BUF.
The movement included members of the Communist Party, the Labour Party, the Quakers, the Catholic church, trade unionists, community groups and many other political, social and cultural organisations.
Over the next two years the anti-fascist movement successfully held Mosley and the BUF back by mass protests. In every instance the police protected the fascists and demonstrators built barricades and had running battles with the police.
In 1936 around 300,000 people took to the streets to stop the Blackshirts marching, in what has become known as the Battle of Cable Street. Housewives united with Irish dockers, who joined arms with Jewish residents and students. Tram drivers abandoned their vehicles and builders’ merchants erected barricades. The chief commissioner of the police abandoned the route, leading the fascists away from east London. This happened again in Bermondsey, south London, one year later.
There was a fight on for the political direction of society. It was sharp, it was brutal and it was quick. The resistance to Mosley worked – after Olympia in 1934 and Cable Street in 1936 the BUF lost respectability, supporters and members. Fascism in Britain was stopped by mass protests, led by the left and in opposition to the “official” leaders of the movement.
Today’s fascists, like Mosley and the BUF, hope to exploit a system in crisis and gain support by disguising their politics. The struggle of the 1930s has left a lasting lesson for anti-fascists in Britain – that we can only defeat the Nazis by confronting them.
 



The trade unions of today came out of working class struggle. Socialists played a critical role in developing them.
The New Unionism of the 1880s heralded a new chapter for the working class in Britain. It broke the decades of defeat that followed the decline of Chartism, and gave birth to general trade unions.
Before this only 10 percent of the working class were in trade unions. These unions were skilled and elitist. Their leaders were either Liberals or worked with the Tories. In 1870 just 400,000 people were members of unions.
Hundreds of thousands of “unskilled” workers struck and joined unions in the following decades – dockers, gas workers, matchgirls, picklers and bottlers, laundry workers and tailoresses. They formed what are some of the biggest unions of today – the GMB and what has become Unite.
One key battle was the 1889 east London dockers’ strike, involving 100,000 people. For five weeks they fought for the closed shop – automatic membership of trade unions – and the “docker’s tanner”, a wage of six pence an hour.
They were, until this point, unorganised. And they won – without the support of the established craft-based unions and the London Trades Council.
The New Unions were led by socialists – members of the Socialist Democratic Federation (SDF). This was a large but propagandist party, whose leader denounced strikes as “a waste of energy”. Despite this, many activists in the SDF played a leadership role in the union struggle. This led some of them to take the opposite position and to denounce “politics”.
This division between political and economic struggles weakened the battle for working class power, and strengthened the state and parliamentary politics.
Eleanor Marx, along with Frederick Engels, William Morris and others, had broken from the SDF. She played a central role, becoming an executive member of the gas workers’ union.
The rising class struggle transformed the craft unions, with miners, rail workers and engineers striking and challenging their conservative leaders and the Tory government.
As the struggle declined, the ruling class planned revenge. Their offensive led to lock-outs of the workers and mass sackings. Agreements were ripped up. Union membership fell by 40 percent between 1890–93. The membership of the biggest New Unions plummeted from 320,000 in 1890 to 80,000 six years later, and from constituting a quarter of the TUC’s membership to only one in ten.
This was a new political landscape. In the absence of a socialist organisation rooted in the rank and file, other traditions formed – trade union bureaucracy and the belief that capitalism could be reformed.
The defeats had a demoralising impact on many of those who had led the struggle. Eleanor Marx committed suicide. John Burns, Will Thorne and Ben Tillett – all former leaders of the New Unions – moved to the right.
Burns was to become a Liberal cabinet minister, saying that he was getting tired of “working class boots, working class trains, working class houses and working class margarine”. Thorne and Tillett became Labour MPs.
Their reaction to events was borne from objective circumstances and not personal weakness.
Defeat at Bradford’s Manningham Mills in 1890–91 gave birth to the Independent Labour Party and the demand for workers’ representation in parliament.
The birth of the Labour Party was rooted in defeat, but was progressive as it was a break with the existing ruling parties of the Liberals and the Tories.
The trade union bureaucracy also became stronger. There were no full-time officials in 1850 but 600 by 1892 and almost 4,000 by 1920.
The left in Britain remained divided between economic and political struggles. The objective circumstances of war and revolution raised the urgent need for unity against a common enemy.
The Communist Party was formed in 1921, bringing together militants with a rich tradition of organising against capitalism. They were to play a decisive political role in the development of 20th century unions.
 



The Cleveland child abuse controversy has forced into public debate the idea that something is rotten inside one of the most common institutions of our society – the family.
The family is deceptive. It looks voluntary, yet few escape it. It’s meant to provide love and security, yet it can be a living hell. It crushes our relationships and distorts our sexuality. When you’re young marriage seems to represent independence and offer respite from family quarrels and parental control. We are told it offers the chance of ‘living happily ever afterwards’.
Marriage is certainly popular. Some 92 percent of women and 86 percent of men marry. But the reality rarely matches the image. One in two marriages ends in divorce within three years, yet 80 percent of divorcees remarry in the constant search for love and happiness.
The modern nuclear family is not a ‘natural’ phenomenon. It has developed and been shaped by the class society we live in.
For us the attraction of the family is that it can seem to be a haven in a horrible world.
For the ruling class the modern family offers something else. It allows it to reproduce the labour force – the only source of its profits – at minimum cost to itself and the state.
Working class families face a constant struggle to survive. Getting a house, paying the bills and clothing the kids dominate. ‘Marital bliss’ comes a poor second. Poor working class families are often trapped with no access to childcare facilities, stuck in bad housing with nowhere for the kids to play.
Relatives and friends are relied upon to watch the kids as mothers work in part time employment. Working shifts in a factory means hardly seeing the kids. When you do, you’re tired and ratty – discipline becomes the norm.
The tension of poverty, the pressure of hard physical work, redundancy or unemployment is what leads the family to crack up. Social workers, doctors and bodies like the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children accept that the tension and stress caused by poverty are to blame for violence and child abuse inside the family.
This doesn’t affect all classes equally. The middle class and working class family are two entirely different homes for children. Middle class families have fewer financial worries and can enjoy their children’s company. Their lifestyle allows time to discuss education. It’s less tense and there’s less pressure.
Violence and child abuse do occur inside the middle class family but not on the same scale as in working class families.
Capitalism distorts our discovery and view of our sexuality. This is true for both the middle and working class. But for the middle class, with its financial comfort and education, the worst excesses of distorted sexuality are avoided.
Incredibly, we are taught that our bodies aren’t our property. When children play with their genitals they’re often scolded for ‘being dirty’. Masturbation is discovered with a mixture of guilt and joy and first sexual encounters can be more frightening than sensual and pleasing.
We are presented with physical stereotypes to imitate. Slim, firm and beautiful for women, muscular, macho and attractive for men. In aspiring to reach the impossible many people can’t cope with the contradictions. It leads to emptiness where we’re taught to expect fulfilment, and misery when the aim is joy. In extreme cases it can lead to individuals being so alienated that they abuse children for sexual gratification.
How should socialists respond to those who execute state laws tearing families apart? We certainly don’t agree with Stuart Bell, the right wing Labour MP for Cleveland. He’s accused the social services of fabricating abuse stories to increase their funding.
But social workers and doctors are caught in a trap. On the one hand they aim to care for people in need. On the other, however, they are often obliged to impose cold, dispassionate legislation in trying to fulfil those aims.
The press focuses on this trap. Social workers are accused of neglect when kids are sexually abused, battered and murdered, and ‘interference’ when they try to prevent such tragedies.
 



FROM NEWSPAPER headlines, the TV and radio to the corridors of Whitehall we have all heard various theories and themes concerning rape in the past few months.
The release of controversial crime statistics on rape shows a 29 percent increase, 50 percent in London, of reported rapes to the police. This has led to many demands, ranging from castration, hanging and higher sentences, to more sympathetic police units.
It has even compelled Woman’s Own, with a readership of over five million, to do ‘our most important survey ever’. The male author of their article is surprised with his conclusion, that ‘every one of us (men) has the guilt and blood of woman’s suffering on our hands’.
His conclusions – that men cannot be changed, that the answer lies in higher sentencing – dovetail with feminist arguments.
Those who argue against higher sentences, like Melissa Benn in April’s Marxism Today, demand the ‘protection’ of women through government expenditure on street lighting, public transport and on housing estates, but even more for a changing of men’s attitudes towards women.
We are a long way from the days when rape victims were weighed down with stones and birch branches and drowned in peat bogs, or where rape victims and their attackers were bound and thrown into the river, awaiting rescue by husband or king.
But we still live in a society which treats women who have been raped with hypocrisy, disdain and distrust. This is true from the newspapers to the church and the courts.
We live in a society where rape is still legally impossible in marriage, where (although not required legally) over 60 percent of rape victims have their past sexual history brought up in court. Where in 82 percent of all rape cases which reach the courts it is a question of consent – did she really say no?
It is a society where women are taught to blame themselves for rape, ‘was it something I said/did’, ‘maybe I shouldn’t have taken that drink’ and where this attitude is embodied into every institution surrounding rape.
This is true from the judge in the Old Bailey case in 1976 who said, ‘It is well known that women in particular and small boys are liable to be untruthful and invent stories’, to the Ipswich judge in 1982 who found a woman who had been raped guilty of ‘contributory negligence’ because she had been hitch-hiking at the time.
The recent statistics have frightened many people because they expose the reality of rape. For the first time for many they have broken the myths surrounding rape.
The press coverage of the Yorkshire Ripper case in the early 1980s – which painted rapists as manic strangers ready to pounce on women late at night in deserted dark alleyways – is no longer seen as the norm.
From the tabloids to the ‘respectable’ press we witness a recognition of rape as widespread and common – something done by ordinary men to ordinary women.
The released figures may be frightening but even more so is the fact that an estimated four out every five rapes are not reported to the police at all.
This has been recognised by feminists for a long time. The Women’s Movement since its inception has fought to dispel the myths and lies fed about rape and violence against women.
But it has been in the framework of pointing the finger at the wrong enemy – of laying the blame for rape firmly at the feet of individual men, in the specific, and overall male control in general.
There is hardly a feminist writer who disagrees with this analysis.
We always hear the echo of the famous, and widely used, statement of Susan Brownmiller from her book Against Our Will: ‘Rape is a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all women in a state of fear’.
But is this really the case? Does the blame lie with male control inside society?
There can be no disputing the fact that blame lies with individual men, in as far as they are the ones who rape and sexually assault women. But do men rape women as part of an overall conspiracy to subjugate women, as a reflection of their overall control inside society?
The answer has to be no.
The London Rape Crisis Centre stated in its first report in 1977, two years after its foundation, that,
‘In a society where woman and man are seen as divided as initiator and consenter, aggressive and passive, predator and prey, wolf and chick, then rape is not abnormal ... Rape is the logical and extreme end of the spectrum of male/female relationships’.
We are reminded constantly of our ‘roles’ inside this society. There is the daily dose of rank hypocrisy from the tabloids which talk sympathetically of rape whilst on the same page carry degrading and humiliating images and stories of women as willing sex objects.
From the billboards we see women being used to sell anything from motor oil to lawnmowers. From the day we’re born to the day we die we’re forced to live stereotypes.
This traps men and women from the pink and blue as babies, from the thin, beautiful blonde and Levi 501 body as young adults, to the dutiful wife and mother and breadwinning husband in later life.
These ideas, and the divisions they cause between women and men, have to be seen in the framework of class society. A society much different from that painted by feminists when they talk of male violence.
It is one where the majority of people, both working class men and women, suffer because of their alienation. Where being forced to depend on selling your labour power means having no real control over where you live, where you work or what you earn.
Capitalism doesn’t begin and end at the factory gate, it affects all aspects of our lives.
From the firefighter’s wife who was speaking during her husband’s strike of 1977/8 when she said:
‘I can’t talk to my husband when he comes in – the job makes him so tense and ill. When I tell him his dinner’s in the oven or something, he often just tells me to shut-up.’
To the Ford worker who said of working on the production line in the 1960s:
‘I used to come home from work and fall straight asleep. My legs and arms used to be burning. And I knew hard work ... I didn’t have any relations with my wife for months. Now that’s not right is it? No work should be that hard.’
This is in stark contrast to what we are taught to expect from life – love, marriage, kids and eternal happiness, with perhaps a few hiccups.
The reality means unhappiness, loneliness, distorted sexual relationships and more alienation. And we should not be surprised when that results in violence. Because of the inequality and nature of society it will mean male violence.
No matter how hard we try we are reminded that we can’t have free and equal relationships in a society which treats men and women unequally. Or a society which treats any of its members unequally.
Witness the treatment of black and white men in America.
Blacks are only 11 percent of the population and they are the poorest and most alienated.
Murder, assault, rape and robbery are the big four in violent crime in America. Blacks, in 1973, constituted 58 percent of all arrests for murder, 63 percent for armed robbery and 47 percent for rape.
An examination of 3,000 rapists in 11 southern states, between 1945 and 1965, showed that blacks were seven times as likely as whites to get the maximum sentence of death and 18 times as likely if a black man raped a white woman than if a white man raped a black woman.
The US Justice Department showed that blacks were 89 percent of all men executed for rape between 1930 and 1964.
A survey carried out by Amir into all reported rapes – 646 cases with 1,292 offenders – in Philadelphia between the years 1958 and 1960 noted that 90 percent of rapists ‘belonged to the lower part of the occupational scale, from skilled workers to the unemployed’ and were aged between 15 and 19 years old. Most had previous convictions for burglary, robbery, disorderly conduct or assault – only 9 percent had a previous conviction for rape.
He concluded that the average rapist was the ‘typical youthful offender’.
The FBI has said that 61 percent of American rapists are under 25 years old. And other studies have noted that two thirds of American rapists are single and from the ‘lower classes’. Their victims too are young and from the ‘lower classes’.
Most studies point to the majority of rapes occurring late at night during the weekend and an increase in the numbers of rapes during the summer. They have also noted a link between the consumption of alcohol and rape.
As Susan Brownmiller has noted the typical American rapist is likely to be 19 years old and the boy next door, that is if you happen to live in a ghetto. She says:
‘Women who live in urban lower-class neighbourhoods of high crime and juvenile delinquency are subject to the greatest risk of any class. It follows then, and statistics bear it out, that the group of women who run the greatest risk of being assualted ... are black, teenage, urban lower-class girls.’
We are victims of a class society, not a patriarchial society as feminists would have us believe. Yet Ruth Hall, from Women Against Rape, said in 1976 that rape was ‘a violent expression of men’s power over women, and a backlash when that power is challenged.’
Women can fight back, we are continually reminded, but ultimately all men, although they may not all choose to rape, have the ability to rape and are aware of that fact. Hence the feminist slogan ‘all men are potential rapists’.
The fact that the vast majority of rapes are committed by men known to their victims – recent British statistics show that only 26 percent of rapes are by strangers, and all rape statistics show that over a half of all rapes are committed in either the victim or rapist’s home – they argue proves their theory. It allows them to draw the conclusion ‘never trust a man’.
As the London Rape Crisis Centre says, ‘the existence of rape is fundamental to the power structure which exists between men and women ... If you are a man you cannot empathise with a woman about rape’.
The conclusions that we draw as Marxists are very different.
Rape is the violent product of a violent and brutal society based on the domination of one class over another. This society teaches its male members that women are commodities, that women are willing sexual participants – anywhere, anytime, anyplace.
No socialist would ever condone rape or violence against women just as no socialist would ever blame individual men for a society which distorts men’s lives as well as women’s.
And the suffering is not equal inside society either. Feminists argue that all women, of all ages, and all classes are raped in equal proportions and are under the same reign of fear from being attacked.
We need to dispel these myths.
Looking at studies which have been carried out into rape helps us do this but it has to be done in the understanding that many cases never reach the realms of being a ‘statistic’. These studies are also few and far between, and mostly American.
But nonetheless they do point to vital factors in determining the class nature of rape.
Amir found that 70 percent of rapes are planned and 11 percent were partially planned and the majority carried out by men known to the women they raped. The London Rape Crisis Centre agrees with this, saying that 80 percent are either wholly or partially planned.
As I have stated above, a recent study by Women Against Rape of 1,236 London women showed that three out of every four rapists knew the woman they raped.
The fact that the majority of rapes are carried out by young, working class kids or young, working class women does not mean that middle class and upper class women are not raped, or do not suffer the threat of rape. This would be an absurd argument.
But it is true to say, when looked at in the perspective of degrees of alienation financial comfort and control over your life as an individual, that the threat is far more pronounced in the working class.
The Kinsey Report on sexuality in America in the 1950s conclusively pointed to the middle class having freer, easier and less inhibited sexual relationships. The same conclusions were drawn by the Sunday Times in May 1984 after their survey on sex and political parties. The SDP topped the poll for best sexual relationships.
As Women Against Rape note from their findings:
‘Women with the least financial security – low paid jobs and/or low paid partners, poor housing and no access to a car – stood a better chance of being assaulted or sexually abused ... The chances of experiencing assault or abuse are high if you are black and if your income is low.’
Often rape is seen by people as a process to intimidate and humiliate women. Although indisputably this happens, it is not the reasons men have for raping women.
More likely is that, in the words of Susan Brownmiller, it is ‘stemming from a need to find or prove their masculinity. They are desperately trying to learn to be successful men’.
And who determines what a ‘successful man’ is – capitalist society.
Gang rape, defined as when two or more men rape one women, is common. Overt violence and sexual humiliation is not.
In Amir’s study 43 percent were gang rapes. He noted that in two out of every three rapes ‘non-brutal’ physical violence was used. Fellatio and repeated intercourse occurred in 27 percent of all the rapes (this was how he defined sexual humiliation).
A study in Toronto showed 50 percent of rapes were gang rapes and in Washington DC it was 30 percent.
An Australian study of rapes in New South Wales in 1973 found 69 percent were single offenders and violence occurring in 13 percent of all rapes.
A study in Denver showed that in nearly all rapes there were demands for affection and co-operation.
Again Women Against Rape note: ‘About half the sexual assaults and about half the rapes were accomplished by means other than the use or threat of physical violence.’
Men do not rape simply to exert violence over women. They rape out of a distorted view of sexuality – one given to them by capitalism.
This is not to say that rape should be ignored or not fought against. Far from it. For socialists the answers to rape and violence against women lies with the collective organisation of both working class men and women. For feminists it means the opposite.
In No Turning Back, an anthology of writings from the Women’s Movement, a feminist theorist writes that,
‘An economic revolution cannot eradicate patriarchial social relations as the basis for male/female antagonisms does not lie in the economic mode of production but in the reproductive role ... and it is here that the final battle will be fought.’
To believe that leads feminists into the reformist camp, with reactionary conclusions. They end up supporting, and calling for, higher sentences, male curfews, ‘better’ police procedure and laws and so on.
They are not the solution to the problem. They end up putting more power into the hands of the state and have the end result of, not only being substitutionist and reformist, but of further widening the divide between working class men and women.
Nearly all feminists call for higher sentences for rapists, some even support castration and hanging. In doing so they distort and misunderstand the real role of the courts and the prison service.
It is still the case that in Britain 25 percent of all violent crime is domestic – ‘crime’ resulting from the frustrations in people’s lives.
Violence in the home, and rape, will be with us until we get rid of the system that creates that violence. The police and courts do not exist primarily to protect ordinary women from that violence, they are an integral part of the system – which is why they spend most of their time defending the property of the rich or smashing up picket lines (note the fact that the police only ever solve 16 percent of all reported crime).
Only a tiny minority of people are sentenced, and when they are it is likely to be for between two and four years (the maximum penalty is life). Rapists normally serve their term of imprisonment in isolation units with little or no rehabilitation therapy.
Unfortunately there are no statistics available in this country which enable us to analyse whether convicted rapists are likely to rape again.
But a whole range of people – from the Royal College of Psychiatrists to feminists – agree that the vast majority of rapists are not lunatics and there is evidence from America that therapy has had an 80 percent success rate.
Socialists should be against the demand for higher sentences because it wrongly locates the blame in individual men, just as we should be against demands for better policing.
It is not a question, as Susan Brownmiller says, of demanding that all lawful power structures ‘must be stripped of male dominance and control’ and that this is ‘a revolutionary goal of the utmost importance to women’s rights’.
Rather it is a question of stripping a minority of their control over the majority of people inside this society. To do that demands class unity.
Feminists draw the wrong conclusions because they have the wrong analysis of the world. They do not believe that working class men can change and see women as victims of a male dominated society. This is a strategy which leaves the working class on the sidelines of changing society and leaves women struggling to reform the system and/or ‘sharing our fears and anxieties’.
One look back to the miners’ strike proves conclusively that working class men and women can change.
It is a small example. But it goes against the argument put by feminists and demonstrates that by fighting together we can not only change society but our ideas and sexual relationships too.
 



Friends of Alice Wheeldon
Sheila Rowbotham
Pluto Press £4.95
ALICE WHEELDON was sentenced to ten years hard labour in early 1917 for allegedly plotting to kill Lloyd George by poisoning him.
She, along with her daughter and son-in-law, served two years of their sentences, being released as an ‘act of clemency’.
But Alice Wheeldon did not live long. Suffering the effects of ill-treatment in prison, she died in early 1919 from a fatal dose of the flu.
Sheila Rowbotham, in her book, attempts to trace the history of the Derby socialist feminist and to establish the political milieu in which she operated.
In doing so Rowbotham conveys, although often disjointedly, the various trends, theories and practices within the labour movement at the time Britain was plunged into the First World War.
This was a period when hundreds of thousands of workers throughout Britain defied the patriotic calls of their rulers by striking and demonstrating to defend their hard-fought-for conditions. In the early part of her book Rowbotham manages to express, with some feeling, the existence of a mood to challenge and change.
In delving into Alice Wheeldon’s background we find a whole range of people challenging the status quo. Suffragettes, pacifists, Irish Republicans, socialists and syndicalists all combine in an alliance against the state.
But Rowbotham denies us any real insight into why these strands, and the strength of feeling against the system, did not combine and converge into creating a new society.
The book would have been strengthened by having a serious examination of the difference between the British Socialist Party and the Socialist Labour Party. [1] A critical analysis of what the divorce between economics and politics meant, not only in organising revolutionary opposition during the war, but also for the tasks facing the Communist Party – which united almost every militant throughout the country in 1921.
Instead the British Socialist Party is largely ignored, the formation of the Communist Party glossed over and the Russian Revolution almost scorned at.
This does not stop her spending most of the book berating today’s revolutionaries, mostly those of us who identify with the aims and objectives of the Russian Revolution and Leninist forms of organisation.
For Rowbotham socialism is about developing new forms of relationships, of having a ‘wider vision’ of a new society. Moreover she identifies the period as one in which ‘the making of socialism involved change in the here and now ... The socialist tradition never abandoned such concerns, but they ceased to be central and passionate and vehement. So we have to labour to reconstruct socialism as a vision of freedom.’
The problem of the ‘left’, according to Rowbotham, is the inability to see how both Labourism and Communism (presumably the traditions of the Russian Revolution) are redundant forces because ‘neither strategy led socialists to put detailed thought into how the existing state was to be dismantled and socialised’.
So what are these alternatives? They are ‘about extending the experience of democracy, not just about voting the Labour Party in or seizing state power through revolution’. In other words, building co-operative movements, campaigns for childcare facilities etc. and putting demands on the state in the here and now. Not as a step towards getting rid of this system, but as a means of reforming it from within.
Rowbotham’s book may talk of revolution – but it is only talk. Her revolutionary politics are confined to rhetoric while her reformism shines through like a blinding light.

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version this is “Scottish Labour Party”, but in the context “Socialist Labour Party” makes more sense.
 



FANCY BEING sickened? I managed it after a sewer rat passed me a few copies of Murky Murdoch’s daily homage to all to the right of Genghis Khan.
Killjoy Commons Leftie and Crazy Clare are The Sun’s answer to Labour MP Clare Short’s Bill designed to ban the degrading and despicable portrayal of women on page three of the tabloids. The reinforcement of the idea of women as passive vulnerable sex objects through the mass media’s imagery must disgust socialists.
The message is that we are housewives in the living room, cooks in the kitchen and tarts in the bedroom. It degrades women and men by reducing women to commodities to be bought and sold. But will banning page three girls help us to get to our goal? I don’t think so. Naked bodies are not what stands between Samantha Fox and women’s liberation. You just can’t legislate away sexism – no matter how good your intentions.
Mandy Merck in this week’s New Statesman says: ‘There is now a considerable lobby in both feminist and Labour circles to outlaw sexist representation. One widely heard suggestion is a statute parallel to the “racial hatred” clause in the Public Order Act.’ Yet that very Act, passed in 1936 at the height of the struggle against fascism, and supported by most on the left at the time, has been consistently used to ‘outlaw’ the left and not the right.
When the left believe that somehow the repressive state machinery can be used to defend our rights they end up boosting right wing forces. Take for example the ‘Clean up Soho’ campaign of four years ago. Feminists and those from the left wing of the Labour Party campaigned to remove visibly offensive and sexist images from the streets of Soho.
The result – the police managed to close, by law or harassment, every gay cinema and bookshop in Soho. Not one sex shop was touched. Clare Short has followed the logic of her position by putting an amendment to Winston Churchill’s Indecent Displays Bill, out to apply the Obscene Publications Act. Such right wingers do not distinguish between free and available contraception for under 16s and banning page three. For them it fits their blanket conception that anything to do with sexuality should be banned.
That’s why countries which ban pornography – fascist Spain, fascist Portugal, Southern Ireland – are ones where women have no contraception rights and no control over their sexuality.
And that’s why Clare Short is barking up the wrong tree.
 



FERDINAND MARCOS once commanded one of the most brutal and repressive state machines in the world. This week his once formidable power has been brought crashing down. A million people came onto the streets of Manila to confront his columns of troops and tanks. Even the Americans have deserted him.
His once loyal boot boys in the military are deserting him like rats from a sinking ship.
Marcos has been forced to leave. But what lay behind his downfall? Does the future hold any promise for a country where 60 percent of the population live in dire poverty?
Aquino’s People’s Party is a fairly recent realignment of that opposition. Yet it can hold little hope for the majority of poor Filipinos.
Cory Aquino is herself a very rich landowner and is surrounded by ‘a mafia of upper class intellectual advisors, many of them US educated,’ as one magazine said. Many of them have been loyal supporters of Marcos and have a vested interest in stability in the Philippines.
Now that Marcos has left Reagan is full of praise for Aquino. This week we had a glimpse of the nightmare that haunts bosses, generals and rulers the world over. Troops sent to crush the popular opposition embraced the crowd.
Ordinary people who have felt their power on the streets could win over the allegiance of large sections of the disgruntled army. Workers and soldiers could tour the estates and the factories debating, arguing and organising.
What is heartening for socialists the world over is to see the embryo of a worker’s power that can get rid not just of Marcos, but Aquino, the Americans and ultimately every single one of the bosses and bureaucrats who run and ruin their lives.
 



“Young and old alike must learn about the Holocaust as warning against the dangers of racism. There is no difference in colour or religion. If I had survived to betray the dead it would have been better not to survive. We must not forget. Please do not forget.”
Leon Greenman, Auschwitz survivor 98288
The movement against fascism has lost one of its most dedicated fighters with the death of Leon Greenman, aged 97.
After surviving five concentration camps, including Auschwitz, and enduring a forced march in which many others died, he pledged his life to educating others against the Holocaust. Thousands have heard Leon’s moving story, with many becoming anti-fascist activists as a result.
Leon was born into a large working class family in the East End of London. His family moved to the Netherlands and he became a bookseller, married and lived in Rotterdam with his wife and son.
As the threat of war rose, Leon, a British citizen, had been contemplating a move back to London. He changed his mind when in 1938 he heard prime minister Neville Chamberlain declare there would be “no war with Germany”.
Leon traced his distrust of politicians back to that statement. He would tell his audiences never to trust the government, urging them instead to create a movement that could prevent a repetition of the Holocaust.
When the Second World War came, it blew his life apart. The Nazis invaded the Netherlands and persecuted its Jewish population, eventually deporting them to the death camps. Leon, his wife Else, and his two and a half year old son Barney were bundled onto cattle trucks and sent to Auschwitz. Leon last glimpsed his wife and child as they entered the camp – both perished in the gas chambers.
Leon believed education to be a powerful weapon against the Nazis and was awarded an OBE for his work in schools. But he was also a firm believer in participating directly in the struggle against fascism.
He was an enthusiastic supporter of the Anti Nazi League and Unite Against Fascism and joined in many demonstrations. He gained immense enjoyment from attending Love Music Hate Racism events, sharing the stage with singer Pete Doherty in Trafalgar Square in 2005. He loved young people and sparked off their energy.
Aged 82, Leon led the 60,000-strong Unity demonstration in 1993 that demanded the closure of the British National Party (BNP) headquarters in Welling, south east London. As the police charged, he was bundled over a wall, narrowly escaping the truncheons. Months later, he led the victorious procession to a carnival to celebrate the defeat of the BNP’s first councillor in east London.
What a fighter Leon was. Of the 700 Dutch Jews who were transported from Westerbork, only Leon and one other survived.
His determination was matched only by his stubbornness.
On one occasion in 1994, the Anti Nazi League organised to stop a fascist “Blood and Honour” gig. It resulted in us being chased by the police and attacked by Nazi thugs. Leon was put into a taxi and sent home for his safety. Five minutes later, we turned around and there he was – back at the front of the demonstration waving his walking stick.
That summed up Leon, a man with no regard for himself who would do anything to fight back against the Nazis.
He will be sorely missed – and we will never forget him.
 



Working your way to the bottom – The feminization of Poverty
Hilda Scott
Pandora, £4.95
FOR THE first time in many years, people are shocked by the sight of queues at ‘soup’ kitchens in America and at the thought of many unemployed and low paid workers in Britain being forced, by government regulations, to sleep rough.
Lack of proper food and housing are only two aspects of ever rising poverty. As the recession bites deeper, so do its effects.
There are nearly 40 million ‘officially’ poor people in the United States, or 15 percent of the population. Seventeen percent of Britain’s population are ‘officially’ poor, and one person in four lives ‘on the margins of poverty’.
A new book by Hilda Scott looks at why poverty exists and argues for a serious examination of the ‘feminization of poverty’ – a phrase used chiefly to describe the economic vulnerability of women who are the sole supporters of their children.
She argues that women are joining the ranks of the poor quicker than men, due to high divorce rates and single mothers, and that, across the classes, women are by and large poorer than men.
The effects of the crisis do hit unevenly. It would have been useful to have read a book which expanded, in a constructive manner, the arguments as to why this is and how it could be overcome. But overriding in her book is the idea that divisions in society lie across the lines of sex – and not class. The fact that it is working class women who suffer most – from the brutal oppression and exploitation of a rich class consisting of men and women – is never fully developed. Instead all we are treated to is a piece of romantic, reactionary nonsense.
Hilda Scott’s book takes us from a historical – both social and economic – appraisal of women’s position in society through to recent debates on the ‘value’ of unpaid work. It ends up arguing reformist feminist solutions which leave working class women, and men, passively on the sidelines.
The book is vehemently anti-men. ‘Misogyny pervades our history and our culture,’ she says, and adds:
‘On the left it is held that to talk about the feminization of poverty is to divert attention from issues of class and race, that women’s poverty cannot be discussed separately from men’s poverty. What I hear... is that there is nothing wrong with women that an employed husband could not cure.’
 
Family wage
Her patronising attitude, not only to the ‘left’ but to women, is twinned with the inference that women are passive observers of their fate. Even if many of her examples – of women being the economic lynchpin in some societies (a whole chapter) or of women fighting against their exploitation as workers (a few lines) – show differently, the conclusions she draws leave women at the mercy of men.
When discussing the rise of capital, she falls into the trap shared by many feminists – that of misunderstanding the ‘family wage’.
‘A major share of the responsibility for the marginalisation of women and the establishment of occupational segregation under industrial capitalism rests with the trade unions ... They refused training to women, threatening expulsion to any member who instructed women in the trade. When women organised themselves national unions refused to admit them. The protective legislation for which they pressed effectively excluded women from many male occupations. Men preferred to fight for a "family wage" rather than extend their class solidarity to women who needed jobs.’
This is a distortion of why the ‘family wage’ arose.
The demand for the family wage – the idea that employers would pay male workers enough not only to feed and clothe themselves but their wives and children too – was one which, in the mid-1800s when the introduction of capitalism was literally killing people off, suited both working class men and women.
The development of capitalism, and with it craftism and a trade union bureaucracy, led not only to the exclusion of women from certain trade unions and industries, but of immigrants and unskilled workers too.
We are not shown in any way how this was fought against.
In her chapter on economics we are given a further insight into how rotten her politics are:
‘As the experience of the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries amply illustrate, however, after private property is overthrown male priorities continue to be anchored in the categories that are visible to men.’
You can almost sympathise with her views on patriarchy – if you believe Russia to be socialist.
We are given a tirade against Marx and Marxism (‘He saw the world through the eyes of the male, working class ... not enough to illuminate the economics of personal life’) and on how awful and male-dominated revolutionary parties are.
Never does the book look at what women and men, as workers, can do to change the world around them. Even when she examines class – and she seems to recognise that working class women do get the worst deal – the overriding feature is that women bear the burden of ‘unpaid work’, housework, child rearing etc. This is true. No one can deny that this system treats women and men totally differently – and unequally.
More so, women and men of different classes are treated differently. The nanny, the maid and the boarding school have never been a feature of working class households. They are in ruling class homes and these features, among many, give rich women the escape from their position that working class women don’t have.
But revolutionaries see some way out of the divisions that arise. When working class women and men fight alongside each other, inequality may not be automatically overcome, but it’s a challenge to the divisions that exist.
This sees the basic division as class – unlike Hilda Scott’s view. She does not look to the transformation of society by workers, of which women are an integral part, but that:
‘A positive alternative could be put forward by a coalition of women, minorities, peace, and environmental movements and labour if they could agree on some common goals and immediate aims.’
In other words, a cross-class alliance to fight the results of a class society based on massive inequality. Her sentiments, of women and men equally sharing housework child rearing and leisure time, are not to be sniffed at – they are admirable. Her perspective for getting it is politically bankrupt.
 



THE RECENT case of sexual harassment in the London Fire Brigade has shown how difficult it is for women who choose to work in traditionally male dominated industries.
The case has also highlighted the inability of the Fire Brigades Union to fight for its members interests and has raised many questions and posed many problems for active trade unionists and socialists on the ground. More than this it has proved to be a sticky wicket for the left wing led Greater London Council.
Fire fighter Garry Langford was dismissed by the Fire Brigade last September for his degrading treatment of woman fire fighter, Lynne Gunning, a few months previously in the Soho station in London.
Every new recruit to the Fire Brigade is forced to go through a disgusting initiation ceremony. This usually involves the new fire fighter being tied to a ladder and doused with water. In Lynne Gunning’s case, it is alleged, she was tied to a ladder, had urine poured over her and suffered sexual abuse and indecent exposure.
The routine is degrading for all fire fighters – but particularly so for women. The number of women in the brigade in London could be counted on the fingers of one hand and the sexism of the majority of fire fighters is overwhelming.
This has caused problems for the GLC in implementing their equal opportunities programme, which states:
‘... that no job applicant or employee receives less favourable treatment on the grounds of sex, race, colour, nationality, ethnic or national origins, marital status, sexual orientation, age, trade union activity, political or religious beliefs.’
The failure to carry out this policy can result in disciplinary action against the employer and/or employee.
The GLC have been campaigning for more women to join the brigade. Posters and leaflets have been produced and the GLC produce a newspaper called Equals which is distributed to their employees arguing that there is a need for more representation in jobs for ethnic minorities, women etc.
Yet none of this has come to terms with the sexism of a male dominated fire brigade.
Garry Langford has been reinstated in his job in a decision taken by the Public Services and Fire Brigade Committee in January of this year. This committee deals with appeals and its decision has caused great embarrassment and anger in the GLC.
The GLC wanted Garry Langford sacked – they see his retaining his job as condoning the sexism of fire fighters. Many leading figures in the GLC, among them Ken Livingstone, are said to be furious at the final outcome. The votes on the committee were meant to be in favour of the man losing his job – but in the course of the hearing two of the Labour members changed their vote.
Among the two was Jenni Fletcher, the vice-chair of the GLC Women’s Committee. There is a lot of pressure, from various quarters but mainly from the feminists, for her to resign. And the Women’s Committee have mounted a token picket for one hour on the station in which Garry Langford is working in an attempt to get him out of the service.
The problems caused for the GLC over this case are a direct result of implementing policy from above. It is a result of being unable to change workers’ ideas by good deeds or decrees.
All socialists would like to see more women in male dominated jobs – on an equal basis. The disgusting way in which Lynne Gunning was treated – as a result she had to spend many months away from her work – has shown the bias and inequality that women suffer in these types of jobs. It is almost impossible for women to work on an equal basis with men when such a high level of prejudice exists. It is for that reason that workers should stand firm behind the principles of the GLC Women’s Committee. More women in the brigade and less sexism.
We have to add riders to this. The tragedy of the case is that it wasn’t dealt with within the structures of the FBU. That the circumstances and sympathies did not exist at a shopfloor level which allowed Garry Langford to be disciplined by his workmates.
This is because neither the FBU nor the GLC have had campaigns at a rank and file level which has confronted the dominant ideas of the majority of fire fighters. This has to be done by active trade unionists and socialists. It is not an easy task – it will mean standing against the stream, taking abuse and being branded as ‘strange’. The need to carry such a campaign is urgent. It has already started on a small scale in London when fire fighters built support for the miners by taking miners’ wives around the stations. This has started to break down the sexism by presenting women as they are – as part of the working class and as part of the fight to change the system.
 
Women workers
This work needs to be built on with a more general campaign at station level around the question of sexism. Local women trade unionists should be invited onto the stations to talk about the problems, and successes, of organising in a workplace.
Women should be invited to debate about the role of women in society – rape, abortion, sexuality, wife-battering, to name a few issues.
But we must recognise that abstract discussion can help to raise the issues but in itself does not convince people. To do that good militants should be attempting to involve fire fighters in activity. By supporting local pickets and activities when they arise, for example over the Gillick decision and the Powell Bill. By actively campaigning for solidarity with women trade unionists when in struggle. It will be by confronting their backward ideas in action that sexist fire fighters can be changed.
Only if this is done will we build an alternative to the tokenism of the GLC and the bureaucracy of the FBU and eventually create an atmosphere and attitude at station level which recognises women as workers and welcomes them as such.
 



In May 1993, just a few weeks after Stephen Lawrence’s murder, openly sieg-heiling BNP councillor Derek Beacon was elected on the Isle of Dogs. Since the BNP set up shop in the area, racist attacks had soared. There had been many demonstrations, protests, vigils and campaigns against racism.
Now the time had come to unify this fightback and demand that we “close down the BNP”. The Indian Workers’ Association, Youth against Racism in Europe and the Anti Nazi League called a unity demonstration to march on the BNP’s headquarters in Welling.
Despite being denounced by the press, the police – who banned us marching past the BNP HQ – and many in the trade union and Labour Party leadership, the march received wide support amongst anti-racists and trade unionists. It resulted in coaches from all over the country converging to form a magnificent 60,000 strong demonstration.
Meanwhile, those who opposed the tactics of the demo held their own protest (at the same time) in Trafalgar Square, with a few hundred attending.
The police brutally attacked the Welling protesters, injuring many. The police brought out horses and helicopters on the day, and used CCTV footage to try to hunt down the protesters. They confiscated clothes and raided homes.
This was in stark contrast to the treatment meted out to the racist murderers in south-east London. Within one year of the demonstration, 13 young people arrested for being on it were jailed. Yet, despite the opposition, the campaign worked. Within months, the BNP councillor lost his seat and the Nazis’ strategy was blown apart, for the time being.
The ANL victory Carnival in south London in May 1994 attracted 180,000 people. A grassroots movement had been re-born to fight the new threat from the British Nazis.
Julie Waterson was a chief steward on the Welling demonstration and was truncheoned on the head by police
 



Dear God, The Price of Religion in Ireland
by Eamonn McCann
Bookmarks £9.99
IF YOU were born into a Catholic family, attended a Catholic school, were sent to mass every Sunday and lived in fear of the local priest then Eamonn McCann’s new book on religion is the one for you. Conversely, if you were lucky enough to escape the Catholic church, then you’ll also find Dear God a fascinating and funny read. Not being one of the lucky ones, I devoured McCann’s book and by the end thought that he had penned it especially for me.
Written primarily about the bigoted and hypocritical role of organised Catholicism in Ireland, it doesn’t stop there. This collection of writings is steeped in history and politics, and surrounded by wit. He does not belittle those who believe in god, but demolishes the role of religion in actively supporting and campaigning for the continuation of capitalism. The pope gets a good kicking from McCann, as does the corruption of the bishops and priests who thrive on superstition and ignorance. He tears apart any notion that ‘human nature’ or ‘culture’ can explain religious sectarianism in the North of Ireland.
Charting the history of the North, he outlines how the marriage of capitalism with religious bigotry served the needs of the rich and powerful. His rejection of the ‘two tribes’ argument leads on to optimism for the future. The absurdity of sectarianism in the North is illustrated by the question to be asked in the 2001 census: they will require knowing whether you are a Protestant atheist or a Catholic atheist!
The contradictions within religion are highlighted throughout and reflect his statement, ‘Religion emerged as an expression of human helplessness in the face of vast and seemingly inexplicable power, and can also be a vehicle for protest.’ He compares the treatment of Islamic fundamentalism in the press and by politicians to the silence that greets the extreme absurdities of the Catholic church.
McCann shows the hypocrisy of all religion, but particular venom is reserved for Catholicism. This is powerfully portrayed in his writings on clerical child abuse, which has destroyed many people’s lives. Here Dear God is sad and full of anger. This book will leave you angrier and more determined to destroy a society that has claimed so many lives for the price of religious bigotry.
 



Threads Through Time
Sheila Rowbotham
Penguin £8.99
Threads Through Time is a welcome breath of fresh air in comparison to the postfeminist right wing drivel that dominates the pages of the Guardian and the classrooms of universities. It is refreshing to read accounts of women’s struggles for sexual emancipation and against brutal employers instead of ‘girl power’.
For people subjected to superficial and supercilious explanations for the continuation of women’s oppression, Rowbotham’s arguments pose a challenge to those who want to move beyond immediacy and who desire a theory and a framework in which to fight for equality. There can be no doubt that she desires this passionately, and she applauds those who have changed the world. Women like Eleanor Marx and Sylvia Pankhurst feature in her book, with much praise heaped upon them for overcoming the obstacles put in their way as they took on the capitalist system.
For those who want a glimpse into the role of women in the magnificent battles which established today’s general unions, she tells of the battles between women of opposite classes. In The Trouble with “Patriarchy”, she brilliantly denounces any idea that you can explain women’s oppression, or overcome it, through the theory of a fixed and unchanging notion of male power:
‘It is not sexual difference which is the problem, but the social inequalities of gender – the different kinds of power societies have given to sexual differences, and the hierarchical forms these have imposed on human relationships. Some aspects of male-female relationships are evidently not simply oppressive but include varying degrees of mutual aid. The concept of “patriarchy” has no room for such subtleties, however.’
This book is a collection of some of Sheila Rowbotham’s finest essays, and some rather embarrassing autobiographical work. Nonetheless, the two intertwine to demonstrate the strength of Rowbotham’s commitment to socialism and equality, while offering us an explanation of her ultimate political inability to effect any real change for working class women.
Sheila Rowbotham attacked Germaine Greer in a recent review of her book The Whole Woman. Rowbotham rightly states,
‘She has retained the assumption that feminism is primarily a matter of self assertion and declaration. In fact it has historically been about very much more – including wider questions of social inequality between women of various classes and races and the nuances of personal gender power which fascinate many young feminists today.’
Somehow. you can’t help thinking this is a little bit of the pot calling the kettle black, precisely because the conclusion of Rowbotham’s socialist feminism is the same obsession with ‘gender power’ and personal change.
In fact, as a snapshot of socialist feminism, it gives us much more. It inadvertently lends us an insight as to why postfeminism has dominated in recent years. It does so by exposing the inherent weaknesses of attempting to marry a class analysis with feminism. It can’t be done. One dominates, and it isn’t class!
So Rowbotham’s history of women is in part inspiring and in part frustrating, albeit not in equal parts at all times. Her feminism tends to negate her socialism and acts as a brake on her historical context and analysis. When writing about Marx’s daughters she lambasts Engels, saying, ‘The Marx daughters’ own lives might have served as a warning that there were a few snags in his theories.’ And, with the classic socialist-feminist theory, she states that ‘Engels presented the liberation of women as the outcome of objective changes in society. He does not stress the importance of women’s own activity as part of the process of liberation.’
In theory, she agrees with Marxism: ‘The terms in which the Marxist approach to women’s emancipation was set made it very difficult to challenge these theoretically.’ In practice, it is an entirely different story: ‘The unequal power between men and women in capitalist society does not miraculously vanish within the organisations for revolutionary change.’
That explains why talented women like Rowbotham ended up trying to reform the system through the likes of the Greater London Council Women’s Committee and in attempting to find a ‘third way’ between reform and revolution (in Beyond the Fragments), only to find there wasn’t one.
The vision of real equality is gone. Rowbotham believes that inequality between the sexes is something we will never fully overcome, because ideas and how we live our lives and relate to individuals is not only socially constructed, but also, ‘We learn to relate through our families and with children who themselves come from families. These relationships affect us not as external ideas but from the innermost self-feelings in our bones.’
Rowbotham writes as if she is expanding Marxism and polishing its rough edges. The opposite is the reality – she is ripping the heart from Marxism and leaving it powerless and ineffectual. The failure of socialist feminism in theory and in practice is an important factor in explaining today’s postfeminists.
 



Moral Panic
Philip Jenkins
Yale University Press £20
‘There is a common thread ... to ignore the real reason for child sex abuse and to refuse to fight against the causes’
Many doors have been opened over the past decade concerning child sexual abuse. The ‘discovery’ of sexual abuse in the family, of ritual abuse by some in the Catholic Church and by a minority of care workers has led many to believe that this was the start of dealing with a pernicious problem. In fact it proved to be the opposite. These doors were slammed shut by the ensuing moral panic over paedophilia.
A new book by Philip Jenkins called Moral Panic is a fascinating and informative read. Jenkins studies the response to child abuse and the moral panics these create over the last 100 years and examines how attitudes, while shifting, have basically remained the same.
Moral panics are not new. From the sexual policing of the newly arrived immigrants at the turn of the century, through the harsh and punitive anti-gay legislation of the 1940s and 1950s, to today’s moral pronouncements, our rulers have always attempted to control our sexuality. Their aim has been the preserve of the family unit and an attack on anything that threatens it. As Jenkins says, ‘Predators, psychopaths and paedophiles represent a very minor component of the real sexual issues faced by children, while even sexual threats must be considered alongside many other dangers arising from physical violence, environmental damage and the myriad effects of pervasive poverty.’ Yet moral panics are focused on this ‘minor component’ and in doing so elevate this component into a common threat, with every child a possible victim.
Despite the press hysteria it is still the case that child sex murders are very rare. Of children under the age of 12 years old in the US, an average of 900 are murdered every year. Some 400 are murdered by a parent and are under one year old, and 54 kids (6 percent) will be killed by a stranger – in only 3 percent of these crimes (27 cases) did ‘a sex offence either [occur] simultaneously with or preceded the murder of the child’. Only five victims a year involved the murder of a child by a stranger in a sexual assault.
One such murder was that of seven year old Megan Kanka, who was raped and strangled in July 1994. Within a month her home state, New Jersey, introduced ‘Megan’s Law’, which compelled sex offenders to register for a ten year period and if convicted a second time to serve mandatory life imprisonment. Two years later and some 35 states had introduced this legislation. It has achieved nothing in dealing with child sex abuse, only feeding the misconception of ‘stranger danger’. This has resulted in the witch hunting of sex offenders and creating a climate of fear and loathing.
Such witch hunting also occurred earlier this century. In 1915 media coverage was ‘intense’ after the murders of two children in New York City. Mobs took to the streets ‘looking for suspicious characters’. The New York Times campaigned for ‘the state to provide adequate places of custody for the feeble minded where they may have the treatment by skilled physicians.’ The introduction of such laws for ‘sexual deviants’ led to between 700 and 800 people being examined by the early 1930s. Again, in 1937, New York City became the scene of mob rule after sex murders of children (with one sheriff recommending that child attackers should be shot on the spot instead of arrested).
Yet who are sex offenders? In the 1990s in New Jersey a 12 year old boy admitted sexually fondling his 8 year old brother in the bath. He received three years’ probation and was then required to register on a sex offenders’ list for the next 15 years!
Among the victims of the moral panic over child sex abuse are gay men. As Jenkins notes, ‘When public fears were at their height, homosexuals were most vulnerable to vice purges and mob vigilantism, to incarceration and medical intervention.’ Sodomy arrests in New York City were at an all time high in the late 1930s, during a moral panic over child killers. A study in the 1950s in New Jersey found that the majority of sex offenders were harmless and convicted of consensual gay sex or something like exhibitionism. Another report recorded that most offenders were ‘immature and underdeveloped emotionally and sexually’ and that ‘sex offenders have one of the lowest rates as repeaters of all sorts of crimes’.
The 1960s and 1970s brought the issue of abuse inside the family to the forefront, but it was shrouded in patriarchy theory. As Jenkins writes, ‘Even in the 1940s, a few writers had seen rape and abuse as a matter or power, aggression and violence, but this was strictly a minority view until the 1970s when feminists stressed that offenders scarcely differed from ordinary men and their sexual urges.’
This view brought together right wingers, who wanted to abolish contraception and sexual education, with some feminists, who united against child pornography and sexual abuse.
Yet the resulting laws in the 1980s have – like before – done nothing to stem child sexual abuse; they have only strengthened the right. Jenkins exposes our rulers’ hypocrisy regarding the safety of children. His treatment of Satanic and Ritualistic Abuse (SRA), where care workers were sentenced to jail because children claimed (with the help of enthusiastic therapists) of ‘meeting cartoon characters, hidden tunnels, having their penises chopped off, barbecued in ovens, dangled over alligator pools’. No physical evidence was ever offered in any trial. As Jenkins notes, ‘The SRA movement represents an eerily postmodern dominance of created illusion over supposedly objective reality.’ By the end of the 1980s the idea that ritual abuse was common had acquired the status of social fact. By 1993-95 SRA was under attack, alongside false memory syndrome. As Jenkins says, we have ‘come full circle’ with respect to child sexual abuse.
This book shows the political weaknesses of those who formulate policies and who fight to implement them. From the turn of the century to the SRA ‘therapists’ today, there is a common thread. This is to ignore the real reason for child sex abuse and to refuse to fight against the causes: sexual repression and the role of the family under capitalism. Nonetheless, this is a book which should be welcomed by anyone who wants to peek behind the headlines and understand the price being paid by many children for our society’s commitment to the nuclear family.
 



The Global Gamble
Peter Gowan
Verso £13
Peter Gowan’s book is a welcome addition to the continuing debate over globalisation. He sets out his analysis of what he has called the ‘Dollar-Wall Street regime’.
Gowan offers us the hard evidence to illustrate the dominance of the US banks, the IMF and the World Bank and, ultimately, US imperialism over the world economy. He argues that the US, in an alliance using the political power of Bill Clinton with the economic power of the banks, engineered the collapse of the south east Asian economies to ensure world domination. Unfortunately, his belief that the collapse of currencies and the movement of the market are determined solely and rationally by the dominant powers hampers his analysis. At times reading The Global Gamble is like flicking through a John Le Carré novel or reading the latest exploits of KGB spies. It is full of unproven conspiracy theories.
It would be wrong to conclude, as Gowan does, that individual capitalists, banks or the state have 100 percent control over the market. Rightly Gowan, like Will Hutton and Larry Elliot, points out the measures that, if enacted, could control sleaze and corruption – like regulation of the stock market and greater control on companies and banks. But, he says,
‘just as capitalism found a way out in the end from the crisis of the 1930s and the war, a way out that offered a greatly improved deal for a large part of humanity, so I believe it could, in principle, again. But I doubt that it will, not because of the nature of capitalism as such, but because a solution would require a tactical radicalism and an intransigence of political will which is difficult to imagine European social democracy as being capable of.’
Here he ends up appealing for a left reformist solution, similar to that of Hutton and Elliott. Much of this appeal is based on contemporary conditions, but his solutions fall flat. His hopes are resting on the shoulders of the now ousted Oskar Lafontaine, the German finance minister who was forced out by the combined forces of big business and the right wing of the SPD:
‘But the new German finance minister, Lafontaine, is certainly different. He raises the possibility of a Keynesianism not so much rooted in the Keynes of redistributing income in the national economy to boost effective demand but in the Keynes of ideas for organising the postwar international economy for growth. The Keynes who sought to propose the kind of “financial repression” and status development strategy for the world, placing productive growth in the saddle and organising euthanasia for the rentier.’
On eastern Europe he examines the development of the reorganised Communist Parties and indicates that the failed economic input from the west after the fall of the Berlin Wall has resulted in wild political fluctuations, with the very real threat from right wing extremists and Nazi parties.
But he harbours a belief that somehow eastern Europe can automatically resist any imposed political or economic domination, particularly from the US.
His illusions in left reformism, Keynesianism and the former eastern European states spoils his powerful arguments against US imperialism.
He ends with an essay on Nato and the EU where he says,
‘We had thought that interwar capitalist society was a thing of the past, a deviation overcome by postwar social progress. But it turns out that the postwar social gains were the deviation and the interwar state and society is again the norm... Europe seems to be drifting toward a divided, turbulent and ugly future.’
The Balkan War showed how right Gowan is. It was a bloody and horrific demonstration of how US imperialism will stop at nothing to remain the world economic and political power.
Unfortunately, The Global Gamble does not hold the answers to how we effectively challenge this domination, but it does offer useful information and many a debating point.
 



A Natural History of Rape
Randy Thornhill and Craig T. Palmer
MIT Press £17.95
I would like to shake the hand of the woman who spat in Thornhill’s face after a lecture he gave in the 1980s. I hope he and his partner in crime, Palmer, encounter more women like her in the future.
Their book is a vile piece of pseudo-scientific right wing nonsense. It serves only one purpose: to excuse rapists and to justify the continuation of women’s oppression. It is an attack on the women’s liberation movement and social scientists. It is derogatory to men, insulting to women and homophobic into the bargain.
Thornhill and Palmer present us with a theoretical justification for rape based on Darwin’s theory of evolution. Yet Darwin would never have offered us anything as crude and as ill-researched as our foes. They may use his language and studies but Darwin was not a biological determinist – Thornhill and Palmer are. They say that ‘science has nothing to say about what is right and what is wrong in the ethical sense. Biology provides understanding, not justification, of human behaviour.’ They want us to believe that theirs is a science book, using objective rules and laws. In fact it is a political book – similar to those used to justify capitalist greed (Dawkins’ The Selfish Gene) and to condone racism (Murray’s The Bell Curve). Now we have one on rape!
They have written off society as a factor in our behaviour, believing that our sexuality and sexual behaviour are predetermined by our genes and mirroring the behaviour of animals. Everything is offered up, from scorpionfly rape to monogamous harbour seals.
‘We would not be surprised to hear social scientists suggest, next, that insects, other anthropods, other invertebrates, and most vertebrates are somehow being influenced during development by music videos, television and movies.’
They use the available studies and data on rape, particularly ‘date’ rape, to justify their view of men as animals with one mission: to reproduce. In doing so, they offer us no explanation for the small number of rapes committed by strangers and tie themselves in knots about ‘evolved behavioural psychology’. If you can’t explain it – make up a theory! For example, ‘We call a behaviour learned when we have identified a specific experiential factor as necessary for its occurrence.’ Or try this one: ‘Women’s sexual jealousy toward their mates could more accurately be called resource and commitment jealousy.’ So, if rape is biologically determined, it is justifiable on the grounds that men just can’t help themselves.
As they say: ‘The large size of the human penis and testicles relative to those of other primates also appears to be an adaptation for sperm competition.’
Coupled with their homophobia, the book makes horrific reading:
‘The sexual behaviour of homosexual men also illustrates men’s evolved motivation for sexual variety without commitment. Although heterosexual and homosexual men desire new sexual partners in equal number, homosexual men have far more new partners because their sex partners are men, who share their desire for new partners.’
It gets worse: ‘Rapes and other sexual assaults of males by males constitute only about 1 to 3 percent of sexual assaults, but data show that these sexual assualters also prefer youthful features in their victims. This pattern is likely to be a byproduct of men’s evolved preference for young sex partners.’ This could be the editorial line of the Sun – gay men are promiscuous and prone to paedophilia!
Thornhill and Palmer are at least consistent – their views on women are as progressive as their opinion of homosexuals. Women are, in the tradition of the right wing, blamed for rape and sexual violence. Of course, they wouldn’t court disaster by saying that we ‘asked for it’, but that is what they are in fact saying. Women are offered ‘advice’ on how to avoid rape: don’t wear low necklines, etc. Sound familiar? We’re reading the Sun again.
There are many problems with this book, one being that the straw doll being knocked is a right wing caricature of feminism. Therefore, rape is about sex for Thornhill and Palmer, about violence for the feminists. What about the relationship between the two put into a social and economic context? Even Susan Brownmiller had to end up contradicting herself in her pathbreaking book on rape. She wanted to write a book to prove that ‘every man is a potential rapist’, and after careful research discovered this wasn’t the case.
Every right wing bigot will applaud their ‘scientific’ justification for rape and its conclusions. We need to see it for what it is – filth. And the only two animals worth mentioning are the pigs who wrote it.
 



The last five years have been punctuated by outbursts of moral panic and mob rule over paedophilia. Tabloid headlines scream about child sex abuse, demanding justice against offenders. [1] The scares touch a nerve among millions of people who feel that they have to go to any lengths to protect children from danger. Yet the effect of the media scares is to target some of the most high profile and unpleasant – but at the same time rare – cases, while ignoring the much greater arenas of child sexual abuse. These are the family, where the vast majority of such abuse takes place, and the various institutions of capitalist society which try to substitute for the family – the children’s homes run by church and state which have repeatedly been involved in child abuse scandals.
Far from protecting children, the result is the opposite. There is the illusion that something is being done, with politicians and newspaper pundits vying to call for longer sentences. Newspapers like the News of the World publish pictures of alleged paedophiles to sell newspapers and then express fake horror when these people are attacked, forced to leave their homes or driven to suicide. Effective mob rule is created on estates like Paulsgrove in Portsmouth where parents organise demonstrations, draw up lists of people they want driven off the estate for alleged sexual offences and create a climate of accusation and suspicion in which no serious debate can take place.
When, predictably, innocent people are wrongly accused, and young children are seen carrying placards saying ‘Hang them’ or ‘Off with their balls’, then the same papers and politicians rush to condemn this frightening ‘underclass’ which has only taken the rhetoric to its logical conclusion. Any socialist response has to start from a very different approach.
Eight year old Sarah Payne’s horrific murder will not be avenged by automatic life sentences for sex offenders, hinted at by New Labour’s home secretary, Jack Straw, and demanded by the Tory leader, William Hague. Nor will further tragedies be avoided by the implementation of ‘Sarah’s Law’, based on the American model of Megan’s Law where communities can be notified of local sex offenders. Evidence from the US points to the opposite being the case: paedophiles are driven underground, thus making it impossible to monitor their movements. There are also the innocent victims of mob terror – of the 20 names on the Paulsgrove residents’ hit list of sex offenders three were people who have never committed any crime, and, a 17 year old who had sex with a 15 year old.
But the real victims are the many children who will continue to suffer abuse, sexual and physical, as a result of a system that encourages mob rule and cracks on about life sentences, but which does little or nothing to deal with the real centres of abuse, and which often ignores or covers up what is going on there.
 
Abuse and the family
The alternative to the reactionary response would mean addressing the fact that most child sex abuse occurs in the family, carried out by relatives or those who are close to the victims. This fact is blurred by the focus on the ‘stranger danger’ of predatory paedophiles, ignoring the fact that, as one eminent researcher has said, ‘bad men don’t get near to children – nice guys do.’ In Britain an average of eight children die at the hands of a stranger every year, whilst a child dies every three days at the hands of a family member. The family is the most dangerous place for children – between the ages of one and five it is the most common place for a child to be killed. In 1995 the chances of being murdered if you were under one year old was almost double the national average and children of that age were most at risk of being killed by a parent. In such circumstances the vast amount of warning about child abuse, propaganda about the dangers to children and so on should be directed to the family. We have yet to see a Daily Mail or News of the World feature which highlights the danger of distorted personalities and twisted sexuality inside the family. That would be to challenge the whole notion of the family, where the children are seen as the property of their parents (after all, physical abuse of children is condoned by many of these same people) and there is an accepted hierarchy in the family where the man is at the top.
The problem with the debate on child sexual abuse is that it is circumscribed by right wing hysteria, which has created an atmosphere of hatred and scapegoating. The current climate limits any real understanding concerning the nature of sex abuse against children, where it happens and who the real offenders are. Moreover, it has effectively curtailed any meaningful discussion about the solution to the problem that blights the lives of many children.
Many sexual crimes will never be reported, and only a tiny minority will result in prosecution and conviction. Nonetheless, the monster danger posed by serial, predatory paedophiles painted by the press is put into some perspective on examination of the 1996 Home Office statistics on sexual abuse. At just over 4,000 cases, this represented a 40 percent increase from 1979–89, although it still amounted to less than 1 percent of all recorded crime.
The vast majority of sexually abused children will personally know their abuser. Home Office figures show that 80 percent of abuse happens in the home, with male relatives being the largest category of abusers. One of the earliest surveys into sex abuse and neglect, of 1,100 cases in New York in 1969, showed that three quarters of victims knew their abuser. Of the 1.2 million calls taken by Childline in 1996–97, strangers accounted for 5 percent of sexual abuse and 1 percent of physical abuse. Fathers accounted for 27 percent of sexual abuse and 38 percent of physical abuse. The rest were relatives or friends.
The majority of sexual offences are committed not by ‘dirty old men’ but by young people, the majority of whom do not reoffend. A 1986 study of US law court statistics found that the same age group carried out 56 percent of all sexual abuse on under 18 year olds. When asked about themselves, the majority of all abusers said they had started committing sexual abuse when they were under 18 years old. A consistent finding from all the data available shows that there are an ‘unusually high’ number of sex offenders who have been abused themselves. An American study in 1987 estimated that between 30 and 50 percent of sex offences against children in the early 1980s were committed by adolescents.
There were 10,000 names on police records before the mid-1990s (and the start of the moral panics). In 1997 it soared to 25,000 ‘suspected or convicted paedophiles’ on confidential police records. Among ‘schedule one offenders’, who remain on a register for life, is a young woman who is banned for life from contact with children because she ripped a chain off a 13 year old’s neck when she was 16 years old. The 1989 sex offenders register contains a six year old boy who put his hands down a girl’s pants in the playground. If convicted, sex offenders and paedophiles are trapped in a system that creates monsters and then institutionalises them.
 
More funding is needed
Treatment programmes are woefully inadequate, and suffer from cuts and underfunding. According to the Prison Service annual report for 1999–2000, only 585 convicted sex offenders completed a treatment programme compared with the target of 700. The shortfall was blamed on a shortage of qualified staff. If Jack Straw wanted to seriously reduce reoffending he would immediately fund a programme that sought to do exactly this. Instead money is denied and, in some cases, withdrawn from such programmes.
The latest Home Office study on sex offenders notes that ‘men who sexually offend against children report a lack of intimacy and high levels of emotional loneliness.’
Another survey in 1988 pointed out that among ‘untreated’ offenders those with a low intellect are most likely to reoffend. In the same year another study found that the people most likely not to reoffend are men over 40 years old outside of the family – the very men we are told are the real problem.
The National Association for the Development of Work with Sex Offenders has argued for extended supervision orders, something which has been available to judges from 1992 yet rarely used. There is no shortage of recommendations. Mike Taylor, director of children’s services at the NSPCC, says, ‘The trouble is those recommendations have never been consistently implemented across all authorities.’
In reality it is impossible for the institutions of capitalism to face up to and deal with questions of child abuse. To do so would challenge the very basis of capitalist society. For to understand sexual abuse we need to understand two aspects of that society. Firstly, it is based on commodity production where everything can be bought and sold on the market. This includes sexuality, and a market based on commodities even uses sexuality to appeal to children – look at Barbie dolls and children’s beauty contests. Sex can be bought through prostitution and pornography. Rich westerners holiday in countries like Thailand expressly to buy sexual services. Secondly, the family plays a central role under capitalism. It reproduces the existing generation of workers at very little cost to the capitalist class and brings up, cares for and socialises the next generation.
The capitalist class always ensures, therefore, that it shores up the family both materially and ideologically. Our sexuality is rigidly defined under capitalism, and obedience to our ‘superiors’ is taught in the family. We are told that the family is the ‘norm’, even though it hides within its walls a multitude of inadequacies and abuses. Because any alternative to the family is unthinkable to the capitalists, everything is done to propagate the myth that most families are happy and only the ‘dysfunctional’ ones suffer. Those who don’t measure up to the ideal are made to feel that this is due to personal failings and inadequacies, not those of society.
Most families and individuals within them try to cope more or less successfully. But for a minority the tensions and misery of the family, the distorted sexuality of capitalism and the belief that sexuality is something which can be bought and sold – and also sometimes stolen – means that sexual abuse is a real but unpleasant fact. Solutions to it mean tackling the huge and deep-rooted reasons why it exists – not ignoring it and then blaming the poorest and most oppressed when they react in ways of which the government and media do not approve. Instead the Blair government has played into the hands of the most conservative and reactionary. At the same time it allows open season to the Murdoch press which creates the witch-hunt but then sneers at the witch-hunters, all the while conceding their demands.

Footnote
1. Defining abuse?
The National Commission of Enquiry into the Prevention of Child Abuse, an NSPCC body, defines abuse as follows:
‘Child abuse consists of anything which individuals, institutions or processes do, or fail to do, which directly or indirectly harms children, or damages their prospects of safe and healthy development into adulthood.
‘Abuse need not, under this formula, be deliberate, direct or even committed by a person. It can be carried out by vague abstractions, by “institutions and processes”. It need not even cause actual harm to the children concerned, only to their “prospects”, which they may overcome. And the harm itself remains left to subjective assessment.’
 



Talking Work: An Oral History
Trevor Blackwell and Jeremy Seabrook
Faber and Faber £15.99
The changing nature of the workforce, the workplace and its implications for the wider transformation of society are arguments which socialists face daily, alongside those about the death of the working class both numerically and as a social force for change.
Blackwell and Seabrook’s book revolves around a series of interviews with workers, their experiences of work, unionisation and home life. These partly reflect the changes in the workforce. They start with a shoe and boot worker, a coachman, a miner and steel workers. These are dynamic and energetic. Moreover, their stories are both interesting and informative.
But they are pessimistic too. Len, a shoemaker for 49 years, says, ‘What’s gone out of life is the quality of things you buy. I think it stems from the root cause that people have no pride in their work.’ Robert, a steel worker from the age of 15 in 1942, thinks that, ‘Young people take no interest in work now ... They have the wrong attitude today. Discipline is nil. They don’t work, they only go for the money.’
Particularly in comparison with later interviews, these workers convey an image of a lost tradition, that of the manual working class, skilled and organised, and which is now gone forever to be replaced by workers who are identified by their fragmentation and instability.
But has all this working class tradition been lost? True, there have been fundamental changes, especially the decline of manufacturing and the growth in the service industries. However, these changes do not negate the actual organisation of workers or their potential strength. It is not, as Blackwell and Seabrook claim, that ‘the working class has been, as it were, evicted from history ... a working class which emerged from, and defined itself against, the lower orders, appears to have lost itself again.’
There are around 20 million workers in Britain – a third of them trade unionists represented by some 300,000 shop stewards. And, just like yesteryear, there still exists brutal exploitation by a class which constantly squeezes workers to pay for their crisis. Over 5 million workers earn less than £4.15 an hour.
Talking Work fails to grasp that the fundamental character of the working class remains the same. This becomes more apparent in the later interviews. Women workers are portrayed as peripheral and no voices are heard from the many women employed in the financial sector or those working in the big superstores.
Women, already 44 percent of the workforce, are expected to be the majority of Britain’s workers by the end of the century. A third of women workers are in trade unions and the majority of women in employment are full time.
Blackwell and Seabrook ignore all of this to push their theory of the domination of an underclass. They state that ‘with this complete attachment of the working class to capitalism other, older fissures and fragmentings have become more obvious, particularly those which once divided the “respectable” working class from the “rough” working class. These two elements, a cleavage once scarcely visible to the outsider, have gone their different ways. The split has become magnified, as a majority of the working class has gone upward and a minority downward. The majority migrated to the middle class, whilst the minority sink to the underclass.’
Talking Work is a politically edited series of snapshots which leave you feeling empty and disorientated.
At heart the authors are pessimistic, viewing workers as self interested and motivated only by personal greed. Their opinion is that ‘there is now no disharmony between the interests of rich and poor, united in their common commitment to more.’
The ‘solidarity and values’ of the working class – by which they mean western workers – have disappeared. ‘They live on, particularly in the Third World.’ And here’s the crux of their argument: that western workers have created the problem of Third World poverty by their individual greed.
‘The resolution of the problem of the working class within western society has been achieved, as we have seen, only by having been externalised; that is to say, it has created the ecological crisis and intensified poverty in other parts of the world.’
No mention here of the IMF, the World Bank or the huge multinationals who hop the globe in search of a cheap source of labour, or, indeed, that Britain itself is becoming a low wage economy – far from the working class moving ahead leaving an underclass behind, poverty pervades the working class.
Every region of the UK, with the exception of the south east, has lower labour costs than southern Italy. And while the poor get poorer the world over, the rich are getting richer. But the reversal of power Blackwell and Seabrook demand is not from the rich to the poor, but from western workers to Third World workers, thus conveniently missing the source of the problem: worldwide class divisions.
Singled out for criticism are Marx and ‘revolutionaries ... still wedded to antique prophecies which would have put the working class at the centre of a project of redemption.’ There is no mention of the failure of Labour and trade union leaders to lead a fight on the minimum wage or in defence of workers’ basic rights, of jobs and services.
But Blackwell and Seabrook would probably view these struggles as movements of avarice!
 



‘Trade unions are in crisis across the world. Twenty years ago they were confident, aggressive organisations able to mobilise workers’ power in strikes and on the streets. In today’s western market economies they have fallen into sharp decline, defensive and uncertain of their future.’
Financial Times, August 1995
Tory minister Michael Portillo claimed six months ago that the British had ‘kicked the habit of going on strike’. Pundits analysing recent strikes dismiss them as the last dying gasp of dinosaurs.
The real picture is somewhat more complicated. The reawakening of sections of the working class is accompanied by the burden of years of defeat and setbacks. It is both conditioned by, and in conflict with, Blairism as Labour’s leaders try to limit the class struggle in the run up to the general election.
In the 1980s significant groups of workers were taken on and beaten by Thatcher – miners, steel workers, civil servants, hospital workers and printers. These attacks led to a drop in union membership – from 13 million in 1979 to 12 million in 1981 (when the steel workers were attacked and manufacturing industry went into a massive slump), 10 million in 1989 (which is almost an exact correlation to the rise in unemployment) and 9.5 million in 1991. But this does not represent a massive haemorrhage from the trade unions. There are still 300,000 shop stewards and reps, and over a half of all workers in Britain work in a unionised workplace. Of the top 50 companies in Britain, 47 are unionised.
Thatcher won many important battles, but she certainly didn’t win the war. One significant victory was the anti-union legislation, which Blair is refusing to repeal. The new laws have disciplined the union leaders and led to the farce of the giant and potentially powerful TGWU refusing to back the 500 dockers who refused to cross picket lines in Liverpool.
Strike days hit an all time low in 1994 when only 278,000 days were ‘lost’. The total for the first nine months of 1995 was 238,000. Since then job centre staff, Merseyside firefighters, Ford and Vauxhall workers and Tate & Lyle production workers have taken selective strike action. There are, or have been, all-out strikes at Liverpool docks, Bolton College, JJ Fast Foods and Hillingdon Hospital. Ford car workers have balloted for action over pay in the new year, and Vauxhall workers have begun to take action. In November last year an unofficial strike by 7,000 postal workers in Scotland ended in victory and prompted headlines like the Daily Mail’s, ‘Bosses fear return to the bad old days’. Other papers have made similar claims.
As the fire brigades union leader Ken Cameron said in the wake of the postal strikes, ‘There’s no doubt people are saying enough is enough and the membership is moving ahead of the trade union leadership.’
But when the figures are collated, 1995 will show only a modest rise on 1994. However, it’s not simply the number of strikes that counts. After all, set against the 1979 total of 29 million days, neither year looks much to shout about. What the media reports have spotted is that our class is beginning to move again.
In terms of strikes, no path breaking pattern emerged in 1995. Most were defensive disputes initiated by the employers. Nevertheless, our side clocked up some important achievements. The eight week strike by library staff in Sheffield was a significant victory. This strike was in sharp contrast to the protracted and defeated Nalgo strikes at Newham and Islington in the 1980s.
Not normally noted for their militancy, lecturers at Southwark College raised £60,000 in solidarity as they fought a four week strike that stopped compulsory redundancies.
At Connah’s Quay power station in March UCATT emerged from the shadows when building workers in six different companies struck and won the reinstatement of two labourers.
Two other disputes speak volumes about the present period. The attempts by British Telecom bosses to sack union activist Mike Luzio, and by NHS trust managers to sack Unison branch chair and staff nurse Dave Carr were both beaten off without coming to a strike. In each case management knew they had a serious campaign for strike action on their hands and caved in. In the present climate fighting back attracts support, and the bosses know it.
The Tories have long ceased to have it all their own way. In the 1980s they won with a strategy of the carrot and the stick. An extra couple of percent was usually enough to buy off the union leaders. It was easy to think that someone else’s fight wasn’t yours. Now the attacks on workers are quickly generalised which breeds solidarity.
Thousands have turned up to the Liverpool docks demos. Even bigger numbers have contributed financially. Nearly 1,000 job centre staff joined the CPSA in the first week of their action, including a good number of casuals.
More importantly, tens of thousands of workers continue to vote to strike, only to see it thrown away by the union leaders. The NHS, British Rail and London Underground are only the most criminal of these. The survey Trends in Trade Unions, commissioned by the TUC, showed that of nearly 500 ballots examined, although 66 percent produced yes votes, in only 82 did industrial action take place. Some were victories of course, but in general the secret ballot and the use of the law have become the favoured weapons of the union leaders and the bosses respectively. So by only looking at the number of strike days it is easy to misjudge the mood of the class.
As the general election approaches and Labour rides high in the polls, the union leaders are left with the job of making sure the working class doesn’t step out of line. It isn’t always easy.
Most of the time the union leaders hold the line, using the anger of workers to win just enough concessions from hesitant bosses. But workers are more ready than ever to call a shoddy deal a sell out, and to vent their anger on the bureaucrats. Striking civil servants in Leeds managed to force their union leaders to keep the strikes going just before Xmas, despite attempts to settle with nothing new on the table.
Thatcher’s plan was to shackle the unions, and break traditions of solidarity and secondary action. Most of the recent disputes show both the limits of their achievements and the damage done by the Tories. The defeats of the past haunt us today, while at present workers’ confidence often doesn’t match the aggressiveness of the bosses’ attacks.
There is a political volatility inside the unions and active intervention, argument, debate and building solidarity are vital. We have emerged from the dark days of the 1980s. Today workers are more willing to take on the bully boys, and their struggles can begin to harness the feelings of bitterness into a wider fightback.
 



Black England
Gretchen Gerzina
John Murray £19.99



‘What are England’s rights, I ask,
Me from my delights to sever,
Me to torture, me to task?’



The abolitionist decade of the 1790s saw sympathetic poems portraying the plight of the slaves. It also launched ‘political jewellery’ with Wedgwood’s medallion of a kneeling black man, with raised shackled wrists, pleading, ‘Am I not a man and a brother?’ This was worn on hairpins, on bracelets and on snuff boxes.
The activities of the rich (which dominate in this book) and the poor (who get passing references) against the brutality meted out to slaves stand as a testament to anti-racism. They also stand as proof against those who argue that inequality has always existed and that all whites benefited from slavery – which was eventually abolished in 1833.
Many blacks entered the world of the rich and powerful, like the shopkeeper and former slave Ignatius Sancho. The Prince of Wales had a black friend, as did Mozart. It was a society where class, not colour, was the barrier to success.
Equal treatment is given to the tiny minority of rich blacks who attended elite schools and occupied, alongside their white counterparts, a privileged position above the vast mass of poor people. It was poverty which united the masses and not racism which divided them.
Racism hasn’t been a static feature of our history – from the 1500s when there was the first black presence in Britain to today. The slave trade ended in the early 1800s, mainly because it had served its economic purpose, but it took until 1905 before the first law on immigration with the Aliens Act aimed at restricting Jews fleeing the eastern European pogroms.
It was the slave trade which built capitalism that gave birth to the vile racism that remains today to divide black and white. Even so, it was an ideology our rulers had to fight to establish. They did so by crushing any organised resistance to their rule. ‘They claim their rights as Englishmen’ the black radical William Davidson told the court in 1820 just before he was hung and beheaded along with four white radicals.
As the anti-slavery movement grew, the bosses who profited from the trade used any justification to stop its abolition. When, in 1781, the master of the English ship Zong took a decision to throw 133 slaves overboard to protect his insurance, there was an outcry. ‘This is a case of chattels or goods. It is really so; it is the case of throwing over goods; for this purpose, and the purpose of the insurance, they are goods and property: whether right or wrong, we have nothing to do with it,’ said the solicitor general.
Statements like this fed the revolt against the inhumanity of slavery and the revolts shifted the justification for the trade. In the latter years of the 1700s and early years of the 1800s pro-slave traders used less brutal reasons – one of which was them offering blacks an idyllic life under palm trees, with food and drink being plentiful and their families living happily!
Gerzina’s book is an interesting read about the lives of a handful of slaves in London, where an estimated 20,000 were held in bondage. Most of the book is devoted to the handful of rich whites who campaigned against slavery with little mention of the forces which propelled their activity.
The American War of Independence, the slave revolts and uprisings in the West Indies and the radicals who agitated on the streets in Britain are mentioned, but you feel they are treated as peripheral events by Gerzina. For instance on two occasions she mentions how one visitor from America was horrified (he was rich and white) at the tolerance shown to blacks and shocked at inter-racial relationships, while another (poor and black) was delighted at the differences. This is not really expanded or explained.
In fact, you feel that she has written it so loosely and without comment that you could take what you want out of it. So one reviewer could say that ‘the book portrays what is effectively a black underclass, internationally manipulated and discarded by powerful agencies.’ I think the purpose of Gerzina’s book was to prove the opposite! For a less one sided approach you should read Peter Fryer’s Staying Power.
 



A Woman’s Place: An Oral History of Working Class Women 1890–1940
Women and Families: An Oral History 1940–1970
Elizabeth Roberts
Blackwell £12.99 each
It is refreshing to read a book that cuts through the picture of the family as an unchanging entity encompassing patriarchal attitudes and a lifetime of servitude for women.
Elizabeth Roberts debunks these myths, often accepted in feminist writings, through her oral study of family life in the three Lancashire towns of Barrow, Lancaster and Preston from 1890–1970.
Although she describes herself as a feminist, her studies led her to draw far from feminist conclusions:
‘There was little feeling among the majority of the women interviewed that they or their mothers had been particularly exploited by men, at least not by working class men ... women who were conscious of their exploitation interpreted it in terms of class conflict.’
It is precisely through Roberts’ work on these families that we witness the ever changing nature of the family – its relationships and attitudes to sex, work, education and social life. The picture is one of continuity and change. The family survives with the help of the welfare state, with education and health reforms ensuring the well being of family members. The onus on the family for child rearing has remained the same from 1890 through 1970 and until today.
It is the taking care of children that dominates and shapes the practice and attitudes of family members. What affects that is the economic standing of the family, and which of its members work and for how long. In stark contrast to feminist theory, Roberts points out that the majority of women held ‘power’ inside the family and this was not related to her position in the workforce, but due mainly to personality.
Although work did affect how housework was done, Roberts notes that in Preston, where the women worked full time, men were central to helping in the home unlike the other areas where women worked part time or not at all.
Large families (one woman had 21 kids!) and dire poverty were the scene at the turn of the century. Even when women worked, from their homes or in the mills, housework was time consuming – with some practices, like donkey-stoning, surviving into the 1960s. The advent of household implements like vacuum cleaners and washing machines transformed women’s lives. Nationally 3.6 percent of families had washing machines in 1942, 29 percent in 1958 and 64 percent in 1969.
The building of council houses was revolutionary! One man remembers being rehoused onto a council estate in Lancaster in 1936 and the rota for relatives and friends to use the bath.
The advent of more readily available contraception meant that limiting the size of your family was uncomplicated and realisable. As Roberts points out, ‘A woman’s job was not so likely to affect her fertility rate as her fertility rate was likely to affect her employment.’
The overwhelming changes took place inside of the family because of outside factors – women entering the workforce en masse. It brought women financial independence and confidence. One woman remembers going to work in Vickers during the war and skipping all the way home with her £5 wage packet – she’d previously earned 15 shillings as a domestic worker. The postwar boom and the advent of the welfare state sucked more women than ever into the workforce.
Whilst escaping work was seen as emancipation for women in the 1890s working 60 hour shifts in the mills, getting a job was perceived as liberating for women in the 1950s and 1960s. Most women spoke fondly of the companionship that work brought and a couple of women worked just to get out of the house. Accompanying these massive changes in work and home patterns was an ideological sea-change regarding sex, children and divorce.
The more affluent position of working class people and the shorter working week meant there was more time to spend together and to afford consumer goods and have holidays. In 1951 only one house in 15 had a television, by 1975 this had shot up to nine in every ten. In 1945 there was one car to every 32 people, this has risen to one for every 4.7 people in 1970.
This changed relationships – particularly in respect to children. Roberts could say that at the turn of the century ‘there was no division between the world of childhood and the adult world of work’. This had radically changed by the 1940s onwards.
Although marriage, and increasingly weddings, were still a major feature in people’s lives the expectations of children by 1970 were much different from their parents. This was in all spheres of life, from jobs to sex and marriage.
Through Roberts’ books we witness working class family life not as the false myth peddled by the right wing defenders of the family of mum, dad and two kids living happily ever after. But neither is it the crude model of brutal patriarchal domination presented to us by feminists. It is, instead, a complex combination of changing relationships shaped by an ever changing capitalist system which the family is there to serve.
 






David Alton’s Bill is an attack on abortion rights. It is merely the latest in a series of attacks on the 67 Act. However the roots of the debate on sexuality, contraception and abortion go much deeper.
Julie Waterson examines this history






THE FIGHT to achieve sexual liberation is not a new one. Debate and argument over birth control and a woman’s right to control her body have raged since the beginnings of capitalism. The echoes can still be heard today.
The socialist tradition is of particular interest today for all socialists fighting the Alton Bill. It is certainly a tradition studded with flaws, inconsistencies and one which often drew reactionary conclusions.
Sexual radicals in the late 1820s and early 1830s in America started publishing material on birth control and “free love” (relationships without marriage). Notable were the utopian socialists William Thompson and Robert Dale Owen – son of the British utopian Robert Owen, who is said to have provided condoms in his New Lanark factory in the early 1800s.
They believed in control over emotions and sexuality. In the words of Robert Dale Owen from his book Moral Physiology published in 1830:
“Her feelings, her interests ... should be an imperative law. She it is who bears the burden, and therefore with her also should the decision rest.”
Birth control was practised in the Utopian communities in America. In Oneida in the 1870s “male continence” was practised, whereby men held back their orgasms and diverted their sperm into the woman’s urethra. This was developed by Alice Stockham in 1896 who argued for “soul unions” through “karezza” – prolonged intercourse without orgasm for men and women.
Progressively they saw sex separately from reproduction, believing in experimentation and demanding fuller, better relationships.
However, it wasn’t the politics of Owen and Thompson which came to dominate the field of birth control in the later nineteenth century, it was those of the eugenicists, who largely based their ideas on the works of Malthus.
 
MALTHUS, who wrote in the mid-1800s, argued that world poverty was due to overpopulation. His solution was the restriction of births amongst the lower classes. He constructed graphs depicting the mass despair and destitution people would face if they didn’t stop breeding. World production, according to Malthus, couldn’t meet world reproduction.
This led the Malthusians to pronounce the world over-populated by “degenerates”. They berated the middle classes as “selfish” for limiting the size of their families and recommended sterilisation for “mental defectives”.
They were patronising and condescending towards the working class. Their attitude towards strikes was: “The only good strike is one against large families.” Indeed they were viciously anti-working class, demanding their numbers be limited. They also called on middle class women to stop using birth control and abortion, saying they demonstrated frivolity and self-indulgence reflecting a love of luxury.
Whilst many feminists, socialists and radicals formally rejected the more reactionary Malthusian positions, their inability to reject them in reality tied sexual politics to the apron strings of reaction. Indeed, many joined the early twentieth century Malthusian League (later the New Generation League) to campaign for contraception amongst the working classes.
It is without doubt that contraception and abortion were very widespread – especially in working class areas where women worked.
The crude birth rate fell from 36.6 per 1,000 in 1876 to 24 per 1,000 by the outbreak of the First World War. This decline started in the upper and middle classes in the 1870s and 1880s when middle class women began to find a role in the professions.
This period provided middle class women with careers – in teaching, in the civil service, in journalism – where previously their only “career” was marriage.
Earlier the defeat of the Chartist movement in the 1830s and 1840s led to the restructuring of the working class family which had been torn apart by capitalism. It created smaller, healthier families across all classes. The poor, however, bore the brunt of the reactionary ideology which accompanied this restructuring.
The Poor Laws of 1834 introduced “punitive” sanctions – against women who bore illegitimate children. Priority, in terms of meagre benefits, was given to “respectable” (married) families. Illegitimacy declined by 40 percent in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, but infant and maternal mortality remained high.
These changes combined to assure the bosses of their future source of surplus value – healthy workers for the factories. They don’t, however, fully explain the changing pattern of childbirth rates.
For an explanation of this we must look at women’s role in the workforce and their attempts to control their fertility.
 
FOR poor families repeated periods of pregnancy destroyed the woman’s health and, where work was available (as it was in textiles), limited her ability to earn. Poverty, bad housing and poor health led to early deaths for parents and children. Infant mortality decreased after 1911, but it took until the 1940s for the number of maternal deaths caused by childbirth to decrease (childbirth was second only to tuberculosis as the major cause of death amongst women at the turn of the century).
Because of the unreliability and unavailability of contraception, abortion was the most common and accepted method of controlling fertility.
This was recognised early on in the nineteenth century. In 1822 Richard Carlile received a letter from Francis Place, who published one of the first pamphlets on birth control, saying that “the means to destroy the foetus had been practised by many married women”. He listed among them wives of tailors and plumbers and skilled craftsmen. Although abortion was made illegal in 1803 and tightened up in the 1861 Offences against Persons Act, imprisonment of abortionists only happened if women died or were seriously injured.
The 1860s and 1870s saw abortion being debated in the press as the “flight from maternity”. Medical journals mention the widespread use of drugs and chemicals to induce abortion.
A study of birth control in northern England between 1876 and 1906 showed that abortion was common in 26 of 104 districts surveyed. All 26 were urban working class areas. Eleven of these were Lancashire textile towns where the decline in the birth rate was higher than average due to the large numbers of married women working.
Higher than average falls in the birth rate were noted in all areas where industrial employment was available for women.
Despite the evident social and economic necessity for working class women to control their fertility and despite the glaring poverty, many “radicals” refused to support birth control and abortion as they were associated with promiscuity, prostitution and venereal disease.
 
THE last half of the nineteenth century was a period of intense social upheaval as the capitalist system fought to consolidate itself through the state and the church. The ruling classes fought back working class opposition and successfully saw through the economic crisis of the 1870s. However, the period did produce a layer of people opposed to their methods and many of their ideas.
Almost exclusively middle and upper class, the radicals, including the eugenicists, formed clubs and committees and attempted movements to challenge the prevailing ideology. The church was challenged, relationships were analysed and the working masses were to be liberated.
Working class radicals of the day – like the leaders of the American syndicalist union the Wobblies, and many British and French feminists and socialists – were influenced by the ideas of the radicalised petite-bourgeoisie.
Some of the eugenicists had openly right wing views. Yet this still didn’t protect them from attack by the state.
Annie Besant and Charles Bradlaugh were hauled up to the Old Bailey in 1877, charged with morally corrupting the young and inciting them to obscene and unnatural practices. As leaders of the British Freethought (atheist) movement, they published Fruits of Philosophy, which was written in 1830 by a Boston freethinking doctor, Dr Knowlton. He had already spent three months in jail as a result of this pamphlet.
The pamphlet adhered to Malthus’s work, but outlined methods of contraception including condoms, sponges and postcoital syringing with chemical solutions. Chastity would be preserved, it argued, if people married young and without fear. Insanity too would be prevented if people didn’t indulge in “solitary gratification”.
The issue of sexuality created much argument and debate. Tensions mounted and eventually formed clearly along class lines. This is illustrated by the behaviour of the exclusive radical Men and Women’s Club. Karl Pearson, a socialist and future eugenicist, founded the club in 1885 to discuss “from the historical and scientific as distinguished from the theological standpoint” the relationships between the sexes.
It had 20 members but many associate members and held open meetings. All were “freethinkers” – middle class and Oxbridge educated. Included among them were Olive Schreiner and Annie Besant.
Although some gay men were involved, homosexuality was viewed as the male preserve of a certain social class. Most discussion took place around marriage and marital sex.
Eleanor Marx was refused entry because of her “free union” with Edward Aveling. She was cursed by Annie Besant in the pages of the Freethought journal for lowering moral standards and bringing the movement into disrepute (since Aveling was a freethinker).
The group never reached agreement on birth control. Some women argued that it “vulgarised the emotions” leading to immorality. The majority agreed that birth control allowed men more control over women’s bodies as men were “beasts of prey”.
A minority argued that sex could bring mutual pleasure to both sexes. The majority view equated this with prostitution! They were also against what they termed “legalised prostitution” – birth control for middle class women or state benefits for mothers at home – as both, they said, would legalise men’s control over women’s bodies.
Debates which unified the club centred on the grossly unequal divorce laws and sexist attitudes towards middle class women entering the professions for the first time. Those inequalities led rich women to openly challenge and reject society’s view of them as feminine and passive.
In the same milieu was a small but influential body which attempted to see sex as a science – the sexologists. They argued that women and men needed a sexual outlet and that it was emotionally and physically damaging not to have sex, although they still advocated a passive role for women.
 
SEXOLOGY became associated with the “New Moralists” at the turn of the century. They argued for free unions and vigorous heterosexuality. Active sexuality was the key, whereas spinsters were described as “the withered tree, the aciduous vestal under whose pale shadow we chill and whiten”.
The sexual radical Havelock Ellis argued against the sexologists. He said that to label women as passive, with a sexual appetite lower than men’s, would be a threat to relationships. It would render women frigid, whilst men were deemed to play the role of pleasing their wives.
Nonetheless the New Moralists were progressive in arguing for relationships to be freely entered and freely left.
Sexual relationships, abortion and birth control were more openly discussed by wider groups of people at the beginning of the twentieth century. This was partly due to the rising influence of socialist and radical ideas, but also a reflection of how widespread the practice of abortion and birth control was.
At the end of the First World War the 1918 Maternity and Child Welfare Act was introduced which established, however inadequately, health visitors, state food provisions and some day nurseries. Childbirth increasingly came under the wing of the state, ensuring healthy and fit workers for the future.
Still abortion was the most common form of limiting births. The 1926–9 Royal Commission on Population heard:
“... the methods used [to limit family size] were very rarely contraceptives. They were limits applied not before but after pregnancy was assumed to have occurred ... The married woman was in the habit of anticipating her menstrual period by drenching herself with violent purgatives, or by resorting to any other of the reputed means for interruption of pregnancy – not only chemicals, but physical.”
 
RECORDS from clinics which served working class women in the 1920s and 1930s show “that a third to a half of all pregnancy losses resulted in miscarriage, natural or self-induced”. In Liverpool withdrawal was the most favoured form of birth control, with condoms coming a poor second. Abortifacients pills and implements came third. It was noted in Salford that abortion was “almost a convention” when married women got “caught” again.
Condoms were far too expensive for workers, while they were widely used by the middle classes. In 1920 they cost from three shillings up to ten shillings a dozen when a skilled worker earned 30 shillings a week.
Methods of contraception for women were expensive and required space and time to mix lotions and potions. With the inadequacies of “withdrawal”, abortion remained widespread. For example, it’s conservatively estimated that in 1935 there were 68,000 abortions and 512 deaths resulting from abortion.
Abortifacients were cheap and widely advertised in the press. Lead was the most common. Only a “pennyworth” of drugs did the trick, but could also leave you blind, paralysed or dead.
The Women’s Co-operative Guild, whose membership comprised mostly skilled workers’ wives, noted (with some disdain) that birth control was certainly widely practised and abortion certainly wasn’t frowned upon by their membership.
Marie Stopes set up the first birth control clinic in Holloway, north London in 1921, which fitted women with cervical caps. She argued the necessity for such clinics, especially in cities, saying, “We have been breeding revolutionaries.”
 
CONSIDERING her arguments and those of the still powerful eugenicists, it is no surprise that many active trade unionists and socialists at the time rejected them out of hand as anti-working class. Word was arriving of the work done by the Bolsheviks in Russia, of the sexual liberation and gains for women made during the Russian Revolution. Debates in the newly formed Communist Party’s paper, the Communist, centred on the individualism and reactionary aspects of the birth controllers.
Margaret Sanger, when visiting Glasgow in 1920, said she met men who were “ready to fight the ancient battle of Marx against Malthus”. She had been very militant in the early battles for birth control, but by now she had fully rejected her radical past and was looking for conservative support for contraception as a “single issue”.
Marx and Malthus represented two traditions which couldn’t be married. Stella Browne attempted and failed miserably. She was a eugenicist who joined the Communist Party and professed that only Communists and feminists were fit to breed for the new race, saying that children born from free love were superior.
She, alongside many others, professed that individuals’ characteristics were genetically determined, whilst Marxism argues that society and its individuals are materially determined.
Stella Browne left the CP in 1923, even though it fully supported birth control, to join the Labour Party.
 
ALONGSIDE Dora Russell she and others formed the Workers’ Birth Control Group in 1924 to campaign inside the Labour Party. They were derided by the leadership which argued that sex and politics shouldn’t mix. At Labour’s 1925 conference, where support for birth control was lost, the top table stated:
“... the subject of birth control is in its nature not one which should be made a party political issue, but should remain a matter upon which members of the party should be free to hold and promote their individual convictions.”
That year 15 local branches supported the pro-birth control motion, more than supported any other resolution with the exception of one calling for affiliation to the CP. Both were stopped by the bloc vote of the trade unions.
Throughout the 1930s the struggles continued in the Labour Party. In 1936 the Abortion Law Reform Association was formed by Browne and Russell. Even up to the campaign for the 1967 Act they refused to fight for abortion as a class issue.
Many of the sexual radicals adhered to the politics that Russell, Browne and co adopted, ignoring the revolutionary socialist tradition and the gains of the Russian Revolution. This led them into the lap of the Labour Party and cross-class alliances to fight for rights which in reality were only denied to working class women.
For middle and upper class women the desire to control their bodies has gone no further than demanding equal rights with men of their class. For working class women the demand for abortion and contraception means much more. It means demanding the right to be free from poverty, oppression and exploitation.
 



Julie Waterson, who died absurdly young at the age of 54 on Friday 16 November, was one of the most outstanding figures to have emerged from the Socialist Workers Party. Whether as organiser, party leader or activist, she inspired everyone who came into contact with her.
Julie came from Bathgate, West Lothian, and the close and loving ties binding her to her large family stayed with her in London, where she spent most of her adult life. She joined the SWP in 1978 while a student at Paisley Tech – she had been elected president of the student union there.
Julie moved to London in 1980 to work on the SWP magazine Women’s Voice. This was a time of intense discussion on the left about the relationship between Marxism and women’s liberation, and Julie threw herself into these debates.
She never lost a sense of the heavy burden of oppression borne by working class women like her, and saw the fight against it as central to the struggle for socialism. One of the first struggles she worked around was the 1981 occupation of the Lee Jeans factory in Greenock by 240 mainly women workers.
Julie worked full time for the SWP for 23 years. She was a local organiser in Edinburgh, east London and north London, party treasurer, journalist on Socialist Worker, and national industrial organiser. Between 1991 and 2003 Julie was a member of the SWP central committee, the party’s leading body.
To everything that she did, Julie brought a profound theoretical commitment to the revolutionary Marxist tradition, tremendous energy and attention to detail, great personal toughness – and overwhelming charm.
Physically tiny, she took people by storm with her directness, quick wit, and subversive sense of mischief and fun. The vast number of friends Julie made were for life.
They included the leading members of the Greek Socialist Workers Party, Panos Garganas and Maria Styllou, whom she met while covering Greece for Socialist Worker during the 1980s. I can bear personal witness to the love and support she gave her friends.
 
Achievement
Julie’s greatest single political achievement was as national organiser of the Anti Nazi League (ANL) during the 1990s. It was her task to revive the ANL to deal with the new threat represented by the British National Party (BNP).
When French fascist leader Jean-Marie Le Pen visited London in 1991, Julie organised a picket and stormed his press conference. The message – that Nazis weren’t welcome in Britain – went round Europe.
The BNP’s noxious rise in the early 1990s was accompanied by a wave of racist attacks. Stephen Lawrence was murdered in April 1993 and in September the BNP’s Derek Beackon was elected as a councillor on the Isle of Dogs in east London.
Julie organised the Unity March that October, leading 60,000 people to demand the closure of the BNP headquarters in Welling, south east London. The result was a police riot in which Julie as chief steward was struck by batons. Undeterred, she appeared on TV the next day in the bloodstained white jacket she had worn on the demo.
At the same time as confronting the Nazis on the streets, Julie was careful to build a broad united front. She worked closely with Labour figures such as Peter Hain and Bernie Grant. Grant, then MP for Tottenham, and his wife Sharon gave her strong support over Welling.
Julie managed all this while working tirelessly in support of the six-month strike against a Thatcherite management by Timex workers in Dundee. She went on to mastermind the campaign in east London that drove Beackon out within a year of his election, and the ANL Rage Against Racism carnival that brought 180,000 to Brixton in May 1994.
Julie fearlessly confronted the Nazis in dozens of national and local protests, and helped to initiate Love Music Hate Racism in 2002. Along the way she found time to help socialists build in post-apartheid South Africa and led the party’s work in support of the long Liverpool dockers’ struggle in 1995–8.
Her role in leading the ANL drew Julie closer to Tony Cliff, the founder of the SWP, who greatly valued her political and organisational skills. She helped to move the party forward after Cliff’s death in 2000.
 
Converged
The first echo in Europe of the great movement against capitalist globalisation that began in Seattle in November 1999 came in Prague the following September. Demonstrators converged from all over Europe to protest at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund.
In frightening and unfamiliar circumstances, Julie brilliantly commanded the large contingent of the International Socialist Tendency (IST), to which the SWP belongs. She also led the IST on another dangerous anti-capitalist protest in Gothenburg, Sweden, in June 2001, when the police shot a demonstrator.
In May 2003 Julie left full time work for the SWP. It was a difficult moment for her personally as well as politically. But she took in hand the necessary adjustment with characteristic courage and determination.
She became a lecturer at City and Islington College and – of course – an activist in the lecturers’ union. When the split in Respect in 2007 precipitated a serious crisis within the SWP, Julie played an important role in helping to set the party back on the right course.
Julie’s last three years were dogged by a succession of illnesses, culminating in the cancer that killed her. She confronted them all with courage, grace and humour.
By the time she left hospital after her last operation, she had won round all the staff, who would flee from her room giggling under Julie’s barrage of friendly abuse.
As it became clear that the operation had failed, a circle of friends and family closed round her, enveloping her in their love and support. They filled the room when she died.
It seems impossible that as vivid a personality as Julie’s no longer exists. But it is true. Alas, capitalism and fascism, the monsters she fought, are still with us. But Julie’s example can still inspire us in carrying on the struggle.
 



As the firefighters’ dispute develops, socialists inside the trade union movement need to answer – and win – the crucial political questions which have underpinned the strike.
Central to the future of our movement is the relationship between the trade union leadership and the Labour Party and our ability, at a rank and file level, to condition it.
As our union leaders fight to ensure the political fund is exclusive to Labour, we need to battle to democratise it. To do so effectively means rebuilding a political rank and file movement as the only method workers have of controlling their union leaders-right wing or left wing.



 


Julie Waterson
London



 






The Nazi BNP believe that they’re on the verge of a breakthrough at the May local elections. But, as Julie Waterson explains, the growth of left wing forces shows there is a power to beat them



Eighteen months on from the race riots they sparked, Britain’s Nazis – the British National Party (BNP) – are exploiting an increase in racial tension. To add to their council seats in Burnley, Blackburn and Halifax, they are planning to stand over 200 candidates in May’s local elections, four times the number they stood last year (when 16 candidates got more than 10 percent of the vote). The BNP believe they are poised to follow in the footsteps of their European counterparts such as Le Pen, Fini and Haider. But the same crisis of neoliberalism that has bolstered them has produced a radical mass anti-war movement that shows the potential for stopping the Nazis in their tracks.
The BNP have been opportunistically building their support on the racist hysteria against asylum seekers being pursued by New Labour and sections of the media. This is nothing new. Nazis, throughout the 20th century, have exploited social and economic crises to peddle their race hatred in order to create the conditions for a race war. What is new is the BNP under Griffin’s leadership. He has changed their tactics and polished their propaganda to mirror fascist parties across Europe in an attempt to emulate their success at the ballot box.
In the North East the BNP paper last May was called British Worker, carrying an appeal for people to join the trade union Amicus! The BNP in the area describe themselves as the ‘only non-Marxist socialist party’. Meanwhile in the South East and the Ribble Valley they organise ‘Land and People’ and have an orientation on the Countryside Alliance. (‘Land and People’ is the name of Le Pen’s rural organisation, taken directly from Hitler’s Nazis.)
The anti-asylum witch-hunt led by the Daily Mail, the Express and the Sun (the latter as a conscious riposte to the Mirror’s anti-war coverage) has been a populist campaign on one of the few issues that goes against the grain of the general leftward movement of ideas. Although rooted in disillusionment with mainstream politics, many Tories have seen it as a vehicle to escape from political irrelevance. New Labour, rather than admit that they have failed to provide adequate housing, schooling and healthcare because of their unwillingness to tax the rich, accept such scarcity as a given and allow asylum seekers to take the blame. This has given confidence to the BNP. Just like the 1930s and the 1970s, the Nazis have been strengthened by the racism of social democratic governments and their ministers.
‘For three years Europe has been mesmerised by the far right,’ writes BBC reporter Angus Roxburgh in his new book Preachers of Hate. ‘Its successes have appalled and shocked. But they have also changed the direction of mainstream politics – not by encouraging, as one might have expected, a strong left wing challenge, but by causing centrist parties to move to the right and adopt more populist policies ... The risk of infection by far right ideas is as dangerous, at least, as the rise of the extremists themselves.’
This has been the horrifying picture that has emerged from Europe as governments have tightened asylum and immigration controls and where fascists have gained power and respectability. Fini in Italy, the direct descendant of Mussolini, is the deputy prime minister and Le Pen, the French fascist written off by many, beat the country’s prime minister to the final round of last year’s presidential elections.
New Labour have embraced the overt racism of ‘Fortress Europe’, strengthening nationalism and giving more power to ‘little Englanders’. Yet those seeking asylum in Britain last year only amounted to 0.18 percent of the population – a minuscule figure given the tens of millions forced to flee from war and persecution around the world.
Britain has an ageing population and suffers a lack of skilled labour, which is why the racist hysteria against asylum seekers sits comfortably alongside the government’s ‘green card’ scheme. Britain’s population has grown by only 573,000 people between 1991 and 2000 (about 1 percent) – so much for ‘overcrowding’!
Labour ministers like Peter Hain, normally associated with anti-fascism, have inflamed the situation by blaming Muslims for failing to integrate, while two northern Labour MPs, Ann Cryer and Phil Woolas, have pandered to the BNP by arguing for compulsory English language and culture classes for immigrants. David Blunkett has also talked of asylum seekers’ children ‘swamping’ local schools.
Anti-racists must drive a wedge between the Nazi cadre and their soft supporters
Such talk does nothing to weaken the Nazis. Rather it gives them space within ‘legitimate’ public debate from which to build. Blunkett’s talk of ‘swamping’ and Blair’s pledge to halve the number of those seeking asylum in a year gives succour to the BNP. The party’s propaganda may differ from region to region, but it is unified in attacking asylum seekers. They peddle myths which they turn into ‘facts’ – racist attacks used by the press, the Tories and finally New Labour to justify further persecution of asylum seekers. And so we have a feedback loop fuelling racism (of which asylum seekers are by no means the sole victims).
This counterproductive top-down strategy has also been at work in Labour-led Burnley council, which has cooperated fully with the three Nazi councillors elected last May, affording them a high degree of respectability and ‘normalising’ them as a legitimate and democratic party. Meanwhile the ANL has been the recipient of repeated bans from the council, the police and the Home Office when organising protests against the BNP, mass leafleting and a Love Music Hate Racism carnival. The carnival had to be moved to Manchester, where it was celebrated by 35,000 people.
A pattern is emerging like that of the 1930s, 1970s and the early 1990s – racism leads to hatred and division, attacks increase and people get murdered for the colour of their skin. This spirals out of control when the Nazis organise. This was true in the early 1990s – when the BNP having a councillor in east London meant racist attacks rocketed by 300 percent in the area. The urgent task for anti-racists is to expose the Nazis as the source of this violence. This is a vital way of driving a wedge between the hard Nazi cadre and their soft supporters. This means the kind of grassroots activism which decimated the Nazis ten years ago.
Black and white unity – challenging the myth that there were fortresses of BNP strength which were ‘no go areas’ for anti-racists – was crucial in driving them out of the East End of London. Then, the TUC organised a magnificent march through the area and toured local factories arguing against racism and the BNP. Local activists and trade unionists also did mass leafleting of the Isle of Dogs to undercut the lies from the BNP.
Today there are two new challenges to deal with. Firstly, the BNP are much more image-conscious than the past, when they were often seen in public giving Nazi salutes. However, many of them have convictions and a history of open Nazi activity which can be exposed. As well as this we need the kind of pressure on them and their organisations that makes their masks slip.
The other difference with ten years ago is that Labour is in office. This makes it even more important that the ‘Don’t Vote Nazi’ slogan is supplemented with activity outside of the electoral arena. Pressure must be put on the TUC to organise against the BNP, both nationally and locally, to counter the threat. Central to this is the initiative of rank and file trade unionists. Seventeen national unions are affiliated to the ANL – we need pressure to turn these good intentions into action. Everywhere the BNP rear their heads we need local campaigning which (1) stresses a determination to confront them politically and physically and (2) proves that they don’t speak for ordinary people.
They need to be confronted physically because they thrive on instilling terror. Only collective resistance can turn their strutting into fear, their arrogance into demoralisation. Their appeal lies in the illusion of empowerment they give. This illusion needs to be comprehensively smashed.
This depends on a clear understanding of the threat Nazis pose to all ordinary people – black or white, gay or straight, men or women. Their parasitical use of frustrations about cuts, privatisation and alienation need to be answered with the ugly truth about their priorities. Griffin is a rich landowner who went to Cambridge, and his party has a stated contempt for the NHS, trade unions and anything else which makes the lives of working class people more bearable.
Like the 1930s and the 1970s, there is a massive radicalisation to the left inside society combined with a polarisation to the right. The lesson from France – where only a turn from passive resistance to directly challenging the Nazis has begun to stem their growth – is that one does not automatically cancel out the other. The crisis of the mainstream parties has led to a volatile political situation that the far right can manipulate. But in almost every street and workplace there are people who have demonstrated against the war who can be won to combining that opposition to imperialism with resistance to the Nazi threat.
We are fighting for a society free from war and exploitation. In doing so we have to utilise the energy, vitality and vibrancy of the new movements to stop the Nazis and create the kind of world which will consign them to history.
 



Free to hate: the rise of the right in post-Communist Eastern Europe
Paul Hockenos
Routledge £17.99
The rise of the far right across Europe has horrified millions and left them desperate to understand this phenomenon. Hockenos’ book will be warmly welcomed by many such people. It, I predict, will sell well. Which is both good and bad.
Good, because he so vividly describes how the euphoria and hope of the revolts and revolutions of 1989 have turned to bitter despair and disappointment for the inhabitants of Eastern Europe. He exposes the hypocrisy of politicians who will wear any political colouration (from Communist to free marketeering) to achieve their own personal ends of money and power, while leaving a path of destruction behind them.
Hockenos takes us on a journey of hatred. He travels Eastern Europe reporting gangs of racist thugs in every country, racist ideas which seem omnipresent and political ‘thugs’ who are willing to dice with fascism to keep power.
It leaves you with a bitter taste. This is the result of one sidedness, lack of clarity and political confusion which, frankly, left me depressed.
This is where you hit the downside. The bad side of the book is that at the centre is his, mistaken, belief that the ideological glue that binds nation states is stronger than the class divisions which rack them.
So Hockenos says, ‘diminutive progressive left or social democratic parties have been unable to compete against the roar of nationalism’.
Yet he does not understand nationalism, its appeal or its origins. The fall of the Ottoman Empire and the First World War are described as shifts in nationalism, which is seen as natural ... ‘While all the far right movements in Eastern Europe are nationalist, not all nationalism is right wing. The free expression of national identity and culture also has a place – and arguably a constructive one – in modern societies.’
But to examine nationalism outside of the class divisions which spawned it is not only stupid but very dangerous, because it leads you to conclusions which bypass those you are trying to understand.
This is what Hockenos does. His book stinks of the corruption, filth and cynical manoeuvring of politicians. This is its strength. But don’t read it looking for answers. For Hockenos wants people to live in peace and accept ‘citizenship’ and not chauvinism. This would be achieved if the West invested in Eastern Europe and the IMF and the World Bank behaved themselves.
I think it is better achieved by the example of the East German steel workers who struck for parity with their counterparts in the West and in doing so united workers from all ethnic groups behind a common banner and against a common enemy – their rich and corrupt bosses. These workers produced strike leaflets in eight languages and held meetings addressed in all languages.
It is action like this, and that of the airline workers in France or the public sector workers in Italy, that can ultimately defeat the hollow nationalism of the Nazis and their friends in government and give people the real sense of society they so desire – building for real socialism.
 



The moral right are on the rampage. They want to take us back to the 1950s – when housewives were tied to the sink and were an extension of their husbands, with little or no independence.
David Cameron has launched an attack on abortion rights by (almost laughingly) appointing the Life group to the Sexual Health Advisory forum. Life advocates abstinence and no sex education – like that’s going to work.
People have always had sex and women have always tried to control their fertility. It was the horror and death caused by backstreet abortions that led to the Abortion Act of 1967. But the rights that we won are again under attack.
Alongside this, Reg Bailey, the chief executive of the Mothers’ Union, has produced a report criticising the sexualisation and commercialisation of children. Cameron is dancing along to Bailey’s tune on this.
Little girls have dressed up and imitated their role models for a long time. But, under advanced capitalism, sex is used as a commodity. This distorts and alienates everyone from real sexual freedom.
The women’s movement has always debated how to respond to this. Past discussions concentrated on porn. Today we consider what approach to take to raunch culture, reclaiming language and the slutwalks.
The more children are exposed to the reality of growing up, becoming sexual and negotiating safe sex, the better. Statistics show that where sex isn’t talked about openly in schools or in families, due to right wing or religious reasons, then teenage pregnancy soars.
The right have a fictionalised account of the past – that children were innocent and safe from harm. In fact, “childhood” is a modern invention and the idea has only become commonplace in the last 200 years. Before then rich children were privileged but poor ones worked as soon as they were able to.
Today we are aware of child abuse, but it took Maria Colwell to be murdered by her stepdad in 1973 to highlight the extent of physical abuse in the family. It took the feminist movement of the 1970s to expose the reality of sexual abuse.
Now we have new battles to fight. We must stop the right from turning the clock back.



 


Julie Waterson
East London



 



‘The political landscape in Oldham has changed, and though the ANL [Anti Nazi League] might not like it, it has been changed through the proper democratic process by Mr Nick Griffin and his British National Party campaigning properly and legally, and persuading people to vote for them.’
Oldham Chronicle, 11 June 2001
‘Another big step towards the political mainstream... Any constituency in which the BNP can take around 3 percent in a parliamentary election contains council seats in which it is possible to take around 25 percent of the vote or even more. This string of near 5 percent votes therefore provides us with a number of winnable council wards in which the British National Party can take the next step into the mainstream.’
BNP press release, 8 June 2001
The Nazi vote in Oldham has sent shockwaves throughout the left. It has been met with disbelief, horror and paralysis. Worst of all, it has been overexaggerated and overgeneralised, serving to fuel the attitude that we can do little to halt the Nazis exploiting racial tensions and social deprivation. To be effective in resisting the rise of the far right means starting with an understanding of their strengths and weaknesses. It is only if we look at the whole picture that we will be able to provide an analysis which enables us to build a movement that can challenge the Nazis. It also provides us with a political framework with which we can build an alternative to the Nazis.
The BNP votes should serve as a warning to us all. It retained five deposits: Oldham West, 16.4 percent (6,552 votes); Oldham East & Saddleworth, 11.2 percent (5,091 votes); Barking, 6.4 percent (1,606 votes); Poplar & Canning Town, 5.1 percent (1,733 votes); and Burnley, 11.3 percent (4,151 votes). In contrast, it saved three deposits in 1997 and in two of those the BNP candidate shared the same surname as the New Labour winner. Alarmingly, after weeks of racial tension, violence and rioting in Oldham, the Nazis grabbed a total of 13,160 votes in the three Oldham constituencies, including their 4.5 percent in Ashton-under-Lyne (1,617 votes). The BNP Fuhrer, Nick Griffin, beat the liberal Democrats in Oldham West.
While the outwardly violent fringes of the Nazi movement – the National Front, Combat 18 and racist football hooligans – rampaged through Oldham, the BNP consistently campaigned on deprived white working class housing estates around social issues – in a racist manner. It blamed society’s ills on multiracialism and multiculturalism, while peddling the myth of Asian on white racist attacks. The BNP also ran an effective press campaign and received coverage in the local paper, the Oldham Chronicle (firebombed by rioting Asian youth).
Yet most of the people who voted for the BNP are not Nazis. They are people disenfranchised from mainstream political life and alienated from mainstream society. They are the victims of a neoliberal agenda ruthlessly pursued by the previous Tory government and today’s New Labour rulers. They are protesting against a system that has failed and betrayed them. The BNP may believe that ‘the [election] result has been a complete vindication of the kind of party the BNP is trying to become – more efficient, more voter friendly and above all, more successful.’ (Mission Accomplished! BNP statement, 11 June, 2001). But it cannot escape its inherent racism and violence. Every Nazi activity breeds violence. Most notably, racist attacks increased by 300 percent on the Isle of Dogs after the election of a Nazi councillor in 1993. In Oldham the Asian deputy mayor’s house has been firebombed, Muslim graves have been desecrated and there has been an increase in racist attacks.
 
Nazis beaten before
We now face the task of repeating the history of anti-fascists in the 1930s, the 1970s and the 1990s to build a vibrant anti-Nazi movement, mobilising the anti-racist majority into a force for change. Such a movement can unite those with divergent political opinions to defeat a common enemy, dividing the hardcore Nazis from their potential members. We must rip the mask of political respectability from the Nazis to expose them for what they are – Hitlerites, race thugs who want a return to the gas chambers.
The BNP stood 33 candidates nationally, gaining 47,225 votes. The number of candidates is down on the 56 who stood in 1997, polling 35,358 votes and averaging 1.3 percent. The 27 candidates in 1992 mustered 11,821, less than 1 percent in each constituency on average. The National Front stood five candidates this time, failing to gain from its strategy of exploiting racial tension by marching, then standing in the general election, in areas like Margate, Bermondsey and Birmingham. This summer the NF is saying it will march in Oldham and Bradford. The police continue to protect the Nazis, at huge cost to the taxpayer, while batoning anti-Nazis who protest against their presence.
The Nazis remain divided and at a fraction of their strength two decades ago. In the battle over the future of our society they are making small and isolated gains, but they are not winning. They are still a very long way from even beginning to emulate their counterparts in Europe.
There is an alternative. A battle is taking place between left and right as society polarises as a consequence of economic crisis. Left candidates won 185,000 votes on a principled stance against New Labour’s attacks on the working class. In comparison the Nazi vote poses less of a threat, but it is not insignificant. The candidates from the Socialist Alliance were contesting the general election for the first time and secured two deposits, and the Scottish Socialist Party made an impressive showing, saving ten deposits. In its heartland of east London the BNP vote fell. From the height of its success in 1993, with the election of a councillor, its vote has plummeted as a result of the opposition it faced. The BNP vote took a ‘dramatic slump’ (BNP statement, 11 June, 2001) when its vote halved in Bethnal Green & Bow, from 7.5 percent in 1997 to 3.2 percent today. Where it kept its deposit, in Poplar & Canning Town, the BNP vote still fell by 2.2 percent.
 
Lessons from East London
The Nazis invested heavily in the East End during the 1990s, as they will no doubt do in the north west of England leading up to next year’s council elections. Our job is to learn the lessons from history in order to repeat them today in defeating the Nazis. The focus on Oldham has obscured other developments for the Nazis in the general election. Firstly, east London has shown that protesting gets results. The diligent and vigilant campaigning against the BNP has paid off, as the BNP notes, ‘For the first time ever, the party is electorally stronger outside of London than in it.’
The BNP has chosen specific areas to build a power base. It tried in the 1990s in east London and we stopped it. The Anti Nazi League must again mount a mass campaign against the Nazis-this time in the north west. As the BNP says in its election analysis of the 11.2 percent Burnley vote,
‘This result was built up with solid community political work and not a race riot in sight ... The BNP’s first electoral outing in 1983 saw it get just 1 percent in its best seat, and that we could only take 3 percent in the Tower Hamlets constituency that included the Millwall ward in the general election before we won the Millwall seat, you can see the extent of the progress made in recent years. The BNP entered this election with the primary aim of setting itself up to make a real push to secure council seats next June, and to publicise the extent to which it has repositioned itself in the political mainstream.’ (BNP statement, 11 June, 2001)
The Nazis today are a fraction of the size and influence of their predecessors. Mass movements against them have shattered their unity, and their gains can be reversed. The Nazis exploited the failures of the last Labour government in the 1970s. As the Labour Party betrayed its supporters and played the race card over immigration, the fascists fed off working class disillusionment. By 1976 they had gained 44 percent in a council seat in London. They had councillors and went on to beat the Liberals in seats in the Greater London Council elections, getting 119,000 votes. National Front demonstrations were attracting new supporters and the Nazis were growing. This gave birth to the Anti Nazi League. On the admission of the then NF leader, Martin Webster, the ANL destroyed their chances of gaining ground.
Areas where the Nazis fared well in the 1970s, like Hoxton in Hackney, east London, are now places where they can no longer show their faces. Anti-racists are the majority – in Oldham and in east London. United we can defeat the Nazis. This has been demonstrated by the movements across Europe which have kept the fascists in check. The 1990s were a roller-coaster for European Nazis, who gained votes and credibility one minute to have them stolen by a surge to the left through workers’ struggles or through anti-racists organising and resisting. We have to learn these lessons again.
 



British Social Attitudes: Focusing on Diversity. The 17th Report
National Centre for Social Research
Sage Publications £35
Tony Blair will think he’s reading a horror story if he picks up the latest British Social Attitudes survey, whose findings demonstrate deeply held beliefs that are in direct conflict to the capitalist system and New Labour’s neoliberal agenda. The majority, irrespective of their class background, reject the drive by New Labour to privatise. There is similar unity, although in smaller numbers, when it comes to favouring redistribution of wealth and greater health spending.
The relentless drive to privatise the NHS does not appear popular. Only 8 percent support charging for visiting your doctor and 17 percent support charges for home visits by your doctor. Only 7 percent think that the NHS caters ‘very well’ for everyone’s medical needs.
Lower taxation is deemed a popular vote catcher, yet nearly six out of ten people favour an increase in taxes for more spending on health, education and social benefits. A mere 4 percent want lower taxes.
Over 80 percent of people believe that ‘the gap between high and low incomes is too large’, again irrespective of their class background. Even where New Labour thinks it can exploit notions of self interest it falls short. Take Labour’s intention to sell off all public housing stock – 73 percent of council tenants say their local authority is their first choice as landlord, even if only just over a half think that estates are ‘generally pleasant places to live’. Over a quarter of housing association tenants would prefer to be council tenants!
While New Labour wants to privatise the welfare state, the vast majority are committed to retaining it. With only months to the general election, Blair and his spin doctors need to perform miracles to overcome this ideological resistance.
So what does this survey tell us about the possibilities of this ideological resistance being matched with physical and and political resistance? Superficially, young people would appear to be less interested in politics than older people. A mere one in ten profess to have any real interest in politics, compared to one in three aged 65 or over. Less than one in three young people are attached to a political party, while nearly half of those over 65 are.
But what ‘politics’ are they talking about? The experience in the last year from the ‘battle of Seattle’ has been a movement of young people who have come together precisely because of their opposition to established politics and political parties. Yet this is not directly reflected in the survey. What is reflected is that the views held, and fought for, by many young people are shared by many older people too.
But there are other ideas highlighted in the survey which appear to be in direct contradiction to socially progressive opinions. ‘It amounts to a potentially powerful right wing appeal’, the survey concludes, adding that ‘the key issue then is whether these sorts of social issues count for votes’. Hague, Widdecombe and the Tories have lurched to the right, playing the race card. Shaw’s condemnation of the Tories rings hollow, when considering New Labour’s drive to authoritarianism on law and order, asylum seekers, single parents and the unemployed.
This poses an immediate challenge for socialists, particularly in the run-up to the next election. Our aim must be to prevent the Tories and the right gaining from the discontent and bitterness inside the working class by fighting for a socialist alternative.
The press and the Tories have crudely interpreted these findings, but closer examination reveals a more complex picture. It is on the social issues that we see the greatest class divide. The authors note that the only time this has ever happened in the 17 years of doing the survey was in 1983 over nuclear weapons.
One in three people from the middle class think that ‘immigrants take jobs away from people born in Britain’, while 57 percent of working class people think so.
On race equality 39 percent of workers think attempts to give black and Asian people equal opportunities have gone too far, compared to 30 percent of the middle classes. The most racist are the self employed, with almost half of self employed people thinking this.
On Europe three quarters of the working class are for keeping the pound, compared to 58 percent of the self employed and 43 percent of the middle classes. Again, this demonstrates a base of support which could be tapped by the right wing or alternatively that could be overcome by fighting against a bosses’ Europe.
More progressive views on sexuality exist among younger people, but not everyone over 50 is a reactionary, although six in ten workers think homosexuality is ‘wrong’ compared to 37 percent of the middle class. More than one in three young people see ‘nothing wrong’ with homosexuality, with just less than one in ten over 65s sharing that view.
The notion of the virgin bride and ‘happily ever after’ is fast becoming a thing of the past. Some 63 percent of young people consider premarital sex as ‘not wrong at all’ while 24 percent of over 65s agree.
The survey shows how people are holding contradictory views. Undoubtedly, it is not good news for New Labour, but it also demonstrates the urgency with which socialists need to fight for a future where the left dominates and not the right.
Note: The survey interviewed 3,000 people, from all classes and age groups. The categories used: ‘middle class’ are higher and lower level professionals and managers; ‘working class’ are those who work in manual occupations including skilled workers; and the ‘self employed’ are farmers, small businessmen and the self employed.
 

